In a batch gas–liquid contactor, gas holdup in two phase (liquid–gas) and three phase (gas–liquid–solid) fluidized bed has been measured experimentally; bubble size and the corresponding interfacial area of contact between the gas phase and liquid phase were calculated. Mass and heat transfer coefficients were evaluated at different solid contents and variable gas superficial velocities for the cooling and humidification of air bubbles into a water-sand slurry under fluidization conditions. Simplified models were derived to estimate the transfer coefficients.
                  Within the present range of parameters studied, the presence of solid particles decreased the gas holdup as well as the interfacial area of contact between gas and liquid, while both the heat and mass transfer coefficients increased several times compared to the two phase (liquid–gas) values by a factor ranging from 2 to 5 depending on the solid contents and the gas superficial velocity. Applications of the present results in the design and operation of multiphase reactors were highlighted.Gas–liquid–solid fluidized bed systems have been developed since a long time and are used extensively in several applications in the chemical, biochemical, electrochemical, mineral processing, and petrochemical industries because of the high rates of heat and mass transfer of such types of reactors Gas–liquid–solid system is characterized by a complicated flow behavior; therefore a better understanding of the behavior of heat and mass transfer in this type is necessary. Previous studies on heat transfer in gas–liquid–solid system focused on wall-to-bed The present work aims to study the effect of solid contents on the gas–liquid heat and mass transfer coefficients in a three phase system at values of solid contents and gas superficial velocities higher than that reported in the literature. Also the study aims to investigate to what extent the gas velocity will affect the heat and mass transfer at high solid contents. The study was carried out on the steady state cooling and humidification of hot air. Water and sand were used as the two other phases in the cooling system. Gas holdup was measured at both a wide range of gas velocity (12–29 cm/s) and a wide range of solid content (10–30%). The range of the parameters studied is wider than that reported in the literature Experiments were carried out in a column having a single gas distributor. Air is introduced into the column at the start, followed by the weighted amount of sand and enough hot water is fed into the column from its top until the level reach to the required value. The system was left to cool down until it attains the steady state and the temperature becomes constant for a long time. At this moment the average bulk temperature was recorded as well as the inlet and outlet gas temperature. The gas holdup was measured and the surface area was calculated. To derive the models required to estimate the gas–liquid heat and mass transfer coefficients in the three phase fluidized bed these assumptions are used; (i) the intraparticle temperature gradient is neglected, (ii) a well mixing in the three phase system is achieved by the presence of solids, (iii) the liquid side resistance to heat transfer is neglected. Under these conditions, calculations can be performed for gas heating or cooling without resort to interface transfer coefficient. As in two phase fluidized bed system heat transfer coefficient (h) based on the total surface area and on an overall effective driving force can be applied to the three phase system by means of the conventional rate equation: The gas–liquid mass transfer coefficient (k) can be evaluated from equation similar to equation The rate of heat or mass transfer can be evaluated by carrying out a material and energy balance on the gas side. Interfacial area can be estimated from the experimentally measured values of gas holdup by using the equation: The velocity of a bubble having the average bubble size at a zero liquid velocity can be calculated from the equation Kim et al. Bubble diameter depends mainly on the specific gas–liquid system and its properties with respect to coalescence. Coalescence is significantly influenced by the physical properties of the liquid. The rise velocities of a single gas bubble depend on its (diameter) size. For small bubbles, the rise velocity is affected by liquid properties such as surface tension and viscosity. For larger bubbles (the present study), the rise velocity is independent to the liquid properties. Peebles and Garber The average number of bubbles in the expanded bed is then equal to: Interfacial area between gas and liquid is a function of the gas holdup as well as bubble size, the bubble size depends on the gas velocity. Liquid properties were found to have little effect on bubble size or bubble rising velocity. Transfer area as a function of the gas holdup in three phase system decreases with increasing the solid concentration Within the range of parameters studied the bulk temperature was found to be constant throughout the whole height, which means that equilibrium was attained between the gas and the liquid. The measured value of the gas holdup was found to increase with increase of superficial gas velocity and to decrease as the solid content was increased. The decrease in gas holdup may be attributed to the coalescence of the bubbles of gas The gas hold up depends on the gas velocity by the general form The values of n for homogeneous bubbles varies from 0.7 to 1.2. For the present study the two phase (gas–liquid) data fit the equation ( The increasing rate of bubble coalescence resulting from both the increased superficial gas velocity and the increased solid content can be predicted from the increases in the bubble diameter as shown in Under the steady state conditions and neglecting the heat losses to the walls, equation Assuming plug flow of gas through the bed and a uniform temperature; equation For the whole height of the bed equation Equation Similarly assuming the gas entering the bed only in the form of gas bubbles, more ever for steady state operation the measure of the mass transfer of water molecules from solution to air bubbles is given by the increase in its concentration (or humidity H) within the bubble and on the basis of the effective surface area of bubbles (equation In order to compare the present data with previous studies on three phase fluidized beds, the mass and heat transfer coefficients were measured at different liquid velocities and different viscosities. The liquid viscosity was varied by adding CMC to water and was measured by a DV-I Prime digital Viscometer.  The heat transfer data fit the equation (  At a given air velocity the mass and heat transfer coefficients decrease with increasing liquid viscosity. Increasing liquid viscosity leads to increasing frictional losses between phases and reduces the mobility of solid particles and it may reduce mass and heat transfer coefficients  For heat transfer, the data fit the equation ( The exponents in equations The present results and the derived models can be used to predict bubble characteristics and transfer coefficients for three phase systems under various operating conditions. To apply the present data for continuous slurry bubble column systems the effect of liquid velocity should be included in the correlations. In a slurry bubble column gas enters the bottom of the reactor through a gas distributor rising in the form of bubbles through a continuous slurry phase. Liquid/slurry enters at the bottom of the reactor and exits from the side.  The presence of fluidized solid particles (sand) in the three phase system plays two opposing roles on the mass and heat transfer operations. On one hand it decreases the interfacial area of transfer, which contributes to the decreased rates of heat and mass transfer and on the other hand it induces more turbulence which contributes to the increased transfer coefficients. Within the present range of parameters studied the turbulence effect overweight the interfacial area effect. Increasing the solid contents to 30% increased the mass and heat transfer coefficients by a factor ranged from 2 to 5 depending on the gas superficial velocity while the gas holdup was decreased by an amount ranged from 0.45 to 0.65. Changing particle size, shape and density will have a different effect. The gas superficial velocity becomes ineffective on the heat and mass transfer coefficients at high solid contents. This would make it possible to operate the three phase system at a low flow rates with a saving in pumping power and operating cost. Using a high gas velocity in the present study makes the mass transfer data insignificant to the Fischer–Tropsch process. However the present data become more significant for the Fischer–Tropsch process at high temperatures and low gas velocity. This work was funded by the  interfacial area of bubbles, cm interfacial area of bubbles per unit length, cm concentration of water vapor in the air bubbles, g/cm concentration difference, g/cm specific heat of air, cal/g·°C specific heat of liquid, cal/g·°C bubble diameter, cm mass flow rate of air, g/s humidity of air bubbles at the constant slurry bulk temperature, g water/g dry air saturation humidity of air at the constant slurry bulk temperature, g water/g dry air heat transfer coefficient between gas bubbles and the slurry, cal/hr·cm overall mass transfer coefficient between gas bubbles and the slurry, g/hr·cm thermal conductivity of liquid phase, cal/hr·cm·˚C number of bubbles height of fluidized bed, cm rise velocity of bubble, cm/s gas superficial velocity, cm/s total volume of bed, cm volume of liquid in bed, cm volume of solid in bed, cm temperature of gas, °C the bulk temperature of the slurry, °C time, sec weight of water evaporated, g gas holdup (void fraction of gas) solid holdup latent heat of vaporization, cal/g liquid viscosity, Pa·s