Oximes of alkyl salicylaldehydes were synthesized from cardanol extracted from cashew nutshell liquid with SnCl4 as a catalyst. Molecular structures, physical and chemical properties of these oximes were investigated by spectroscopic data. These oximes were used as gallium extractant from a concentrated Bayer liquor of Alumina Tanrai (Vietnam). Results indicated that about 80% of gallium was recovered. This study opens up new opportunities to employ an environmentally friendly extractant for recovery of precious metals from industrial waste.Gallium is an irreplaceable metal for electronic industry ( It should be noted that the available gallium in bauxite is excessively higher than the global demand. Currently, only 10% of available Ga in alumina refineries is extracted ( Typically, the organic phase was 8.5 It has been demonstrated ( Since the Ga content in Bayer liquor is typically less than 200 This study employed the produced oximes of alkyl-salicylaldehydes from cashew nutshell liquid to extract gallium from Bayer liquor of Alumina Tanrai plant (Vietnam). We aim to provide an environmentally friendly and economical extractant to reduce the environmental footprint of gallium production. Cashew nutshell liquid was obtained from a local company (Thao Nguyen, Hochiminh City, Vietnam). The liquid was distilled at 220–230 The commercial grade kerosene from Exxon Mobil Chemical was used. Analytical grade of isodecanol, ethanol, SnCl  A multi-neck round bottom flask, fitted with a condenser and a stirrer bar, was used to contains cardanol (20 The organic phase was conducted at three different composition between oxime (extractant), decanol (modifier) and kerosene (diluent). Oxime fraction was varied from 10% to 14%, the decanol volume was kept constant at 12% and the total volume of the solution was maintained at 100 The organic phase of the required composition was mixed thoroughly with the Bayer liquor in a glass beaker using a mechanical stirrer at 300 The IR spectrum of the produced aldoxime also confirmed the oxime group with three characteristic bands: 3453 The The Ga content of the TanRai liquor was 49 Scrubbing and stripping studies of the loaded organic phases were carried out using hydrochloric acid where 6.0 Furthermore, the gallium extracting effectiveness dependence on pH of Bayer liquor was investigated. Gallium extraction and stripping was carried out as mentioned above with the organic phase of 12 The study employed oxime compounds of alkyl-salicylaldehydes produced from cashew nutshell liquid to extract gallium from alumina industrial waste. The gallium from the Bayer process liquor was extracted with different composition of oximes: 10%, 12% and 14%. The optimal extraction efficiency, 80%, was obtained at 12% oxime. The stripping of the loaded organic phase is optimal at 1.5 The authors acknowledge the financial support from the