The relationship between scrap type and its recoverable metal content can play a crucial role in industrial recycling processes. In this paper, the recyclability of different aluminium turnings has been experimentally studied. Various categories of scrap were melted at 800 °C to recover aluminium metal with the protective salt flux of NaCl–KCl–Na3AlF6 under nitrogen atmosphere. In order to understand the melting behaviour, thermo-gravimetric analysis was applied to investigate the weight loss during the melting process. It is shown that the difficulty of recycling the selected aluminium scrap depends on scrap type, scrap size distribution, contaminant, and the ratio of surface area to body volume. Lower distribution mean value, more non-metallic contaminates (oil, plastics), smaller size and higher ratio of surface area to body volume generally led to a lower metal yield. The effect of cryolite addition on the metal yield was also studied, especially for the scrap with higher ratio of surface area to body volume. It was shown that the accumulation of the metal beads was improved with higher amount of cryolite addition. A simple statistical approach is presented to correlate metal yield to scrap properties for inclusion in process optimisation and control models.The recycling of aluminium scrap has significant economic, energy, environmental and resource savings implications. Comparing to the primary aluminium production, aluminium recycling has a great advantage due to lower production cost ( The chemical composition of the molten aluminium product is controlled not only by the process operation, but also to a large extent by proper selection of charged aluminium scrap. As the real metal content of the scrap remains unknown, metal yield becomes a crucial factor for the recycling of aluminium scrap. Unfortunately, due to aluminium’s high reactivity, metal yield of aluminium is a function of numerous parameters such as surface area to volume ratio (due to oxidised surface), shape of the scrap, type of alloy, scrap history, contaminants (e.g. oxides, water, oil and paint) and amount of required flux additives in the melting process. For example, any increased level of contamination on scrap reduces metal recovery due to reaction with aluminium, and further lowers the metal yield. In the scrap yard, materials are usually identified by experienced sorters based on the object recognition, knowledge of use, colour, and apparent density, and last but not least by proper sampling. In the secondary smelting furnace, metal recovery and metal yield may vary according to the quality of the charge material, and the poorly sorted charge may to a certain extent widen the predicted range of metal yield. The metal recovery is defined as the percentage of metal gained from the metal content of the scrap. However, the metal yield represents the percentage of metal gained from the total mass of scrap. Normally, the metal yield is lower than the metal recovery, due to the various contaminants and losses during melting. In the secondary aluminium production, it is very important to emphasize these terms in order to obtain a precise interpretation of results and the modelling of them for optimising the furnaces and the complete plant. Through reviewing the information in the literature for the aluminium recycling, it was clear that most efforts were laid on the economics, process analysis and industrial technology. For the fundamental research, several papers were found for discussing the recycling of used beverage cans and aluminium dross ( Turnings from machining various aluminium products, the focus of this paper, are recycled in a conventional rotary salt slag melting furnaces. The surface area of this scrap is relatively high and covered with an aluminium oxide layer and machining oil. Depending on the products, some turnings even contain significant amount of plastics, which are unfavourable for metal recovery and yield. The oxide film on the turnings, the new oxide skin formed during the melting process and the related chemical reactions have a significant influence on metal losses, and lead to a skim formation during melting. To facilitate handling of these aluminium turnings and to reduce the metal loss in an industrial process, it is essential to investigate the melting behaviour of these different aluminium turnings. In the present paper, the melting experiments were carried out in an electrical resistance chamber furnace in a laboratory scale with controlled nitrogen atmosphere at 800 °C. The NaCl–KCl–Na The experiments were carried out in a high temperature Carbolite chamber furnace equipped with a removable stainless steel retort to ensure that the N In addition, a few tests with thermo-gravimetric analysis (TGA) were conducted in a resistance tube furnace. The scrap was melted in an alumna crucible at 800 °C with salt flux protection under a nitrogen atmosphere. The salt flux composition for all the experiments was 70 wt.% NaCl–30 wt.% KCl with additional different amounts of Na Four types of aluminium turnings were investigated: the aluminium turning scrap A is characterised by a small turning with included plastic pieces; sample B is characterised by small cuttings with a wider size distribution, which was classified by sieving the scrap into different categories, to examine the effect of turning sizes on the metal yield; sample C is a widely distributed cutting with varied width and length; sample D is oil contaminated characterised by smaller turning chips. After melting, the crucibles with the samples were washed with water, and the metal beads and the precipitates were filtered, dried and sieved. The filtered precipitates were prepared for XRF and XRD analysis. After mass balancing, the fraction of metal recovered with respect to the total scrap (in other words the metal yield) was calculated and the size distribution of recovered metal beads was measured. The metal beads are created due to the high surface tension created by the oxidic and other products that collect on the surface of the molten aluminium and the fact that no stirring occurs in the crucible. Note that due to unknown quantities of oxide material entering, oxidation and side reactions considerable care must be taken to produce a good mass balance. This in addition to careful experimentation is of utmost importance to produce good yield data. Various turning scrap were melted under the same experimental conditions. In addition, the effect of turning size and cryolite addition on the melting behaviour was investigated. The experimental results for scrap A and B before and after melting are shown in The scrap with more percentage of bigger metal beads (>2mm) would be considered to have better recyclability. Therefore, it can be concluded that scrap B and C produce a higher yield and could therefore be easier to recycle than scrap A and D. From the above results it is suggested that both the metal yield and the product (metal beads) size distribution are highly affected among other factors by the size distribution of the charging scrap. In order to quantify this correlation and to gain insight into the melting behaviour in relation to the scrap size, the asymmetrical Weibull distribution function ( In order to investigate the scrap distribution on metal yield, representative amount of samples from different scrap and the recovered metal beads were sieved into six size fractions viz. <2, 2–4, 4–6, 6–8, 8–12, and >12 mm.  In order to formalise the results in In summary, therefore, for the melting product, it is clearly shown that a higher In general, to obtain more constructive relations for establishing a statistical model, further research is necessary, and more experimental data are required. The results in this study show a realistic path for research to follow in the future in order to understand the governing parameters, which influence metal recovery and yield in the industrial process. Each of the five categories of scrap B was melted at 800 °C for 2 h with the salt flux composition of 70 wt.% NaCl, 30 wt.% KCl and additional 5 wt.% cryolite under nitrogen atmosphere. As with the previous experiments, the metal beads were recovered from the salt in the crucibles after melting by dissolving the salt in water. The recovered metal was measured and classified. The amount of metal recovered after melting is shown in It shows that the smallest size (<2 mm) has lowest metal yield due to highest surface to mass ratio (due to larger oxidized surface and associated alumina). Increase in scrap size from 2–4 mm leads to a slightly higher metal yield, but the difference is very small. However, the slightly lower yield for the melting of the turning with size 8–12 mm may be caused by the loose compacting of the scrap in the crucible and possible aluminium being lost due to oxidation since it was not completely covered by salt. The salt composition was selected based on the preferred European melt salt composition, considering that KCl is more expensive than NaCl. Theoretically, the salt flux on equimolar NaCl–KCl composition (i.e. 44 wt.% NaCl–56 wt.% KCl) would give better melting results, which corresponds to the eutectic temperature of about 650 °C. Addition of cryolite to the mixture of NaCl and KCl was to increase the interfacial tension between the salt and the molten metal, enhance the stripping of oxide film from metal droplets, favour the agglomeration of the metal drops and reduce the aluminium loss by entrapped metal into salt slag. Samples from scrap A and scrap B with size 2–4 mm were melted at 800 °C for 2 h with the salt flux composition of 70 wt.% NaCl, 30 wt.% KCl and additional 5, 10, 15 and 20 wt.% cryolite, respectively, under N A thin black layer was formed on the top of the crucible. The precipitated black powder (carbon) amount is increased with cryolite addition. The size distributions of the recovered metal beads after melting with the effect of scrap size and cryolite addition are represented in The weight losses recorded from TGA experiments are demonstrated in The main products from the decomposition of organic materials are normally gases and fine carbon precipitates. For the melting of the scrap A, due to the significant amount of plastics, a thick black layer was formed on the top of the crucible after melting. With increasing the amount of cryolite in the salt flux, more black (carbon) was precipitated out. For melting of scrap B, a thinner black layer was observed. Based on the scrap analysis, both scrap A and B contains magnesium as alloying element. Scrap A (0.11% Mg) contains more magnesium than scrap B (0.02% Mg), and scrap B contains higher silicon (10.2%). Mg acting as a surface-active element ( It is also clear from A good mass balance could be attained in the melting experiments. The weight of charged crucible before and after the experiment was measured for the various aluminium scrap type investigated in this study. The relationship between the total weight loss of the charged crucible and the recovered metal is given in The amount of salt added may affect the metal loss. Inorganic impurities from the scrap are dispersed in the salt-phase and may change the density and viscosity of the molten salt slag. If the amount of salt is not enough, the high concentration of oxides and other contaminants in the salt may lead to a high viscosity of the molten salt. The metal drops distributed in the salt may be difficult to settle down, and the more viscous slag will keep the metal droplets entrapped and lead to a significant metal loss. As it is well known, there is always an oxide film on the surface of aluminium scrap. Usually, the thickness of the oxide film depends on the scrap compositions and its history ( In this paper, the melting behaviour of four different turning scrap was investigated. The melting experiments were carried out at 800 °C under nitrogen atmosphere. The basic salt flux used in the experiments contained 70 wt.% NaCl–30 wt.% KCl with additional and varying amount of Na The present results confirmed numerous fundamental aspects in the melting furnace, and provide better understanding of the melting behaviour of the distributed turning scrap. The distributed metal yield as a function of scrap type and size is the basis for establishing a future statistical model to ensure better product quality in the recycling industry. Some indications are given here how such a statistical model could look like. In addition, the data presented here for use in population balance models are currently being developed by the authors for aluminium scrap melting. The aluminium turning scrap and the analysis supplied by Brinker Aluminium Schmelzwerk GmbH, Germany, are acknowledged.