Suspensions were prepared from attrition-milling of a mixture of yttria-stabilised zirconia (YSZ) and aluminium (Al) in acetyl-acetone (ACAC). The attrition milling not only reduced the particle size of the powder mixture, but also reduced the YSZ crystallite size. One factor contributing to reduction in both particle size and crystallite size was chemical reaction between YSZ and ACAC during attrition milling. TEM of the particles before and after milling confirmed the effect of the chemical reaction. Thermal analyses and dilatometer measurements of the green compact made from these particles indicated that the oxidation of Al occurred at temperatures from 400 to 880 °C and sintering started at 1000 °C.Reaction bonding of aluminium oxide (RBAO) was developed to produce alumina based composites. A combination of electrophoretic deposition (EPD) of YSZ/Al and the RBAO process has been used to produce ceramic coatings on metal substrates. In this study, attrition milling has been used to prepare metallic-ceramic suspensions. ACAC was used as a solvent because of its low volatilisation and low dielectric constant, which are desirable for the following EPD. Suspensions were characterised with particle size analyses and zeta-potential measurements. The powder was analysed using X-ray diffraction (XRD) and transmission electron microscope (TEM). The microstructures of the green coatings were examined using polarized optical microscope. Thermal analyses and dilatometry were used to study the oxidation of the Al and sintering of the coatings. A mixture of 90 wt.% (80.5 vol.%) YSZ (HSY-8, Daiichi Kagaku Kogyo, Japan) and 10 wt.% (19.5 vol.%) Al powder (Alpoco, UK) was attrition-milled in acetyl-acetone (ACAC, Aldrich, UK). The attrition mill (type 01HD, Szegvari Attritor System, Union Process) with a 750ml-capacity milling tank, was loaded with 40 g of the powder mixture, 800g of tetragonal zirconia polycrystalline (TZP) milling balls (diameter of 3 mm), and 200 ml of ACAC. The rotation speed of the stirring arm of the attrition miller was 550 rpm while cooling water was used to keep the milling tank at a constant temperature. Suspensions were prepared with a dilution 10 times of the milling mixture with ACAC. The particle size distributions (PSD) and mean particle sizes in the suspensions were measured using a Mastersizer microplus (Malvern Ltd, UK). The zeta potential of the suspensions was examined using a DELSA 440 SX (Beckman Coulter, UK). For thermal analyses, the milled powder–solvent mixture was separated from the TZP balls using a coarse sieve, and then dried on a hotplate at ∼60 °C. The dried power was washed with ACAC five times in order to remove the organo-metallic compounds. The dried cake was ground using a mortar and pestle. The loose and dried powder was used for thermogravimetry/differential scanning calorimetry analysis (simultaneous TG/DSC Apparatus STA 449C Jupiter, Netzsch-Gerätebau GmbH, Postfach). The heating rate for thermal analysis is 3 degrees per minute from room temperature to 1200 °C, and remains at this temperature for 4 h. Phases and crystallites of the powders were identified using an X-ray diffraction technique (APD, Philips). The as-received YSZ powder and the milled YSZ powder were examined using a transmission electron microscope (CM200, Philips). Suspensions were prepared with a dilution 10 times of the milling mixture with ACAC. Before EPD, the suspension was subjected to ultrasonic vibration to break down weak agglomerates and to homogenize the suspension. EPD was performed by immersing two parallel electrodes (coating substrate as cathode and platinum electrode as anode) with a separation of 15 mm into the suspension. During EPD, the suspension was kept being stirred using a magnetic stirrer and a constant voltage of 80 V was applied between the two electrodes. After deposition, green coatings were dried at room temperature. Microstructures of the green coatings were examined using polarized optical microscope. In ceramic processing, milling has been used to reduce the particle sizes, to change the particle size distribution, to change the particle shape, to alter the surface activity and to disperse agglomerates. In this work, a mixture of YSZ (90 wt.%) and Al (10 wt.%) was attrition milled in ACAC. Twelve hour milling considerably reduced the number of the large particles and increased the number of smaller particles ( During attrition milling both shear and press forces acted on the particles by the milling media (i.e., TZP balls). Due to the malleability of Al, in the initial stage, Al particles could only be deformed and flattened by the milling forces, rather than be broken up immediately. At the same time, the hard and smaller YSZ particles were forced by the milling forces into the relatively soft Al particles to form a kind of mechanical mixture of Al with YSZ. This mechanical bonding action would make the large Al particles even larger and large particles increased their volume percentage in the suspension. This is the reason why the PSD of the suspension after 8 h milling shows a high percentage of large particles with a size larger than the original particles ( It is difficult to distinguish Al and YSZ in the green coatings using SEM. This may be due to embedment of YSZ in Al. By using optical polarized illumination, the Al appears brighter than the YSZ ( ACAC is a beta-dicarbonyl compound. Due to the charge de-localisation over two oxygens, the central mythylene group is strongly polarized. This means that ACAC is a polar solvent with a strong acidity.   The chemical reactions between YSZ/Al and ACAC should release large amount of protons, according to Eqs. (1) and (2).   The main purpose of adding aluminium into the green coating was to make use of the volume expansion due to the Al oxidation to compensate the shrinkage of the green coating during sintering. DSC analysis was used to characterize the oxidation/sintering process of YSZ/Al. The oxidation of aluminium is extremely exothermic (Δ The dried power had been washed with ACAC several times in order to reduce the amount of the organo-metallic compounds before the TG/DSC and dilatometer analyses. As shown in The attrition milling has a significant effect on the particle size distribution and grain size. As milling time increased, the particle size in the suspension changed gradually from a bimodal distribution to a nearly unimodal one. During attrition milling ACAC as solvent reacted with both YSZ and Al particles. The chemical reactions might lead to a reduction of crystallite size of YSZ. The zeta potential of the suspension was found to increase with the milling time, which might also be due to the chemical reaction between ACAC and solid particles. Thermal analyses indicated that Al particles were oxidised at about 540 °C, and sintering started at 1000 °C. The volume expansion due to the Al oxidation was insignificant in comparison with volume shrinkage due to sintering.