Heterocyclic compounds are widely distributed in nature, and among the six-membered hetero-cyclic compounds the chemistry of pyridine and of its benzo derivatives, especially quinoline and isoquinoline, is particularly well known, and many important compounds have been synthesized. Wide-ranging applications have been discovered, including their use as reagents in organic synthesis, as precursors to nonheterocycles, polymers, dyestuffs, additives, pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals, veterinary products, surfactants, and corrosion inhibitors. The applications of pyridine and its benzo derivatives have been reviewed in the first edition of Although pyridine does not occur free in nature, its derivatives are found abundantly as natural products, some of which are of fundamental importance to living systems. Naturally occurring pyridine derivatives include nicotinamide ( The alkaloid quinine ( Many polycyclic alkaloids containing the piperidine moiety have been reported Pyridine is weakly basic (p Pyridine on reaction with thionyl chloride gives Pyridine, through its lone pair of electrons on nitrogen, reacts with a wide range of Lewis acids to give complexes, many of which are useful synthetic reagents. Pyridine hydrochloride is used as a demethylating agent for The pyridine–borane complex ( Pyridinium chlorochromate (PCC) ( 2-Chloro-1-methylpyridinium iodide ( Pyridine-2-thione ( The use of Quinoline and alkylquinolines are used in high-temperature reactions as solvents and catalysts, especially for decarboxylations and Rosenmund reductions 2-Ethoxy-1-ethoxycarbonyl-1,2-dihydroquinoline (EEDQ) ( Like pyridine, quinoline and isoquinoline form Many nonheterocyclic compounds have been prepared using heterocyclic compounds. This section highlights some of the classical uses of pyridine and its derivatives in that role. Excellent review articles have appeared on this subject The base-induced ring opening of substituted pyridinium salts, a well-documented phenomenon, provides an entry into the 6,6′-biazulene system ( The cycloaddition chemistry of pyridones is analogous to that of α-pyrones Medium- and large-ring lactones are prepared in good yields from ω-hydroxyacids, for example ( The preparation of conjugated dienes from pyridines is exemplified by the transformation of 2-picoline into the sex pheromone ( 2-Vinylpyridines are important bis-annelating agents in steroid synthesis, the key steps of which are Michael addition to the vinyl group followed by conversion of the pyridine ring into a 1,5-diketone by a reduction–hydrolysis sequence. For example, the base-catalyzed reaction of the enone ( 2-Methylquinoline ( Few piperidine polymers have been reported. For example, 1-acryloylpiperidine ( Polyvinylpyridines are an important class of polymers with interesting properties due to the presence of the weakly basic nitrogen atom, which makes possible a similar variety of reactions in pyridine polymers (e.g., 2-Vinylpyridines have practical uses as comonomers for synthetic rubbers and fibers. The homopolymer of 2-methyl-5-vinylpyridine has properties similar to those of polystyrene. 2-Vinylpyridine rubber has better flex cracking, tearing, resilience, and tensile properties than styrene–butadiene rubber Copolymers of 2-vinylpyridines with styrene and butadienes are used as tire cord adhesives for bonding reinforcing fibers to a rubber matrix 2-Vinylpyridine rubber itself has a high adhesivity for tire cord materials such as rayon, nylon, and polyester. 2-Vinylpyridine may be used as a bonding material between glass fiber and resin in fiber-reinforced plastics, and it is an important comonomer for improving the dyeability of acrylic fiber A wide array of initiators can be used to polymerize vinylpyridines (e.g., free radical, anionic, or cationic) Poly(2-vinylpyridine) The use of pyridine-containing polymers as supports for reagents in organic reactions has been reviewed Reducing agents derived from polyvinylpyridine and sodium borohydride, borane, or borane with dimethyl sulfide are milder than their precursors Complexes of poly(4-vinylpyridine) with Rh 1,2,3,4-Tetrahydronaphthalen-1-one is produced by the liquid phase oxidation of tetralin using 2% chromium(III) acetate supported on cross-linked poly(4-vinylpyridine) resins The hydrolysis of esters such as 4-nitrophenyl acetate, 3-nitro-4-acetoxybenzoic acid and aspirin is catalyzed by poly(1-alkylvinylpyridinium halides) Homopolymers of 2- and 4-vinylpyridines Poly(1-alkylvinylpyridinium halides) have been shown to be good negative electron beam resists for microlithography. Doping poly(2-vinylpyridines) with iodine or an organic electron acceptor such as 7,7′,8,8′-tetracyanoquinodimethane (TCNQ) results in the formation of semiconductors with conductivities of 10 Various pyridine-based homopolymers can be used in lithography and reprography. Poly(2-vinylpyridine) ( Polyvinylpyridines in combination with polyvinyl alcohol form excellent dye mordant or image receiving layers. Mordant layers containing the polyvinylpyridines bind both metallized and non-metallized acidic dye developers. Solutions of polyvinylpyridines Fibers incorporating polyvinylpyridines show excellent dyeing intensity and are color-fast Treatment of bleached kraft paper with poly(2- or 4-vinylpyridine) is reported to increase TiO The addition of a quaternary salt of a polyvinylpyridine to a conventional bright nickel bath at concentrations ranging from 0.05 Poly(4-vinylpyridine) is a film-forming corrosion inhibitor in nonoxidizing acid solutions, including HCl, in acid concentrations up to 37%. Poly(4-vinylpyridine) prevents corrosion of metals and alloys including iron, aluminum, copper, brass, magnesium, solders, and so forth Acid salts Acid solubility and film-forming properties have made the polyvinylpyridines useful in the medical and biological fields. A skin-like bactericidal film can be formed from polyvinylpyridine and acetyl-pyridinium chloride. Poly(2- and 4-vinylpyridine) have both been used to prepare oxygen- and moisture-resistant tablet coatings which disintegrate in 5–20 Poly(4-vinylpyridine) has been used as a carrier for the antitumor drug sarcolysin. The drug-loaded polymer was less toxic and had a better tumor cure rate than sarcolysin alone The ion exchange properties of the polyvinylpyridines have made the polymers important components of membranes capable of a variety of separations. The adhesive and film-forming properties of the polymers facilitate membrane preparation by several techniques. Poly(4-vinylpyridine) deposited onto a polyvinyl chloride substrate gives a membrane that shows 90% chloride rejection, 99% magnesium and calcium rejection, and 99% sulfate rejection Poly(4-vinylpyridinium halides) and poly(1-methyl-4-vinylpyridinium halides) are reported to possess antiviral activity against tobacco mosaic virus, cucumber mosaic virus, and cucumber green mottling virus. The polymers prevent viral infections in tobacco, tomato, pepper, cucumber, and watermellon plants Polymeric versions of the nucleophilic catalyst DMAP have been developed, and syntheses and applications have been reviewed. In most cases the materials are as effective as DMAP and may be recycled with minimal loss in activity 1,4-Dihydronicotinamides bound to a variety of insoluble supports (e.g., cross-linked polystyrene resins) are formed by the reduction of the nicotinamide salt precursor with sodium dithionite. The materials have been used for the stereospecific delivery of hydride ions to carbonyl compounds, and offer the advantage of a recylable reagent and easy workup These polymers, which are useful as polyelectrolyte redox polymers Cross-linked polyvinylpyridines are completely insoluble in all solvents and show high heat stability. Such polymers have been used as catalysts, supports for metals, for metal recovery, in pollution control applications, and as acid scavengers, particularly in nonaqueous media Cross-linked 4-vinylpyridine polymers have been found to be excellent catalysts for the Knoevenagel reaction and catalytic amounts of the resin hydrochlorides may be used for ketal and enamine formation. Similarly, polymer acid salts in bead form act as catalysts for the tetra-hydropyranylation of primary, secondary, and tertiary alcohols, and phenols The macroporous anion exchange resin, Reillex HPQ ( The 4-vinylpyridine–divinylbenzene gel bead copolymer Reillex 425 ( Ion exchange resins that are selective for copper and nickel have been prepared by reaction of chloromethylated polystyrene with 2-picolylamines ( Amphoteric ion exchange resins Procedures for the separation of copper from nickel and nickel from magnesium have been developed using 8-hydroxyisoquinoline functional resins Polyquinolines are versatile, thermally stable polymers and are characterized by repeating quinoline units, which display a catenation pattern of 2,6, 2,4, or 3,6 units Most of the polyquinolines display photoresponsive Polymers based on 2- and 4-vinylquinoline and 8-hydroxy-2-methyl-3-vinylquinoline have been prepared Pyridine derivatives are used as hair dyes: 4- There are many heterocyclic amines which have been used in the synthesis of cationic dyes including pyridine and quinoline derivatives The chemistry of cyanine dyes has been reviewed Quinophthalone dyes are outstanding for their color brilliance and light fastness A number of synthetic dyes containing the acridine (e.g., acridine orange ( Compounds which exhibit photochromism are classified according to the mode of their photochemical reaction, because changes in color can arise as a result of isomerization, tautomerism, oxidation, and so forth. They are used in producing prints and proofs of limited lifetime and in areas such as halography, dosimetry data display, and microimaging. Certain azo compounds and substituted ethylenes can undergo photo-induced The subject of heterocyclic compounds as additives has been extensively studied and reviewed The chemistry of antistatic agents has been reviewed Antioxidants are used in many applications, and the chemistry of these materials has been reviewed Certain heterocyclic compounds, including pyridines and piperidines, are used to accelerate both amine and anhydride cures of epoxy resins ( Most metals are subject to corrosion, which occurs at metal surfaces in the presence of oxygen and moisture Anionic and nonionic surfactants are used as wetting, spreading, emulsifying, dispersing, and foaming agents The quaternary ammonium salts of isoquinoline and pyridine are most often used as disinfectants and sanitizers for hard sufaces. Cetylpyridinium chloride ( The control of bacteria, mildews, slimes, algae, and fungi has led to preservatives becoming important industrial additives. Comprehensive reviews have been published on the use of cyanine dyes as sensitizing dyes, for example ( Sterically hindered piperidine derivatives such as 2,2-Dimethyl-4-(2- or 4-pyridyl)butyronitriles The applications of pyridine-containing compounds in the pharmaceutical field have been reviewed extensively This subject has been extensively reviewed Anesthesia without muscular relaxation is achieved by the simultaneous use of the neuroleptic drug droperidol ( 2-Methylquinoline ( The subject of analgesics has been extensively reviewed Unlike the general anesthetics and sedatives, the potent, centrally active analgesics bind to specific receptors in the CNS. The piperidine derivative pethidine ( Several common structural features necessary for opioid analgesic activity have been identified from the action of the analogs. The nitrogen atom of the piperidine ring in particular appears to be essential for pharmacological activity and is believed to attach to an anionic center in the receptor. Fentanyl and alphaprodine retain the key 4-phenylpiperidine ring structure. These agents appear to interact more strongly with the κ receptor than morphine, although they are still strong μ agonists. Fentanyl is more potent than morphine, with a much shorter duration, and is used to aid the induction and maintenance of inhaled anesthesia. Morphine and other opium alkaloids affect the activity of the bowel and have long been used in antidiarrheal medicines. Pethidine has a similar effect, and the piperidine diphenoxylate is effective in the treatment of diarrhea in doses that do not produce any CNS effects. Phenylramidol ( Epibatidine ( The pyridine derivatives propiram ( The piperidine derivatives tolpronine ( Generalized anxiety disorder is a syndrome characterized by unrealistic or excessive feelings of apprehension. Panic disorder is a second type of anxiety disorder that is characterized by discrete periods of intense fear that do not occur in association with specific anxiety-provoking situations. The chemistry of anxiolytic agents has been reviewed Buspirone ( Depression is a very common illness, and three of the most prevalent types of depressive disorders are major depression, dysthymia, and bipolar disorder, formerly called manic–depressive illness. Cotinine ( Derivatives of acridine and phenanthridine are used as antidepressants and tranquilizers. Examples are clomacran ( Psychosis is a general term denoting mental disorders in which an individual’s capability to distinguish reality and to communicate is impaired. The psychotropic agents thioridazine ( Sedation and hypnosis (sleep from which arousal is easy) represent lower levels of CNS depression, and increasing doses of sedative–hypnotic drugs will produce sedation, hypnosis, anesthesia, and death from respiratory depression. Dioxopiperidines analogous to the barbiturates are used for sedation and the induction of sleep The chemistry of antitussive agents has been reviewed There are a number of reviews on antihistamines in asthma therapy Terfenadine (Seldane) ( The chemistry of antiasthmatic agents has been reviewed Pirsidomine ( Considerable progress in cardiac electrophysiology has been achieved, and a large number of new antiarrhythmic drugs have become available for clinical use to relieve symptoms caused by arrhythmia or to prevent sustained ventricular arrhythmia, which has the potential to cause sudden death Hypertension is the most common of cardiovascular diseases. Antihypertensive agents lower blood pressure, and their modes of action have been reviewed The calcium antagonists bupicomide ( The 1,4-dihydropyridine nifedipine ( Antihypertensive agents such as quinapril ( Diuretic agents have been reviewed Peptic ulcers result from an imbalance between the aggressive action of acid and pepsin and the gastroduodenal mucosal defensive systems in the stomach and duodenum. The inhibition of gastric acid secretion and the enhancement of mucosal defensive systems have proved to be useful therapeutic approaches for promoting healing of peptic ulcers The antidiarrheal agent mebiquine ( Both icotidine ( Pyridine-based antibacterials such as protionamide ( Quinoline-based antibacterials have been reviewed Cephapirin sodium ( Several reviews on antibiotics have been published 2,2′-Hexadecamethylenediisoquinolinium dichloride (hedaquinium dichloride) ( The acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) is a complex disease produced by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. Since 1983, when HIV was discovered, an extensive knowledge of the molecular characteristics of the virus has been acquired. Nevertheless, effective anti-HIV therapy still remains as a major but elusive goal in the field of drug therapy. Excellent reviews have been published on this subject HIV reverse transcriptase is essential for viral replication. Compounds that interfere with the virus in associated reverse transcriptase have been the most extensively studied for the chemotherapy of HIV disease. Inhibitors of reverse transcriptase can prevent the spread of viral infection to new cells, but do not interfere with the replication of HIV genomes that are integrated into the host genome. A number of pyridine-containing reverse transcriptase inhibitors are undergoing clinical evaluation, including nevirapine ( HIV-protease is an aspartic protease encoded by the retrovirus that cleaves specific amide bonds in polyproteins or their precursors and induces the production of infectious viral particles. Protease inhibitors have been shown to be additive or synergistic with reverse transcriptase inhibitors. Pyridyl-substituted imidazoles have been reported as capable of inhibiting cytokins and to be potentially useful for the treatment of HIV infections 3-Amino-2-chloro-4-methylpyridine and 2-chloronicotinic acid are both used for the preparation of nevirapine, a potent inhibitor of human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) reverse transcriptase Antiprotozoals have been reviewed, and pirinidazole ( Anthelmintic drugs are used to eradicate parasitic worm infections; they act locally on worms in the gastrointestinal tract or systemically on those that have invaded various body tissues The pyridine derivative ciamexon ( Minoxidil ( Psoriasis is an inflammatory, chronic, noncontagious skin disease characterized by reddish patches and white scales on human body. Psoriasis therapy is aimed at decreasing the cell turnover, hyperkeroatosis, or vascularity of the superior dermis. Two pyridine-based topical retinoids, namely ( Many enzyme-catalyzed reactions require coenzymes (or confactors) in addition to the enzyme and the substrate for reactions to proceed 3-Pyridinecarboxylic acid (niacin) is used extensively in the diets of both humans and animals for the prevention of pellagra-like diseases. It is an important component of vitamin premixes in animal feeds and is used as a food-enriching agent in cereal products. 3-Cyanopyridine and 2-methyl-5-ethylpyridine are the feedstocks for both niacinamide and niacin. 3-Cyanopyridine is produced by the vapor phase ammoxidation of 3-methylpyridine Both pyridoxol ( Many NSAIDs have been developed in recent years, and the subject has been extensively reviewed 2-Amino- and 2,6-diaminopyridines are used as precursors for the synthesis of various anti-inflammatory agents. Examples are piroxicam ( Niflumic acid derivatives ( Cetylpyridinium halides are used both as disinfectants and preservatives Compounds that are capable of improving cholinergic transmission within the CNS are called cholinergic agents. Dialkylpiperidinium bromides, such as pipenzolate bromide ( Increased levels of total low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol is identified as a risk factor for the development of coronary heart disease. Reduction of LDL cholesterol concentrations in the plasma of hypercholesterolemic patients has been shown to reduce the incidence of cardiovascular mortality. Hyperlipidemic agents are used to regulate and reduce LDL cholesterol in the circulatory system. Several drugs derived from 3-substituted pyridines have been developed, including oxiniacic acid ( Malaria is caused by several species of protozoan parasities known as plasmodia. Quinine ( Both pamaquine ( Almost simultaneously with quinolines, a series of acridine antimalarial compounds were developed, and quinacrine ( Quinoline derivatives such as plasmocid ( Cetylpyridinium chloride ( 9-Aminoacridine ( Isoniazid ( Amrinone ( Zopiclone ( The dihydropyridine derivative ( Most cough suppressants and antitussives currently in use are centrally acting opioids and nonopioids. Nikethamide ( Picobenzide ( The cathartic agent bisacodyl ( Anginin, 2,6-pyridinedimethanol bis(methylcarbamate) ( Quaternary salts of pyridinecarboxaldehyde oximes, particularly pralidoxime methiodide ( Vasodilators are classified into three catagories: cerebral, coronary, and peripheral. Piperidine is used in the production of vasodilators such as dipyridamole ( The coronary vasodilator nicorandil, ( Examples of pyridine-based vasodilators include betahistine ( Anticholinesterase agents act by reversibly inhibiting acetylcholinesterase, the enzyme that breaks down acetylcholine, thereby increasing the duration of action of acetylcholine. Both pyridostigmine bromide ( Cholinesterase inhibition, the mechanism whereby a number of insecticides and nerve gases function, may be reversed by acid salts of pyridine-2-carbaldehyde oxime ( A number of radiosensitizers have been developed to suppress tumor growth The subject of anticancer activity has been reviewed recently Some piperidine derivatives ( Many drugs developed for human use eventually find a place in veterinary medicine, but in this section only drugs developed solely for veterinary use are covered. The chemistry of veterinary products has been reviewed Conjugate addition of methoxide to 2-vinylpyridine offers methyridine ( A number of pyridine and quinoline derivatives find use as veterinary drugs Sulfasalazine ( Many pyridine derivatives exhibit considerable useful bioactivity, in terms of their use as herbicides, insecticides, and fungicides. Several books and reviews can be recommended for general reading and background information on agrochemicals Chlorpyrifos-methyl ( Chlorination of α-picoline affords 2-chloro-6-trichloromethylpyridine (nitrapyrin) ( Paints are attacked in both the liquid and dry state by various microorganisms, particularly under damp and humid conditions. Fungicides such as 4-methylsulfonyl-2,3,5,6-tetrachloropyridine (Dowicil S-13) ( Fluazinam ( The 3-benzylpyridine derivative ( The most significant quinoline fungicides are metal chelates of 8-hydroxyquinoline 〈56CR217〉. Related compounds include quinacetol sulfate ( A major use of pyridine is in the manufacture of the herbicides paraquat ( In the early 1980s, new postemergent herbicides such as fluazifop-butyl ( Chloropyridines are widely used as herbicides, and a variety of commercial products have been introduced. Chlorination of 2-methylpyridine gives 3,6-dichloro-2-trichloromethylpyridine ( 4-Amino-3,5,6-trichloro-2-picolinic acid, picloram ( Nicosulfuron ( The reaction of 2,3,5,6-tetrachloropyridine ( Fluoridone ( 2,3,5,6-Tetrachloropyridine is used to produce insecticides of the chloropyrifos type. Chloropyrifos-methyl ( Pyrethroids containing a pyridine unit are used as insecticides Imidaclopyrid ( Nitroguanidine ( Pix (mepiquat) ( Norbormide ( Nitrogen heterocycles are extensively used in the analysis of metals, particularly by spectral methods. 2,2′-Bipyridine is used as a reagent for the determination of iron 1-(2-Pyridylazo)-2-naphthol ( 1-Butylpyridinium bromide ( The presence of certain metal ions can have detrimental effects on photographic materials. For example, calcium ions found in hard water can form troublesome precipitates during processing. This problem can be alleviated by the use of a sequestrant such as the pyridinedicarboxylic acid ( 1-(2-Pyridinyl)piperazine ( The actinoquinol sodium salt (  A major use of piperidine is in the production of dithiuram tetrasulfide (