The use of a pneumatic conveying technique for the transportation of drill cuttings within and from offshore drill rigs is a new and challenging research field at present. In addition to experimental techniques, computational fluid dynamics (CFD) can be used for detailed understanding of the process. CFD modelling of pneumatic conveying is not very new; however, the nature of the drill cuttings introduces additional challenges for the modelling work. In the present paper, published information related to the CFD modelling of pneumatic conveying is presented in general and in detail. The information covers a wide range of pipe geometries/orientations (horizontal, vertical, different types of bends/elbows), operating conditions (air velocity, solid loading) and solid materials (particle size, particle density) being transported. The model approaches used for the predictions (Eulerian or Lagrangian, collision model, software) and the main focus/results are also presented. Next, the main challenges with regard to modelling of drill cuttings transport are addressed. The inevitable variance in cutting composition, wetness, oiliness, non-sphericity, very wide particle size distribution and degradability/instability of drill cuttings are identified as the major challenging factors.Pneumatic conveying involves the transportation of a wide variety of powdered and granular solids in a gas stream The use of pneumatic conveying for the transportation of offshore drill cuttings is currently the topic of many discussions and is becoming an interesting research field. However, challenges in the experimental and numerical studies on using this technique in transporting offshore drill cuttings are extensive owing to the nature of the materials, so the related research is not very straightforward. The behaviour of gas–solid flow is very complicated because of the complex interactions between individual particles and their interactions with the surrounding gas and wall. However, a better understanding of the dynamical behaviour of gas–solid flows inside the conveying unit is essential for optimal design, scale-up and operation of the systems In the present article, pneumatic conveying and CFD modelling of pneumatic conveying are first discussed in general, and then an overview of offshore drill cuttings is provided. Next, published information on the studies related to CFD modelling of pneumatic conveying is documented in detail. Finally, any challenges regarding CFD modelling of pneumatic conveying of offshore drill cuttings compared with previously performed studies are addressed. There are two fundamental modes of pneumatic conveying: dilute (lean) phase and dense phase One of the greatest difficulties in accurately predicting pneumatic conveying system performance lies in the lack of fundamental understanding of precisely how the material properties influence the conveying flow regime within the pipeline Different types of CFD models are available for the prediction of gas–solid flows ( Solid rock cuttings are created when different rock layers are drilled through during construction of oil and gas wells. These solid rock cuttings are carried to the surface in the drilling mud (drilling fluid) that is used for the drilling process Transportation of drill cuttings within the rig and from the rig to ships is a vital process. Conventionally, screw conveyors, manual forces and the skip-and-ship methods have been utilized in transferring drill cuttings The particle size distribution (PSD), particle shape, particle density, moisture content and oil content, mineral and chemical compositions are commonly used properties for the characterization of drill cuttings. However, these properties depend on many factors including solid control techniques used and have a strong relationship with the type of drill bit, rotation speed of the drill bit, lithology of the rock layers and the type of the drilling mud being used Along with the experimental work for drill cuttings characterization and pneumatic conveying, CFD modelling is an advantageous and advanced tool to use in studying pneumatic conveying of drill cuttings. The published information about CFD modelling research carried out before are studied and analysed (  A brief and general overview of the table is presented here. Considerable amount of publications are available for modelling horizontal pipe flows, vertical upward flows and flows in horizontal-to-vertical bends/elbows. A few others have focused on vertical-to-horizontal bends/elbows and other types. Most of the studies are related to circular pipes rather than ducts. Simulated pipe diameters range from lab scale (7 The particle diameters range from micrometres to millimetres. Comparatively, many have simulated millimetre size particles; however, the maximum size was approximately 5 Very light particles with density of approximately 500–800 Most of the simulated flows are dilute (solid loadings from 0.01); however, dense phase (up to solid loading 438) flow simulations are also not very scarce. The most commonly used commercial software is Fluent (later ANSYS Fluent); however, it seems that comparatively, quite a few researchers have developed their own in-house codes. The Eulerian–Lagrangian approach has been widely used over the conventional Eulerian–Eulerian approach for granular flows. The Eulerian–Lagrangian approach has its own merits, especially for flows with particles with a particle size distribution. Quite recently developed models—e.g., DDPM-KTGF, DDPM-DEM and MP-PIC methods—have not been used in any pneumatic conveying study. The particle–particle interactions are ignored in 30% of the studies summarized in the table. The soft sphere model (DEM) is widely used in modelling of particle–particle interactions. Others have used the hard sphere model or stochastic approach developed by Sommerfeld in Lagrangian models. In general, the pneumatic conveying characteristics have been predicted for a range of flow regimes—e.g., dispersed, stratified, dune flow, slug and plug flows ( In addition to the information tabulated, more aspects are discussed in other publications. Schallert and Levy have investigated the effect of two closely spaced elbows on roping behaviour in a vertical pipe downstream of the second elbow As The drill cuttings contain moisture (moisture content < The drill cuttings are contaminated with drilling fluid, so they can contain oil content up to 5%; however, this can be reduced to < The wetness introduced through moisture and oil of drill cuttings cause agglomeration of particles due to liquid bridges formed The drill cuttings are non-spherical in shape Studies related to non-spherical particles (ellipsoids, discs, fibre, cylinders and other irregular shapes) address the effect of non-sphericity on drag force and relevant modifications for drag coefficients, importance of considering wall-roughness effect and rotational motion of non-spherical particles compared to spherical particles and applicability of the multi-sphere discrete element method The particle size distribution of drill cuttings lies in a very wide range from 2 The maximum particle diameter simulated before was approximately 5 Modelling a wide particle size distribution will be challenging due to different time scales associated with different sizes. Dividing the full size distribution to different particle distribution classes and carrying out simulations for narrow ranges of distributions would be an initial suggestion. In Eulerian-Lagrangian approaches, the mesh size needs to be larger than the particle size Even though, a given rig typically contains several horizontal, vertical and different bend sections and the whole system is important when designing an entire conveying system. Most of the studies have focused on only a section of the whole conveying rig. This seems reasonable because simulating a full-size rig might be computationally demanding, especially with Eulerian-Lagrangian approach. However this depends on the computational capacity available. In cases where the whole rig cannot be simulated due to such practical issues, finding well-defined boundary conditions, especially at the inlets of certain simulated sections is a huge challenge. To overcome that, experimental setups should be well-defined and verified, if the results are going to be compared. For example, despite the flow at the inlet of the entire rig being dispersed (according to solid feeding method), it might be more stratified at some distance downstream. So, there should be experimental techniques to observe flow pattern and velocities of phases downstream where the inlet of the simulated domain is specified. The size and shape of the drill cuttings can be changed while conveying because the material is highly degradable/unstable Previous attrition and abrasion studies can be useful for modelling degradation of particles during pneumatic conveying. Some have used the CFD approach to determine stress conditions which are useful to predict attrition level The drill cuttings properties are different from well to well and continuous and random changing of the properties of the drill cuttings should be expected (size, shape, associated drilling fluid type etc.) Use of process analytical technology to tackle continuous variation of properties of drill cuttings and developing correlations between their characteristic properties and transport properties will be an effective approach under the challenging situation of conveying drill cuttings pneumatically. Development of a universal model considering all these aspects would be really challenging. A step-wise approach with integration of previous studies which have covered some of these aspects would be appropriate. The use of CFD modelling for the investigation of pneumatic conveying characteristics of particulate materials is not scarce, and published information is documented in detail in the present paper. Characteristics of different flow regimes (dispersed, stratified, dune flow, slug and plug flows) with wide range of solid loadings have been investigated regarding many aspects. Horizontal pipe flows, vertical upward flows and flows in horizontal-to-vertical bends/elbows have been in much focus. Particle diameters range from micrometres to millimetres (up to 5 Investigation into the possibility of using the pneumatic conveying technique for the transportation of drill cuttings within and from offshore drill rigs is quite a new and challenging research field at present. In addition to experimental measurement techniques, CFD modelling might be an appropriate tool to gain a comprehensive understanding of the process. However, the effort has not yet taken place. It is because, gas–solid multiphase flow modelling is very challenging in general, and the nature of the drill cuttings introduces even more challenges for the modelling work. Wetness, oiliness, very wide particle size distribution and degradability/instability of drill cuttings are among those challenging factors for future modelling research in this topic. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support provided by the