In this study, Li2CO3 was extracted from a zinnwaldite concentrate with 1.21% Li and 0.84% Rb prepared from zinnwaldite wastes (0.21% Li, 0.20% Rb). These wastes originated from dressing of Sn–W ores, which were mined in the Czech Republic in the past. Processing of the zinnwaldite concentrate consisted of roasting the concentrate with CaCO3 followed by water leaching of the resulting calcines. This method made it possible to extract about 90% of Li as well as Rb. Lithium carbonate products were separated from leach liquor using two different procedures. The first one comprised conversion of the original alkaline leach liquor to carbonated solution by CO2 bubbling, solution purification and Li2CO3 crystallization during water evaporation. The second procedure consisted of lithium solvent extraction from the original leach liquor using LIX 54 and TOPO as an extraction agent followed by stripping with diluted H2SO4, solution purification and lithium carbonate precipitation with K2CO3. Water-washed lithium carbonate salts were produced in both procedures and contained almost 99.5% Li2CO3 with the first method providing higher yield. Mother liquors after Li2CO3 crystallization and/or inorganic phases after lithium solvent extraction are suitable intermediates for production of rubidium compounds, such as Rb2CO3, Rb2SO4 or RbOH.Lithium is mainly used as a component in primary and secondary batteries, as an alloying constituent in lightweight alloys and as a heat transfer medium in nuclear reactors. Lithium chemicals find extensive applications in many industrial branches, such as glass, ceramic, metallurgical and pharmaceutical industries. Lithium carbonate is the starting material for the industrial production of all other lithium compounds, including lithium chloride, the raw material for lithium metal production. The total world lithium market consumption was estimated to be 16,300 At the present time subsurface brines are the dominating raw material for lithium carbonate production worldwide because of lower production costs as compared with mining and processing costs for lithium ores. As the demand and prices rise, lithium-bearing minerals might once again yield economically feasible raw materials for the production of lithium carbonate ( Processing of lithium ores is based on breaking down the lithium minerals during their heating with chemicals followed by acid or water leaching of the products obtained. A number of processes have been reported for lithium recovery from spodumene, petalite and lepidolite ( In our previous studies ( Zinnwaldite concentrate was prepared from zinnwaldite wastes originating from dressing of Sn–W ores, which were heavily mined in the past in the Czech Republic at Krušné hory in Cínovec area. These wastes present the most accessible raw material for lithium and rubidium production in the Czech Republic. The objective of this study was to establish conditions for obtaining Li Lithium may be precipitated from alkaline solutions using CO Lithium carbonate dissolves in water at lower temperatures and in the presence of CO The solubility of LiHCO Purification of lithium carbonate solutions and lithium carbonate precipitation process are based on different solubility of Li Lithium can be selectively extracted from solutions containing Rb, Na and K at pH A hydrogen ion in the LIX54 molecule is replaced by the lithium ion in a substitution reaction. Further reaction with TOPO is now possible due to the formation of the [Li–R] complex. TOPO denoted as S can react by forming a complex with [Li–R] according to the following equation Combining Eqs. The main advantages of solvent extraction are in the possibility to concentrate Li in diluted acid solutions during the stripping step, and to obtain insignificantly contaminated solution of Li The course of individual reactions aiming at lithium carbonate separation was studied on model solutions and the results were applied to processing of leach liquors originating from roasting of zinnwaldite concentrate with CaCO The investigated zinnwaldite concentrate containing on an average 1.21% Li and 0.84% Rb was prepared from wastes (0.21% Li, 0.20% Rb) using dry magnetic separation. These wastes were mined from the landfill of wastes in Cínovec area. The typical content of main elements present in the concentrate was 30.53% Si, 13.27% Al, 10.97% K, 5.87% Fe, 0.63% Ca, 0.30% Na and <0.10% Cs. According to the results of XRD analyses, zinnwaldite concentrate consisted of two main phases: dominant zinnwaldite KAl(Fe,Li)(Si Following chemicals were used in this study: LIX54 (Cognis, Ireland), TOPO (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany), Spirdane 40 (Euro-Šarm, Czech Republic), Li Conditions of roasting of the zinnwaldite concentrate and leaching the calcine were chosen in agreement with the results of our previous research work ( Mixtures of fine ground zinnwaldite concentrate and CaCO Alkaline leach liquor containing Li, Rb and impurity metal hydroxides was bubbled with CO Lithium was extracted from leach liquor (pH At first, two methods were tested to obtain lithium carbonate product from model sulphate solution the composition of which corresponded to the Li During the experiments, liquid samples were withdrawn, analysed for lithium and impurities content. Solid samples were analysed for their chemical and phase composition. Four techniques were used in this study to characterize composition of the processed concentrate and solid phases formed during solution processing: atomic absorption spectrophotometry (AAS) using GBC analyser Avanta 932 plus, (GBC Scientific Equipment, Australia), X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy (XRF) using Thermo ARL 9400 XP spectrometer (Thermo ARL, Switzerland), X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a diffractometer X'Pert PRO (PANalytical, The Netherlands) and particle size analysis using low-angle laser light scattering analyser Fritsch Analysette 22 (Fritsch, Germany). Composition of solutions was determined by the AAS method. Decomposition of solid samples was performed by standard methods such as acid dissolution or alkali and acid fusion. Calcine formed during roasting the concentrate with CaCO Particle size distribution of the ground calcine subjected to leaching is shown in Results of experiments performed with a hydroxide model solution (418 Based on the results achieved, lithium carbonate crystals were separated step-by-step from leach liquor according to the flow sheet shown in Purity of unwashed lithium carbonate products decreased with the evaporation level. They were contaminated by soluble carbonates of alkali metals, namely of potassium due to their increasing concentration in the condensed solution. However, these impurities were practically removed during washing the lithium carbonate products. Purity of lithium carbonate crystals and the content of major contaminants are given in Mother liquor, from which Li Concentrations of Li, Rb and impurities in the processed alkaline leach liquor, the leach liquor after lithium extraction and the extract are given in Results of experiments performed with a model extract solution (719 For this reason, lithium was separated from the extract as Li The Li Precipitated lithium carbonate product and water-washed lithium carbonate salt were practically contaminated only with K and SO Investigations on the preparation of lithium carbonate salts from alkaline leach liquors originating from processing of zinnwaldite with CaCO Mother liquor after Li This study was supported by the research grant No.