The dissolution kinetics of pure vanadium trioxide in an alkaline–oxygen system was investigated. The effects of temperature (80–130°C), oxygen partial pressure (200–700kPa), initial sodium hydroxide concentration (0.1–2M), and stirring speed (200–1000rpm) on the vanadium dissolution rate were studied. The experimental data showed that the vanadium dissolution rate increased with increasing temperature and oxygen partial pressure; stirring speeds above 800rpm and sodium hydroxide concentrations above 1.0M had very little effect on the dissolution rate. The kinetics analyses of the experimental data for various experimental conditions indicated that the dissolution process was controlled by the chemical reaction during the early stage of dissolution, with an activation energy of 45.3kJ/mol, and was then controlled by liquid-film diffusion, with an activation energy of 11.6kJ/mol. In the initial stage of dissolution, the reaction orders with respect to sodium hydroxide concentration and oxygen partial pressure were 0 and 0.75, respectively.Vanadium is used almost exclusively in ferrous and non-ferrous alloys because of its high tensile strength, hardness, and fatigue resistance ( Many studies have shown that vanadium can be recovered from vanadium-containing materials by a number of processes, including sodium salt roasting/leaching, solvent extraction, and ion exchange. Sodium salt roasting has been employed for many years to extract vanadium from various materials, especially from steelworks slags. However, the process inevitably produces hydrochloric acid and chlorine (  Although many researchers have studied the leaching of vanadium-containing raw materials in alkaline solutions, detailed dissolution kinetics results are not available, particularly for vanadium oxides. Some dissolution kinetics investigations have been carried out either at lower temperatures or in acidic media. However, the kinetic characteristics of pressure alkaline dissolution of vanadium oxides are poorly understood because of the varied mineralogy and matrix of vanadium-bearing materials. Therefore to fundamentally understand the feasibility of vanadium oxides extraction by alkaline dissolution under pressure, we investigated the dissolution kinetics of pure V The V All the experiments were performed in a 0.5 The influence of the stirring speed on V The results showed that the distributions of oxygen and particle suspension at 800  A series of experiments were carried out with different concentrations of sodium hydroxide. The sodium hydroxide concentration ranged from 0.1 The effect of oxygen partial pressure on vanadium dissolution at 100 As oxygen is the main oxidizing agent in the V According to Tromans' results, the increase in oxygen partial pressure is directly proportional to the oxygen solubility. As a result, a faster reaction rate could be obtained. In our study, the oxygen partial pressure increases from 200 The experiments were carried out with mean particle size 198 The morphology of the V V The data were analyzed using a shrinking-core model ( Assuming that the reaction rate is controlled by the chemical reaction,  The slopes of the curves in The control factors in the reaction-controlled stage used in statistical modeling of the reaction rate constant are sodium hydroxide concentration and oxygen partial pressure. The effect of these factors on the reaction rate constant can be written as follows: It can be seen in The dependence of the kinetic constant on the partial pressure of oxygen can be determined from the slopes in The kinetic factors in the dissolution of V A stirring speed greater than 800 This work was financially supported by the NSFC (