Aluminum-clad U-7Mo/Mg and U-10Mo/Mg pin-type mini-elements (with a core uranium loading of 4.5 gU/cm3) have been fabricated at the Canadian Nuclear Laboratories for experimental tests and ultimately for use in research and test reactors. In this study, the microstructure and phase composition of unirradiated U-7Mo/Mg and U-10Mo/Mg fuel cores were analyzed using optical and scanning electron microscopy, and neutron powder diffraction. Thermal properties were characterized using a combination of experimental measurements and thermodynamic calculations. The thermal diffusivity was measured using the laser flash method. The temperature-dependent specific heat capacities were calculated based on the linear rule of mixture using the weight fraction of different crystalline phases and their specific heat capacity values taken from the literature. The thermal conductivity was then calculated using the measured thermal diffusivity, the measured density and the calculated specific heat capacity. The resulting thermal conductivity is practically identical for both types of fuel. The in-reactor temperatures were predicted using conjugate heat transfer simulations.There is an ongoing international effort to convert all civilian nuclear research and test reactors that employ high-enriched uranium (HEU) to proliferation-resistant low-enriched uranium (LEU) fuels. Many research and test reactors worldwide have already been converted to LEU; however, a number of high performance research and test reactors require uranium loading as high as 8–9 gU/cm Although pure uranium metal has the highest possible uranium loading, its low-temperature alpha (orthorhombic) phase is known for poor dimensional stability causing anisotropic growth and swelling during irradiation. Different alloying elements (i.e., molybdenum, niobium and zirconium) forming solid solutions with uranium have been considered to stabilize the high-temperature gamma phase (body-centered cubic) possessing better dimensional stability The first generation of U-Mo-based fuels for research and test reactors were comprised of U-Mo particles dispersed in an aluminum matrix and were denoted as U-Mo/Al. In 1998–2004, the Canadian Nuclear Laboratories (CNL) (formerly, Atomic Energy of Canada Ltd. (AECL)) fabricated and tested pin-type aluminum AA 1060-clad U-7Mo/Al and U-10Mo/Al Four alternative U-Mo-based fuel designs were proposed to mitigate the fuel particle-matrix interaction, see Refs. Historically, U-9Mo/Mg fuels have been used since the 1950s in the Soviet Union/Russia at three different power generation stations In 2010–2014, CNL fabricated pin-type AA 1060-clad U-7Mo/Mg and U-10Mo/Mg mini-elements with a uranium loading of 4.5 gU/cm The in-reactor temperature distribution of the fuel was initially predicted based on the fuel core thermal conductivity estimated using the Maxwell-Eucken model by Piro and Leitch The U-Mo/Mg fuel fabrication process at CNL has been described by Wang et al. Neutron powder diffraction patterns were collected at room temperature using the C2 powder diffractometer located in the NRU reactor to quantify the content of different crystalline phases in U-7Mo/Mg and U-10Mo/Mg fuel cores. A silicon monochromator (311) was employed to achieve the neutron beam wavelength of 0.237 nm. The diffraction patterns were collected for the range of 20° < 2θ < 100° with the step size of 0.1°. Cylindrical U-Mo/Mg samples (Ø6.35 mm × 10 mm) were continuously rotated around the radial direction to minimize texture effects. The U-7Mo/Mg and U-10Mo/Mg fuel cores were sectioned in the transverse and longitudinal directions, polished, and examined using an optical microscope. Energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) analysis of U-7Mo fuel particles was performed on as-polished U-7Mo/Mg transverse cross-sections using a field emission scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with a backscatter electron (BSE) detector. The laser flash method was used to measure the thermal diffusivity of U-7Mo/Mg and U-10Mo/Mg fuel core samples. In this method, a laser pulse was applied to the front face of a sample while the rate of heat propagation was determined by measuring the resulting temperature increase on the rear face with an infrared detector. The sample surface was overilluminated with a high-power pulse solid state Nd: YAG laser. The solid state laser produced a pulse with homogeneous energy. The energy deposition on the sample surface was, therefore, uniform. The laser flash apparatus was equipped with Al  Four crystalline phases were identified in the as-fabricated U-7Mo/Mg and U-10Mo/Mg fuel core samples: γ-U(Mo) (U-Mo substitutional solid solution, body-centered cubic, The refined lattice parameters for γ-U(Mo) and α-U are listed in The phase composition results are summarized in Representative BSE images of U-Mo fuel particles in U-7Mo/Mg fuel as well as EDS spectra for several distinct regions are shown in The temperature-dependent specific heat capacity at constant pressure of both U-7Mo/Mg and U-10Mo/Mg fuel cores was calculated based on the linear rule of mixture using the weight fractions of the four phases (i.e., The U-10Mo/Mg fuel core sample has a slightly higher specific heat capacity compared to U-7Mo/Mg, as shown in The variation of the specific heat capacity [J/g/K] with temperature for U-7Mo/Mg and U-10Mo/Mg was described using second and first order polynomials, respectively: The thermal diffusivity was measured for three samples for each of U-7Mo/Mg and U-10Mo/Mg fuel cores (see The thermal conductivity of the U-7Mo/Mg and U-10Mo/Mg fuel cores was calculated using the following equation: Note that this expression does not distinguish between U-7Mo/Mg and U-10Mo/Mg fuel cores since their thermal conductivities are practically equivalent. This trend is reflective of the relatively higher To the best of the authors' knowledge, no thermal diffusivity or conductivity data for U-Mo/Mg fuels was available in the open literature for comparison purposes. In a previous effort to simulate heat transfer of U-Mo/Mg fuel to predict fuel and cladding temperatures, the thermal conductivity of the fuel was approximated with the Maxwell-Eucken model As illustrated in The experimentally determined thermal conductivity of the U-7Mo/Mg and U-10Mo/Mg fuel core samples (see Equation  The simulations assume a homogenous material with the same thermal conductivity throughout the fuel core, while in reality U-Mo fuel particles are not homogenously distributed (as shown in Microstructure and thermal properties of as-fabricated U-7Mo/Mg and U-10Mo/Mg fuel cores were studied. These investigations determined that most of the γ-U(Mo) phase was retained in as-fabricated fuel. Small quantities of two other uranium-containing phases were also found, namely α-U and UO The authors would like to acknowledge C. Boyer from the Neutron Scattering Branch at CNL for providing the raw neutron diffraction data. The authors further wish to thank A. Lockley and L. Gendron for the preparation of optical and SEM samples, and C. Mayhew for the SEM analysis. The authors also thank J. Mouris and M. Sinclair for their assistance with the immersion density and thermal diffusivity measurements, as well as N. Wang and A. Prudil for their internal review of the manuscript. Helpful discussions with J. Creasy (International Atomic Energy Agency), D. Burkes (Pacific Northwest National Laboratory), C. Guéneau (Commissariat à l'énergie atomique) and E.C. Corcoran (Royal Military College of Canada) are greatly acknowledged.