The rate of ion transfer across the supported liquid membrane (SLM) is studied in the rotating diffusion cell (RDC), varying the chemical composition of the SLM from net-cloth supported gel membranes to radiation-grafted polymer membranes. Steady-state current–voltage curves are measured as a function of the rotation rate, and values for the standard rate constant, k
                     0, are determined for a series of tetraalkylammonium cations from the analysis of the initial slopes and the diffusion limiting currents. The analysis gives values for k
                     0 of the order of 10−2–10−4 cms−1, which is in rather good agreement with the values found in the literature for this type of the system. As controlled delivery of ionic drugs can be achieved by control of the electric current, whereby the SLM acts as a drug reservoir, the study is extended to the release of the anti-Alzheimer drug Tacrine, where ion-exchange fibers are embedded in the membrane as the drug carrier. Our previous transient experiments are also discussed, and it is suggested that their interpretation is seriously hampered by the non-uniform potential distribution, which brings about high capacitive currents.A supported liquid membrane, SLM, is usually formed by impregnating a non-volatile organic solvent into an inert and porous polymer membrane, whereby the solvent is held within the membrane by capillary forces. Placing the SLM between two aqueous solutions, a heterogeneous system is brought about, which can be applied in, e.g., hydrometallurgy We have previously used SLMs in a rotating diffusion cell In this communication, we address these dilemmas afresh, and study the role of the membrane in a more versatile manner. This is accomplished by varying the support of the membrane from an ordinary net-cloth to radiation-grafted polymers We adopt here the Butler–Volmer formalism for the ion transfer kinetics, recognizing that it is just a phenomenological approach; this question has been widely discussed in the literature, and we are not going to repeat it. The only aspect of the Butler–Volmer approach that we consider here is that we concentrate on the analysis at low overpotentials where the linearisation can be carried out. The reason is that there is no a priori knowledge of the value of the charge transfer coefficient We repeat only the main features of the transport equations to make the paper more readable. From our previous paper The exchange current The surface concentrations Now, the cell potential Thin gel SLMs can be cast for use in transient measurements. For RDC measurements, the gel is sufficiently strong to separate the two aqueous phases, but deflects into a hemisphere. Such gel SLMs are too flexible to retain a rigid interface during rotation; in order to cancel this deflection, the gel was supported on an inert cloth mesh. The mesh selected was ordinary net cloth containing holes of diameter between 1 and 2 mm. The net support was not soluble in either of the solvents under consideration; it was prepared for use by boiling for 3 h in MilliQ water (changed once per h) to remove any salts or particulates from the material. The material was dried and cut into circles of 4 cm diameter for RDC use and 2 cm for transient experiments.  The gel was cast using the following method: 0.5 ml A glass slide (ca. 8 Hydrophobic polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membranes (GVHP, Millipore, MA, USA) with a dry thickness of 125 μm and a pore size of 0.22 μm were radiation-grafted with acrylic acid monomers as described in detail in The experimental setup employed for RDC and voltammetric measurements has been described earlier Impedance measurements were made at the start and end of each experiment to confirm that the cell resistance was constant throughout. The impedance equipment comprised of a 1286 potentiostat and a 1255 frequency response analyzer (Solartron, UK In In The offset currents obtained from the linear fits in From Eq. From the intercept the limiting current in the membrane phase takes the value of 87.9 μA, which is, however, less than the measured limiting currents with Next a series of tetraalkylammonium cations with varying alkyl chain length from methyl to hexyl was compared. It appeared that the potential window of the tetramethylammonium was too narrow to obtain a clearly defined limiting current, and it was left out of the analysis. Furthermore, recrystallisation of the tetrahexylammonium TPBF From the plots Four different membrane compositions were studied varying the organic solvent from With the membranes without grafting the plots   In the gel membrane with a thickness of 265 μm, When a grafted membrane impregnated with NPOE was used, the plot A grafted membrane with In Tacrine studies, Relying on the measured value In The mysterious extra resistance In our previous paper As the electric current is continuous in an electroneutral system, the excess current, viz the capacitive current, is conducted across the membrane, increasing the ohmic drop within the membrane and the peak separation accordingly. From the simulation point of view, the value of It can be argued that since the potential drop across the opposite interface is rather low, its capacitance is much lower, and in the series combination of two capacitors, only the lower of the two capacitances is observed: The effect of the chemical composition on the rate of ion release from a supported liquid membrane, SLM, was studied. Previous results were critically reviewed, and it was found that an extra resistance resides somewhere in the rotating membrane cell. Correcting for this resistance, plausible values agreeing with the results obtained at the single liquid-liquid interface, are recovered. The release of probe ions from the SLM appears to be under mass transfer control, and the role of the membrane is of secondary importance, the only requirement being that the SLM is stable enough. The results of previous transient experiments with a SLM were discussed, at it is now believed that the several problems appearing in such experiments make the quantitative interpretation of them rather difficult. The potential gradient in a system can be written in the general form of Eq. The integral in Eq.