In this study, the CeO2/reduced graphene oxide (rGO) nanocomposite was synthesized by a facile hydrothermal method. Structure and morphology of the synthesized nanocomposite were characterized by X-ray diffraction and scanning electron microscopy. Raman spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy were used to quantify the concentration of oxygen vacancies. Compared with the bare glassy carbon electrode (GCE) and CeO2-modified GCE, the CeO2/rGO electrode exhibited an excellent electrochemical activity toward the oxidation of ascorbic acid and dopamine. Increased concentration of oxygen vacancies coupled with the introduction of rGO as a matrix in the composite resulted in the improvement of the conductivity of the nanocrystals, thereby leading to a faster charge transfer. The photocatalytic properties of CeO2 and CeO2/rGO nanocomposite were evaluated using the degradation of methylene blue under UV–vis light irradiation. Degradation rate constant was determined to be 0.0011 min−1 and 0.0035 min−1 with CeO2 and CeO2/rGO photocatalyst, respectively. The CeO2/rGO nanocomposite exhibited a significant increase in the photoactivity compared with CeO2 because of the unique properties of rGO in suppressing the recombination of photogenerated charge carriers.Ascorbic acid (AA) and dopamine (DA) are compounds of great biomedical interest, which play an essential role in human metabolism Analytical techniques, such as titrimetry, spectrophotometry, and chromatography have been reported for the determination of biomolecules However, there are few reports on the electrochemical sensors based on CeO GCEs are one of the most commonly used electrodes for modification as they provide a wide potential window with low background currents and are chemically stable Furthermore, cerium oxide has also been regarded as an excellent material for photocatalysis for the degradation of organic contaminants and water splitting to produce hydrogen owing to its excellent physical and chemical properties In this article, the structure and morphology of rGO, CeO Graphite (powder <20 μm), AA, and DA hydrochloride were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Standard phosphate buffer solution (PBS) (0.1 M) with different pH values was prepared from salts KH XRD (Rigaku D/Max-2200V) was used for structural analysis, and XPS (Kratos Axis Ultra DLD) was used to obtain the concentration of Ce Electrochemical measurements were performed using a Gamry 600 D electrochemical workstation. A conventional three-electrode configuration consisted of Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode, a platinum wire as the counter electrode, and the bare GCE and CeO The photochemical reactor consisted of a borosilicate glass vessel that contained the MB solution, in the center of which an immersion well housing the light source was placed. The well was a quartz tube with a cooling water jacket, which prevented the lamp from overheating. The light source was a 500-W tungsten halogen lamp, and the reaction vessel had two ports, one for withdrawing the solution at regular time intervals and the other for thermometer insertion. A step-down transformer was used to initiate the light source. First, graphene oxide (GO) was synthesized by improved Hummers' method To obtain CeO The GCEs were polished to a mirror finish using 0.3 μm of alumina slurry. It was then ultrasonically washed with acetone and DI for 5 min. To prepare the solution, 5.0 mg of commercial ceria nanoparticles or CeO XRD patterns of CeO Raman spectroscopy is used to study defects such as oxygen vacancies in oxides Hence, Eq. XPS is an effective technique to analyze the Ce3d state and oxygen vacancies The results obtained by XPS are in good agreement with the Raman downshift results. The calculated fraction of Ce Surface morphology was analyzed using SEM and TEM, as shown in  Electrochemical behavior of the mixture of 25 μM DA and 300 μM AA at three different electrodes is shown in  To investigate the kinetics of electrode reactions, CV of DA and AA were carried out at different scan rates in the range of 50–300 mV/s at the CeO Influence of pH in the range of 5–9 on the CV response of AA and DA was also investigated. The photocatalytic activity of CeO Based on the optical band energy value of CeO In this work, the modified GCE was used to investigate the electrochemical behavior of AA and DA. Compared with the bare GCE and CeO