The environmental and economic benefits of recycling spent Nd-Fe-B magnets are becoming increasingly important. Nevertheless, the reprocessing of this type of material by conventional processes remains a challenge due to the difficulties of rare earth elements (REEs) and Fe separation, low products purity and large-scale generation of boron wastewater. This research presents an effective approach for the comprehensive recovery of REEs, iron and boron from Nd-Fe-B magnet wastes. Investigations of the initial roasting pretreatment showed it to be an effective method that aids the subsequent selective separation of REEs, with the most suitable temperature determined to be 800 °C. During the following selective hydrochloric acid pressure leaching of the roasted magnet, the addition of 2 g/L NaNO3 was found to significantly improve the separation of REEs and B from Fe. The results indicated that almost 99% of REEs and 97% of B could be extracted, whilst in contrast, less than 0.1% of iron dissolved, to leave a hematite rich residue. The extracted REEs were then directly precipitated as oxalates with >99% extraction and 99.95% purity at a value n(oxalic acid)/n(REEs) of 1, resulting in significant improvements to oxalic acid consumption and REEs product purity. In the final step, 99.5% of boron was recovered via a three-stage counter current extraction with 30% (v/v) (EHD) and 70% (v/v) sulfonated kerosene. These findings demonstrate that high recoveries of REEs, Fe and B are achievable with hydrochloric acid pressure leaching followed oxalate precipitation and boron recovery.Rare earth elements (REEs) are important strategic resources due to their unique properties and have been extensively used in a variety of high-technology fields, such as high-temperature superconductors, NiMH batteries, fluorescent lamps, permanent magnets and catalysts ( In addition to the REEs, the other predominant metal in spent magnets is iron that comprises ca. 50–70% of the total mass and as a result, any recovery methodology must be able to separate effectively REEs from Fe ( Several efforts have been made to eliminate the negative influence of sulfate ion by the use of alternative leaching systems based on nitric, hydrochloric and acetic acids. The results showed that high levels (>95%) of both REEs and Fe were leached due to the higher solubility of REEs in chloride and nitrate media ( Another alternative method that has been widely adopted for REEs recovery is the oxidative roasting – selective leaching process ( After roasting, low concentration hydrochloric acid leaching process was conventional and economic process for the recovery of REEs from roasted magnet wastes. The advantage of pressure leaching is that the iron mainly exists in the leaching residue as hematite (Fe Another challenge in the recycling of spent Nd-Fe-B magnets is the removal of boron. Currently, most research focuses on the recovery of valuable metals such as REEs, Co and Fe, although there are a few reports on boron retrieval from spent magnet waste ( In the current study, a new pressure leaching approach for Nd-Fe-B magnets is taken by introducing NaNO Spent Nd-Fe-B magnets, obtained from a company in Finland, were firstly demagnetized in a muffle furnace (air atmosphere) by heating at 350 °C for 1 h, before being crushed and ground in a mill (Pulverisette 9, Fritsch, Germany). It need to be noted that as the particle size of magnet waste decreases the waste will become pyrophoric in character, readily reacting with the heat of the milling and oxygen present in the air ( In order to investigate the REEs oxalates precipitation phenomena, the effect of ferrous and ferric ion on the recovery and purity of REEs oxalate was investigated by a synthetic solution with After the REEs precipitation, dissolved boron was extracted and enriched by solvent extraction. The extraction experiments were carried out in 125 mL separation funnels by mixing an organic phase and the aqueous solution, with different organic/aqueous phase (O/A) ratios, at 30 °C for 10 min in an incubator shaker (Model KS 3000i, IKA, Germany). The organic phase consisted of 30% (v/v) 2-ethyl-1,3-hexanediol and 70% (v/v) sulfonated kerosene (both provided by Shanghai Rare-earth Chemical Co., Ltd., China) as the solvent for extraction. The loaded organic phase was subsequently stripped with 0.1 mol/L NaOH for 15 min at an O/A ratio of 1:2 and 30 °C. The investigated parameters utilized at each processing stage are displayed in The chemical analysis of the spent magnet, leaching residues and products formed were performed using a number of different spectroscopic techniques. Firstly, the solid samples were subjected to total dissolution in aqua regia, then the resultant solution concentrations of REEs, Fe, Co, B and other impurities were determined by inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES, Perkin Elmer Optima 7100 DV, USA). The Fe(II) concentrations in the spent magnet and leaching residues were analyzed by the chemical dissolution - potassium dichromate method. In contrast, the Fe(III) concentrations in leachate were analyzed by a precipitation separation - EDTA titration method ( After demagnetization, crushing and grinding, ca. 80% of the particles in the spent magnet powder were <160 μm. After grinding, oxidation roasting with different temperatures (700 °C, 800 °C and 900 °C) was undertaken, and the roasting time was 2 h. XRD results, shown in From the analysis of the raw materials, it was found that the iron content was as high as 50%, which in the traditional hydrochloric acid leaching or sulfuric acid leaching of magnet waste makes the leaching of Fe inevitable. In order to determine the effect of Fe on the REEs oxalate precipitation behavior, the REEs oxalate precipitation was investigated in synthetic solution at different concentrations of the ferrous and ferric ion. The purity of the precipitate was found to increase from 98.5% to 99.9% as the proportion of ferric ion increases from zero to 100% (  The effect of leaching temperature on the recovery of REEs (Nd, Pr, Gd, Ho and Dy), Fe, Co and B from roasted spent magnet powder was investigated with a solution containing 0.6 mol/L HCl. Results presented in The effect of the leaching time on the leaching of REEs, B, Fe and Co is presented in The effect of hydrochloric acid concentration on the leaching of REEs (Nd, Pr, Gd, Ho and Dy) and Fe was examined by varying the HCl concentration from 0.3 mol/L to 0.8 mol/L. The results, shown in The leaching results of REEs, B, Fe and Co obtained at different liquid-to-solid (L/S) ratio are displayed in Phase analysis results of roasted spent magnet samples show that, in addition to the presence of NdFeO After treatment with hydrochloric acid, ferrous ions predominate within the PLS. Fe(II) tends to be stable in solution up to a pH of 6 and Fe(II) oxalates are highly insoluble, whereas in contrast, Fe(III) precipitates at a pH around 2–3 and Fe(III) oxalates are highly soluble. Therefore, in order to achieve a good separation of REEs and Fe, the selective oxidation of Fe(II) is necessary and NaNO The effect of sodium nitrate addition on the leaching of REEs, B, Fe and Co were examined with a total pressure 0.62 MPa, an HCl concentration of 0.6 mol/L and an L/S ratio of 10 at 180 °C for 2 h ( Based on the results shown in The effective separation of REEs and Fe can be achieved by hydrochloric acid pressure leaching as this not only helps avoid any adverse impact of impurities on product quality, but also reduces oxalic acid consumption. The effect of oxalic acid levels on the precipitation of REEs in Fe-free solution was investigated in more detail with a reaction temperature of 50 °C, initial pH = 2.2 and 30 min reaction time. As shown in After REEs precipitation, the concentration of B and Co in the REEs-free solution were in the order of 680 mg/L and 50 mg/L (pH 0.45), with the boron mainly present as H After boron recovery, the Na This research outlines a novel method to separate the REEs from spent Nd-Fe-B magnets by a combined pretreatment, REEs oxalate precipitation, boron solvent extraction and cobalt precipitation process. In particular, optimization of the selective leaching of REEs vs. Fe is highlighted as this decreases both solution purification operational costs and minimizes oxalate consumption in REEs recovery stage. For the pretreatment stage, a temperature of 800 °C was selected to avoid excessive oxidation, which leads to unsatisfactory REEs extraction, and insufficient roasting that results in poor selectivity separation of REEs and Fe. Additionally, it was found that the existence of Fe(II) in the oxalate solution had a negative impact on REEs product purity, and ferric ions Fe(III) result in increased levels of oxalic acid consumption due to strong complexation between oxalate and ferric ions.- In the pressure-leaching step, increased temperature and prolonged leaching times can be both utilized to achieve the effective removal of Fe. Moreover, the use of NaNO After leaching, >99% of REEs can be precipitated by oxalic acid at the value The conventional technical challenges such as difficulties of rare earth elements (REEs) and Fe separation, low products purity and large-scale generation of boron wastewater in the conventional processes have been well solved by this new developed process. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors acknowledge