In order to recover valuable metals and regenerate the etching solution from the spent nitric etching solutions of printed circuit board (PCB), solvent extraction, stripping, electrowinning, precipitation and cementation experiments have been performed. Nitric acid was selectively extracted by TBP from the spent etching solution and pure nitric acid solution was stripped by distilled water. After extracting nitric acid, pure copper metal was obtained by electrowinning and tin ions were precipitated by adjusting the pH of solution with Pb(OH)2. Lead metal with purity of 99% was obtained by cementation with iron powder.In the etching process of printed circuit board (PCB) by nitric acid, spent etching solution with the following composition is produced, 250 g/L HNO Extraction studies of nitric acid with Aliquot 336 nitrate and with TBP have been reported In this study, solvent extraction, stripping, electrowinning, precipitation and cementation experiments have been performed to regenerate nitric acid solutions and to recover copper, tin and lead from the spent etching solutions of PCB. The experiments were conducted by using synthetic etching solution, the chemical composition of which is shown in Electrowinning experiments were carried out in a 0.5-L vessel. Titanium that had been coated with platinum and stainless steel plate were used as cathodes and anodes, respectively. After removing nitric acid by solvent extraction, the solutions were put in the electrowinning cell and the current was controlled by DC power supply (HP E3610). The concentration of nitrate ion was measured by a pH/ISE meter (Orion 920A). After removing nitric acid, copper and tin, cementation experiments of lead were performed by adding iron powder (99.9%, −100 mesh) at the rotation speed of 400 rpm. A condenser was employed for preventing the evaporation of the solution. In the solvent extraction experiments, the concentration of nitric acid in the synthetic etching solution was 250 g/L. In order to investigate the effect of TBP concentration on the extraction of nitric acid, volume percentage of TBP was varied from 30% to 70%. The extraction results are shown in Using 50% TBP, a McCabe–Thiele plot was obtained for a feed solution containing 250 g/L nitric acid and is shown in The effects of nitric acid concentration on the extraction behavior of copper, iron, tin and lead ions by 50% TBP from the synthetic solution are shown in The effects of TBP concentration on the extraction of nitric acid, copper, iron, tin and lead from the real spent etching solutions were investigated and the results are shown in The stripping isotherm of nitric acid by distilled water is shown in Because of high acidity in the spent etching solution, it is difficult to electrodeposit metal ions directly from the spent etching solution. Therefore, electrowinning experiments of copper were performed after nitric acid was removed from the synthetic etching solution by solvent extraction with TBP. The effects of electrowinning time on the concentration of metal ions in the etching solution are shown in In the preliminary experiments on the effect of current density, current density was varied from 0.02 to 0.22 A/cm The variation of the concentration of metal ions with the electrowinning time is shown in Since hydrogen gas was evolved at the cathode during electrowinning, pH of the solution was increased. Owing to the increase of solution pH, some of tin ions were precipitated in the course of electrowinning by the following equation. On the assumption that the activity of tin ion equals to the concentration of tin ion, the calculated pH at which tin hydroxide begins to form is 0.94 when the concentration of tin ion is 0.34 M After nitric acid, copper and tin were removed, cementation experiments of lead were performed by adding iron powder with −100 mesh. Synthetic solutions, in which the concentrations of lead and iron were 10 and 14 g/L, respectively, were prepared for the cementation experiments. Because of the oxidizing nature of nitric acid, cementation of metal ions from the nitric acid solution is very difficult to achieve. In order to suppress the oxidizing properties of nitric acid solution, sodium pyrosulfite was added to the nitric acid solution After adding sodium pyrosulfite to the nitric acid solution, cementation experiments of lead with iron powder were performed. In these experiments, the initial pH of nitric acid solution was adjusted to 2.0 by adding sodium hydroxide into the solution. The effects of sodium pyrosulfite concentration and reaction temperature on the cementation percentage of lead are shown in After copper, tin and lead were separated from the spent etching solution, the concentration of iron in the solution was 10–30 g/L. By adding nitric acid to the solution, it is possible to reuse this solution in the etching of PCB. The following conclusions were obtained by conducting experiments on the recovery of valuable metals and regeneration of nitric acid from the spent nitric acid solutions of PCB. From a feed solution containing 250 g/L nitric acid, 95% extraction of nitric acid was possible by 50% TBP in five counter-current stages at the volume ratio of organic to aqueous of three. By using distilled water as a stripping agent, most of nitric acid was stripped from the loaded organic phase containing 80 g/L nitric acid. Pure copper metal was obtained by electrowinning from the etching solution after nitric acid was removed by solvent extraction. After copper was recovered by electrowinning, tin ions were precipitated at 80 °C by adjusting the solution pH with Pb(OH) By adding sodium pyrosulfite as a reducing agent, lead metal with purity of 99% was obtained from the solution by cementation with iron powder.