Hydrothermal conversion of fly ash into zeolites was conducted and the effects of the addition of sodium halide and waste solutions produced after zeolitization of fly ash, as well as the adjustment of the Si/Al ratio prior to synthesis process on the formation and cation exchange capacity (CEC) of zeolite product were evaluated. Both the addition of NaCl and NaF ameliorated the crystallinity and CEC of synthesized zeolite, but NaF had a better improvement effect. Na+ was considered to enhance the crystallization of zeolite, while F− favored the dissolution of fly ash. The type of zeolite formed depended on the Si/Al ratio of the starting material prior to the nucleation and crystallization of zeolite. The adjustment of the Si/Al ratio of fly ash by addition of Na2SiO4 and Al(OH)3 changed the type and CEC of zeolite. Waste solutions contained large amount of Si and little Al due to the formation of a zeolite named NaP1 in zeolite terminology with the Joint Committee of Powder Diffraction Standard (JCPDS) code of 39-0219. The alkalinity decreased largely. As a result, the CEC value of zeolite products synthesized with waste solution as alkali source decreased. The supplementation of new alkali to adjust the alkalinity of waste solution could enhance the CEC of synthesized product. It was concluded that: (1) addition of sodium halide and adjustment of the Si/Al ratio prior to synthesis can improve the quality of zeolite; (2) waste solutions produced following the zeolitization of fly ash can be reused as an alkali source in the activation of fly ash; zero-emission of waste solution in the synthesis of zeolite from fly ash is possible.The synthesis of zeolite by hydrothermal alkaline treatment is one of the promising techniques for the reutilization of coal fly ash; a solid waste generated in coal fired power stations. It is well known that zeolite synthesis behavior is affected by the composition of raw material, type of mineralizer and reaction conditions. Mineralizer used for hydrothermal synthesis of zeolite involves hydroxide anion and fluoride anion. Based on the formation of zeolites using different alkaline species (NaOH, KOH, and Na The benefits of use of fluoride anion, rather than hydroxide anion, as a mineralizer for the synthesis of high silica zeolites were reported by several groups ( In the case of composition, researchers have found that removal of iron oxides from fly ash by magnetic separation prior to synthesis improved the CEC (cation exchange capacity) value of the products ( Synthesis of zeolite by hydrothermal treatment produces large amount of alkaline waste solution. Discharge of the waste solution would cause serious environmental problems. In order to recycle the waste solution as an alkali source in zeolitization of fly ash, the effect of addition of Si or Al (i.e. the adjustment of Si/Al ratio of starting material) on the synthesis process is also considered to be quite important, because Si or Al are usually the major constituents of waste solution. The effects of the addition of NaCl, NaF, Na A fly ash was supplied by the second electric power station of Wujing, Shanghai, China. The raw fly ash was first passed through an 80-mesh sieve prior to conversion into zeolite. Chemical analysis except silicon was conducted by digesting the fly ash with hydrogen fluoride in conjunction with perchloric acid followed by dissolution in hydrochloric acid. For the analysis of silicon, the fly ash was melted with sodium hydroxide. The elements in solution were then measured by using an inductively coupled plasma emission analysis equipment (IRIS advantage 1000). The results are listed in Analysis by X-ray diffraction revealed that the major crystalline phases in the fly ash were quartz and mullite together with amorphous component, which is the most reactive in alkaline media. Synthesis of zeolite was carried out in a closed system and in an open system. For the synthesis of zeolite in the closed system, 15 g of fly ash was mixed with 150 ml of NaOH solution in a sealed Teflon reaction vessel. Three NaOH concentrations (0.5, 1.0, 2.0 mol L A conventional refluxing method in the ambient atmosphere was used in the synthesis of zeolite in an open system. 15 g of fly ash was placed in a flask. NaF, NaCl, Na The obtained slurry was boiled with reflux for 24 h without stirring. The solution temperature was 95 °C during the reaction process as determined by a thermometer. Afterwards, the operation procedure was the same as before, i.e. the solid phase was separated by centrifugation, washed and dried. The zeolitic phase(s) in the products were identified by powder X-ray diffraction method on a D8 ADVANCE X-ray diffractometer using a Ni filtered Cu–kα radiation (40 kv, 40 mA). Cation exchange capacity was determined using the ammonium acetate method. The results were expressed as cmol per kilogram of solids.  Monomineral phase of a zeolite named NaP1 in zeolite terminology with the Joint Committee of Powder Diffraction Standard (JCPDS) code of 39-0219, was consistently formed in the open system at all NaOH concentrations studied. Activation in the closed system at NaOH concentrations lower than 2 mol L Up to the NaOH concentration of 2 mol L In addition, the results in  The extent to which the CEC value was improved by the addition of the sodium halide was higher at the NaOH concentration of 0.5 mol L It is known that the formation of zeolite during hydrothermal treatment of fly ash could be divided at least into two stages: the dissolution of Si and Al ingredient, and the nucleation and crystal growth of zeolite. By the investigation of different behaviors of zeolite production using several alkalis, Similar to OH The raw fly ash had a Si/Al ratio of 2.9. The alkaline treatment of the fly ash by 2 mol L The chemical composition of the waste solution recovered by centrifugation after the conversion process was shown in As has been seen in The waste solutions were obtained by separation (centrifugation) of solid and solution following zeolite synthesis process. The first waste solution was reutilized in the synthesis of zeolite from fly ash, and this synthesis process produced the second waste solution. The second waste solution as an alkaline source was again mixed with fly ash to synthesize zeolite, and the third waste solution was thereby generated. In order to keep the liquid/solid ratio at a constant value of 10 during the synthesis process, the amount of fly ash was altered according to the amount of the waste solutions obtained. Zeolitization of fly ash consumes OH  The CEC values of zeolite products obtained by using 2 mol L As mentioned above, the Si/Al ratio of the starting material is one of the important factors determining the CEC value of product. It is thus expected that the addition of Al source into the waste solutions would be advantageous to the reuse of dissolved Si remaining in the waste solution and improve the quality of zeolite product. It can be concluded that, the waste solutions resulting from the zeolitization of fly ash could be reused as an alkali source in the activation of fly ash, and zero-emission of waste solution in the synthesis of zeolite from fly ash is possible. Zeolite was synthesized by the hydrothermal treatment of coal fly ash and the effect of the addition of NaCl, NaF, Na This research has been supported by a grant from the Chinese Ministry of Science and Technology, project No. 2002AA601013.