Irreducible ankle fractures are a relatively rare phenomenon. We present a case of a pronation abduction-type ankle fracture that was irreducible in the emergency room despite sedation. The patient was taken to the operating room, where the posterior tibialis tendon and retinaculum, deltoid ligament, and anteromedial capsule were found to be trapped within the joint. After removal of the tissue, alignment was restored. The patient did well clinically and was advanced to full weightbearing at 6 weeks. This is, to the best of our knowledge, the first report of entrapment of all 4 anatomic structures, preventing closed reduction.Irreducible ankle fractures are a rare phenomenon, and entrapment of the posterior tibialis tendon even more so A 36-year-old male presented to our emergency department with an inability to bear weight and severe pain after a fall down stairs 4 days earlier. Closed reduction had been attempted at an outside hospital, but the ankle could not be reduced, and the patient was advised to undergo surgical evaluation. On physical examination, a well-molded short leg splint was in place, which was taken down. Extensive swelling and ecchymosis were present over both malleoli; however, all compartments were compressible, and he experienced no pain with passive stretch. The neurovascular examination findings were normal. Initial radiographs were notable for subluxation of the talus laterally and malalignment of the mortise. The patient was sedated in the emergency room, and closed reduction was reattempted ( The patient was brought to the operating room. The medial side was addressed first ( Attention was then turned to the lateral side. In this case, the soft tissue swelling was not so severe as to preclude internal fixation; however, if the soft tissues are tenuous, an external fixator can be applied, and definitive internal fixation can be performed in a staged manner. The comminuted fibular fracture was fixed with one 3.5-mm cortical lag screw and a one-third tubular plate to bridge the remainder of the comminution. Fluoroscopy confirmed reduction of the fracture and ankle mortise; however, external rotation stress testing revealed syndesmotic widening. The syndesmosis was reduced under direct visualization by raising an anterior flap over the distal fibula, and 2 tricortical 3.5-mm cortical screws were placed. Repeat stress testing confirmed reduction of the syndesmosis but revealed residual talar tilt ( Irreducible ankle fractures are rare. Either soft tissue or bony pathologic features can preclude reduction In previous reports, the posterior tibialis tendon was described as dislocating from the posterior tibial tendon groove and moving from the medial to the lateral aspect of the talus and tibia during ankle dislocation. During attempted reduction, the tendon can be caught on the lateral aspect of the tibia at the level of the syndesmosis and at the posterior talus As noted by Connors et al The posterior tibialis originates on the posterior borders of the tibia and fibula and travels within the deep posterior compartment of the leg. The tendon traverses posterior to the medial malleolus before dividing into 3 components: plantar, main, and recurrent. The plantar branch inserts on the base of the second through fourth metatarsals, second and third cuneiforms, and cuboid. The main portion inserts onto the navicular and first cuneiform, and the recurrent inserts onto the sustentaculum tali of the calcaneus To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report to describe the case of entrapment of not only the posterior tibialis tendon but also the deltoid ligament and anteromedial capsule. Our data search revealed only 1 report of isolated deltoid ligament entrapment leading to an irreducible ankle, although deltoid rupture is a common sequela of many ankle fractures Although many surgeons often begin ankle procedures with the lateral side, if entrapment is expected, it is reasonable to approach the medial side first. Once the interposed medial soft tissue structures have been removed, the ankle joint can be reduced. The fibula and syndesmosis can then be reduced and fixed. We prefer to leave both wounds open until all fixation and stress testing have been completed to allow a return to the medial wound if needed (e.g., to repair the deltoid ligament and posterior tibialis retinaculum to prevent future subluxation). In the present study, we report, to the best of our knowledge, the first reported case of posterior tibialis tendon, deltoid ligament, anteromedial capsule, and retinaculum entrapment, preventing closed reduction of an ankle fracture. Several factors can heighten suspicion for soft tissue entrapment, including a disproportionately wide medial clear space, anterior or lateral subluxation of the talus, and high-energy pronation mechanisms. Successful outcomes depend on recognition that the fracture requires open reduction, careful intraoperative examination and surgical technique to address the interposed tissues, and thorough stress testing to identify and resolve any persistent ankle instability.  Supplementary material associated with this article can be found in the online version at