The mobility of the glenohumeral joint in multiple anatomic planes is not without consequence as recurrent instability is common, particularly among young, active individuals. Throughout midranges of shoulder motion, stability is conferred primarily by the compression-cavity effect of the rotator cuff as muscular contractions maintain the humeral head centred in the glenoid cavity. At extremes of shoulder motion (flexion and abduction), derangements of capsule-ligamentous complex, glenoid and glenoid labrum drive a pathophysiological cascade that manifests clinically as recurrent anterior, unidirectional instability. In the setting of bone loss <25% of the inferior glenoid diameter, arthroscopic Bankart repair using proper technique yields reliable clinical results. Additionally, much is now known about the extent to which attritional glenoid bone loss, related commonly to repeated dislocation events, affects the predicted success of certain treatment approaches. The preponderance of existing literature supports performing a bone grafting procedure for cases in which the osseous defect comprises >25% of the glenoid width, with the Latarjet procedure being favoured among recent authors. A growing body of evidence has elucidated the consequence of humeral head defects (the Hill-Sachs lesion) as a predictor of recurrent instability. Thus, the concept of ‘bipolar bone loss’ has emerged as a critical concept in the surgical treatment of recurrent shoulder instability. Surgeons should adopt a treatment paradigm that focuses on the relationship between both osseous defects—glenoid and humeral head—and incorporates a surgical tactic to appropriately address each lesion.Traumatic anterior glenohumeral dislocation is a common clinical entity, occurring at a rate of 0.08 dislocations per 1000 person-years. The pathophysiological cascade of events related to anterior shoulder instability is well described. The Bankart lesion represents avulsion of the IGHL off of the glenoid. Conversely, avulsions off of the humerus are referred to as humeral avulsion of the glenohumeral ligament (HAGL). In addition to capsuloligamentous injuries, associated osseous defects are divided into glenoid and humeral lesions. Osseous defects about the glenoid are further distinguished based on the presence or absence of fragments. Sugaya The type and amount of glenoid bone loss has a marked effect on treatment approach and expected clinical outcomes ( Glenoid bone defects frequently do not occur in isolation, and compression fractures of the humeral head (Hill-Sachs (HS) lesions) are commonly observed in patients with recurrent instability. Furthermore, the role of humeral-sided bone defects in glenohumeral instability continues to be elucidated in biomechanical and clinical studies, as several authors have described the reciprocal pathomechanic relationship between these ‘bipolar’ lesions. The relationship between concomitant glenoid and humeral head osseous defects—'bipolar bone loss'—has significantly improved contemporary understandings of recurrent glenohumeral instability. Burkhart and De Beer pioneered this concept, and Boileau and Balg devised an 'instability severity index score (ISIS)' that incorporated the concept of bipolar bone loss into a grading scheme to help guide treatment. These authors identified several risk factors, including age younger than 20 years, participation in competitive or contact sports, shoulder hypermobility and identifiable bone defects of either the humeral head or glenoid on plain radiographs, as predictors for failure of arthroscopic repair.   Number of previous shoulder dislocations; Estimation of time spent dislocated; History of previous stabilisation procedures; Sport-specific considerations: participation in collision sports, throwing athlete; Precise measurements of: glenoid bone loss, glenoid track, Hill-Sachs lesion, Hill-Sachs interval. The purpose of this review is to provide an update on the salient issues in the surgical management of glenohumeral instability with a special focus on bone loss and an emphasis on a treatment paradigm that addresses bipolar bone defects. We present our view of the most important papers published on this topic (   Burkhart and De Beer; Di Giacomo Yamamoto Balg and Boileau; Purchase Burkhart Itoi Burkhart Ghodadra Hartzler The success of arthroscopic treatment of glenohumeral instability has been well established in scenarios involving minimal glenoid bone loss. However, high-quality prospective clinical trials are generally lacking. In a large systematic review encompassing the results of 1781 patients with a mean follow-up of 11 years, Harris Arthroscopic techniques for addressing instability in the setting of minimal glenoid bone loss continue to be refined. Several authors have described techniques for addressing displaced anterior glenoid rim fractures that are potentially repairable, commonly referred to as ‘bony Bankart’ lesions. These lesions are common, with the prevalence reported to be as high as 50% of shoulders with instability events Failure of arthroscopic stabilisation techniques can be attributed to a number of factors, including patient selection, failure to identify and treat associated pathology, poor surgical technique and patient non-compliance with postoperative activity restrictions (   Failure to appreciate extent of glenoid bone loss; Inability to visualise all associated pathology (ALPSA, HAGL); Use of less than three suture anchors; Inadequate mobilisation of capsulolabral tissues; Inadequate plication of capsular tissues; Suture anchor placement to medial off of the glenoid. Recently, however, several authors have explored the possibility of certain subsets of patients (contact athletes and military members) that may be particularly vulnerable to recurrence following arthroscopic repair in the setting of degrees of glenoid bone loss previously thought to be appropriate for an all-arthroscopic treatment approach. Associated pathologies must be recognised and addressed in order to maximise the likelihood of a successful arthroscopic Bankart repair. HAGL is a relatively rare injury associated with anterior glenohumeral instability, estimated to occur in ∼9% of instability events. Apart from the aforementioned pitfalls of treating glenohumeral instability, accurate characterisation of the extent of glenoid bone loss is required in order to develop the appropriate surgical tactic. As plain radiography oftentimes provides incomplete visualisation of the glenoid, three-dimensional (3D) CT sagittal oblique view should be considered the gold standard for analysing the morphology of the anterior glenoid rim with the humeral head subtracted from the image. A number of methods, using a best-fit circle superimposed on the inferior glenoid, have been described to calculate the amount of glenoid bone loss (defect length, width-to-length ratio, defect width/circle diameter ('glenoid index'), defect area/circle area ('Pico method')). Glenoid bone loss is well described as a key factor in glenohumeral instability. In a cadaveric study, Greis HS lesions are compression fractures of the posterosuperolateral aspect of the humeral head, resulting from contact with the glenoid during anterior instability events. These lesions are exceedingly common and have been observed in 65–67% of first-time shoulder dislocators and 84–93% of recurrent shoulder dislocators. Although occurring in a minority (7%) of cases of recurrent anterior shoulder dislocations, the concept of HS lesion engagement is a critical concept in understanding the pathomechanics of anterior glenohumeral instability. Whether or not a HS lesion is ‘off-track’ or ‘on-track’ is predicted on the size and orientation of the humeral lesion relative to the rim of the glenoid. From a pathomechanical standpoint, if the medial margin of the HS lesion is within the glenoid track ('on track'), the adjacent bone prevents engagement of the HS lesion with the adjacent glenoid rim as the shoulder is abducted and externally rotated. However, if the medial margin of the HS lesion lies medial to the medial extent of the glenoid track, the HS lesion engages the glenoid rim ('off-track') thereby destabilising the glenohumeral articulation as the shoulder is abducted and externally rotated ( In our view, characterising the morphology of the HS lesion is most precisely accomplished by the use of a 3D CT with special emphasis on the posterior aspect of the humeral head. Two reference points—the medial margin of the footprint of the rotator cuff and the medial margin of the HS lesion—are marked and the distance between these two points is noted. Next a line, equal to 83% of the remaining glenoid width, is set from the medial margin of the rotator cuff footprint. In the absence of a HS lesion, this line represents the medial margin of the glenoid track. The measured width of the glenoid defect (d) is subtracted from the 83% line to obtain the medial margin of the actual glenoid track ( Attention is next turned to calculating the HS interval (HSI) (   Determine the diameter (D) of the inferior glenoid using the best-fit circle method. Determine the width of the anterior glenoid bone loss (d). Calculate the width of the glenoid track (GT): 0.83 (D−d). Calculate the width of the Hill-Sachs interval (HSI): width of the Hill-Sachs lesion (HSL)+width of the bone bridge (BB) between the rotator cuff insertion and the lateral aspect of the HSL [HIS=HSL+BB]. If Hill-Sachs lesion (HSL) > glenoid track (GT), Hill-Sachs in off-track; If HSL <GT, Hill-Sachs is on-track. This arthroscopic method of quantitatively determining the nature of HS lesion engagement (‘on-track’ vs ‘off-track‘) is superior to a dynamic, qualitative, arthroscopic assessment for several reasons. First, the dynamic intraoperative assessment of HS lesions is typically performed prior to arthroscopic Bankart repair. In this setting, prerepair capsuloligamentous insufficiency may very well permit excessive anterior translation of the humeral head, resulting in engagement of the HS lesion with the glenoid rim. Second, dynamic arthroscopic assessment of HS lesion engagement following Bankart repair puts the repair at risk by overstressing the reapproximated capsuloligamentous tissues with shoulder abduction and external rotation. Viewing through the anterosuperior portal, the distance from the bare spot of the glenoid to the posterior glenoid rim (R) is measured with an arthroscopic probe and doubled to define the diameter of the inferior aspect of the glenoid (D). Next, the distance from the bare spot to the anterior rim of the glenoid is measured (r). In the absence of glenoid bone loss, R and r will be equivalent. However, in the setting of glenoid bone loss, R minus r will yield the amount of glenoid bone loss (d). The glenoid track is then calculated as follows: 0.83D−d. The results from several recent clinical studies support the ‘on-track’ ‘off-track’ concept of the engaging HS lesion. Shaha Purchase A number of biomechanical studies have demonstrated the effects of this procedure on decreasing HS engagement while also altering glenohumeral range of motion and increasing mechanical stiffness. Elkinson In spite of concerns pertaining to restrictions in external rotation, there is an emerging body of literature to suggest the utility of remplissage in engaging HS lesions. Boileau Based on the biomechanical and clinical data, glenoid defects of 25% or more should be addressed with a glenoid grafting procedure. Among the various bone grafting procedures described to augment the deficient glenoid (Latarjet procedure, iliac crest bone grafting, allograft augmentation), we prefer the Congruent-arc Latarjet procedure for the management of critical glenoid bone defects. The Latarjet procedure has been shown to confer stability through the combined ‘triple effect’ which: (1) lengthens the articular arc of the glenoid, (2) the ‘sling effect’ of the conjoint tendon bolsters the anteroinferior aspect of the glenohumeral joint in shoulder abduction and external rotation and (3) tensions the subscapularis, thereby providing a checkrein against anterior translation of the humeral head. Whereas the traditional Latarjet procedure involves direct inferolateral translation and fixation of the cut cancellous surface of the coracoid base to the deficient glenoid edge, De Beer and Burkhart described a modification (‘Congruent-arc Latartjet‘) to coracoid transfer in which the medial surface of the coracoid is rotated 90° on its long axis to abut the deficient glenoid edge. Recently, several important anatomic studies have supported the rationale for the Congruent-arc Latarjet procedure. Using 34 3D CT models, Armitage Multiple authors have demonstrated favourable outcomes and low recurrent instability rates following the Latarjet procedure at mid to long-term follow-up. A recent systematic review of 10 series reporting outcomes of the Latarjet procedure observed an overall recurrence rate that ranged from 0% to 8%.    Perform diagnostic arthroscopy; Patient positioned in beach chair with head elevated 20°; Continue dissection of the soft tissues away from the coracoid such that a finger can be placed inferior to the coracoid; Coracoid osteotomy performed at the base of the coracoclavicular ligament; Ensure that the saw blade or osteotome does not exit the coracoid onto the glenoid face; Avoid lateral graft overhang to prevent progression of arthritis; Avoid medial graft overhang to prevent under-tensioning of the soft tissue sling; Maintain screws within 10° of the glenoid in the axial plane to minimise the likelihood of injury to the suprascapular nerve. A recent comparative analysis of arthroscopic and open Latarjet procedures underscores the potential pitfalls of an all-arthroscopic surgical tactic. Among 28 patients treated with an all-arthroscopic Latarjet and 36 patients treated with an open Latarjet procedure, Cunningham While neurovascular injuries following open Latarjet procedure are relatively uncommon, a thorough understanding of the relevant anatomy is crucial to safe coracoid graft harvest and fixation to the anterior glenoid rim. Among 47 patients (48 shoulders) treated with open Latarjet procedure, Shah Special attention must also be paid to the anatomy of the suprascapular nerve as iatrogenic injuries have been reported. The importance of optimising the position of the coracoid graft on the anterior glenoid rim cannot be overemphasised. Ghodadra In our practice, patients undergoing arthroscopic Bankart repair are immobilised in a sling for 6 weeks, with only active elbow flexion and extension allowed. The duration of immobilisation is modified somewhat for overhead athletes that have undergone surgery. These patients are immobilised for 4 weeks. After immobilisation in a sling, full forward flexion is allowed, while external rotation is progressed to half that of the well arm at 12 weeks from surgery. Similarly, overhead athletes are permitted to strive for more external rotation. Shoulder strengthening work is initiated 6 weeks from surgery, unless remplissage is performed, in which case, strengthening is delayed until 12 weeks from surgery. If remplissage is performed in conjunction with arthroscopic Bankart repair, we delay strengthening until 3 months postoperatively to allow for solid healing of the capsule-tendon composite into the HS defect. Full, unrestricted activities are typically allowed 6 months from surgery. Postoperative rehabilitation following open Latarjet reconstruction begins with 6 weeks of immobilisation in a sling. Similar to restrictions following arthroscopic stabilisation, external rotation is limited to half of normal until 12 weeks postop. At 12 weeks postop, radiographs of the shoulder are obtained to verify the position of the coracoid graft relative to the glenoid. If the position is satisfactory, strengthening exercises are started, and patients are authorised to begin lifting weights at 6 months postop. Participation in collision sports is restricted until 1 year postop. As an appreciation for the importance of bipolar bone loss in treating glenohumeral instability grows among surgeons, novel approaches to difficult clinical scenarios involving osseous defects continue to emerge. In addition to coracoid transfer and iliac crest bone grafting procedures for addressing critical glenoid bone loss, several authors have advocated for the use of a distal tibial allograft, citing its excellent articular conformity with the native glenoid ROC. Successful surgical management of glenohumeral instability demands a complete appreciation for pathology of the soft tissues and osseous structures. Our treatment paradigm (