Embryonic stem cells are pluripotent cells derived from the inner cell mass of mouse blastocysts that have been shown to differentiate spontaneously into cell types representing all three germ layers. This study shows that ES cells were induced to differentiate in vitro into mineralized osteoblasts under the influence of ascorbic acid, β-glycerophosphate and 1α,25-OH vitamin D3. The activity of alkaline phosphatase, an early osteoblast marker, was found to be increased around day 12 of culture. Mineralized cells were clearly identified by histochemical staining, which detects mineralized calcium. The major noncollagenous component of bone matrix, osteocalcin, was localized to the mineralized cells by immunofluorescence. The expression of bone-specific genes was analyzed by real-time quantitative PCR. Osteocalcin and bone sialoprotein (BSP) were identified as early as in the fourth week of embryonic stem cell culture, both being characteristic for late stages of osteoblastic differentiation, indicating that at this time of culture the identified cells represent “mature” osteoblasts. The osteoblast-specific transcription factor Cbfa1 was induced a few days earlier. The expression of osteopontin and osteonectin, both being involved in binding calcium ions and hydroxyapatite during mineralization processes, as well as of collagen type I, representing by far the most predominant collagen in vertebrate organisms, is enhanced at the beginning of the second culture week upon addition of supplements. In the third week of culture, treated cells showed a second peak of osteopontin, osteonectin and collagen type I expression, osteopontin and osteonectin being stimulated 3 – 4-fold and collagen type I being induced 6-fold over control values. Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) expression was enhanced at the beginning of the third week of culture and was found to be increased again at later stages of culture at days 27 – 34. The in vitro differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells into osteoblasts may provide a suitable model for studying the molecular processes of osteoblastic development in vivo.