A retrospective analysis of 893 consecutive periprosthetic femoral fractures treated between 1976 and 2001 shows that component exchange with reimplantation of a cemented long-stem implant can be considered a reliable method of treatment with good functional results and low rates of complications (10%) and revision (7.5%). The possibility of increasing the degree of weight bearing postoperatively at an early stage or even immediate full weight bearing (25%) greatly facilitates mobilization of the mostly elderly and fragile patients. Evaluation according to the Harris Hip Score of the operation and rehabilitation results of a representative sample of 120 patients shows an average value of 85 after a mean period of 6.4 years. The patients' own rating is correspondingly high. In the authors' view, stem exchange is currently the method of choice in the majority of cases because of the rather high rate of stem loosening (77%) at the time of operation, the age-related frequently poor quality or loss of bone substance, and the possibility that the implant material may be damaged. The fact that more than one third of the fractures occurred without significant trauma underlines the importance of this injury as a possible sign of previously unrecognized osteolysis and weakening of the bone as a result of loosening of the prosthesis stem.Periprosthetic fractures of the femur are a serious complication after total hip arthroplasty, occurring in approximately 1% of cases. The absolute number of periprosthetic femur fractures continuously increases as the number of patients requiring such implants grows. They are usually treated by exchange of the prosthesis stem or both components or, if the prosthesis is still firmly in position, by plating osteosynthesis. The minimally invasive nature of this procedure (eg, by means of the so-called LISS system) is considered to be its most important feature. Plating osteosynthesis is without doubt an established method of treatment, but long-term follow-up reveals that reoperation becomes necessary in as many as 25% to 50% Between 1976 and 2001, the ENDO-Clinic Hamburg treated 875 consecutive patients with a periprosthetic femoral fracture using a cemented long-stem or total femur replacement (TOFEM) ( After reduction and stabilization of the fracture, the prosthesis was fixed in position with Refobacin-Palacos. The bone cement was prepared conventionally and applied in the retrograde method. Great care was taken to avoid penetration of the bone cement between the fragments. Near bone defects, the TOFEMs were coated with cement, as in these cases, the bone served only as a muscle insertion. At the same time, it was necessary to prevent tubular fragments from telescoping on the prosthesis surface. The analysis group comprised 120 patients from this series who returned for follow-up after an average of 6.4 years (range, 2-13 years). With regard to age, sex, primary diagnosis, time to revision, accident mechanism, and fracture classification, they constitute a representative sample of the whole group ( From the radiographs, we assessed fracture consolidation, material damage, and implant position. In the cases with revision stems, any radiolucent lines, osteolysis, or stem subsidence at the implant-bone or bone-cement interface of more than 1 mm were evaluated as needing further monitoring. Radiolucent lines, osteolysis, and stem subsidence of more than 2 mm were evaluated as clear signs of loosening. In the TOFEM, patients these changes are only relevant in the regions of tibial and acetabular anchorage. Therefore, only these regions were radiographed for assessment of implant position. The results were evaluated according to the Harris Hip Score (HHS). In addition, the TOFEMs were analyzed separately so that their functional results could be compared with those of the total study group and the follow-up group, respectively. In 66.1% of patients, the right femur was fractured, and in 33.9%, the left femur. More than one third of the fractures (35%) occurred as a result of trivial trauma only, and in 77% of cases, there was radiological or previous clinical sign We implanted TOFEMs in patients whose uninjured part of the femur was not long enough or whose bone quality was not good enough to ensure secure anchorage of a long-stem implant or who also had advanced unstable osteoarthritis in the ipsilateral knee. Additional wire cerclage was necessary in 70.1% and autologous or homologous bone grafting in 9.6%. Fracture classification according to Bethea ( Only 44 (5%) of the patients had to avoid weight bearing completely after the operation. Primary full weight bearing was possible for one quarter, and the remaining three quarters achieved full weight bearing after 1.5 months (0-4 months), on average. At the time of discharge or commencement of rehabilitation, 94.1% had achieved full extension of the hip, and flexion was 62° (35°-90°), on average. The average postrehabilitation walking time of the 120 patients examined clinically was about 85 minutes, ranging from 10 to 200 (unlimited) minutes. Orthopedic aids, mostly canes, were used by 42 (35.8%) patients. None of the patients complained of pain in the operated leg when at rest or beginning to walk. Only 14 (11.7%) experienced more or less severe pain on weight bearing. They did, however, frequently complain of pain in the contralateral joint. This was mainly caused by arthrosis or loosening of an arthroplasty previously implanted in this hip. According to Charnley's classification, 49.2% of the follow-up patients were experiencing unilateral joint disease, 36.7% bilateral disease, and 14.1% multiple joint problems. Total arthroplasty or component exchange was, therefore, planned for the contralateral hip of 15 (12.5%) patients. More than one third (35%) were also experiencing back pain, and one quarter had to take nonsteroidal antiinflammatory medication sporadically or regularly for various reasons. Clinical examination showed that 16 (13.3%) limped and 14 (11.7%) had a positive Trendelenburg on the operated side. Twelve (10%) had impaired sensibility around the operation scar. There was no evidence of paresis, markedly impaired circulation, or soft tissue irritation. The operated leg was, on average, 0.9 cm (−3 to 1 cm) shorter than the other. In 50%, leg length difference was less than 0.5 cm and could be compensated by a heel cushion. The mean range of motion of the operated hip at the time of follow-up was good, considering the age of the patients and type of operation ( The overall complication rate was 10% ( The results of the TOFEM subgroup, in comparison with the total study group and follow-up group, are summarized in At follow-up, there were only minor differences between the groups regarding average postoperative walking time and the necessity for orthopedic aids. Weight bearing–related pain occurred in the TOFEM subgroup more frequently. This did not correlate to nonsteroidal antiinflammatory medication, however, although there was a much higher percentage of patients with multiple joint problems in this subgroup. A large number of the TOFEM patients limped at the ipsilateral hip or had a positive Trendelenburg as evidence of their original muscular dysbalance and the operation trauma. Generally, there was very little difference between the groups regarding leg length discrepancy and range of motion at the hip (particularly in abduction and adduction). The HHS result in the TOFEM subgroup was only 71, in comparison with 85 in the follow-up group. Correspondingly, fewer patients rated the operation result as “excellent.” The rating was more often “good” or “satisfactory.” The complication rate of the large implant subgroup was higher than that of the other group, and radiographs of this subgroup revealed a higher incidence of focal osteolysis and radiolucent lines in patients who were completely pain-free. Predisposing factors for fractures around the femoral component are mainly the difference in elasticity between the prosthesis stem and the osteoporotic rarefied bone stock, as well as progressive prosthesis loosening. The femoral cortex may be impaired by drill holes, cortical windows, previous revisions, or heterotopic femoral fractures. As long as stem implants are firmly in position and there are no iatrogenic or acquired stress raisers (osteolysis), periprosthetic fractures are rare, usually only occurring as a result of violent trauma. The importance of injury as the first indication of undiagnosed stem loosening was confirmed by our study in which more than one third of the fractures occurred without any significant trauma, and a large number of the stem implants showed clinical or radiological signs of loosening at the time of accident Therapy of fractures around the femoral stem is determined by localization, radiological or clinical evidence of prosthesis loosening, femoral bone defects, and also patients' age and general condition. A number of procedures are recommended, depending on the individual situation of the patient. These include traction, casting and partial weight bearing, cerclage wiring, screw/plate fixation, long-stem revision with or without additional fixation or bone grafts, and other less frequently reported techniques. There is no standard therapy concept, and the different fracture classification systems, which partly overlap or include combinations of different categories, are of little relevance In this study, fracture localization was classified according to the Tower and Beals and the Bethea systems. In their survey, Mont and Maar It is nevertheless remarkable that despite the variety of the injuries, exchange of the prosthesis or component is almost always counted among the procedures with a comparatively good outcome. Implant loosening, inability to relieve weight, and poor bone quality are the general criteria that make component exchange necessary. Seventy-seven percent of the patients in our study showed evidence of clinical or radiological loosening at the time of fracture or revision. Because of their age or disease, the majority of them were not able to keep to a 3- to 4-month period of no or only partial weight bearing. Intraoperatively, bone quality was classified as poor in 32%. Often, the same patient fulfilled 2 or all 3 of these criteria. For this reason, only about 2% of patients admitted to the Endo-Clinic with periprosthetic femoral fractures are treated by osteosynthesis. In other publications, the evaluation of bone quality or loss of bone stock as a factor that codetermines the method of treatment is surprisingly absent In current literature, there are no comparable studies with a similarly large number of cases. The series reported to date deal with relatively small numbers of different fracture types treated by different methods. The results are, therefore, inconclusive and because of the many different factors involved not comparable. We also know of no other study in which the condition of the acetabular component was routinely checked as part of the revision procedure. In view of the number of loose acetabular components that we diagnosed intraoperatively (62.1%), the number of loose acetabular components overlooked when other procedures are used routinely is probably seriously underestimated. It is a frequently ignored fact that a hitherto firmly fixed stem prosthesis that has loosened because of fracture has virtually no chance of regaining its firm fixation without an exchange operation, even when consolidation of the fracture is good From experience, we know that elderly and polypathic The aim of treatment should be to achieve anatomic alignment, quick fracture union, return to prefracture functional status, early mobilization, and a stable prosthesis after fracture consolidation. It, therefore, seems an anachronism that, on the one hand, intramedullary stabilization is increasingly preferred as treatment of fractures in long bones instead of conventional osteosynthesis techniques, but on the other, this trend has so far been largely ignored for the treatment of periprosthetic fractures in spite of numerous poor results with osteosynthesis. Osteosynthesis often requires additional bone grafting with autologous cancellous bone involving correspondingly large donor site morbidity and high compliance by the patient. At the same time, the mainly elderly patients often cannot yield a sufficient quantity of suitable cancellous bone. Minimally invasive techniques, such as the LISS system, have not yet been adequately tested as a standard procedure on large groups of patients. Many reports point out that the stabilization techniques most frequently used to treat periprosthetic femoral fractures are those that are associated with the worst results for certain types of fracture. Conservative procedures involving long-term nonweight-bearing, plastering and casting, or traction techniques should definitely be a thing of the past because of the medical problems associated with prolonged bed rest and their frequent failure to maintain alignment even in cases of nondisplacement As shown in our study, the technical difficulties often assumed to be involved in the revision of firmly fixed stem prostheses do not present too serious a problem when dealt with by an experienced surgeon using an appropriate technique: Neither the intra- nor postoperative rate of complications is greatly different from the rates after revision of loose stems. This corresponds to our experience with 1-stage exchange to treat periprosthetic infection, where exchange of both components, regardless of the state of the prosthesis fixation, is mandatory. In cases with severe loss of bone substance, TOFEMs can be considered (eg, after multiple exchanges) in patients with poor bone quality, fractures between the stem and an ipsilateral knee prosthesis, ipsilateral knee arthritis, in cases where it is no longer possible to implant a long-stem component to span lost bone stock, and also in rare cases such as pathological fractures caused by tumors. Implantation of a modular TOFEM is nowadays a standard procedure that can be completed in 3 to 5 hours. From the technical point of view, it is easier than a complicated exchange procedure. An important advantage, especially for elderly patients, is that this replacement implant allows immediate weight bearing and rapid remobilization that considerably reduces the rate of perioperative morbidity. Good functional results can be maintained over a long period depending on the condition of the soft tissues