The failure mode of rock under cutting exhibits a ductile-brittle transition as the depth of cut increases. The critical transition depth, beyond which energy consumed in brittle fracturing surpasses the energy consumed in plastic flow, is the key to differentiating between the ductile and brittle cutting modes and therefore is an important parameter to optimise tool design and operational parameters to meet specific application requirements. This critical failure mode transition depth depends not only on rock properties but also on cutting operational parameters, in particular, the back rake angle. In this work, a series of rock cutting tests were performed to investigate the influence of back rake angle on the critical failure mode transition depth. Size effect law is employed first to identify the critical transition depths, which are then compared with values derived from the analysis of specific cutting energy. It is found that the critical failure mode transition depth increases with the back rake angle. This suggests that the brittle fracture failure induced at large depth of cut can be inhibited by increasing the back rake angle. Cutting at a small back rake angle, on the other hand, is desirable if minimisation of the cutting energy is required in the application.Understanding the interaction between rock and a cutter is important for many rock engineering applications, including exploration drilling, tunnelling, mining, stone sawing and polishing ( It is well known that there exist two different failure modes in rock cutting, namely, ductile and brittle failure modes ( The failure mode transition has been an active research topic in rock cutting mechanics, e.g., ( However, to our best knowledge, the effect of some operational parameters such as cutting velocity and back rake angle on the failure mode transition phenomenon has rarely been explored. Recent experimental observations suggest that the critical failure mode transition depth is dependent not only on rock properties but also on the operational parameters. It was found that the cutting velocity in the range of 4–20 This paper aims to investigate the effect of back rake angle on the transition of cutting failure modes. A series of cutting tests are conducted on two types of limestone and size effect law (SEL) is introduced into the analysis of the cutting mechanisms. The SEL derived failure mode transition depths are then compared with those derived from specific cutting energy analysis. The accuracy and reliability of SEL model and specific energy model are assessed by examining the cutting grooves. Although there are extensive experimental and numerical studies reported on rock cutting processes, few of them deal with the reliable determination of the critical transition depth that quantifies the change of dominant rock failure modes during rock cutting. To deal with this issue, two different approaches are presented below, with one based on the size effect analysis and the other on specific cutting energy. It is well understood, in general, larger structures are more brittle than smaller structures ( In rock cutting, ductile failure dominates at shallow cuts and the specific cutting energy is almost constant, independent of the cutting depth. After the cutting depth is greater than the critical transition depth, brittle failure dominates and the specific energy will decrease against increasing cutting depth. This failure mode transition displays similar characteristics as the size effect law even though strictly speaking the underlying mechanisms considered behind these two features are different. The reduction in strength in size effect law is mainly due to the inclusion of more defects in rocks at large scales, while the reduction in specific cutting energy in rock cutting is mainly due to the increment in the proportion of fracturing failure mode as cutting depth increases. However, there is some equivalence as both are dealing with easier brittle failure at larger scales due to the involvement of fracturing. In this respect, Lin and Zhou tried to promote the understanding of rock cutting mechanics by the application of the size effect law ( In this study, we take the view that the assumption of the tangential cutting force In view of the difference in the energy dissipation between ductile and brittle failure modes in rock cutting, the specific cutting energy, an index to measure the cutting efficiency, was utilised to quantitatively determine the critical failure mode transition depth by For new PDC cutters (as used in this study), it is reasonable to neglect the influence of wear flat of the cutter tip on the cutting force responses. Therefore, when cutting proceeds in ductile failure mode, the specific cutting energy is given as On the other hand, when the cutting changes to brittle failure dominating mode, the specific energy is related to the depth of cut as: When the ductile failure mode is dominant in cutting, the energy is dissipated in volumetrically deforming the rock ahead of the cutter and the material is removed via plastic flow. While for brittle failure dominant cutting, the energy is mainly dissipated upon crack propagation and development of fracture surfaces. Eqs. Therefore the complete expression of the specific energy for different cutting conditions is a piecewise function by combining Eqs. This piecewise function is used to fit the experimental data from cutting such that the critical transition depth Comparing these two techniques discussed above for the determination of the critical transition depth Linear rock cutting tests were conducted on two selected limestone: Savonnières (SL) and Tuffeau (TL) for their homogeneity in order to obtain more reproducible results and minimise the influence of rock heterogeneity on the variability of experimental data under the same cutting conditions. Rock properties including uniaxial compressive strength In laboratory rock cutting tests, there are mainly three operational parameters, namely cutting velocity, depth of cut and back rake angle, affecting the cutting responses. It was concluded by  The increasing rate of the cutting force against cutting depth can be used to estimate the critical transition depth ( The force profiles discussed above only provide a qualitative description of the critical failure mode transition. The quantitative determination of the critical transition depth based on the two data fitting models, i.e., the size effect law and the specific cutting energy transition model, is described below.  In addition to the fact that the critical failure mode transition depth increases with the back rake angle, it is interesting to note that the specific cutting energy for the ductile-failure-dominant cutting process, represented by the horizontal line segment in The estimated critical transition depths for Savonnières limestone based on the two models for different back rake angle of 15°, 30° and 45° are displayed in To reduce the undesirable effects of the debris obstruction on our analysis, the cutting data of Savonnières at As the back rake angle increases, this geometric factor The estimated critical transition depths from the two models discussed are summarised in Obviously the results from the two models are different. To assess the accuracy of these estimates, we can examine carefully the cutting grooves at least to reach a qualitative conclusion. For example, at In order to examine whether the factors introduced in this study, i.e., Actually a mathematical relationship for predicting This study introduced two data fitting models to identify the critical failure mode transition depth for rock cutting: the size effect law model and the specific energy transition model. Rock cutting tests on two types of rocks, Tuffeau and Savonnières, were conducted with three different back rake angles of 15°, 30° and 45° to demonstrate the applicability of these two models in determining the critical failure mode transition depth. In the specific cutting energy transition model, the specific energy in the ductile cutting dominant process is considered to be independent of cutting depth while in brittle cutting dominant mode it is related to the cutting depth by a power-law relationship. For the size effect law model, a refinement has been made in this study to include the effect of the normal component of the cutting force, which acts as an indentation load on the cutting force responses. Compared with the more traditional qualitative method of examining the force trace patterns, these two data-fitting models can give definite and more accurate values for the critical transition depth without requiring the rock properties to be known The critical failure mode transition depth is found to be dependent on the back rake angle: it increases when the back rake angle increases. The specific cutting energy transition model tends to underestimate the critical failure mode transition depth in comparison with the size effect law model. Cross validation with the failure surface profiles suggests that the size effect law model can give a better estimate for the cases tested. Although both the piecewise specific energy variation and size effect law models can be used to derive specific critical transition depth, they are no more than two curve-fitting models. It should also be noted that not all the fitted values of those factors (except The work has been partly supported by the Deep Exploration Technologies Cooperative Research Centre whose activities are funded by the