This paper describes results of seam welding of relatively high temperature melting materials, AISI 304, C-Mn steels, Ni-based alloys, CP Cu, CP Ni, Ti6Al4V and relatively low temperature melting material, AA6061. It describes the seam welding of multi-layered similar and dissimilar metallic sheets. The method described and involved advancing a rotating non-consumable rod (CP Mo or AISI 304) toward the upper sheet of a metallic stack clamped under pressure. As soon as the distal end of the rod touched the top portion of the upper metallic sheet, an axial force was applied. After an initial dwell time, the metallic stack moved horizontally relative to the stationery non-consumable rod by a desired length, thereby forming a metallurgical bond between the metallic sheets. Multi-track and multi-metal seam welds of high temperature metallic sheets, AISI 304, C-Mn steel, Nickel-based alloys, Cp Cu, Ti6Al4V and low temperature metallic sheets, AA6061 were obtained. Optical and scanning electron microscopy examination and 180 degree U-bend test indicated that defect free seam welds could be obtained with this method. Tensile- shear testing showed that the seam welds of AISI 304, C-Mn steel, Nickel-based alloy were stronger than the starting base metal counterparts while AA6061 was weaker due to softening. The metallurgical bonding at the interface between the metallic sheets was attributed to localized stick and slip at the interface, dynamic recrystallization and diffusion. The method developed can be used as a means of welding, cladding and additive manufacturing.Conventional lap seam welding processes can be classified as fusion-based which include resistance seam, laser beam, electron beam, plasma arc welding, soldering, and brazing and solid-state-based which include ultrasonic welding and roll bonding. The lap seam welds produced by fusion based methods are often associated with a variety of problems, including cracking, high porosity, deleterious metallurgical changes, and high residual stresses. Resistance seam welding is difficult to apply to aluminum alloys because of their high conductivity, low strength at temperature, and tendency to degrade the electrodes Cladding refers to the deposition of a filler metal on a substrate metal to impart corrosion, wear resistance or some desired property that is not possessed by the substrate metal. Examples of cladding include hard facing for the purpose of reducing wear, abrasion, impact, erosion, galling, or cavitation, weld cladding for the purpose of providing a corrosion-resistant surface and buttering for the purpose of adding one or more layers of weld metal to the face of the joint or surface to be welded. Conventional cladding processes can be classified as fusion-based including electric arc welding processes, brazing, electron beam welding, and laser beam welding and solid-state welding processes including explosive cladding, friction surfacing and roll bonding. The clad metals produced by conventional fusion-based methods are often associated with a variety of problems, including cracking, high porosity, deleterious metallurgical changes, and high residual stresses. High percentages of dilution, viz., the amount of base metal in the clad metal can occur in such fusion-based clad metals. Dilution percentages are typically very high, as high as 20%–50%, in most commonly used arc cladding processes such as submerged arc. Explosion cladding is typically restricted to metals with minimum elongation of 10%–15% and a notch toughness value above 30 J at bonding temperature Additive manufacturing methods and additive and selective subtractive manufacturing methods are conventionally used to fabricate layered, multi-material structural components. Layer-by-layer fabrication of three-dimensional components can be directly fabricated from a computer-aided design, CAD model of an object. Laser Engineered Net Shaping, Direct Metal Deposition, Selective Laser Melting, and Electron Beam Melting are among a number of processes being considered as additive manufacturing methods by which material addition is achieved through melting and solidification. Due to melting and solidification involved in these processes, the parts made by these techniques suffer from the following limitations Solid-state additive manufacturing methods, where liquid to solid transformation is absent, have been used to address many of the shortcomings of liquid-to-solid-based additive manufacturing methods. Ultrasonic consolidation was the first solid state additive and selective subtractive manufacturing method to be applied, and was shown to overcome some of the limitations of fusion-based methods. In contrast to the fusion based additive manufacturing methods, ultrasonic consolidation is a typical additive and selective subtractive manufacturing method to build up a near-net shape part which is then machined to its final dimensions using an integrated, 3-axis CNC milling machine. Ultrasonic consolidation suffers from limitation such as the formation of inter-foil defects Thus, there is a need to develop alternative methods for forming strong lap seam welds between a variety of hard and soft materials while avoiding the physical and metallurgical deficiencies of conventional welding methods. There is a further need for applying these lap seam welds for cladding and additive manufacturing applications. Our motivation for the work on lap seam welding emanated from our experimental work on friction spot welding method: Systems and Methods for Friction Spot Welding and Friction Seam Welding, S/N PCT/US2014/012355, Filed January 21, 2014. Our results of this work have shown that it is possible to develop metallurgically bonded spot welds of relatively thicker materials up to 3.25 mm, both low melting temperature alloys such as aluminum, magnesium, copper and high melting temperature alloys such as steel, stainless steel, Ni-based alloys. Typical spot welds of AISI 304 sheets are shown in The following metallic sheets were used in this work: AISI 304; AISI 1012; Ni-based alloys: IN 600, IN 625, HX; AA 6061; commercially pure CP Cu, CP Ni, and Ti6Al4V. The thickness ranges of metallic sheets were 0.5–5.0 mm. The dimensions of the sheets used were as follows: 190 mm × 200 mm × thickness. Non-consumable rods, CP Mo with 25.4 mm dia. and AISI 304 with 25.4 mm dia. and In this method, an upper metallic sheet was overlaid on to a lower metallic sheet which was clamped under pressure to an anvil. In some cases, an intermediate metallic sheet was also positioned in between upper and lower metallic sheets. The seam method involved advancing the rotating non-consumable rod, CP Mo or AISI 304, toward the upper sheet of a metallic stack clamped under pressure. As soon as the distal end of the rod touched the top portion of the upper metallic sheet, an axial force was applied generating frictional heat and plasticizing a portion of the upper metallic sheet. After an initial dwell time, the metallic stack moved relative to the stationery non-consumable rod by a desired length, thereby forming a metallurgical bond between the metallic sheets. Following completion of the weld, the rod is retracted. The length of each seam weld was about 125 mm long and 25 mm wide. Multi-track seam welding was formed by repeating the above steps after the clamped metallic sheet stack was axially shifted perpendicular relative to the welding direction by a desired length. The second seam weld overlapped the first seam weld relative to the transverse axis. The amount of overlap between the first seam weld and the second seam weld was between 10% and 20% of the width of the first seam weld. The lap seam welding method described above was repeated to obtain multi-layer stacks. The sequence described for two consecutive metal sheets was continued by adding a third sheet to the pre-existing two sheet welded stack. These metallic sheets comprised similar as well as dissimilar metal combinations. In another series of experiments, 2 mm thick Inconel 625 sheets with dimensions 150 mm × 150 mm, were used to fabricate a metallic micro reactor. Micro-channels with dimensions: depth of 1 mm with a length of 25 mm and width of 2 mm were milled over one sheet using a CNC milling machine. Two holes with a diameter of 3 mm were drilled holes at the edges of the linear micro-channel milled. By overlapping another plain sheet of Inconel 625 on the milled sheet, seam welding was performed as described above. To view the concealed micro-channel a radiograph of a friction seam weld of Inconel 600 was taken. To assess the continuity of the micro-channel, colored water was injected from one hole to exit through another hole via the micro-channel of seam weld. The longitudinal length from the collet end to the distal end of the rod ranged from 50 mm to 100 mm. The process parameter range used was as follows: Non-consumable rod rotational speed 800–1600 RPM; axial force 5–12 KN and weld traverse speed 15–20 mm/min. A commercially available friction stir welding machine was used to achieve the seam welds. The temperature generated due to the frictional heat was measured between two overlapped metallic sheets, AISI 304, 1.5 mm thick each using K-type thermocouples ( Bond integrity was evaluated using optical and scanning electron microscopes and 180 degree U-bend test. Microstructure of weld samples was evaluated using optical, scanning electron microscopes (SEM) and SEM-Electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD). EBSD studies were conducted on seam welds using an FEI Quanta-600 scanning electron microscope equipped with TSL-OIM software. The scan area was 150 μm × 150 µm. Tensile-shear tests was conducted to assess the tensile strength of the seam welds (  Applying the single track weld parameters, multi-track welds were made as per procedure described earlier. After fabricating multi-track weld sheets between two overlapped sheets, a third sheet was overlapped to make three layered seam weld stack. Multi-track seam welds were made on two and three sheets of AISI 304; AA1012; HX alloy and AA6061 sheets. The length and width of each seam weld was about 125 mm and 25 mm respectively. The process parameters for dissimilar metal single track welds are shown in  Optical and scanning electron metallography and 180 degree U-bend test showed that the seam welds were free of any no-bond zones or any types of physical defects, such as porosity and cracking. Typical U-bent specimens of seam welds are shown in In the tensile-shear tests, all the welds, except AA6061, failed in the base metal and not in the weld, indicating that the seam welds were stronger than the base metal counterparts. The weld integrity of these seam welds can be attributed to the metallurgical bonding between the upper and lower sheets. However, AA6061 seam weld failed in the heat affected zone (HAZ). AA6061 was welded in a T-6 aged condition and due to the thermal cycles experienced, the HAZ showed a softening effect. The microstructure of the ASI 304 sheet cladded to AISI 1012 steel substrate showed a “step” structure, similar to the one showed in The fact that the grain size changed from the interface of the seam weld to the outer surface of the top and bottom sheets indicates that the weld interface was subjected to a different degree of plastic flow, induced by the rotation and axial force exerted by the non-consumable rod, compared to the rest of the sheet thickness. It also shows that there must be a gradation in plastic deformation from the weld interface toward the outer surface of the sheets. Recrystallization is a restoration process within the deformed microstructure with the formation of new dislocation free grains. Recrystallization taking place during deformation at elevated temperatures is termed as dynamic recrystallization (DRX) and is known to be exhibited in relatively low-to-medium stacking fault energy metals such as steels, nickel based alloys, copper etc. Recrystallization removes most of the dislocations, but the material still contains grain/sub-grain boundaries, which are thermodynamically unstable  It is likely that the metallurgical bonding at the seam weld interface is formed by the formation of finer grains between two abutting metallic sheets because of dynamic recrystallization. Inter diffusion between two abutting surfaces could also have played a role in the formation of metallurgical bonding. The grains extending from one metallic sheet to the other metallic sheet are indicative of the diffusion between the two metallic sheets ( The rotational rate and an axial load applied to the rod can impart rotational force to the plasticized metal on the top surface of the upper sheet. It is contemplated that the imparted rotational force can cause elasto-plastic deformation due to the shear forces at the interface between the bottom surface of upper metallic sheet and top surface of lower metallic sheet. More particularly, tangential, centrifugal or rotational forces, can lead to the formation of spiral flow lines that emanate from a center portion of the metallic sheets to the peripheral portions of the metallic sheets ( This paper describes results of seam welding of AISI 304, C-Mn steels, Ni-based alloys, CP Cu, CP Ni, Ti6Al4V, AA6061. It describes the solid state seam welding of multi-layered similar and dissimilar metallic sheets. Multi-track and multi-metal seam welds were obtained which were defect free and metallurgically bonded. Tensile-shear testing showed that the seam welds were, in general, stronger than the starting base metal counterparts. The metallurgical bonding at the interface between the metallic sheets was attributed to localized stick and slip at the interface, dynamic recrystallization and diffusion. The method developed can be used as a means of welding, cladding and additive manufacturing.  Friction assisted solid state lap seam welding method is reported for metal joining, welding, cladding and multi-layered structures as part of additive manufacturing. Multi-track, multi metal and multi-layered friction seam welds were successfully fabricated using AISI 304; AISI 1012; Ni-based alloys: IN 600, IN 625, HX; CP Cu, CP Ni, Ti6Al4V and AA6061. Micro-channeled micro-reactor was successfully fabricated using the friction seam welding method. The metallic sheets were found to be metallurgical bonded by this method which exhibited higher tensile strength values than their base metal counterparts. The seam weld interface exhibited dynamic recrystallization phenomenon with finer grains compared to the starting metal sheets which showed relatively higher hardness values. The metallurgical bonding at the interface between the upper and lower metallic sheets was proposed to result from one or more operating mechanisms, including (a) localized stick and slip at the interface, which tends to break up surface oxides and surface films, (b) by the formation of finer grains between two abutting metallic sheets because of dynamic recrystallization and (c) diffusion between the upper and lower metallic sheets.