The newly developed patented technology of hydroseparation [Rudashevsky, N.S., Garuti, G., Andersen, J.C.Ø., Kretser, Y.L., Rudashevsky, V.N., Zaccarini, F., 2002. Separation of accessory minerals from rocks and ores by hydroseparation (HS) technology: method and application to CHR-2 chromitite, Niquelândia, Brazil. Transactions of the Institution of Mining and Metallurgy (Section B: Applied Earth Science) 111, B87–B94] was applied to study two samples from the Skaergaard intrusion, Greenland (BS03-01 and BS03-04) to determine the nature of the precious metal minerals (PMM) and to provide guidance for mineral processing. Copper alloys of Au and Pd, which dominate the PMM, characterize both samples. BS03-01 has 596 PPM particles: 94.7vol.% PdCu (average grain size 24.5μm), ∼4.0vol.% PGM, and 1vol.% Au minerals. The average grain size for all 596 precious metal minerals measured in this sample is 21.9±1.1μm at 95% confidence (median=21.5μm). Also, nearly 90vol.% of the PMM measured in the <125μm fractions are either liberated or attached/included in BMS, which makes the ore amenable to sulphide flotation. BS03-04 has 478 PPM grains, consisting of 84.7vol.% Au alloys and 15.3vol.% PGM. The average grain size of all the PMM particles in the gold ore is 22.3±0.9μm at 95% confidence (median=22.35μm). Like the Pd ore, recovery of precious metals in this sample will be closely related to the liberation of BMS. The mineralogical data proved useful to the metallurgical testwork on the bulk samples.The study of heavy accessory minerals in rocks, ores, industrial products, and potentially polluting materials is usually limited by the scarcity and small grain size of the target minerals. Consequently, the investigation of the sampling population with more common techniques is very limited. Unfortunately, many such studies rely on the investigation of only a few mineral grains and it is difficult to assess the statistical variance and, therefore, the significance of the results obtained. Where mineral concentration processes have been applied they have usually been limited to heavy liquid techniques or a micropanner, which are inefficient for the separation of small particles and trace concentrations of very dense particles, such as the platinum-group minerals (PGM) or gold minerals. In addition, operation of the micropanner is operator-dependent, not efficient for particles <30 The earliest hydroseparator (HS-01) was one of a series of hydroseparation devices for concentration of dense particles from sample powders Skaergaard Minerals Corp. is currently evaluating the PGE-Au mineralization in the Skaergaard intrusion, Greenland. Two sub-samples from bulk samples, obtained by blasting at the Toe of Forbindelsesgletscher, Skaergaard intrusion, Greenland, were used in this investigation. Sample BS03-01 was taken from Pd5 horizon to be representative of the palladium zone and sample BS03-04 was taken from the Pd3 horizon to be representative of the gold mineralization. The host rock is gabbro, similar to the previous samples tested in Greenland ( The assay data are given in The fractions coarser than 125 An example of a general hydroseparation flow sheet for each sized sub-fraction is shown in The silicate minerals consist largely of clinopyroxene–orthopyroxene intergrowths and plagioclase with the sulphides, olivine, titanian magnetite, ilmenite, and precious metal minerals occurring as typical intercumulus textures ( The sulphide minerals are dominated by A large number of PGM and gold minerals, consisting of 13 different species, were found in the HS concentrates. Two of the PGM species appear to be new minerals with ideal formulae of PdCu and Pd As shown in The grain-size distributions of the PGM, gold and silver minerals are given in The PGM, gold and silver minerals are grouped according to their liberation and mineral associations in A variety of PGM and gold minerals are shown in The silicates are dominated by clinopyroxene–orthopyroxene intergrowths, similar to those shown in The sulphide minerals are dominated by bornite, with chalcocite and digenite being next in abundance. Also found were a Cu–Co spinel (Cu,Co,Fe,Ni) A large number of gold minerals and PGM, consisting of possibly of 11 different species, were found in the HS concentrates. The precious metal minerals consist mostly of copper alloys of gold or of palladium or platinum, with few exceptions, which are Pd tellurides, as can be seen in The grain-size distribution of the precious metal minerals is given in The minerals associated with the precious metal minerals are shown in Samples BS03-01 and BS03-04 are Pd-rich and Au-rich, respectively, with low Pt contents as seen in The precious metal minerals include several that may be new minerals. The most abundant of these is the new mineral skaergaardite (PdCu), recently approved as a new mineral by the Commission on New Minerals and Mineral Names (International Mineralogical Association): see A large number of precious metal mineral particles were found in samples BS03-01 (596) and BS03-04 (478), though not all sieve fractions were examined because earlier studies (see The average grain size (ECD) of skaergaardite, the major precious metal phase (vol.%) in sample BS03-01 was 24.5 Nearly 90 The average grain size (ECD) of the major precious metal phases (vol.%) in sample BS03-04 (Au alloys) was slightly finer grained than in sample BS03-01 (22.6 Nearly 87   The strong association of PGM The high percentage of liberated PGM The nature of the mineralogy also suggests that the recovery of Au, Pt, and Pd will all be similar and will be insensitive to head grade. This was borne out by the testwork, which showed almost constant recovery over a wide range (1 order of magnitude) of head grades. Another conclusion with regard to the new hydroseparation technology is that it enables one to perform a rapid analysis on a large number of Au/PGM grains without spending many hours searching in multiple polished sections and obtaining data of less statistical relevance. Finally, one may state that observations numbers 1–3 have significant implications in terms of minimizing downstream refining costs. We are grateful to Skaergaard Minerals Corp. for permission to publish this data and to Troels Nielsen and the Geological Survey of Denmark and Greenland for funding the first studies on this interesting deposit.