Introduction
                  The rapid growth of Botswana’s economy since independence in 1966 has brought more tarred roads and vehicles, accompanied by an escalating road crash fatality rate. We tested the hypothesis that motor vehicle crash fatality increases resulted from, rather than just corresponded with, annual gross domestic product (GDP) increases. Data from Zambia, adjacent to Botswana, were used for comparison.
               
                  Methods
                  Annual social and economic indicators and motor vehicle crash fatality rates in Botswana and Zambia were accessed from 1960 to 2012 and analysed using vector autoregressive analysis and Granger causality tests.
               
                  Results
                  In Botswana, annual changes in per capita GDP predicted annual changes in motor vehicle crash fatality rates (p
                     =0.042). The opposite was not observed; annual changes in motor vehicle crash fatality rates did not predict annual GDP changes. These findings suggest that GDP growth in a given year caused additional road traffic fatalities in Botswana and that, on average, every billion dollar increase in GDP produced an increase in the rate of road traffic fatalities. In Zambia, annual GDP changes predicted annual fatality rate changes three years later (p
                     =0.029), but annual changes in road crash fatality rates also predicted annual increases in per capita GDP (p
                     =0.026) three years later, suggesting a correlation between trends, but not a causal effect of GDP.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Road crash fatalities increased in recent decades in both Zambia and Botswana. But the rapid economic development in Botswana over this time period appears to have driven proportionate road traffic fatality increases. There are opportunities for newly emerging economies such as Zambia, Angola, and others to learn from the Botswana experience. Evidence-based investments in road safety interventions should be concomitant with economic development. Road traffic crash is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in Africa. There may be a relationship between rapid economic growth in African countries and frequency of road traffic crashes. Road safety interventions, especially in African countries with rapidly growing economies, are likely to be beneficial. Low- and middle-income (LMIC) countries carry a disproportionate burden of the death and disability caused by road traffic crashes (RTCs). The relationship between economic development and traffic fatalities is complex. Studies in 41 out of 88 countries comparing RTC fatality trends with measures of economic development found positive associations. The WHO and other organisations have emphasised the important contribution of economic development to mobility, increased motorisation and vehicle ownership, increased vehicle miles driven, and therefore increased exposure to risk. There has been a need to intensify research efforts about RTCs in Africa, in particular, improving data quality, increasing surveillance, and implementing actions based on evidence from African countries. This study accessed data from the World Bank, WHO, and Botswana Motor Vehicle Accident Fund for socio-economic indicators and annual RTC fatality rates in Botswana and Zambia for the period 1960–2012. The annual data on GDP and RTC deaths were plotted, with changes over time measured as percent changes and average percent changes per year. The study was approved by the University of Pennsylvania Institutional Review Board. The populations of Botswana and Zambia were 531,555 and 3,044,262 respectively in 1960, and 1.90 The absolute number of RTC deaths increased in both Botswana and Zambia with 450 deaths in Botswana in 2005 and 890 deaths in Zambia in 2007. However, per capita RTC deaths increased 172.2% in Botswana and decreased 17.1% in Zambia over the observed period of approximately 20 In Botswana, vehicles per 1000 population increased from 18 in 1990 to 156 in 2007, an increase of 766.7%, while RTC fatalities per 10,000 vehicles decreased from 128 to 22, a reduction of 82.8% ( Conventional diagnostics identified autocorrelation in the time series representing GDP per capita and RTC fatality rates in Botswana ( The regression analyses conducted on the time series for RTC fatalities per capita and GDP per capita in Botswana indicated that annual changes in per capita GDP in a given year (compared to the preceding year) were positively associated with annual changes RTC fatalities per capita ( In Zambia, annual changes in road traffic crash fatality rates predicted annual increases in per capita GDP ( The WHO observed that to improve global road traffic safety, there must be sound justification to overcome the prevailing perception that RTC fatalities are the “price to be paid” for achieving mobility and economic development. When diamonds were discovered in 1967 in Botswana, there were fewer than five kilometres of tarred roads and only three secondary schools in the country. By 2001 there were 6000 Botswana now has the opportunity to make a significant difference to its RTC mortality profile through investment in new initiatives that include the Botswana Society for Emergency Care, a Resuscitation Training Centre, a Trauma Research Centre at the University of Botswana, and the formation of a committee to design a national policy for pre-hospital care. There are many lessons Zambia could consider from the experience of Botswana, in addition to adapting with fewer resources. A 2008 study found that only 50% of hospitals in Zambia had an emergency medical system (EMS) that transported patients. Even in resource constrained settings there are many actions that can prevent road traffic crashes and subsequent morbidity and mortality. These include preventing speeding, stricter penalties for alcohol drinking and driving, reducing traffic congestion, roadway development to accommodate traffic volume, promotion of public transportation, driver licensing and training, mandatory vehicle performance checks, promoting seatbelt use, separation of vehicles and pedestrians, and fencing to keep animals off roadways. Those in Zambia should also promote road safety, even with an economic profile different from Botswana. As with all public health and health promotion strategies, the best impact can be gained through synergistic multidimensional interventions: through policy, legislation, environmental modification, public education, and motivation. Despite the limitations of our approach, our results in Botswana and Zambia reflect on the urgent need for road safety. First, Granger causality is not the most robust test of causation: even Granger suggested a better term may be “temporally related.” The WHO Decade of Action for Road Safety 2011–2020 is underway, with the goal of preventing five million road traffic deaths globally by 2020. As a result, countries worldwide will be prioritising opportunities to improve road safety improvements in addition to fostering economic development. As reported in the WHO Training Manual on Road Safety, the evidence for what works has been demonstrated, and must now be prioritised in action plans and strategies. The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare. DW and CB conceived the study idea, collected the data and conducted the analysis. DW and CB drafted the manuscript; SR provided public health input; SR, TM, and KC provided guidance and edited drafts of the manuscript. All authors contributed edits to prepare revised versions of the manuscript.