Reconstruction of the frontal bar following complex craniofacial fractures involving the frontal sinus is a central strategic element, and inaccurate reduction can result in contour defects and non-union. Such defects can be reconstructed using autogenous bone from the inner table of a calvarial graft. Traditionally this is done with rotary instruments and osteotomes. In this article, we describe the use of piezoelectric surgery to harvest the graft. This technique allows for more precise and less destructive harvesting of autogenous bone with the additional benefit of reducing the risk of injury to the surgeon.Reconstruction of the frontal bar following complex craniofacial fractures involving the frontal sinus is a central strategic element, and inaccurate reduction can result in contour defects and non-union. Autogenous bone may be harvested intracranially; this has the advantage over other sites in that it may be harvested simultaneously with the neurosurgical repair of the dura and does not leave a secondary donor site defect. The inner table bone graft can be mobilized using rotary instruments and osteotomes, but the process is destructive and inaccurate, and in addition such instruments can injure the surgeon. Piezoelectric surgery is a relatively new technique for thin precise bone cutting. It is based on ultrasonic microvibrations, and allows precise cutting of mineralized tissue with soft tissue preservation. With the use of this technique, very accurate osteotomies can be performed, with minimal heating of bone, and there is no risk of perforating the surgeon's glove. The authors used piezoelectric surgery to treat a patient who had sustained Markowitz 1 naso-orbito-ethmoid ( Following craniectomy, the frontal bar was reassembled, and marked comminution of the anterior table was noted. The missing bone was marked via a template formed from a metal suture packet, and this was transferred to the craniectomy. The inner table was then harvested using the piezoelectric surgery technique ( Piezoelectric surgery uses ultrasonic vibrations for osteotomy and selectively removes the bone, which allows the operation to be done with minimal invasion of the soft tissues, such as blood vessels and nerves. None. None. Ethical approval was sought but deemed not necessary. Not required.