The performance of urine Xpert MTB/RIF Ultra (Xpert Ultra) for pulmonary TB diagnosis is unknown. HIV-positive and HIV-negative adults were enrolled at two health facilities in Kampala, Uganda. We compared the accuracy of urine Xpert Ultra and Determine TB-LAM in reference to sputum-based testing (positive Xpert MTB/RIF or culture), and assessed incremental yield. Urine Xpert Ultra had low sensitivity (17.2%, 95% CI 12.3–23.2) but high specificity (98.1%, 95% CI 94.4–99.6). Sensitivity reached 50.0% (95% CI 28.2–71.8) among HIV-positive patients with CD4 <100 cells/μL. Compared to Determine TB-LAM, urine Xpert Ultra was 9.4% (95% CI 3.8–14.9, P = 0.01) more sensitive, and 17.2% (95% CI 4.5–29.8, P = 0.01) more sensitive among HIV-positive patients. However, the incremental sensitivity of urine Xpert Ultra relative to sputum Xpert MTB/RIF was only 1% (95% CI -0.9 to 2.8). Urine Xpert Ultra could be an alternative for patients with advanced HIV infection unable to produce sputum.Semi-automated nucleic acid amplification testing (NAAT) with Xpert MTB/RIF (Cepheid, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) has greatly improved the ability to diagnose pulmonary tuberculosis (TB) in low-resource settings ( In addition to potential utility for diagnosing renal TB ( We conducted the first study of urine Xpert Ultra testing among adults with presumed pulmonary TB. Our objectives were to compare the diagnostic accuracy of urine Xpert Ultra and Determine TB-LAM, and calculate the additional yield of one or both urine tests relative to sputum Xpert MTB/RIF alone. In this cross-sectional study, from April to December 2018, we enrolled consecutive hospitalized and outpatient adults (>18 years) HIV-positive and HIV-negative who were undergoing sputum-based pulmonary TB evaluation at Kiruddu hospital and Kisenyi Health Center IV in Kampala, Uganda. At the time of the study, routine sputum-based TB testing at both sites was performed using the Xpert MTB/RIF assay. We included all patients with positive sputum Xpert MTB/RIF results and a random sample of patients with negative Xpert MTB/RIF results (1:1 sampling) tested on the same day. We excluded patients if 1) Xpert MTB/RIF test results were indeterminate; 2) they were already on anti-TB treatment or had taken agents with anti-TB activity such as amino quinolones in the prior 12 months; 3) they reported a prior episode of TB; or 4) they refused or were unable to provide informed consent. The Makerere University School of Medicine Research and Ethics Committee, the Uganda National Council for Science and Technology and the University of California San Francisco Committee on Human Research reviewed and approved the study. This study was performed according to the Standards for Reporting of Diagnostic Accuracy Studies (STARD) guidelines ( To identify eligible patients, we screened the Xpert MTB/RIF testing log at each study site daily to identify all patients who submitted sputum for TB testing. Using the log, study staff first approached all patients with positive test results and then a random 1:1 sample of patients with negative test results. Patients were approached on the wards (if hospitalized) or when they returned to collect test results (if outpatient) to confirm eligibility and obtain informed consent. Upon enrollment, we obtained a detailed demographic and medical history using a standardized form and collected blood for HIV testing and CD4 count (if HIV-positive), spot sputum samples and spontaneously voided urine from all patients. Sputum samples were used to perform Xpert MTB/RIF testing × 1 in all patients, and mycobacterial culture on solid and liquid media × 2 in patients with negative Xpert MTB/RIF results (i.e. culture was not performed to confirm positive Xpert MTB/RIF results). Trained laboratory technologists in the Kiruddu Hospital Microbiology Laboratory and the Makerere University College of Health Sciences Mycobacteriology Laboratory conducted all TB testing following standard protocols for Xpert Ultra ( We used results of sputum Xpert MTB/RIF and mycobacterial culture as the reference standard. We considered patients to have TB if they had either positive Xpert MTB/RIF based on routine testing, or positive culture if sputum Xpert MTB/RIF testing was negative. We considered patients not to have TB if both Xpert MTB/RIF and culture results were negative, excluding those with <2 negative culture results due to contamination. The index tests included urine Xpert Ultra and urine Determine TB-LAM. We followed WHO recommendations for categorizing urine Xpert Ultra (trace results considered positive only among HIV-infected patients) and Determine TB-LAM (positive if Grade 2 or higher) results ( We summarized demographic and clinical data using appropriate descriptive statistics and calculated the sensitivity and specificity of each index test (urine Xpert Ultra and urine Determine TB-LAM) along with the 95% confidence interval (CI) using our reference standard definition of TB. In our primary analysis, we compared differences in sensitivity and specificity between index tests using McNemar's test for paired proportions, and by HIV status and CD4 cell count category using chi-squared or Fisher's Exact tests. We also calculated the incremental sensitivity of urine Xpert Ultra and Determine TB-LAM testing alone and in combination relative to Xpert MTB/RIF overall and among HIV-positive participants. Individuals with missing results were excluded. We used STATA 15 (StataCorp, College Station, TX, USA) for all analyses. During the nine-month study period, 2347 individuals were referred for TB testing at the two sites ( Most participants (N = 297, 83%) were outpatients, the median age was 32 years (IQR 25–39), and 249 (70%) were male ( As shown in As expected, the sensitivity of urine testing varied by HIV status and degree of HIV-related immune suppression ( When stratified by CD4 category, the sensitivity of urine Xpert Ultra was significantly higher among HIV-positive participants with CD4 count <100 cells/μL (50.0%, 95% CI 28.2–71.8) than CD4 count ≥100 cells/μL (23.8%, 95% CI 12.1–39.5), a difference of 26.2% (95% CI 1.6–50.7, Performing urine Xpert Ultra yielded two additional cases over sputum Xpert MTB/RIF (both HIV-positive, CD4 cell count 93 and 108 cells/μL, incremental sensitivity 1.0%, 95% CI -0.9 to 2.8), while performing Determine TB-LAM also yielded two additional TB cases (both HIV-positive with CD4 cell count 93 and 104 cells/μL, incremental sensitivity 1.0%, 95% CI -0.9 to 2.8) ( False-positive cases were defined as a result positive by urine Xpert Ultra or Determine TB-LAM but negative by Xpert MTB/RIF and culture. There were five patients with potential false-positive urine Xpert Ultra or Determine TB-LAM results, with characteristics presented in False-positive cases were defined as a result positive by urine Xpert Ultra or Determine TB-LAM but negative by Xpert MTB/RIF and culture. There were five patients with potential false-positive urine Xpert Ultra or Determine TB-LAM results, with characteristics presented in Urine testing has the potential to increase diagnostic yield and to provide an alternative means of confirming pulmonary TB in sputum-scarce patients. We conducted the first assessment of urine Xpert Ultra testing for the diagnosis of pulmonary TB. We found that urine Xpert Ultra was more sensitive than Determine TB-LAM, but like Determine TB-LAM, testing was most beneficial among HIV-positive patients with low CD4 counts. Overall, urine testing (Xpert Ultra and/or Determine TB-LAM) provided little additional yield relative to sputum Xpert MTB/RIF testing, including among HIV-positive patients. While urine Xpert MTB/RIF has shown utility in extrapulmonary TB ( Urine testing with Determine TB-LAM for pulmonary TB is currently recommended as an adjunct to sputum testing in HIV-positive individuals with advanced disease or serious illness ( When sputum testing is not possible, we found that urine Xpert Ultra had higher accuracy than Determine TB-LAM for pulmonary TB diagnosis. Urine Xpert Ultra was 9.4% more sensitive than Determine TB-LAM overall, without significant difference in specificity, and continued to have higher sensitivity than Determine TB-LAM among HIV-positive patients (difference 17.2%). At CD4 count <100 cells/μL, urine Xpert Ultra was 18.2% more sensitive than Determine TB-LAM, but the sample size was small and the difference was not statistically significant. In contrast to our findings, past studies have found that urine Xpert MTB/RIF had lower or similar sensitivity to Determine TB-LAM in HIV-positive adults ( We present a well-characterized cohort of both HIV-positive and HIV-negative adults referred by clinicians for sputum-based TB testing. However, there are several limitations. We did not confirm positive sputum Xpert MTB/RIF results with culture. However, Xpert MTB/RIF is known to have high specificity (98%) ( Given the ease in obtaining urine, greater efforts are needed to lower the level of detection for current assays and identify novel urine-based diagnostics for pulmonary TB. A study in Peru utilized hydrogel nanocages to concentrate urine LAM and increase the sensitivity to >95% in HIV-negative adults ( The following is the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at We thank the patients and staff of Kiruddu Hospital and Kisenyi Health Center IV, the staff and management of Mycobacteriology laboratory at the Makerere University College of Health Sciences, and Christine Bachman and Dr. David Bell of the Global Good Fund, Intellectual Ventures Laboratory. We also acknowledge the Center for Emerging and Neglected Diseases (CEND) - University of California, Berkeley. Funding was supported by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation Trust through Global Good Fund at Intellectual Ventures. AA is a PhD student at Makerere University (Kampala, Uganda) and supported by The Pulmonary Complications of AIDS Research Training (PART) Program (National Institutes of Health-Fogarty International Center D43TW009607). DJ is a Fellow in the Pediatric Scientist Development Program and is supported by K12 HD000850 from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for publication.