In hydrometallurgy, traditional extraction technologies, in particular, for isolation and purification of rare-earth metals include a number of processing steps using up to hundreds of mixer-settler extractors. These technologies could be greatly simplified by using the methods of countercurrent chromatography (CCC) separation. However, the current CCC equipment cannot process large volumes of feed material formed during the industrial production of these metals. In this paper, the cascade of centrifugal mixer-settler extractors assembled as a multi-stage unit is suggested for industrial application of CCC and discussed.Separation processes largely determine the quality of the products in the production of organic and inorganic materials. An urgent problem is the production of pure and ultrapure substances. To address this issue, new, highly efficient processes of separation and purification of substances are being developed. Countercurrent chromatography (CCC) and centrifugal partition chromatography (CPC) separation processes, collectively called countercurrent chromatography (CCC) [ The complexity of centrifugal chromatographic devices imposes restrictions on their scale, and limits the productivity of the separation processes. Technical limitations of the larger instruments do not allow expanding the scope of application of CCC technologies, for example, in hydrometallurgy for separation of rare-earth metals. The purpose of this paper is to discuss the possibilities of using currently available countercurrent solvent extraction equipment, in particular, a cascade of centrifugal mixer-settler extractors, for conducting chromatographic separation processes including conventional CCC separation and more novel elution modes such as multiple dual mode [ As mentioned above, a disadvantage of chromatographic apparatuses is relatively low throughput when addressing the needs of large volume industries, such as hydrometallurgy. They are incapable of throughput levels achievable by conventional solvent extraction equipment. The performance of mixer-settler extractors is several orders of magnitude higher than that of chromatographs and they are able to handle large volumes of dilute liquors. Multistage cascades of mixer-settler extractors are widely used in hydrometallurgy. A plant producing rare-earth elements may contain hundreds of stages of mixer-settlers [ A mixer-settler extractor basically consists of two – mixing and settling – chambers. In principle, CCC separations can be carried out in cascades of conventional mixer–settlers. However, in conventional extractors, the separation of the liquid phases occurs in the gravitational field, which causes a large volume of settling chambers. In the case of chromatography, this will enhance the broadening of chromatographic bands as they move along the cascade. Centrifugal extractors are free of this disadvantage; the volumes of mixing and settling chambers are approximately equal. In the mixing chamber – a stirred tank (TsENTREK, Russia [ The use of the cascade of centrifugal mixer-settlers (CCMS) as a chromatography plant offers a variety of options for performing industrial CCC separation processes.  To retain the stationary phase in the cascade, in conventional isocratic single pass ( In cyclic dual-mode processes ( To proof the principle of CCMS CCC, experiments were carried out with two serially connected centrifugal mixer-settler extractors of the TsENTREK type (laboratory model EC33 F from “NIKIMIT-Atomstroi”, Russia: the volume of the mixing chamber – 90 mL, the volume of the separation chamber – 40 mL) [ To evaluate the performance of the CCMS CCC device, the biphasic solvent system hexane / isopropanol / water with volume ratio of 1:1:1 was applied. As stationary phase retention is of paramount importance for successful performance of the operating schemes A and B ( The results of experiments on stationary phase retention are shown in  In The results of experiments presented above demonstrate that the cascade of centrifugal extractors can indeed operate as a countercurrent chromatography machine. The on CCMS based CCC can be used not only for the industrial separation and purification of natural products, but it can also find wide application in the production of inorganic materials. The development of CCMS CCC technology due to its advantages, such as the ability to handle large volumes of dilute liquors; fewer geometry, solvent system and phase holdups restrictions and high throughput compared with conventional CCC; ease of scaling (the eluting profiles of solutes can be predicted from the partition coefficients) and operating (the operation of the cascade can be stopped and resumed without interfering with the separation process); high recovery of target compounds in a single processing step by using optimal operating mode (traditional solvent extraction methods require several process steps) can make this technology one of the most appropriate commercial technologies for chromatographic separation of rare-earths. The chromatographic operation modes of the cascade of centrifugal mixer-settlers have still to be experimentally investigated. Investigations are to be done to estimate the optimal operating conditions and technical development of the CCMS CCC separation technology. The development of CCMS CCC instrumentation can enable the application of CCC methods on an industrial scale in the production of organic and inorganic materials.