Lignocellulosic wastes are generally pre-treated to facilitate the hydrolysis stage during the anaerobic digestion process. A process consisting of solid state fermentation carried out by white rot fungi and anaerobic digestion was evaluated on corn stover to produce ligninolytic enzymes and biogas. The enzyme production was quantified every 3d for a month at 30°C, and three fungal strains and two particle sizes of waste were compared. Of the main outcomes, Pleurotus eryngii produced the highest laccase enzyme activity compared with Pleurotus ostreatus and Trametes versicolor. Furthermore, this activity was improved by 16% when copper was used as an enzyme inducer. On the other hand, most of the conditions studied showed a decrease in maximum biogas production compared with untreated waste, the addition of copper decreased biogas production by 20%. Despite the above, Pleurotus eryngii showed promising results allowing a 19% increase of biogas production and high enzyme production values.Currently in the world, more than half of the cultivated area are used for crops because they are considered the most important food source for human consumption. In addition, the primary cereals in the human diet are maize, rice and wheat, which represent 42.5% ( Corn stover is a by-product generated by corn grain cultivation, and their production is estimated to be in a ratio of 1:1. Corn stover includes the husks, cobs, leaves and stalks. In addition, it is considered a lignocellulosic waste (LW) and typically comprises 37.5% cellulose, 22.4% hemicellulose and 17.6% lignin ( Lignocellulosic biomass is a complex solid substrate matrix that limits the hydrolysis stage on anaerobic digestion (AD), generating a bottle-neck for the next stages ( Biological pre-treatments are considered a low-cost alternative, and they are typically used to treat lignocellulosic biomass because the fungal metabolism can modify its chemical composition ( Lac is a multi-copper enzyme that can oxidize phenols and aromatic amines ( On the other hand, a physical pre-treatment approach used for the AD process is comminution where the particle size of the substrate is reduced, causing an increase in the hydrolysis stage rate. Indeed, particle size reduction has increased biogas production, especially in the case of substrates with a high content of slowly biodegradable materials ( According to the literature, it is possible to find studies about biological pre-treatment application by WRF under aerobic conditions on LW to improve the AD process. Specifically, lignocellulosic substrates as wheat straw, rice straw, corn stalk, and wood fibre have been subjected to biological treatment with WRF to enhancement methane or biogas production on AD process ( According to this background, this study proposes to evaluate the feasibility of producing enzymes and biogas from a single lignocellulosic waste -corn stover- through the application of a physical-biological treatment followed by an anaerobic digestion process. In addition, the global process was studied for two particle sizes of lignocellulosic waste, and the response against three different strains of WRF were compared. Finally, the copper inducer presence was evaluated for the production of both stages, enzyme and biogas. Corn stover was the lignocellulosic waste used in this research project. It was collected in a single day from a rural vegetable street market in Santiago, Chile. The corn stover was dried at room temperature until achieving 10% moisture. Next, it was manually chopped and subsequently mechanically minced. Later, the material was sieved and collected in two fraction sizes (Gilson Company Inc); the small size S1 was between 0.5 and 4.5 The waste characterization was performed through the quantification of total lignin in the biomass (TL) using the NREL method ( Three strains of WRF were used in this study: Fungus proliferation was carried out using agar slants in which a small portion of an individual strain was inoculated on MEA plates. After 7 This study exhibited the effect caused by three main variables: two waste sizes (S1 and S2), three fungal strains ( The enzyme production stage was performed by dosing 3 The monitoring of the biological treatment was made as The liquid extract was prepared adding 50 The quantified ligninolytic enzymes were Lac, MnP and LiP. First, the enzymatic activity of Lac was measured by monitoring the oxidation of ABTS (2,2′-Azino-bis (3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulphonic acid) diammonium salt, ≥98% (Sigma Aldrich) in acetate buffer (pH 5.0) at 436 The reducing sugar content was quantified using 3.5-dinitrosalicylic acid (Sigma Aldrich) and the DNS method ( According to the protocol of the biomethane potential (BMP) ( Biogas production contained in the bottle was indirectly quantified by daily measurement of the temperature and pressure using an IFM electronic pressure transducer. The biogas composition was quantified by gas chromatography with a thermal conductivity detector (Agilent Technologies Model 7890-B). The method consisted of a system with two capillary columns working in parallel (Molsieve 5A and PoraBOND Q) to enable the measurement of CH Accumulated biogas production obtained in BMP experiments were adjusted using the Transfer Function (TF) ( Eq. The characterization of the conditioned material showed that the corn stover contents of TS and VS were 920.6 (±0.89) Furthermore, the difference between both samples was identified as significant by the comparison of the confidence intervals of both means. The slight increase in TL contents for S1 to S2 could be explained by the mechanical properties of the fibre when it is subjected to grinding. From this point of view, the components of the waste would have a different response to the treatment due to their hardness or fragility, modifying the composition of the treated compound. This behaviour has been previously observed in the treatment of sunflower oil cake, in which the degradation efficiency was higher for larger particle sizes due to a lower fibre content ( The first objective of this study was to evaluate the feasibility of enzyme production from agricultural waste, but information regarding which enzymes are produced or at what specific time fungal fermentation occurs is not available in the literature for this waste. The results presented in The MnP activity ( Finally, the maximum production of LiP at S1 ( The multiple and close peaks detected in the enzymatic activity ( For a more detailed analysis, it is necessary to indicate that the activity of both enzymes, Lac and MnP, reached their highest value from the 6th d of biological treatment, coinciding in time with a significant reduction of the reducing sugar content in the extract ( A more detailed analysis of the CH composition in the extract reinforced previous results of reducing sugar consumption. The results obtained showed a decrease in the presence of glucose, sucrose and fructose over time, with glucose being the fastest sugar consumed and fructose being the slowest. More specifically, for small particle sizes the initial concentration of glucose, sucrose and fructose detected were 7.05 (±0.71) Thus, the difference observed for enzymatic activities between small and large particle sizes was significant and could be attributed to the initial total lignin content in the conditioned waste and/or that the small particle size favoured the fungal penetration into biomass respect to the large particle size ( This phenomenon observed can be explained by LW composition and fungal growth mechanism. Several studies have indicated that when Previous results indicated that the most produced enzyme in the shortest time was laccase On the other hand, the weight and TL loss values of LW were quantified for 15 The variation of corn stover degradation with different strains of WRF had been reported previously after 30 In this study, the assays in the presence of the inducer showed different responses for each strain. In The second objective of this study was to evaluate the feasibility of producing biogas from LW after biological treatment. Particularly, it was required to evaluate if this sequential process can improve or inhibit the second stage. Addressing this issue was not trivial because the enzymatic expression and effects on the waste were different depending on the fungus applied. Therefore, to identify kinetics parameters and differentiate the effects on the AD process, the results were adjusted to the Transfer Function (  According to The maximum biogas production rate ( A previous research has indicated that maximum methane production rate on anaerobic digestion is related with substrate lignin content ( For all the types of samples studied, biogas production reported by the S2 size was higher than that for S1. These results could be attributed to the different TL contents reported for both sizes, in which S1 had a higher content than S2 ( Furthermore, on the condition that the biogas production data is quantified using VS content values after 30 In a previous ( The parameters obtained after data modelling provided more information for inducer effect interpretation ( Another parameter proposed to evaluate the process type is the selectivity index ( Despite the results obtained, the overall effect of the inducer dosage should be quantified by an economic evaluation, in which the effect on enzyme production increase by 16% and biogas production reduction by 20%, as well as the cost of the copper dosage, were evaluated jointly. Application of biological treatment with Copper as an enzyme inducer is an option to increase laccase production, but it reduces biogas production. The global behaviour of the system depends significantly on the particle size and structural characteristics of the waste. Global results indicated the feasibility of carrying out a sequential strategy to produce extracellular enzymes and biogas using corn stover as raw material. However, further research must consider the extraction and purification stages for economical evaluation of the enzyme produced. This work was supported by CONICYT [ Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 