Two different wet sewage sludges have been characterized under fluidized bed combustion conditions with reference to their devolatilization behavior and ash comminution with the aid of different and complementary experimental protocols. Analysis of the devolatilization process allowed to determine the size of fuel particle able to achieve effective lateral spreading of the volatile matter across the cross-section of medium-scale combustors. Primary fragmentation and primary ash particle characterization pointed out the formation of a significant amount of relatively large fragments. The mechanical properties of these fragments have been characterized by means of elutriation/abrasion tests using both quartz and sludge ash beds.actual diameter of ash, mm average diameter of the particle, mm average diameter of coarse particles, mm average diameter of fine particles, mm lateral solid dispersion coefficient, m initial diameter of particles, mm fines elutriation rate, g/min abrasion constant of Eq. abrasion constant of Eq. low heating value of the fuel, kJ/kg transversal size of the reactor, m transversal size of the reactor, m number of fragments before the primary fragmentation test number of fragments generated after the primary fragmentation test primary ash particle size distribution sewage sludge stabilized and conditioned with the addition of lime and ferric chloride sewage sludge stabilized and conditioned with the addition of inorganic materials and organic polymers time, s interval time corresponding to 95% of volatile matter emission, s characteristic time scale of lateral mixing, s gas superficial velocity, m/s gas superficial velocity, m/s fluidization velocity, m/s minimum fluidization velocity, m/s particle terminal velocity, m/s actual inventory of ash, g Sewage sludge is derived from the treatment of urban wastewater. Among municipal and industrial wastes, sewage sludge represents an increasing problem due to the larger and larger production and the progressive restrictions of the conventional disposal options. Three disposal methods are currently used: recycling in agriculture, landfilling and combustion. Agricultural utilization is hindered by the presence of heavy metals and organic micro-pollutants and, as a consequence, this kind of recycling is, nowadays, more and more disappointing. Landfilling is not considered any more environmentally sustainable due to liquid and gaseous emissions in soil, water and air. Combustion and co-combustion are the mostly viable strategies to dispose sewage sludge Fluidized bed combustion/gasification has been indicated as one of the best option, due to operation flexibility and to high efficiency and low pollutant emissions achieved with different biogenic fuels, used either alone or in combination with fossil fuels Critical issues are mainly related to: (i) formation and properties of fly ash The present paper aims at contributing to a better understanding of devolatilization and ash comminution of two different wet sewage sludges under fluidized bed combustion conditions. This aim is pursued with a combination of experimental protocols and bench scale apparatus. Fuel devolatilization process has been characterized and analyzed in the light of the possibility to achieve effective lateral spreading of the volatile matter across the cross-section of medium-scale combustors. Primary fragmentation and the amount and size distribution of primary ash particles have been characterized. Attrition and comminution of ash particles have been also studied in order to estimate the effective contribution of the fuel to the build-up of the bed inventory. A stainless steel atmospheric bubbling fluidized bed combustor 41 The freeboard was kept unlagged in order to minimize fines post-combustion in this section. Gases were fed to the column via high-precision digital mass flowmeters. Three different configurations of the reactor were used for the experimental tests. In the first configuration ( In the second configuration ( The third configuration ( The reactor used for the characterization of the primary ash particles size distribution (PAPSD) is represented in Experiments were carried out with two sewage sludges (SS1, SS2), shown in These tests were carried out in the combustor arranged according to the configuration in Experiments were performed using the basket equipped configuration ( These experiments, aiming at the characterization of the primary ash particle size distribution (PAPSD), were carried out in the combustor shown in Batches of particles (corresponding to approximately 20 Ash attrition experiments were also performed measuring fines elutriation rate of a bed constituted only by sludge ash. Air was used as inlet gas. Experiments were carried out with a superficial gas velocity of 0.8 The assessment of devolatilization time was carried out by analyzing the time series of CO and CO The comparison between the time scale of devolatilization phenomena and the lateral mixing of the fuel particles on the surface of a fluidized bed reactor points out the effective distribution of volatile matter along the transversal section of the reactor. The characteristic time scale of lateral mixing ( The extent of primary fragmentation of samples of the two sludges has been investigated by means of batch experiments in the basket-equipped bench scale combustor ( SS1 sludge tests highlight: (i) a moderate primary fragmentation; (ii) no difference between tests carried out with nitrogen and with air; (iii) a particle multiplication factor of about 26 in either case. The average diameter of tested particles was about 9 Primary fragmentation was almost negligible for the SS2 sludge both in nitrogen and in air with an average number of fragments generated equal to 3. The average diameter of tested particle was about 10 The nature of fluidizing gas (air or nitrogen) did not influence primary fragmentation being negligible the fixed carbon content for either sludge.  The amount and the particle size distribution (PAPSD) of primary ash particles released upon complete burn-off of samples of the two sludges have been characterized by means of the experimental apparatus reported in A different and more application-oriented way to represent ash content and PAPSD data is shown in   In order to better understand the surface abrasion and secondary fragmentation phenomena of sludge ash particles, elutriation/abrasion tests were also carried out with beds of sludge ash. The elutriation rate measured as a function of time during a typical experiment is reported in The analysis of the time-resolved concentration profile of CO SS1 and SS2 sludge particles pointed out a moderate and a scarce primary fragmentation, respectively. Nevertheless, the generated large fragments showed a porous and quite fragile structure. As matter of fact, the elutriation tests highlight a significant rounding-off as well as secondary fragmentation of ash particles. The abrasion constant ( Mr. V. Stanzione is acknowledged for the inorganic elemental analysis of fuels determined by ICP-MS.