The solution structure of a gemini surfactant, C22-6-6, associated with various counterions was investigated with small-angle neutron scattering (SANS). Subsequently, C22-6-6 with various counterions (Br−, HC2O4
                     −, C2O4
                     2−, CO3
                     2−, H2PO4
                     −, HPO4
                     2− and OH−) was applied as a structure directing agent (SDA) in the synthesis of hierarchical zeolites. C22-6-6 gemini surfactants form robust prolate (rod) micelles that only exhibit small changes in size with varying counterion, concentration, temperature and salt. Hierarchical MFI successfully crystallized with C22-6-6 associated with various counterions as the SDA. The exception was for HC2O4
                     − and H2PO4
                     − which lowered the pH of the final synthesis solution. Different SDA counterions engender MFI zeolites with various morphologies, such as flat sheets, wave-like sheets, aggregates, micron sized spheres, and change the mesoporosity, total pore volume and silicon to aluminum ratio.Zeolites are inorganic crystalline microporous aluminosilicates that have a negative framework balanced with exchangeable cations. When the cation is a proton, strong acid sites are engendered in the zeolite framework and such zeolites can be used for acid-catalyzed industrial reactions. Zeolites are also thermally stable and can be recycled by calcination for multiple uses making them economical materials for industrial use. Zeolites are thus widely used in industry as catalysts, membranes, ion-exchangers and absorbents More recently, single template methods using a gemini surfactant, a surfactant molecule with more than one hydrophobic tail and hydrophilic head group connected by a spacer, to template both the micropores and the mesopores have been demonstrated Subsequent research with similar gemini surfactants reported changes in morphology from a “house of cards” to dense packing plates with the addition of tetrapropylammonium hydroxide This paper explores the ability to tune hierarchical zeolite morphology by changing the gemini surfactant counterion used in its synthesis and thoroughly characterizes the gemini surfactant solution structure to determine if it is directly responsible for the zeolite morphology. Presently, the mechanism by which the surfactant induces changes in zeolite morphology is still unclear and requires further elucidation. It has been proposed that the C The structure of surfactant self-assemblies or surfactant soft structures is related to the surfactant's molecular dimensions, hydrocarbon chain length ( In this study, a range of surfactant counterions associated with the C Orthophosphoric acid (85%, Sigma-Aldrich), oxalic acid (anhydrous, >99%, Fluka), 1-bromodocosane (>98.0%, TCI), 1-bromohexane (98.0%, TCI), N,N,N′,N'-tetramethyl-1,6-diaminohexane (98.0%, TCI), acetonitrile (>99.5%, Sigma-Aldrich), toluene (99.8%, Tedia), diethyl ether (anhydrous, Tedia), tetraethylorthosilicate (99%, Merck), aluminum sulfate (hydrated, 98%, Sigma-Aldrich), sodium hydroxide (99%, Merck), sulfphuric acid (95–97%, Honeywell), sodium aluminate (Sigma-Aldrich), fumed silica (99.80%, Aerosil 200), sodium hydroxide (98%, Sigma-Aldrich), and tetrapropylammonium bromide (98%, Sigma-Aldrich) were used as received. The water used in all protocols refers to Milli-Q water with a conductivity of 18 MΩ C For surfactants with hydrolysable counterions, hydrolysis in solution leads to a distribution of counterion species which can be determined from the solution pH based on acid-base equilibria equations and the K For the conventional MFI synthesis, sodium aluminate was dissolved in water to form solution A. Solution B comprised of sodium hydroxide and tetrapropylammonium bromide (TPABr) dissolved in water with fumed silica blended in. Solution A was then added to Solution B dropwise with vigorous stirring and left to stir and age for 1 h. The final solution was loaded into a reactor and MFI crystallized statically at 150 °C in 4 days. The molar composition of the final solution is 13.4 Na All nitrogen physisorption measurements were conducted with an ASAP 2020 automatic high resolution micropore physisorption analyzer. Approximately 100 mg of calcined samples were used for the analysis. The micropore volumes were calculated from the quantity of nitrogen adsorbed. The samples were imaged at the National University of Singapore (NUS) Material Department of Materials Science and Engineering with a Zeiss SUPRA™ 40VP Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope. An accelerating voltage of 5 kV was used with a range of magnifications – 5000 ×, 10,000 × and 20,000 ×. All SEM samples were coated with a layer of gold with a thickness of approximately 5 nm prior to imaging. Powder X-ray diffraction analysis of the samples was conducted using a Bruker D8 with general area detector diffraction system (GADDS). A Cu-Kα X-ray source was used with a scanning angle range from 2θ = 2°–65°. Elemental analysis for all samples was obtained using inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) performed by Galbraith Laboratory, Inc., Knoxville, Tennessee. Small-angle neutron scattering (SANS) experiments were performed on the QUOKKA 40 m beamline at the Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organization (ANSTO) The absolute scaled scattering intensity as a function of the scattering vector The challenge of precipitating zeolites in the presence of different SDA counterions was investigated and the resulting zeolites formed were characterized. Surfactant counterions (Br All of the C SANS scattering patterns with model fits for C The best fit parameters obtained from model fitting to uniform ellipsoids with screened Coulomb interactions are listed in Much of the literature focuses on the structure of shorter chained, symmetrical gemini surfactants, namely the C In another study, it was revealed that the structure of C Oda et al. observed that the dissymmetry in chain lengths in gemini surfactants causes an increase in spontaneous curvature which favors the formation of small spherical micelles and is more pronounced when one chain is less than half the length of the other, as is the case for C The implication for zeolite synthesis is that the association of such hydrolysable, strongly hydrated ions could help stabilize micelle morphology in the presence of other added zeolite reaction components but induce a controlled, small change to zeolite morphology due to the delicate balance of forces between the template molecules and zeolite crystallization components. In addition, hydrolysable counterions should enhance surfactant solubility and the propensity to form lamellar structures would be a lot lower compared to symmetric geminis. The likelihood of templating of zeolite secondary structures on lamellar aggregates as suggested previously The SANS scattering patterns with model fits for 1% and 10% C The addition of Al Both 1% and 10% C Supernatant solutions from the zeolite synthesis reaction were extracted at the half-way mark of the reaction at 2.5 days (SS - 2.5 days) and at the end of the reaction at 5 days (SS – 5 days). The composition of these samples are similar to the 10% C The zeolites formed with the different surfactant counterions yielded various morphologies and textural properties as shown in The Z-Br sample comprised of MFI flat nanosheets that are stacked approximately perpendicularly to each other to form spherical particles ranging from 1 to 5 μm ( The Z-CO Consequently, changes in morphology were effected by changing the surfactant counterion while still ensuring that MFI crystallized with no additional phases. The variation in zeolite morphology was not expected as the SANS experiments showed that similar soft structures formed with all the counterions. There is however, some correlation between the size of the zeolite micron-sized spheres and the nano-sized surfactant SDA micelles. The prolate micelles increase in the length of its rotational axis, R While the monovalent counterions, OH The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the synthesized zeolites are shown in All of the zeolites exhibited Type IV isotherms (see In addition to changing the soft structure of the C The silicon to aluminum (SAR) ratio of the zeolites was determined and used as an indicator of the zeolite acid properties ( In addition, the differences in SAR could indicate that the change in counterion affects the crystallization of the zeolite and how silicon and aluminum is incorporated in the final structure. The SAR ratios of the synthesized zeolites are 7–31% higher than the SAR of the synthesis gel (SAR = 50). Aluminum species are known to provide nucleation sites for the crystallization of zeolites and are typically fully incorporated into the final zeolite structure. Thus, the synthesized zeolite SAR is expected to be lower than that of the synthesis solution. This higher than expected SAR could indicate that the zeolites preferentially nucleate on the surfactants rather than on the aluminum species and/or the aluminum species may not interact well with the surfactant induced nucleation sites. However a more detailed study would be required to provide evidence for this hypothesis. We have applied C While gemini surfactants have been increasingly reported in the synthesis of zeolites, this is the first paper to investigate the structure of the C Various MFI morphologies were obtained with the different SDA counterions – micron sized spheres with flat sheets (Z-Br and Z-OH), micron sized spheres with wave-like sheets (Z-C Many inorganic synthesis routes require surfactant templating, but manipulating the identity of the surfactant SDA counterion has been relatively unexplored and underexploited. These findings provide an alternative to changing SDA chain length or the use of side group substitutions to access different morphologies and as a means to tune properties such as mesoporosity in hierarchical zeolites. Due to the complexity of the synthesis solution, we have shown that the counterion identity can be used engender a variation in architectures and properties to hierarchical zeolites even if the surfactant soft structure in solution remains unchanged. This work was made possible through financial support from the We thank Ms. Yi Ting Chong, Mr. Kenson Oen, Mr. Wei Cheng Fong, and Ms. Jacelyn Angkasa for their assistance in the laboratory; Mr. Poh Chong Lim and Ms. Lim Mui Keow, Agnes, (NUS MSE) for assisting with XRD measurements and SEM respectively. We acknowledge Dr. Jitendra Mata (ANSTO) and Dr. Jatin Kumar for their assistance with the SANS experiments. We acknowledge the support of the Australian Centre for Neutron Scattering, Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organization, in providing the neutron research facilities used in this work and funding from The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Additional SANS data for the surfactant SDA and characterization data for the synthesized zeolites is provided as electronic supporting information. Supplementary data related to this article can be found at