Presented is a measurement approach to differentiate reliably exhaust gas components using standard zirconia-based thimble-type potentiometric lambda sensors. A self-discharge characteristic after applying different voltage pulses between the sensor electrodes is used as a measurement parameter which depends on the gas component and its concentration in the exhaust. The detection of NO in the lower ppm range is demonstrated. In addition, this approach allows significant improvements in the response and selectivity to NO compared to other investigated gases such as H2, C2H5OH, and a mixture of hydrocarbons. Therefore, this technique seems to be capable of enabling NO sensing in combustion exhaust with improved selectivity using standard lambda sensors.At present, exhaust gas sensors are installed in quantities of millions per year in automotive exhaust aftertreatment systems. Virtually any automobile being powered by a gasoline combustion engine is equipped with at least one zirconia exhaust gas oxygen sensor (lambda sensor) for detection of the air-to-fuel-ratio or λ. Generally, one lambda sensor is mounted upstream and one lambda sensor is mounted downstream of the three-way catalyst (TWC) To date, only one automotive exhaust gas NO Due to its low costs, the classic lambda sensor is the preferred exhaust gas sensor The classic lambda sensor is a potentiometric solid electrolyte concentration cell (“Nernst cells”). It measures the oxygen activity towards an outside air reference or in novel embodiments towards an internal pumped reference An yttria stabilized zirconia (YSZ) ceramic membrane with porous electrodes separates two gas chambers with the oxygen partial pressures Two main embodiments are in commercial use. The initially introduced lambda sensors consist of a thimble-type zirconia element as schematically depicted in A more novel embodiment utilizes planar yttria stabilized zirconia (YSZ) multilayer technology. These sensors reach their working temperature faster and require less heater power. Based on this planar technology, enhanced functionality like amperometric oxygen sensing even in rich atmospheres To date, both the thimble-type and the planar design are on the market. For our initial investigations on the feasibility to measure NO Electrochemical devices based on YSZ are appropriate for applications such as oxygen sensors at temperatures higher than 600 The measurement process used in this work is shown schematically in In addition to this novel procedure, steady state measurements have been carried out for comparison, i.e. the (constant) voltage without applied pulses are measured. The obtained so-called mixed potential is compared with the results of the discharging curves. Gas measurements have been carried out at an oxygen concentration of 4% and a humidity level of 3% absolute. The total air flow was set to 1 The thimble-type lambda sensors (Standard Motor Products, type SG-267) were mounted in a furnace in order to simulate a hot exhaust pipe. If not stated otherwise, a furnace temperature of 325 The resulting sensor voltage  The response curves shown in Concentration dependent sensor characteristics can be derived from the final values of the time dependent voltages in Since exhaust gas temperatures can reach several hundreds of degree Celsius, the thermodynamic equilibrium of NO and NO In exhaust gas, a number of gas components are present in parallel, which may cause interfering effects on the NO The investigation of the self-discharge characteristic is a promising approach for detection of NO It shall be emphasized that this study has to be seen as an initial approach that shows the feasibility of the novel measuring principle. If one aims to install such a sensor in automotive exhausts, the cross sensitivity to oxygen, water, and carbon dioxide has to be investigated as well as the influence of the sensor and the exhaust temperature. From a sensor system point of view, one gains the advantage additional information of another gas concentration, for instance of the NO However, installed in stationary systems, like in combustion plants or in waste incinerators, one might gain the concentration of two or more gases with only one inexpensive lambda sensor. Besides these technical issues, forthcoming studies will focus on the underlying electrochemical principles for this effect.