Optical image analysis is a very convenient tool for obtaining comprehensive information about fine iron ore size fractions. Data can be obtained on mineral abundances, porosity, particle shape and ore textures with a high level of accuracy. A range of techniques has been used to characterise iron ore samples on a particle-by-particle basis. Automatic textural classification of iron ore particles was used to establish classes containing particles with very similar mineral composition and texture. Image analysis coupled with probe analysis and mineral density measurements provided information about the chemical composition and density of each particle class. The combination of these results enabled a “virtual feed” to be created, which can be a key input into a beneficiation unit model for predicting its performance. Identification and classification of the textural type of each particle was performed according to the CSIRO-Hamersley Iron Ore Group Classification Scheme. If more detailed classification is needed, further classification can be performed based on dimensional, chemical or mineral criteria, such as the presence of certain minerals in particles or total iron content. Some deficiencies of the current image analysis procedures and their further improvement and automation are also discussed.To understand the behaviour of fine iron ores in downstream beneficiation operations or in subsequent processing operations such as granulation and sintering, and to reliably predict such processes, a large amount of information about the ore fines needs to be obtained ( Determination of the mineralogy of iron ore particles can be carried out by several methods – indirect or direct measurements. Indirect methods usually assume that the minerals in the examined ore are stoichiometric, which is not always the case. Diagnostic leach tests and calculation of mineralogy from assays can be included in this category ( Among the direct techniques are quantitative XRD (e.g. Optical image analysis systems are capable of identifying porosity in different minerals and differentiating between various iron ore minerals. This differentiation is based on the distinctive reflectivities of different iron oxides and hydroxides. The image analysis described in this paper is based on utilization of two software packages: KS400 (ZEISS) and Recognition2 (see also The ore texture group identification is performed according to the CSIRO-Hamersley Iron Ore Group Classification Scheme described by Recognition2 also has the option of classifying particles by mineral content or by total iron. The “Selection” procedure in Recognition2 can select particles based on their dimensional, chemical or mineral characteristics. When linked together, these capabilities enable a set of classes with distinct characteristics to be built. This set of classes represents the iron ore size fractions under investigation. If beneficiation modelling is the goal of the characterisation, and if the ore will be used as feed to specific beneficiation units, the full data set of classes is called the “virtual feed”. During subsequent modelling, the virtual products can be calculated and compared with the measured properties of actual products using the same procedures as for the feed material. Information obtained from Recognition2 enables “virtual feeds” to be constructed for feeding into a hydrocyclone model ( For optical image analysis each sample (size fraction) is mounted in an epoxy resin block, which is polished on one side and image analysed under reflected light ( Improvement of the quality of the image is the initial stage of image processing within the MINERAL software, where contrast and sharpness improvement as well as further background correction are performed. Background correction is a special procedure which compensates for non-uniform illumination across the image. For this purpose, a reference image has to be obtained, which involves imaging a highly uniform surface without any inclusions or scratches using the same focal length lens and illumination as the image to be corrected. A polished highly uniform piece of quartz is suitable for this purpose. After the image has been improved, different minerals are discriminated and identified with the assistance of colour and greyscale thresholding and visual identification. In Finally, information about every particle is measured and is saved as a file. This information includes the area of every mineral, the locked (not in contact with the epoxy matrix) and free (connected with the epoxy matrix) perimeter of every mineral, dimensional characteristics of the particle, grey levels, etc. Subsequently, this information is read and processed by the Recognition2 software package. In terms of sample representativity, it is understandable that, the larger the number of particles measured, the better the statistical figures for particle distribution by texture and the smaller the random errors. However, there is still the possibility for systematic error if the set of particle sections in the blocks is systematically different from the actual size fraction. It is more likely for this to happen for very small size fractions, such as CS6 and CS7 (CS – cyclosized fractions), which have particle sizes below 9 To make sure that the set of particles analysed is representative of the whole size fraction, the following procedure is used. In advance of image analysis, chemical information about every major mineral in the ore is obtained by electron microprobe analysis. Averaged values from 30 to 100 measurements for every mineral are used. Within Recognition2 there is a procedure named “Composition” (see  Identification and classification of the textural type of each particle is a very labour consuming process, which usually involves the microscope operator counting every particle and allocating it to a certain ore type. This approach can only provide data on major ore types and the number of particles of a certain ore type in specific size fractions, and cannot provide more detailed information on other characteristics such as liberation, mineral associations, dimensional characteristics, average density and the mineral and chemical composition of each ore type. To refine the classification algorithm in Recognition2, particle identifications from Recognition2 were compared with identifications provided by an experienced mineralogist. If these identifications did not coincide, a decision was made as to whether there was a possibility of identifying the particles correctly simply by changing boundaries and conditions in the existing recognition scheme (if that was the case, other particles which were close to this particle were also reconsidered) or whether a new texture characterisation parameter needed to be introduced into the image analysis software. In the vast majority of cases where the two classifications did not agree, it was due to mineral misidentification in the initial image analysis. At the current stage of development of Recognition2, if minerals are properly identified, then 96–99% of particle identifications match those provided by experienced mineralogists. In the very last test of recognition procedure on approximately two hundred particles where mineralogy was correctly identified, only one particle was allocated to the wrong textural class by Recognition2. Two examples of common image analysis misidentifications are described in more detail below. The particle shown in The second particle shown here ( As already discussed above, after the information from the MINERAL program is loaded into Recognition2, Recognition2 automatically classifies particles into different ore texture groups. The main information (the number of particles in every textural group, their percentages by area and weight) appears on the “Particles Recognition” form (see If more detailed information about the entire particle group, specific ore texture class or a combination of several texture classes is needed, the operator can go to the “Statistics” procedure form in Recognition2 (see Particle dimension analysis (see “Modal/Composition Analysis” is subdivided into three different tables. The first one provides information about the presence of different minerals in the particles (see The second table produced during “Modal/Composition Analysis” is the “Variability Analysis” table (see The third table provided by “Modal/Composition Analysis” gives compositional analyses. This includes the molecular composition calculated from electron probe analyses for every mineral considered and the total calculated assay for the group of particles under investigation. As outlined above, there are several different ways to classify particles in Recognition2. Classification via the presence of a specific mineral or minerals in iron particles (liberation analysis by phases) can be applied for the entire group of particles under investigation or for specific texture classes. In  In In industrial applications, classification by total iron (Liberation by Total Iron) is also sometimes necessary. In addition to the classifications described above, extraction of particles from the entire group or from already created classes can be performed with the help of the Selection module (see Optical image analysis is a convenient and reliable tool for obtaining comprehensive information about iron ore samples. It enables different degrees of iron oxidation and hydration to be distinguished. It can also identify the porosity of different minerals in particles, and hence the density of particles can be calculated. Use of calculated chemical composition and mineral abundances within Recognition2 enables quality control of mineral identification to be performed. Information about the percentage of different iron ore textural types and their chemical composition is very important in predicting downstream processing performance and product characteristics. The Recognition2 software can automatically identify different ore textures and classify particles into different ore texture groups. The main reason for any misclassification of particles is mineral misidentification in the initial image analysis. If the image analysis is correct, then 95–99% of all particles are identified correctly. Classification by ore texture creates classes of particles with quite similar mineral composition, and hence the density and chemical characteristics are also similar. Procedures such as “Liberation by Phases”, “Liberation by Total Iron” and “Selection” can create particle classes with even closer mineral and chemical composition. This is useful for modelling purposes (see To have reliable figures on the abundance of different iron ore textures in a sample, the number of particles analysed needs to be statistically significant. It depends on the number of different texture groups within the ore, the abundance of ore texture groups of interest and the acceptable statistical error for the study. Even though the initial image analysis is partially automated, significant labour is required for the initial image analysis using KS400, especially if manual editing is necessary to obtain correct mineral identification. Currently CSIRO Minerals is working on methods for better mineral identification, more comprehensive texture classification and full automation of image analysis. The authors wish to thank staff of the CSIRO Iron Ore Processing group, for valuable suggestions during the development of Recognition2, especially Daniel Saunders who took part in the development and James Manuel and Simon Campbell-Hardwick for providing classification selection criteria. The authors would also like to thank Ralph Holmes for valuable discussions and editing of this paper.