In this study, the protection effect of black carrot extract on the stability of liposomes during storage was evaluated. The physical and chemical stability of the extract (0.4% w/w) including extract-loaded liposomes with various lecithin content (1%, 2%, and 4% w/w) were demonstrated. Z-average particle diameter and zeta potentials of liposomes were evaluated before and after 21 days of storage. The particle diameter of the samples was found to be lower than 50 nm after storage and no statistical change was determined (p < 0.05). The liposomes with and without extract were visualized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) after negative staining. The TEM images revealed that unloaded and extract-loaded liposomes are similar in size. The degradation of extract (30%–90%), phenolic content (10%–29%), and antioxidant capacity (4%–33%) of liposomes depending on lecithin content were also determined during storage to evaluate the biochemical stability. A hexanal analysis was performed to investigate the lipid oxidation in liposomes within 60 days. According to the results, the oxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids may be inhibited with the addition of the extract to liposomes; however, lipid content should be limited according to the extract concentration. The highest protection on oxidation was observed in extract-loaded liposomes containing 1% lecithin. The study provided valuable data on the contribution of an anthocyanin addition to liposomes to overcome oxidation of unsaturated phospholipids.Liposomes are widely used as a delivery method for antimicrobials ( The stability of liposomes can be considered in physical and chemical factors ( Black carrot is a rich source of anthocyanins (1750 mg/kg), mostly composed of acylated anthocyanins (64–77%) ( In this study, liposomes containing black carrot extract were prepared with a high pressure homogenization method, and the storage stability of the extract-loaded, including free liposomes, were investigated. The physical and chemical stability of the liposomes were analyzed during storage. We hypothesized that black carrot extract as a rich anthocyanin source may increase the stability of the extract-loaded liposomes against lipid oxidation without reduction in red color. The current study evaluates the phenolic content, antioxidant activity, anthocyanin stability, and color properties of liposomal samples together with lipid oxidation during the storage period. Black carrot extract (BCE) (HF# 2.10592) was provided by Döhler GmbH (AG Darmstadt, Germany). The soy lecithin (Lipoid S75), containing 69.3% phosphatidylcholine, 9.8% phosphatidylethanolamine, and 2.1% lysophosphatidylcholine, was obtained from Lipoid AG (Ludwigshafen, Germany). Sodium acetate (# 6773.3), acetic acid glacial (# 3738.5), and ethanol (# 5054.1) were purchased from Carl Roth GmbH & Co. KG (Karlsruhe, Germany). Sodium carbonate anhydrous, Folin-Ciocalteu reagent, Sephadex G-50 (G50300–100 g), copper (II) chloride (CuCl2), ammonium acetate (NH BCE solutions were prepared by dissolving the liposomes in an acetate buffer (pH 3.5, 250 mM) as three independent replicates for each sample (0.1%, 0.2%, and 0.4% w/w). Sodium azide (0.02% w/w) was added during acetate buffer preparation to prevent microbial growth ( The z-average particle diameter was determined using a dynamic light scattering instrument (Nano ZS, Malvern Instruments, Worcestershire, UK). The liposomal samples were diluted up to a lecithin concentration of 0.1% (w/w) with an acetate buffer to prevent multiple scattering effects. The refractive index for the lecithin and aqueous part used were 1.44 and 1.33, respectively. The mean particle diameter (z-average) and polydispersity index (PDI) were recorded. The average and standard deviation of the results were calculated from three freshly prepared samples using three measurements per sample. At the same dilution ratio, the zeta (ζ) potential values of liposomal samples were measured using a dynamic light scattering instrument (Nano ZS, Malvern Instruments, Worcestershire, UK) using the Smoluchowski mathematical model. Sephadex® gel was used to remove unencapsulated extract from the liposomal samples. The formation of the Sephadex® gel was performed as described in a previous study ( The Folin-Ciocalteu reagent was used to determine the total phenolic content of the samples using the modified method of The encapsulation efficiency of the liposomes was determined by phenolic content analysis. The amount ratio of phenolic compounds before and after gel filtration was specified as the encapsulation efficiency in percentage. The amount of the phenolic compounds of the total extract ( The anthocyanin amount in the liposomes was determined spectrophotometrically at 530 nm using the modified method of The TAC was determined using a cupric ion-reducing antioxidant capacity (CUPRAC) assay. The antioxidant capacity was determined using the method of Hexanal, a secondary oxidation product, was determined using a Clarus 580 gas chromatograph with a Turbo Matrix autosampler (Perkin Elmer, Shelton, CT, USA) and a RTX-200 fused silica capillary column (30 m × 0.32 mm × 1 μm) (Restek GmbH, Bad Homburg, Germany) using the method of Color attributes (CIE L*, a*, and b* values) of the samples were measured with a CR-400 handheld chroma meter (Minolta, Tokyo, Japan). The free and extract-loaded liposomes were stored at room temperature in the dark for 21 days. All the samples were stored in airtight containers as full volume. All the analyses were performed on the stored samples during the storage period. TEM images of prepared free (1% lecithin) and extract-loaded liposomes (0.1% extract & 1% lecithin) were performed using the method of All the experiments were performed at least 3 times for each triplicate sample. The average and standard deviation of all data were calculated using Microsoft Excel for Mac (version 15). Statistical analyses were performed using an one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), followed by the Duncan post hoc test using SPSS software (version 21.0, SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA) and Tukey post hoc test using Minitab software (version 16.0, MINITAB Inc.). The particle diameter and zeta potential of the liposomes specify the physical stability of the liposomes during storage. The particle diameters of all the samples were found to be <50 nm ( ζ-potential is one of the main indicators of physical stability of liposomes, and a higher absolute value of ζ-potential indicates higher stability ( The encapsulation efficiency of the extract-loaded liposomes was determined using total phenolic analysis. The extract-loaded liposomes before and after gel filtration were analyzed. The lecithin was removed before analysis with ethanol dilution and centrifugation method to prevent interference to absorbance. A higher encapsulation of the extract was achieved in liposomes containing higher lecithin concentrations ( The degradation of the extract concentration, total phenolic content, and antioxidant capacity of liposomes were evaluated for all parts of the liposomes. The results of the gel-filtered liposomes showed a change in the amount of bioactive materials inside liposomes during storage. In addition to the degradation mechanism of bioactives, random molecular movement caused diffusion of the biomolecules ( The degradation of the black carrot anthocyanins was reported as an extract concentration during storage. In The content of total phenolics in liposomal samples were reported as gallic acid equivalents. The change in total phenolic content of liposomes with 0.4% extract is shown in Various antioxidants were used to increase the oxidation stability of phospholipids such as α-tocopherol and butyl hydroxyl toluene ( Liposomes composed of different lecithin concentrations (1%, 2%, and 4%) were analyzed for lipid oxidation over 60 days ( The color attributes (L*, a*, and b* values) of the liposomal samples were measured and the results for 0.4% extract-loaded liposomes are presented in Visual observations of liposomes containing different lecithin concentrations (1%, 2%, and 4%) ( In conclusion, liposomes have mostly been used for the encapsulation of bioactive compounds. In addition, the storage stability of liposomes, including unsaturated fatty acids, was mostly affected by chemical degradation. In this study, the physical and chemical stabilities of extract-loaded liposomes with various lecithin content were demonstrated. The oxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids may be inhibited with the addition of the extract to liposomes; however, lipid content should be limited according to the extract concentration. On the other hand, it should be noted that, even though a protection effect on fatty acids is provided, bleaching of anthocyanins is observed due to the degradation of the flavylium cation by oxidation products of unsaturated fatty acids. This study provided significant information on the potential limits of liposomes generated from lecithin containing high concentration of unsaturated fatty acids. Further investigations will be necessary to increase the storage stability of liposomes, which may be improved by a polymer coating as a barrier layer on liposomes. This study was supported by a fellowship within the Doctoral Research Program of The Scientific and Technical Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK-BIDEB 2214-A & 2211-A). The authors wish to express their sincere appreciation to