The complete mineralization of organic pollutants present in wastewater is usually achieved via thermally activated oxygen/air. This process occurs at high temperatures and pressures (300°C, 200atm) and often gives small amount of acetic acid as a final product. In this work, we demonstrate using acetic acid as a model compound that organic molecules can be activated electrochemically such that they react at room temperature with oxygen, resulting in mineralization of even acetic acid present in 1M HClO4 supporting electrolyte. This electrochemically induced activation occurs during anodic polarization of boron-doped diamond electrodes (BDD) in air/oxygen-saturated solutions. The direct evidence for this process was found during electro-oxidation of acetic acid saturated with isotopically labelled 18O2 resulting in evolution of C18O2 and C16O18O. We suggest that the mechanism of activation on BDD is initiated by hydroxyl radicals formed on the electrode surface.The complete oxidation of organic pollutants present in wastewater is usually achieved using oxygen/air at high temperature (300 Here, we report that mineralization of organic compounds on BDD electrodes does not only involve hydroxyl radicals but also molecular oxygen present in air/oxygen-saturated aqueous organic solutions. The direct evidence for this process was found during electro-oxidation of acetic acid saturated with isotopically labelled BDD electrodes (B/C – 6000 On BDD, we have studied (i) deaerated by argon, (ii) aerated, (iii) The rate of O  A similar experiment was performed for aerated and The decrease of the It is interesting to note that in parallel to decrease of  It is interesting to note that ionic current of C The results presented here provide direct evidence that molecular oxygen can be used at room temperature for the mineralization of acetic acid after its activation on BDD electrodes. This activation of the reaction with molecular oxygen proceeds most likely through the sequence of reactions that are initiated by HO Carboxymethyl radical can directly react with molecular oxygen to form peroxy carboxymethyl radical (Eq. Peroxy radicals are very reactive and can initiate subsequent chain reactions leading, via several possible intermediates, to complete oxidation of acetic acid. As an example of possible subsequent reactions, O Globally, we can consider that isotopically labelled peroxy carboxymethyl radical is decomposed to carbon dioxide through formation of oxalic acid Results presented in this work show that molecular oxygen dissolved in aqueous solution contributes to the degradation of acetic acid on BDD electrodes in ambient temperature. This non-faradaic enhancement of the acetic acid electro-oxidation is initiated by HO It can be further concluded, that such electrochemically induced activation process may occur also on other electrode materials on which organic radicals are formed during a direct discharge of organic compounds at the electrode surface. The authors thank the Fonds National Suisse de la Recherche Scientifique and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft for the financial support.