Numerous tremors occur in underground mining engineering and rockbursts are related to tremors, while not all tremors can trigger rockbursts. A good understanding of the triggering criterion for the occurrence of a rockburst under strong tremor disturbance can offer useful insight into the evaluation of rockburst hazard as well as revealing the causes. Thus, a test facility was developed to investigate the behaviour and bursting failure in modeled roadway under dynamic loading. The results demonstrate that an increase in input dynamic loading energy from 29.4 J to 117.6 J did not affect acoustic emission (AE) activity, suggesting that the roadway retained its resistance to the dynamic load at that time. Then, a sharp increase in AE activity occurred at an applied dynamic loading energy of 147 J, indicating significant damage within the rock masses surrounding the roadway. Acceleration signals and deformation between roadway sections with different support patterns were different: bursting failure of the roadway section with a simulated anchoring interval of 1200 mm was severe and took the form of local bump with the roadway section being semi-closed, while the other section with a simulated anchoring interval of 800 mm could retain its structural integrity at that time. This study may eventually lead to a method for laboratory testing of dynamic behaviour and bursting failure process of roadways.The rockburst, that is one of the leading disasters in mining and rock engineering causing serious casualties and property losses, frequently occurs in a sudden or violent manner. Many countries have reported rockburst accidents. In china, more than 170 coal mines have suffered rockbursts as mining depths increase. For instance, on 14 February 2005, a rockburst induced a serious gas explosion and killed 214 people in Sunjiawan Coal Mine, Fuxin City, China ( During tunneling and mining activities, there are many strong tremors with different energies generated, which will induce dynamic disturbances, but, not all strong tremors can induce rockbursts ( Over the last decade, interest in the use of dynamic test facilities that can provide an insight into the performance and capacity of different reinforcement systems has A Pendulum Impact Test Facility was designed for generating dynamic loads and performing bursting failure tests on the roadway model. Damage evolution in rock masses surrounding the modeled roadway under staged dynamic loading was monitored by using an acoustic emission (AE) system. Acceleration signals and failure process were recorded by an ultra-dynamic signal monitoring system and high-speed camera, respectively. The deformation of the roadway was measured by displacement sensors. The behaviour and failure of roadway sections with different support patterns were compared. This study may eventually develop a method for laboratory testing of dynamic behaviour and bursting failure of the roadways, which would provide a significant advance in the research into rockburst mechanisms. As mentioned above, for a better understanding of the inherent behaviour and bursting failure of roadways, studies should not only focus on supporting units, but investigate the damage to the roadway structure under dynamic loading. As shown in The facility consists of gate-shaped steel frame, hydraulic loading device and a pendulum impact system. Dynamic loads were produced by the sudden release of a pendulum to cause an equivalent impact within the rock mass. As shown in An eight-channel AE PCI-2 system (Physical Acoustics Corporation) was employed to record fractures and energy release in the model. Eight AE sensors at 1–100 kHz range were attached to the front and back of the model. Sampling frequency was set to 1 MHz. The AE count and energy were directly calculated using the software on the PCI-2 system to elucidate AE activity. The sensor layout is illustrated in The roadway model represented the geological conditions around an excavated roadway in Xing’an Coal Mine, Hegang City (Heilongjiang Province, China). Thickness and lithology of each stratum in the model were also summarized in The roadway excavation zone located within stratum 3 was designed as an arched space with an axial length of 400 mm. The excavation was started at the back of the model, and progressed to its front face, with a chisel and a hammer used as tunneling tools. The roadway was then supported by anchors on its top and two sides. The drop height of the pendulum was varied in increments of 150 mm, ranging from 150 to 900 mm, until bursting failure of the roadway. The corresponding dynamic loading energy increment was 29.4 J, and the applied energy ranged from 29.4 to 176.4 J. The tremor energy measured in coal mines was around 0.26–3.6% of the total energy released in the rupture of such coal-rock masses ( The behaviour and failure of the roadway under different dynamic loads were then investigated. Shock resistance abilities of reinforced roadway sections with different anchoring spacings were also tested. Based on equal equivalent rigidity and the results of surveys on mechanical parameters of a number of materials and model tests ( An AE monitoring system used here can monitor micro-fractures and reveal the evolution of damage in a rock mass (  As mentioned above, the simulated anchoring intervals at the front half (0–200 mm) and back half (200–400 mm) of the modeled roadway are 1200 mm and 800 mm respectively. Accelerations of roadway sections were recorded using an ultra-dynamic signal monitoring system. Acceleration signals from the two roadway sections at different dynamic loading stages are demonstrated in At a dynamic loading energy of 176.4 J, bursting failure of the modeled roadway was observed, and the failure process was recorded by using GX-3 high-speed camera ( These experimental results are in line with the conclusions of many other studies ( Research findings reveal that a rockburst may occur when the total stress and energy (due to the superposition of static stress and dynamic disturbance) within the coal–rock mass reach a certain critical level ( The research provides a better understanding of the behaviour and bursting failure of roadways under dynamic loading. The following conclusions could be obtained: AE activity underwent no significant changes upon the increase of input dynamic loading energy from 29.4 J to 117.6 J. Then, at a dynamic loading energy of 147 J, strong AE activity was observed, indicating significant damage to the rock (the roadway had almost reached its ultimate shock resistance). Finally, bursting failure of the modeled roadway was observed at an input dynamic loading energy of 176.4 J. Bursting failure of the roadway section with a simulated anchoring interval equivalent to 1200 mm was severe and took the form of a local bump. The roadway section was almost closed, while the other section retained its structural integrity. Whether, or not, a rockburst could be eventually observed was related to the load-bearing capacity of the roadway. This work was supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: