This paper systematically studied the effect of lead ions on floatability of scheelite under sodium oleate (NaOL) system, and the deep adsorption mechanism was revealed by a series of mechanism experiments and the adsorption morphology of NaOL was observed by atomic force microscope (AFM). Micro-flotation test indicated that the floatability of scheelite increased sharply from 47.25% to 80.12% in the presence of lead ions at pH 7. Zeta potential results revealed the positively charged lead ions species (Pb2+ and PbOH+) positively changed the zeta potential of scheelite, which favored the adsorption of negatively charged NaOL species (RCOO−, RCOOH·RCOO− etc.). XPS and FTIR analysis confirmed that NaOL was chemisorbed on scheelite surface and the adsorption was more severe in the presence of lead ions. Lead ions were chemisorbed on scheelite surface in the form of W-O-Pb2+, which facilitated the further adsorption of NaOL. This increased the active sites on scheelite surface for NaOL adsorption. AFM images intuitively showed the presence of lead ions increased the adsorption coverage of NaOL but did not affect the thickness of the adsorption layer. The adsorption thickness was still 6 nm–7 nm and the adsorption was multilayer adsorption. Based on these studies, an adsorption model was finally obtained.In industry, both wolframite [(Fe, Mn) WO Metal ions are mainly adsorbed on the mineral surfaces to increase the active sites of mineral in flotation, increasing the adsorption amount of collectors and improving the floatability of minerals This paper aims to reveal the underlying activation mechanism of lead ions in scheelite flotation using NaOL as collector. The effect of lead ions on the floatability of scheelite was studied by pure mineral flotation tests. The activation mechanism of lead ions was revealed by solution chemistry and zeta potential measurements. Compared with the Zhao et al. study Pure scheelite was taken from Guangxi Province, China. After the massive scheelite was hammered with a hammer, the crystals with better purity were hand-selected, then ground in a ceramic ball mill. Then the samples were sieved with 37 μm and 74 μm dry sieves. The grinding time should avoid too long to avoid excessive grinding. The scheelite samples used for micro-flotation had a size of −74 + 37 μm. Then, −37 μm samples were further manually ground with an agate mortar for subsequent mechanism tests. The purity of the pure scheelite sample by chemically analyzed was 96%, and the X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD) of scheelite was shown in The Micro-flotation test was performed on a XFG flotation machine, keeping the spindle speed at 1500 r/min. The selected pure mineral size was −74 + 37 μm. 2 g of samples and 35 mL of ultrapure water were added to the 40 mL flotation cell. The flotation was performed according to the following procedure ( The foam products and the tailings products were separately weighed and the recovery was calculated. The formula is as follows: Samples were further ground to less than 5 μm for zeta potential analysis using a zeta potential analyzer (ZetaPlus, Bruker, Germany). 20 mg of samples and 40 mL of ultrapure water were weighed into 35 mL KNO A Spectrum One FTIR (Shimadzu Corporation, Kyoto, Japan) was used for infrared spectrum test. The test samples were prepared as follows: The scheelite powder was ground in an agate mortar to less than 2 μm. One part of the sample was used for the mineral infrared spectrum test. Another part of the sample was placed in a beaker and then 35 mL of ultrapure water was added. Then the pH was adjusted and a certain concentration of reagents was added as the flotation process. Then, after the scheelite and the reagents reacted for 20 min, they were filtered through a microporous membrane three times. The solid sample was dried at low temperature for testing. XPS is an important surface analysis method for analyzing chemical composition and chemical state of elements. XPS is used more and more widely in mineral processing. The XPS detection device used in this experiment was a K-Alpha 1063 X-ray photoelectron spectrometer, and the experimental results were processed by Advantage 5.9741 software. The sample preparation process were consistent with the flotation. The obtained solid samples were rinsed with ultrapure water three times, and then filtered and dried for testing. The whole process ensured that the samples were not contaminated. AFM imaging study was conducted with a MultiMode SPM AFM (Veeco Instruments, Inc., USA). The experiment was carried out in a tapping mode. The main parameters used in the experiment are as follows: The test probe (RTESP-300) was a single crystal silicon probe with a resonance frequency of 286 KHz. The maximum scanning range was 3 μm × 3 μm. The experimental results were analyzed with software Nanoscope 7.3. The test was carried out at room temperature of 25 °C. The scheelite sample was polished by a semi-automatic polishing machine (Tegramin-25, Struers). The polishing cloth of the semi-automatic polishing machine has five fineness from coarse to fine. The scheelite samples were sequentially polished from coarse to fine. It was necessary to add corresponding polishing liquid when polishing with the finest two polishing cloths. The finest step need to be repeated twice. The polished sample was then repeatedly rinsed with ultrapure water. The freshly cleaved scheelite sample was placed in the same concentration of reagents as the micro-flotation experiment for three minutes. After the freshly cleaved mineral was reacted by the corresponding reagents, the scheelite surface for tested was dried by high-purity nitrogen. The whole process ensured that the samples were not contaminated. The effect of lead ions on the floatability of scheelite with collector NaOL was studied, the flotation results are shown in   The flotation reagents in the slurry exist in different forms at different pH, affecting the zeta potential of the mineral To reveal the adsorption mechanism of the reagents on scheelite surface, the effect of pH and lead nitrate concentration on the zeta potential of scheelite are shown in In order to further determine the adsorption mechanism of lead ions and NaOL on scheelite surface, the FTIR spectra of scheelite before and after treating with different reagents were measured ( Some relatively weak absorption peaks appear at 2921.33 cm The change of the chemical species at the scheelite surface before and after adding of different reagents were investigated by XPS analysis. In order to ensure the accuracy of this experiment, the spectra involved in this experiment are all referenced to the existing literature data and databases. The survey scan spectra of scheelite before and after treatment with different reagents are shown in Since W and Ca elements control the active sites of the scheelite and mainly affect the flotation of scheelite, W and Ca elements are selected for more detailed analysis of the narrow spectrum. The accurate binding energies results and the chemical shifts of binding energies are shown in The narrow spectrums of C 1s and O 1s of the original and treated samples are illustrated in In order to prove that the lead ion can increase the adsorption amount of NaOL on scheelite surface, the adsorption morphology of NaOL on the surface of scheelite before and after the reaction of lead ion was further observed by tapping mode atomic force microscope (TMAFM).   The effects of activator lead ions on the flotation behavior of scheelite were investigated by micro-flotation test in NaOL system. The action mechanism of the lead ions was analyzed by zeta potential test. The adsorption form and the adsorption amount of the reagents were further analyzed by XPS and FITR. The adsorption morphology of the NaOL was observed by AFM, and the thickness and coverage of the adsorption layer on the mineral surface were measured. Finally, an adsorption model was obtained ( Lead ions could significantly increase the floatability of scheelite under NaOL systems. The recovery of scheelite rapidly increased from 47.25% to 80.12% with the pre-addition of 2.0 × 10 The authors would like to thank Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: