Introduction
                  The purpose of this study is to describe the epidemiology of orthopaedic injuries incurred secondary to firearms among children and adolescents at a major metropolitan trauma center and to identify risk factors for complications and long-term morbidity.
               
                  Methods
                  A retrospective review was performed of consecutive patients 17 years of age and younger who sustained a firearm injury and required orthopaedic treatment at a major trauma center from 2006 to 2013. Patient demographics, injury mechanism, fracture classification, neurovascular injury, antibiotic administration, and length of hospitalization were recorded. Radiographic studies were used to determine fracture pattern, methods of stabilization, and time to union. Primary clinical outcomes include fracture nonunion, infection, and physeal arrest.
               
                  Results
                  46 patients with a mean age of 12.7 years were treated for firearm related orthopaedic injuries. 72% of the patients were ages 13–17, while 28% were 12 years of age and younger. There were 28 violent injuries (21 assaults, 7 innocent bystanders) and 16 non-violent injuries (15 unintentional discharges and 1 self-inflicted). There was a bimodal distribution of violent versus nonviolent mechanisms, with the majority of children 12 years of age and under sustaining non-violent injuries and adolescents more commonly injured with a violent mechanism.
                  There were 44 fractures and 6 traumatic arthrotomies, with eight associated neurovascular injuries. Twenty-five patients had an orthopaedic procedure, with a total of 43 surgeries. Mean hospital length of stay was 6.8 days. There were five deep infections. Four patients developed non-unions and all of these patients had deep infections. The timing and duration of antibiotic therapy was not significantly different between those who did and did not develop infection. Of the non-operatively treated fractures, there were no infections or non-unions at long-term follow-up.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Morbidity and mortality related to firearms is a growing public health problem in the United States. Results of this study suggest that gunshot related fractures had higher than anticipated morbidity, including permanent neurologic deficits, infection (11%) and fracture non-union (9%). More than half of patients underwent surgery and experienced long hospital stays secondary to the complexity of the injury. This epidemiological data on firearm injuries in children and adolescents is an impetus for prospective study, with the goal to increase awareness and develop treatment strategies for firearm-related fractures.Firearm-related injuries are a leading cause of serious and fatal injuries to children and adolescents. While in the past paediatric gunshot wounds were rare and frequently incidental, there has been an increase in civilian gun violence since the late 1980s, with a disproportionately large increase occurring within the paediatric population. In 2010, firearm injuries led to the death of 3459 children and adolescents under the age of 21, representing the cause of death for 25% of adolescents 15–19 years of age. Additionally, there were 9981 non-fatal injuries during the same year, an incidence of 12.64 per 100,000 The rising incidence of firearm-related injuries in the paediatric and adolescent population represents a significant public health concern. The resulting complex orthopaedic and visceral injuries have associated short and long-term morbidity. To date, no treatment algorithm has been formulated for the management of paediatric patients with ballistic orthopaedic injuries, nor is there a good understanding of the predictors of poor clinical outcomes. Many population-based studies describe the epidemiology of firearm-related deaths Contrary to the wealth of published literature on adult firearm injuries, studies specific to the paediatric population are sparse. In particular, the few studies that have been published on paediatric orthopaedic injuries report on a small number of patients from centers outside of the United States The aim of this study is to describe the epidemiology of orthopaedic injuries incurred secondary to firearm injuries among children and adolescents at a major metropolitan trauma center over an eight-year period and to identify risk factors for complications and long-term morbidity. After institutional review board approval for data collection and analysis, we retrospectively reviewed consecutive patients 17 years of age and younger who sustained a firearm injury and were evaluated at a level 2 paediatric trauma center over an 8-year period from 2006 through 2013. Patients with orthopaedic injuries as a result of firearms were identified from the institutional trauma registry utilizing ICD-9 codes. Patients that were not evaluated by the orthopaedic service during their hospitalization were excluded. Demographic information was obtained from the institutional trauma registry and included age at the time of injury, gender, and race. The electronic medical record was utilized to obtain additional details related to their injuries. Pertinent data points included type of firearm (low or high-velocity), nature of the injury (non-violent unintentional, non-violent self-inflicted, violent innocent bystander, or violent assault), and perpetrator (known or unknown, minor or adult). Based on the principles of muzzle velocity and soft tissue injury, handguns were considered low-velocity weapons and shotguns and hunting riffles were considered high-velocity weapons. A non-violent unintentional firearm injury was defined as one that occurred when the gun was accidently discharged during cleaning, hunting, playing, or inspecting it. Violent injuries were defined as intentional acts of injury towards another individual, with the victim being an innocent bystander or intended target. Injury specific variables included number and location of fractures, soft tissue injury, and associated neurovascular injuries. Hospital course, including administration and timing of antibiotics, surgical procedures, and length of stay were documented. Radiographic studies were reviewed to determine fracture location, methods of stabilization, and time to union. Primary outcomes included fracture nonunion, infection, and physeal arrest. Descriptive statistics was used to determine risks factors for nonunion, infection, and physeal arrest. From January 2006 to December 2013, 46 consecutive patients (36 male and 10 female) were treated at our children's hospital for firearm-inflicted orthopaedic injuries. The mean age of the patients was 12.7 years (range 2–17). 33 (72%) of the patients were adolescents (ages 13–17), and 13 (28%) were twelve years of age and younger. Races included African–American (72%), Caucasian (22%), and Hispanic (6%). The inflicting weapon was a handgun in 38 patients (83%), shotgun in 7 patients (15%), and BB gun in 1 patient (2%). There were 30 (65%) violent injuries (23 assaults, 7 innocent bystanders), 13 (28%) non-violent injuries (12 unintentional discharges and 1 self-inflicted), and 3 injuries (7%) with an unclear mechanism.  The cohort was divided into two groups based on ages; 13–17 years of age and 12 years of age and younger. The selected age division was based on a distinct bimodal distribution of violent versus nonviolent mechanisms. The majority of the younger children (62%) sustained their injury by a non-violent mechanism. In contrast, the adolescent group was more likely to have been injured with a violent mechanism (67%). This is illustrated in There were 44 fractures and 6 traumatic arthrotomies in the 46 patients. Of these, 26 (59%) were lower extremity injuries and 18 (41%) were upper extremity injuries. Twenty-four of forty-six patients (52%) underwent surgical intervention at the time of their orthopaedic injury. Operative indications were at the discretion of the treating physician based on extent of soft tissue injury and standard techniques for fracture management. A total of 43 surgeries were performed, with the number of surgeries for each patient ranging from 1 to 6 (mean 1.8). Twelve of twenty-four surgical patients (50%) underwent isolated irrigation and debridement without the need for fracture fixation. Eight patients (33%) had irrigation and debridement with internal fixation of fractures (intramedullary nail or plate fixation) and two patients (8%) were stabilized with external fixation. Two patients (4%) required fasciotomies secondary to compartment syndrome, one associated with a tibia fracture and the other following reperfusion after bypass grafting of the subclavian artery injury. Seven of the twenty-four surgically treated patients (29%) required at least one additional surgery following the initial operative intervention including split thickness skin grafting, iliac crest bone grafting for nonunion, below elbow amputation, external fixator adjustment, and proximal tibial epiphysiodesis. Mean hospital length of stay was 6.8 days (range 1–42). All but six patients received antibiotics (cefazolin) during their hospitalization, ranging from a single dose at the time of injury, to five days of therapy. Five patients (11%) were diagnosed with deep surgical site infections based on clinical suspicion and confirmed with deep cultures. One additional patient experienced a pin site infection. The injury mechanism of those with infections was low-velocity handgun (4) and high-velocity shotgun (2). All patients who developed infection had received antibiotics following their injury and the timing and duration of antibiotic therapy was not significantly different as compared to those who did not develop infection. Causative organisms were coagulase negative staphylococcus, methicillin sensitive staphylococcus aureus, methicillin resistant staphylococcus aureus, enterobacter, and enterococcus. All patients who developed an infection had undergone formal surgical debridement at the time of injury and five of six had internal fixation of their fracture. Patients with infection required additional surgery, with an average of 2.8 surgeries per patient (range 1–5). None of the twenty-one patients treated non-operatively developed an infection. Four patients (9%) developed a non-union (one femur, one tibia, and two metacarpal fractures) and all of these had associated deep infection. All had undergone debridement and internal fixation for initial treatment and two required revision fixation with or without internal fixation to obtain union. One patient (2%) developed a physeal arrest of the distal tibia following a Saltar-Harris two distal tibia fracture and required a contralateral epiphysiodesis for limb length difference ( Average follow-up for all patients was 9 months, (range 0–101 months). Nine of forty-six patients (20%) failed to return for any scheduled orthopaedic office visits. An additional ten patients (22%) were seen for an initial post-injury appointment but did not return for further scheduled follow-up. Morbidity and mortality related to firearms is a persistent public health problem in the United States. In this modern study at a metropolitan paediatric trauma center, we identified forty-six paediatric firearm-related orthopaedic injuries. The majority of the patients in our study were male adolescents with injuries secondary to low-velocity handguns. Additionally, we noted a bimodal distribution of patients sustaining these injuries, with increased violent injuries in the adolescent and a greater number of non-violent injuries in children younger than 13 years of age. In the treatment of ballistic fractures, orthopaedic management must consider the extent of soft tissue injury, associated neurovascular injury, fracture management, and antibiotic therapy. A total of 44 upper and lower extremity fractures and 6 traumatic arthrotomies occurred in 46 patients. Of these, 17% had an associated neurovascular injury, raising the importance of a thorough physical exam upon initial evaluation. Furthermore, all but one nerve palsy persisted at long-term follow-up suggesting the importance of the zone of injury and appropriate patient and family counselling. Surgical intervention was deemed necessary in half of the patients, with additional surgery needed in patients with complications. This lends evidence to the potentially complex nature of the injuries. Similar to previously published studies The frequency of deep infection (11%) among patients with open fractures that require internal fixation secondary to ballistic injury is significant and higher than previously reported in the literature Four patients in this study had evidence of fracture non-union during long-term follow-up. Non-unions included epiphyseal, diaphyseal, and metaphyseal locations, suggesting that location alone is not a predictive factor of non-union. All non-union patients had evidence of deep infection, making this as a strong contributing factor. Several other factors related to ballistic injuries have been proven to contribute to non-union, including fracture comminution, disruption of the soft-tissue envelope, bone loss, and lack of stable fracture fixation Several limitations of this study should be considered when interpreting the results. The most significant weakness is lack of routine follow-up, with nearly 20% of the patients failing to return for a single scheduled orthopaedic office visits and another 20% with insufficient follow-up to document union or long-term morbidity. Although lack of sufficient follow-up is inherent to retrospective studies in the trauma population, socioeconomic factors related to this injury mechanism may also be a contributing factor. Given the number of patients with significant short and long-term morbidity with adequate follow-up, we believe that those included are representative of the larger cohort with fewer follow-up visits. Firearm injuries continue to occur with increasing frequency despite strong political action and increasing gun laws. Orthopaedic injuries account for a significant portion of traumatic musculoskeletal care following firearm injuries. The accepted treatment for low-velocity stable fractures in adults includes a single dose of intravenous antibiotics, a short course of oral antibiotics, and definitive closed treatment of the fracture. Patients with high-velocity unstable fractures receive intravenous doses and antibiotics and open debridement and stable fracture fixation. Until additional studies are published in the paediatric orthopaedic literature appropriate treatment of low and high-velocity gunshot fractures should follow a similar algorithm. Our suggested algorithm for the treatment of firearm-related fractures in paediatric patients is represented in This study has demonstrated that paediatric victims of firearm injuries frequently have significant injuries that require surgical intervention, including irrigation and debridement with or without stabilization of fractures. Our experience highlights the potential risk for infection and fracture non-union, in addition to recognizing the impact of growing gun violence in the paediatric population. This study on firearm injuries in children and adolescents is an impetus for a further prospective multicenter study, with the potential to develop paediatric-specific treatment strategies for firearm-related fractures as well as better define risk factors for complications and long-term morbidity. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interests.