After some general considerations concerning the blood supply to the bone and skin, and the timing of the surgery, the different approaches to Pilon fractures are presented. These approaches have to be planned according to 3D CT reconstructions to provide the best visual control over the reduction manoeuvres without creating supplementary damage to the blood supply to the bone and skin. This article then reviews in detail the steps of reduction and internal fixation for different types of fractures. As a principle, it is recommended to begin with the fixation of the fibular fracture unless it is comminuted. In these cases a bridge plate osteosynthesis is made after tibial reconstruction.
                  Tibial articular reconstruction can be achieved “from outside” in case of simple large fragments (AO types B1 and C1), or under direct visual control in case of comminution. There are different options for fixation, from isolated screws, eventually combined with intramedullary nailing in some simple fractures, to locking plates for complex fractures. There is no place anymore for conventional plating in pilon fractures. Pre-shaped locking plates are frequently used. In contrast, the AO LCP pilon plate can be placed at any position around the distal tibia depending on the fracture anatomy and the approaches. It has to be cut and adapted individually to each case. The extremities of the plate have to be glided below the soft tissues and screws inserted through stab incisions when necessary, to avoid additional soft tissue damage. In the postoperative care a plaster cast for 6 weeks is a reliable option to avoid equinus and secondary rehabilitation problems.
                  In conclusion, open reduction and internal fixation of pilon fractures remains a challenge, but preoperative 3D CT reconstructions for planning, and fixation with locking plates changed dramatically the way of treating and the prognosis of these severe fractures.The term of “pilon tibial” was first introduced by Destot The blood supply of the pilon The surgeon should always keep in mind the blood supply when choosing the appropriate approach to penetrate the joint directly between the fragments, and then intraoperatively avoid periosteal stripping in the metaphyseal area according to the concept of “bridge osteosynthesis” like in the minimally invasive surgery. At the level of the joint, one should avoid detaching the articular capsule off the main fragments. The blood supply to the skin is quite rich and each angiosome Generally, it is not practicable to perform this time consuming and very demanding surgery in pure emergency. It is also generally admitted that after two days, local conditions are worse with oedema and blister formation and that a delay of one week is optimal Delay of surgery for weeks, as may be necessary for complete skin healing in severe cases will definitely compromise any chance of anatomical reduction in very complex fractures. Thus, according to Heim It is of utmost importance to plan the approaches according to the anticipated reduction manoeuvres and fixation method in order to avoid any additional damage to the blood supply of the soft tissues and bone. The anteromedial approach is the classical one For the lateral approach there are also two options ( Between the anteromedial and the anterolateral approaches one should maintain a minimum distance of seven centimeters to avoid skin problems A posterolateral approach ( The choice of the approaches is probably the most important decision in this surgery ( The length of the approach is also a very critical point. It is generally held that a small incision is less dangerous than a long one. In fact, the opposite may be true, if a small incision does not allow for adequate visualization and excessive traction is exerted on the wound edges during surgery. The problem is not the size of the approach. The highest risk of skin necrosis is not at the extremities of the approach but at the level of the epiphysis. Thus, making a long incision may actually decrease the risks. However, making a large approach should not be a pretext to use large retractors or clamps around the metaphysis. In this context “the skin protects the fracture from the surgeon” like Christoph Sommer (cited in Osteosynthesis of a complex Pilon fracture is generally a long procedure and can’t be completed within a reasonable tourniquet time. But application of a tourniquet can be useful during the approaches and the first stages of reduction. It is recommended just to elevate the limb and not to use an elastic bandage (Esmarch band) before inflating the tourniquet. In this manner, small vessels are better visualised and respected. This is particularly true for the anterior perforating branch of the fibular artery just in front of the syndesmosis, and for the the anterior network of thin vessels penetrating the periosteum of the metaphyseal fragments. The specific vessels for the epiphysis within the capsule are generally not visualised but the capsule itself has to be preserved as much as possible, as mentioned above. Occasionally, in case of a very long procedure, the tourniquet can be used for a second time before wound closure in order to decrease the oedema and facilitate the suture. The large “femoral” distractor is very useful during the reconstruction, and sometimes absolutely mandatory. It can be used either between the tibia and the calcaneus or between the tibia and the neck of the talus. This second option generally allows a better control of the position of the talus. The pin can be inserted into the talar neck, obliquely from the anteromedial approach. The connecting threaded rod should be placed parallel to the long axis of the tibia because distraction will follow this direction. Distraction with a standard external fixator is not as efficient. The classical steps of Pilon fracture fixation are Reconstruction of the fibula Reconstruction of the tibial articular surface Bone graft Plating In case of a fractured fibula, usually above the syndesmosis, the distal tibiofibular ligaments are intact in the majority of cases. Therefore, reduction of the fibula creates some amount of ligamentotaxis and provides indicators for reduction of the tibia. This is particularly useful for obtaining the correct length of the lateral part of the tibia in the frontal plane, whereas, in the sagittal plane, the tibiofibular ligaments cannot reliably prevent tilting of the tibia. In order to be a reliable guide for the tibial reconstruction, the fibula must be anatomically reduced. It is generally necessary to twist the plate to avoid a rotatory malreduction. Axial pinning with a Kirschner wire should be avoided. In the presence of fibular comminution it may be necessary to perform a bridge plate osteosynthesis. In these cases, fixation of the fibula has to be done after the tibial reconstruction. The correct length and rotation of the fibula can be then obtained by reducing it to the lateral facet of the talus. Rarely, the fibular fracture is accompanied by as rupture of the distal tibiofibular ligaments The classical theoretical steps In B1 fractures with simple large epiphyseal fragments and without articular depression the reduction can be achieved “from outside”, i.e. by reducing the fragments against the intact part of the tibia. This is generally achieved with pointed clamps while respecting the soft tissues. The clamp should not be slid below the skin but rather through a second incision ( In B2 and B3 fractures reduction requires a direct control of the depressed articular fragment(s). This can be achieved by entering the joint between the main fragments according to the preoperative planning. The depressed fragment is then reduced against the talar dome and thus correctly positioned below the remaining intact part of the pilon ( In C2 or C3 fractures with at least one large articular and metaphyseal fragment, it is sometimes possible to transform the fracture into a B1 fracture, by fixing this fragment to the diaphysis ( In C2 and C3 fractures with metaphyseal comminution, the first step is to reduce the joint, fixing the articular fragments together. Once anatomical reduction of the joint is achieved and checked under fluoroscopy, then the articular block is aligned to the distal diaphysis and the length and axis are checked and corrected if necessary ( With the use of locking plates, there is no need of bone graft as a mechanical support of the articular fragments but it could be useful to fill a large metaphyseal defect with bone graft in order to avoid interposition of fibrous tissue into the gap. Under no circumstances this should be achieved at the price of additional damage to the soft tissues and to the blood supply to the bone. The gold standard of definitive fixation is the locking plate, but there are some other options for specific cases. An isolated screw fixation can be sometimes achieved in B1 fractures with large fragments. In C1 fractures with intact large fragments, screw fixation can be combined with an antegrade tibial nail that is locked distally close to the joint, generally in a minimally invasive procedure. Conventional plates are not indicated anymore in the fixation of pilon fractures. They do not provide a stable angular fixation and they are deleterious to the blood supply to the bone that is compressed below the plate. Several locking plates are available for the distal tibia. They are anatomically preshaped for the medial side or for the anterolateral side, but they generally do not allow a complete fixation of a complex pilon fracture. The medial plates do not stabilize the Chaput's tubercle fragment, unless it is very large, and the anterolateral plates are not optimal for fixation of the medial malleolar fragment. These plates therefore are rather indicated for simple pilon fractures. In contrast, the AO LCP pilon plate Fixation usually begins with one screw in the epiphysis and one in the shaft. Using conventional screws to compress the plate against the bone is not always advisable. Increased pressure will always lead to a certain amount of bone necrosis below the plate The fixation of Chaput's tubercle illustrates the technical considerations with the fixed direction of screws within the locking plates. When using medial or anteromedial plates, the tip of the horizontal arm (slid in subcutaneously from the medial side) is usually slightly bent to fit the curvature of Chaput's tubercle. This adaptation can be done in situ with a special bending tool. Care should be taken that the locking screw will be thus directed slightly posteromedially ( Directly above the horizontal arm one or two oblique screws are placed slightly descending, due to the bending of the metaphyseal part of the plate. These screws are important for the stability, providing a “brace” ( Fixation of the plate to the diaphysis is usually achieved by three bicortical locking screws, or two bicortical and two monocortical screws. There is no need that the plate fits exactly to the bone, especially if placed anterolaterally. The plate can be slid gently below the soft tissues and some of the screws can be inserted via stab incisions, or through the muscles of the anterior compartment. In case of metaphyseal comminution, one or more locking screws can be used to fix a large intermediate fragment, but the principle is to make a biological bridge osteosynthesis ( “There is virtually no other site where the quality of skin suturing is so crucial” The classical concept of “early active motion” whenever possible, is probably not as efficient after internal fixation of pilon fractures as it is for other joints. It rather carries the risk of pain, wound healing problems and residual equinus. In contrast, after cast immobilisation for 6 weeks in neutral, the foot is free of pain and in a physiological position. It is then much easier to get some degree of dorsiflexion, than to try to correct an equinus position. Furthermore, painfree partial weight bearing is easily obtained, while it is painful to walk with an equinus. The forefoot lever arm increases the strains on the fracture site, even with attempts of partial weight bearing. “Pilon fracture surgery is not for beginners and not for the middle of the night” The benefits of locking plates are frequently not fully exploited. It appears hard to change the strong habits of using conventional plates and screws Last but not least, a common mistake is to equal the length of the approaches with the amount of soft tissue damage. Not the length of the approach, but the care of the soft tissues is critical during surgery. A long incision can be much less damaging than a short one when the fracture is visualised better and excessive traction can be avoided. On the other hand, without respecting the blood supply a long incision with stripping of the bone will even create more damage. In summary, the treatment of complex pilon fractures is not for unexperienced surgeons, and care of the soft tissues should be an essential preoccupation during the whole surgery. There is no conflict of interest.