The stabilisation of calcium arsenate waste from a copper smelter by precipitation of arsenical natroalunite has been investigated. This procedure could solve the problem of arsenical gypsum production because it is transformed into arsenic-free anhydrite. Natroalunite precipitation was studied at 180-200°C from the slurry obtained after H2SO4-leaching and ozonation of the original waste - using sodium and aluminum sulfates as reagents. Calcium arsenate waste and final precipitates were characterized by chemical analysis (ICP), SEM-EDS and XRD. Solubility tests were also performed on original waste and selected precipitates.
                  The effects studied in the hydrothermal treatment were: initial pH, Al/As molar ratio, As concentration, reaction time and prior gypsum removal. For (Al/As)aq
                     =4.5, a complex natroalunite (~(Na,Ca)(Al,Fe)3((S,As,P)O4)2(OH)6)) was extensively formed. Under these conditions, As-substitution in TO4 was 7-8% molar. Decreasing (Al/As)aq increased As-substitution in natroalunite (up to ~14% molar) but mansfieldite ((Al,Fe)(As,P)O4.2H2O) co-precipitated. Other effects such as the arsenic concentration in the range 3.5-7.0g/L and prior gypsum removal did not significantly alter the arsenic phase ratio and the composition of the arsenic phases. However, treatment at 180°C increased mansfieldite precipitation. Calcium incorporation in natroalunite was small (~0.04 in formula) and for initial pH=1, precipitation of Cu, Ni and Zn was insignificant.
                  Arsenical natroalunite can be effective for long-term storage. At its natural pH (4-5), arsenic solubility remained stabilized at ~0.1mg/L in 6months. Mansfieldite was not stable under the same conditions with arsenic solubility between 5-10mg/L. The major disadvantage of natroalunite is the limited arsenic partition between solid and aqueous phases (~0.45 molar). However, as the precipitation rate is fast (<15min), it seems technically feasible to improve the arsenic precipitation yield by semi-continuous addition of reagents in a single hydrothermal operation. Cadmium incorporated into the anhydrite structure causes cadmium release in leachates. It seems that this problem can only be overcome through prior removal of cadmium from the plant effluent.Arsenic stabilization remains a significant challenge for the primary base-metal industry and particularly for copper pyrometallurgy ( Phases of the alunite supergroup are very common in nature, some of which appear to be very stable under a wide range of conditions and decompose only in strong acid or alkaline media ( Basic studies in Al The present paper reports hydrothermal precipitation from real waste in a Na Some experiments on synthetic arsenical natroalunite are also included for comparison. Synthetic arsenical natroalunite was prepared under the conditions shown in Calcium arsenate waste was obtained from an effluent from the gas cleaning steps of a large copper pyrometallurgical plant. This effluent was industrially treated with Ca(OH) Before the hydrothermal experiments were performed, the calcium arsenate waste was leached with H Hydrothermal experiments were conducted in a PARR 4563 autoclave reactor equipped with temperature, pressure and stirring controls. The solutions or slurries containing the reactants were heated at 5 Bulk chemical composition was determined by dissolving 0.1 SEM-EDS characterization was performed using a JEOL JSM-840 instrument. An approach of the coefficients of the components in the alunite and mansfieldite formulas was obtained by EDS, since the attempts to obtain these data by EPMA were unsatisfactory due to the large spot size this technique requires compared to the small crystal sizes. These coefficients were computed from the atomic percentage of each element obtained in the mean punctual analysis and assuming a structural basis of S The percentages of anhydrite, natroalunite and mansfieldite in the precipitates from calcium arsenate waste were estimated from the results of the bulk chemical analysis. Anhydrite was calculated from the calcium content, because in conditions we used the degree of substitution of this element in the natroalunite lattice was very small. Natroalunite content was computed from the sodium content and assuming the natroalunite formula obtained by EDS. Mansfieldite content was estimated from the difference between total arsenic and that combined as natroalunite. Short-term leaching of selected hydrothermal precipitates from industrial waste, containing natroalunite, natroalunite Long-term leaching (up to 6  Bulk chemical composition (  The arsenic solubility of the calcium arsenate waste was very high: at pH 9 (as received) it was 34 It is well known that arsenic volatilizes as As(III) during copper smelting processes and it can partially remain in this form in the effluents from gas cleaning steps ( Ozonation experiments on the waste studied showed an O The effect of initial pH was studied at 200 This was studied at 200 Under these conditions, the (Al/As) In all cases, the initial calcium from gypsum and arsenates was basically transformed into anhydrite which formed relatively large crystals (10-30 Natroalunite appears as clusters of up to ~ For the waste studied, the arsenic substitution in natroalunite reached a maximum of about 14% molar in TO The (Al Iron substitution for aluminium in natroalunite from waste was 0.12 in the formula, when this phase was virtually the exclusive arsenic compound, but it decreased to 0.08 when large amounts of mansfieldite precipitated. Small amounts of phosphorous present as traces in the initial waste also substitute to 1-2% molar in the TO In the conditions studied, calcium substitution in the natroalunite lattice was very limited (0.04-0.08 in formula, XRD patterns ( Mansfieldite morphology changed as a function of its degree of precipitation. When it was formed in large amounts, mansfieldite appeared as relatively large clusters on anhydrite, but as very small, poorly developed crystals (≤ The effect of the (Al/As) The effect of arsenic concentration was only studied in the 3.5-7.0 This effect was studied for (Al/As) The effect of gypsum removal was studied at 200 Thus, the major effect of gypsum removal was on the cadmium removal from hydrothermal precipitates (  Maximum solubilities for all the samples occurred at pH 1. In samples consisting of mansfieldite (P2) or containing minor mansfieldite (P4) these values are around 2 Also, for all samples, arsenic solubilities decreased when pH increased, reaching minimum values at pH 6-8. These were around 0.1 The reported arsenic solubilities for scorodite obtained from pure As(V)/Fe(III) solutions, indicate minimum values of between 0.1 and 1 The results for arsenical natroalunite indicate that this phase is more stable than mansfieldite, as also confirmed through the aluminium extraction ( Long-term solubility was studied for the same samples used in previous short-term tests, as well as for a sample of synthetic arsenical natroalunite ( In contrast to natroalunite, samples containing significant amounts of mansfieldite exhibited high long-term solubility, reaching arsenic concentrations of 5-10 However, in our studies, no crystalline Al(OH) The (24-h) solubility of cadmium in precipitates containing anhydrite was practically independent of the other phase composition ( However, prior gypsum separation probably results in a major problem such as the generation of large amounts of arsenic contaminated gypsum. Gypsum obtained after leaching the studied waste at pH 1 and conventionally washed did not contain significant cadmium (< Natroalunite precipitation at 200 Natroalunite, precipitated from calcium arsenate waste, is a complex phase in which Fe, Ca and P were also substituted in small amounts. However, under the conditions studied, Ca substitution was very low (~ Natroalunite composition and the natroalunite/mansfieldite ratio in precipitates at 200 The stability of arsenical natroalunite and mixtures with small amounts of mansfieldite in short-term leaching (24 The financial support of the Spanish