Acetabular impaction fractures when not adequately addressed leads to early arthritis. Dome impaction injuries and marginal impaction injuries have to be properly planned pre-operatively with respect to surgical approach, disimpaction techniques and fixation strategies. CT scan is the best modality to analyse the site, extent of impaction and plan strategies to reduce. Emphasis of early mobilisation should not drive the surgeon towards the motive of rigid fixation of columns alone, as the inadequate reduction of acetabular impaction leads to loss of mechanical support on weight bearing and thereby cause loss of reduction. Bone grafting either by auto or allograft or graft substitutes in the void after disimpaction helps in reducing anatomically and provide mechanical support adequately. In cases of severe comminution, reconstruction of the wall defect with autologous graft is a better treatment option. In this article we reviewed the characteristics of impaction injuries of acetabulum exploring surgical procedures, approaches and techniques for achieving open reduction and internal fixation.Acetabular impaction fractures could be either ‘dome impaction’ fractures or ‘Posterior wall marginal impaction’ fractures of acetabulum. Both the patterns, when unreduced properly lead to early arthritis and hip joint instability particularly with unreduced posterior wall impaction injuries. These incarcerated fracture fragments are often termed as harbinger for failure following internal fixation. It is evident that type of impaction acetabular fractures in elderly age group involves anterior acetabular elements and in younger age group posterior wall impaction injuries are observed. Among elderly, landing on greater trochanter while falling from a height creates a medially directed force that drives the femoral head through anterior column and the quadrilateral surface resulting in anterior and medial displacement followed by impaction of the acetabular dome with a predominant fracture patterns involving anterior column and the anterior column/posterior hemi-transverse areas. The anteromedial dome fragment is either free floating or hinged on the lateral articular surface creating a characteristic gull wing appearance. The marginal impaction fractures involving posterior acetabular wall [ We reviewed here the characteristics of acetabular impaction fractures of dome and posterior wall, exploring surgical procedures, approaches and techniques for achieving open reduction and internal fixation. Anatomic reduction and stable fixation of acetabular dome aid in early mobilisation with good functional outcome as in any articular injuries. Among elderly group, to facilitate early mobilisation, stable fixation of columns are preferred by most surgeons than anatomic reduction as any arthritic changes can be contemplated to total hip arthroplasty. But, the value of early mobilisation cannot be overemphasized by stable fixation of the column alone, as an inadequate reduction of dome impaction leads to loss of mechanical support, thereby causing secondary loss of reduction. With the ilioinguinal approach the anteriomedial ‘dome impaction’ can be visualized either through an independent iliac cortical window or via the pre-existing fracture of the internal iliac fossa. We address the dome injuries by the afore mentioned techniques. Most of them are addressed with modified Stoppa’s approach combined with extended iliac window when required. Acetabular dome fractures extending towards laterally and neglected presentations are preferred with ilio-inguinal or ilio-femoral approach. The impacted fragment is manipulated using a combination of blunt periosteal elevator or by a ball spike or by both tools. Lateral traction of femoral head by schanz pin yields fragments in impaction which can be elevated and reduced and is an important surgical step to disimpact the incarcerated fragment. Once elevated, the traction is released and the fragments are pushed using a ball spike, to achieve anatomic reduction as the femoral head acts as a template of reduction. The residual void is filled with graft or graft substitutes to prevent secondary loss of reduction. Maintaining the reduction is difficult as most of the times the fragment is found free floating after disimpaction and hence provisionally fixed with k wires. K-wire reduction is stabilized using cortical raft screws from medial to lateral, followed by quadrilateral buttress and columnar plating where required [ When the impacted fragment has been identified on pre- or intra-operative imaging but is not accessible during surgery, alternative means for indirect reduction by independent iliac cortical window as described by Scolaro and Rout can be used. Precise reduction of the posterior wall fracture is very important, as the posterior wall constitutes a large portion of the articular surface, which is particularly loaded in flexion. Marginal impaction fractures represent a severe injury pattern. CT scan is the choice of investigation to mark the site and extent of impaction, than a MRI or X ray pelvis. Cranial dome marginal impaction injuries are not uncommon and disimpaction of incarcerated fragment in such injuries is difficult to access. Osteotomy of Greater trochanter which easily reflects the abductors, give good access to this area to disimpact the incarcerated bone to achieve anatomical reduction. Usually, posterior marginal impaction injuries are accessible through fracture planes. Schroeder et al. Owing to high energy trauma, acetabular fractures can always be associated with femoral head fractures. Papachristos et al. suggested treatment of such incarcerated impaction of acetabular fractures with concomitant osteochondral femoral head fractures by the use of a posterior wall osteotomy and surgical hip dislocation. We strongly recommend grafting either by auto/allo or graft substitutes while addressing the impaction injuries of acetabulum to prevent secondary loss of reduction, which could be main reason for catastrophic failure. Recent studies have shown a superiority of tricalcium phosphate over autograft particularly in dome impaction injuries. Acetabular impaction fractures are earlier considered to be one of the main criteria for failure following their internal fixation. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.