We use input–output techniques to analyse the impacts of gold, coal, and other mining activities upon the South African economy between 1971 and 1993. Our results suggest that the premise upon which the South African government's proposed minerals policy is based, i.e. that “the mining industries have the capacity to generate wealth and employment on a large scale” (Republic of South Africa, Department of Minerals and Energy, 1998. A minerals and mining policy. White Paper, Department of Minerals and Energy, Republic of South Africa), may require further thought. Our estimated production and employment multipliers indicate that the impacts of marginal changes in mining production and employment were not significantly different from production and employment impacts of most other South African economic activities and that there were few linkages between mining and the rest of the economy. These results suggest that South African mining activities will increase income and employment only if exports increase or if policies are established to increase linkages between mining and the rest of the South African economy.South African mineral resources are among the largest in the world. It has the largest reserves of gold, platinum, titanium, chromium, manganese and vanadium, the second largest reserves of zirconium, and significant reserves of phosphates, antimony, coal and nickel (see There is an extensive literature on the benefits of mineral wealth and its relationship to economic growth.  There is a more basic reason for the failure of mineral rich developing countries to match the growth of mature but mineral deficient countries. The major industrialised nations of the world are also involved in this debate, albeit in a vaguely defined form. Some may regard South Africa's large and comprehensive mineral reserves to be of strategic importance to their own economies. In a throwback to the days of colonial rule, and even mercantilism, some nations seek to secure sources of raw mineral inputs for their own manufacturing industries. They see the prime role of South Africa as an exporter of raw minerals, and its industrialization policies are regarded as ‘tools of apartheid’ and dismissed as ‘absurd’ ( South Africa's national income is roughly one-seventh that of the United Kingdom, but South Africa is by far the most industrialized nation in Africa. It has a well-developed, sophisticated financial system that operates in the First World, but has a typical Third Nation income distribution profile ( Manufacturing and mining account for about 25% and 11% of GDP, respectively (see Compared with the 1970s and 1980s, mining, especially gold mining, declined in importance to the South African economy (see The South African government claims that: “South Africa's mining industry is supported by an extensive and diversified resource base, and has since its inception been a cornerstone of the South African economy. The changes which have come about in our country make it necessary to prepare the industry for the challenges which are facing all South Africans as we approach the twenty first century” ( A concise, comprehensive description of mining's relationships with the rest of the South African economy is necessary to guide policymakers if mining is to be the major basis for future economic development. However, the nature of these relationships is not generally well understood. I–O techniques numerically model the relationships among the productive sectors of an economic system. the models are final demand driven; different production activities can be grouped into homogeneous sectors, each producing one product; there is no substitution of intermediate inputs; each sector's demand or intermediate inputs changes in direct proportion to output from that sector; no technological change occurs ( By 1961, I–O techniques had developed to represent “a great simplification of theoretical models but a considerable elaboration and refinement of statistical data, to the point where theory and empirical implementation meet” ( Two other limitations of I–O techniques and GDP estimation should temper conclusions about South Africa. First, GDP estimates, whether derived from I–O techniques or from expenditure analysis, do not account for natural resource depletion. Consequently, GDP tends to exaggerate the wealth of economies, such as South Africa, in which resource extraction plays a large part ( Despite these problems, virtually all developed countries, as well as many developing countries, use I–O techniques for national income accounting. Proponents argue that the high level of disaggregation in I–O analysis reduces the likelihood that technological change will affect the product mix. Statistics South Africa (SSA) compiles and publishes official statistics, including I–O tables. It first published South African I–O tables in 1967 and then in 1971, 1975, 1978, 1981, 1984, 1988, 1989 and 1993 ( Tables from 1971 to 1993, except for 1988, comprise the data for this analysis. We aggregated all the SSA transaction tables into 35 sectors to simplify calculation and interpretation of results.  The technical coefficients in columns (4) to (6) give sales of the three mining sectors to the 35 sectors of the South African economy. Here, the sectors highlighted in bold represent those sectors in which the three mining sectors had insignificant sales. There were 22, 33, and 22 sectors of the South African economy that were insignificant purchasers of intermediate inputs from coal, gold, and other mining, respectively. The sum of the technical coefficients (total intermediate sales) for coal and gold mining were far below the average (0.4479) of all sectors' intermediate sales. Gold, in particular, only sold 0.0336 rands per rand of output to other South African industries. Inter-industry sales of coal mining output were less than half of the average and were mainly confined to the electricity and iron and steel sectors. Sales to chemicals and related, iron and steel, jewellery and related, and construction activities caused the other mining sector to have intermediate sales above the average across all sectors. GDP and employment multipliers, estimated from I–O tables, measure the effects of changes in a particular activity's output or employment upon all other activities throughout the economy. The South African I–O tables produced total GDP and type II total GDP multipliers and total employment and type II total employment multipliers for the gold, coal, and other mining sectors as well as for the other 32 South African economic activities. Total GDP multipliers estimate the direct, indirect, and induced effects of marginal increases in a sector's value added on GDP. The direct effect is the increased value added of the sector. The indirect effect is value added by other sectors needed to satisfy the sector's increased demand for intermediate inputs. The induced effect is increased demand due to household incomes generated in producing the intermediate and final outputs. Type II total GDP multipliers are the ratios of the direct, indirect, and induced effects to the direct effects of the increased marginal output. Total employment multipliers estimate the number of jobs created per one million monetary units of marginal output from a sector. Type II total employment multipliers give the number of jobs created throughout the economy per job created in the sector in which the marginal increase in output occurred.  Comparison of multipliers in The conclusion, then, is that mining's importance to South African GDP did not change much, if at all, over the period. In contrast, the largest multipliers deviated positively from the mean by between 2.47 and 3.29 standard deviations and the smallest multipliers deviated by between −1.70 and −2.66 standard deviations from the mean. Activities with multipliers higher than mining multipliers all produced services with the exception of building construction. Sectors that consistently had multipliers more than two standard deviations above the mean were financial institutions and insurance services and other non-profit seeking services. The slight increase in the gold mining multiplier suggests that it developed somewhat stronger linkages with the rest of the economy. In 1971, the gold mining total GDP multiplier was 1.3% greater than the mean. Beginning in 1984, the gold mining total multiplier began to diverge positively from the mean and, by 1993, was 8.2% greater than the mean. At the same time, gold mining's declining relative importance as a producer of export income These multipliers differ from total GDP multipliers as they measure the impact of a marginal increase in the income within a sector upon GDP while total GDP multipliers measure the impact of a marginal increase in a sector's value added on GDP.  Further, there were no significant increases in the impact of increased mining income on GDP. In contrast, the large and smallest multipliers in each year deviated from the mean by between 2.5 and 4.48 and 1.01 and 1.52 standard deviations, respectively. The household sectors (all years) and the ‘others, scrap and government services’ (all years except 1981) consistently had significantly more positive impacts on the economy than all other sectors, i.e. with multipliers more than two standard deviations from the mean. These comparisons also imply that income from mining activities, which the South African government hopes will carry the economy ahead into the future, had among the least important impacts on GDP of all South African economic activities. These multipliers relate the number of jobs created in the economy for every one million rand increase in a sector's output. Mining sector employment multipliers were generally higher ranked than their GDP multipliers, which suggests that mining activities generated more jobs but lower incomes than many other activities. This comparison may indicate that wages in the mining sectors were generally lower than in other sectors. In 1993, the average employment multiplier (weighted by output) for all sectors excluding mining was 26.5. The average employment multiplier for the combined mining industries, also weighted by output, was 27.9. Only ‘catering and accommodation services’ (in 1975, 1978, 1981) and ‘agriculture, forestry and fishing’ (in 1993) had employment multipliers more than two standard deviations from the mean. With the exception of coal mining in 1971 and 1975, mining activities had about the same employment impacts as other sectors. The coal mining employment multiplier never ranked higher than 13th after 1975 and was 21 in 1993. The highest ranking of the gold mining employment multiplier was 9 (in 1993) and the other mining's employment multiplier never ranked higher than 20 (in 1975). In 1993, the gold mining multiplier was 0.80 standard deviation above the mean, coal mining 0.24 standard deviation below the mean, and other mining 0.49 standard deviation below the mean. The conclusion is that the mining industries did not, apart from coal mining in 1971 and 1975, have significantly different impacts upon employment per unit of mining income than other South African economic activities, although gold mining has increased in importance since 1981. There has also been a general trend of decreasing employment linked to increased output, and the actual number of new jobs created by increased mining sector output diminished over the period. These decreases were due to inflation These observations suggest that, while increased mining production will no doubt lead to increased employment, the trend has been to a smaller, not larger, number of jobs per unit of output. As evidence of this trend, consider that employment in the mining industry dropped about 39% from an average of 660,000 in 1992 to 405,000 at the end of 1998 while the volume of total mining output was essentially unchanged ( These multipliers estimate the number of jobs created in the economy for every job created in a particular sector. Type II total employment multipliers are a truer indication of value of a sector's employment creation to the rest of the economy than total employment multipliers. An example illustrates this conclusion. Gold mining's total employment multiplier of 33.7 in 1993 placed it in ninth position as a generator of employment ( Sectors with significantly different employment positive impacts (multipliers more than two standard deviations from the mean) were jewellery and related (1971, 1975, 1978, 1981), food, liquor, beverages and tobacco (1971, 1975, 1981, 1984, 1989, 1993), machinery and equipment renting and leasing (1975), and households (1989, 1993). The coal, gold, and other mining type II employment multipliers never ranked higher than 20th (1993), 33rd (1971, 1975), and 18th (1984), respectively. Notwithstanding these rankings, coal and other mining type II employment multipliers show a general increasing trend. The gold mining multiplier changed little. However, type II employment multipliers for all three mining sectors remain well below the mean across all sectors The opening paragraph of the government's White Paper ( A basic premise of the White Paper is that the South African mining industry “has the capacity to generate wealth and employment opportunities on a large scale” (p. 4). Our estimated total and type II total GDP multipliers indicated that mining activity in South Africa had about the same impact on GDP as other economic activities. These estimates mean that investment in the minerals industry will generate value added at the same degree as investment in other sectors. Total employment and type II total employment multipliers demonstrate that both output from and employment in the mining industries do not create employment in the rest of the economy to any significantly greater degree than output and employment in other economic activities. We therefore conclude that the basic premise upon which the White Paper is based may be misplaced. Future investment in the mining industry should not be assumed ipso facto to be a cornucopia of benefits to the economy. South African gold production has become a smaller share of worldwide gold production. A large share of other South African mineral production is sold in export markets and the South African mining industry will increasingly need to compete in a volatile international base minerals market. The manner by which South Africa can benefit from mineral reserves other than gold is an area for urgent comprehensive research. Likewise, consideration should be given to policies to increase linkages between mining and other South African economic activities. The authors thank several anonymous referees for their comments on a previous draft of this article.     