In this paper, the mathematical theory of fuzzy probability measure (FPMs) is used for the problems of rock mass displacements and deformation due to underground excavation, especially mining in soft rock strata. A fuzzy system model is developed for the movement and deformation of rock mass on the basis of the assumption that the displacement and deformation of rock mass is a fuzzy event, and from this model theoretical formulas are derived for calculating the rock mass displacement due to underground excavation. The theories of both the two and three-dimensional problems are developed and are applied to the analysis of ground movements due to underground mining. The agreement of the theoretical results with the field measurements shows that fuzzy system model is satisfactory and the formulae obtained are valid and thus can be effectively used for predicting the displacements and deformations due to underground mining in soft rock strata and the safety evaluation of the buildings on the ground surface.As we all known, since its formalisation in The prediction of movements of rock mass and their surface effects is an important problem of rock mass mechanics in the excavation activities, especially the ore mining ( In this paper, a new numerical method has been developed by the present authors. The method is based on the The displacements and deformations of rock mass due to underground mining in soft rock strata has often resulted in major disasters throughout the world, frequently inflicting heavy losses of life and damage to property. And these disasters have motivated the development of rock mass mechanics. In both the underground and surface mining, if a void is excavated in a rock continuum, the load formerly applied on the rock in the opening will be transferred either to the rock surrounding the opening or to the supports (pillars) within the opening or both, and finally to the ground surface, hence resulting in a macroscopically nonuniform deformation (tensile or compressive) of the surface in the horizontal or vertical direction. If the uneven deformation or subsidence (i.e. differential subsidence on the top of the mined-out area) cannot be effectively controlled then it will cause damage and even a disaster, such as deformation or even cracking of buildings, particularly tall buildings. This means that the failure of a building is to a great extent controlled by the presence of differential subsidence rather than the absolute magnitude of subsidence. It is difficult to calculate the accurate displacement of every point in a body of rock because of the complexity of the problem. Instead, various approximate methods have been used for this calculation. In fact, the movement of each point at a level of overburden can be regarded as a fuzzy event. In other words, this displacement will take place at a fuzzy probability, and so the theory of In this paper, the application of the First several definitions of Suppose triplet ( If Let We shall restrict our discussion to the ground subsidence due to underground mining of metal and non-metal ore, although a more general subsidence due to excavation may be discussed in a similar manner. When the subsidence of overburden takes place due to the underground mining, some points on the corresponding surface will deviate from their equilibrium positions, and so displacement will occur. Because ground subsidence is controlled by many factors, such as geologic conditions, the presence of groundwater, the properties of rock masses, mining conditions, etc., it is very difficult to predict ground subsidence (the magnitude and range of subsidence) accurately. Because the theory of fuzzy mathematics is generally taken to embrace the whole field of imprecisely described systems, the above theory of fuzzy probability can be used for this prediction. For this purpose, we first describe the assignment of the membership function for the plane problem (two-dimensional). Consider an From any book on fuzzy mathematics (e.g. see In many cases, for the problem dealt with in this paper, the degree of membership can be assigned by the fuzzy statistical method, so as to study the indeterminacy by means of the deterministic system.The fuzzy statistical test involves the following aspects (  the field X under study; a fixed element x0 in field X; an ordinary set movable in X, a set associated with a fuzzy subset B (the corresponding fuzzy concept being e), a defined partition of e is realized whenever B is fixed. This partition is an approximate extension of e; condition R; it determines the movement of B, and is associated with the factors on which the partition of e depends. Now the frequency of membership When The membership function for engineering problems can be assigned by the membership function of the points on the subsidence surface to the fuzzy subset As shown in The statistical analysis (i.e. fuzzy statistical analysis according to Eq. As far as the fuzzy membership function is concerned, the above theoretical analysis predicts that the magnitude of the ground surface subsidence will decrease with the increase in distance from the center of the mined-out area and tend to a stable value. The field measurements show that the theoretical prediction is in agreement with observations and that the fuzzy statistical analysis is valid in assigning the membership function. The above density distribution function (i.e. the distribution function for the surface subsidence) can be established by using the statistical theory of probability. In the case of the mining of ore, the subsidence of ground surface depends on many factors such as mining depth, the thickness and occurrences of rock strata, the physical properties (such as elastic module, Poisson’s ratio, compressive and tensile strength, shear strength), the mining method, the mining rate, geologic structure, development of joints and fracture, the original stress distribution of rock, redistribution of stress after mining, and groundwater. The subsidence is a combined effect of all the factors, because each factor alone cannot play a decisive role. In summary, from the above analysis we can arrive at the conclusion that each one of the above factors will obey the normal distribution to a large approximation, and hence the magnitude of subsidence due to mining will also obey the same distribution. This conclusion can be verified by the central limit theorem of probability theory (see Ref. We shall consider the theory of the plane problems as particular cases of rock mass movements. In the When subsidence takes place in the underground rock mass, there must exist one subsidence point In the space rectangular coordinates, let In the in the Engineering example. Yingzi mining area, Mou-Mine, Shan-dong Province. The topography in the district is complex, with the maximum relative difference of height up to 20 To observe the effect of underground mining on the ground surface, a monitoring line was established. In the northern working face, the thickness of the seam is 30–70 In order to demonstrate the application of the formula for the ( The engineering parameters can be determined by the artificial neural networks (ANNs) method. Recently, artificial neural networks, has begun to be used in rock and soil mechanics and geotechnical engineering ( Neural networks are nonlinear dynamic systems that have important features, such as self-learning, adaptive recognition, nonlinear dynamic processing and associative memory. They have the ability to learn knowledge from historical data (e.g. A–E in Neural network models are set up by learning or training. If a network model is trained with a large number of input-output pairs, it can produce an appropriate output for untrained inputs. More than 50 neural network models have been devised so far, and it is found that the back-propagation learning algorithm based on the generalized delta rule by The BPNN generally consists of many sets of nodes arranged in layers (e.g. input, hidden and output layers). The output signals from one layer are transmitted to the subsequent layer through links that amplify or attenuate or inhibit the signals using weighting factors. Except for the nodes in the input layer, the net input to each node is the sum of the weighted outputs of the nodes in the previous layer. An activation function such as the sigmoid logistic function is used to calculate the output of the nodes in the hidden and output layers. We can divide the back-propagation neural network into five subsidiary nets for the sake of predicting five parameters ( In topological structure of back-propagation neural network in The parameters of rock mass displacements are obtained using a BPNN method ( From these data in ( In addition, the BPNN model of this paper is applied to determine the engineering parameters (ground subsidence factor, ( Mining subsidence often produces significant horizontal and vertical movements at the ground surface. The maximum value “ In this paper, by applying the concepts of The formulas derived in this paper have been confirmed by a large amount of measured data. The FSMs, therefore, is valid for solving the problems of the rock mass displacement and ground subsidence due to underground mining in soft rock strata, especially the mining of coal and metal. The support of this research work by a key project of science and technology from the Hebei province is gratefully acknowledged (No. 072156142). The project was supported by the research fund of the project of science and technology from the Educational Office of the Hebei Province is gratefully acknowledged (No. 2004308).