This study examines the potential for use of biogenic sulphuric acid for leaching of a low-grade Brazilian ore containing 0.64% copper occurring as brochantite, Cu4SO4(OH)6, and as malachite, Cu2CO3(OH)2. Ore was agglomerated with elemental sulphur and sulphur-oxidizing microorganisms. Copper extraction was more efficient from inoculated ore amended with 6.67kg So/t of ore, compared to uninoculated ore with no added So and leached with an acid solution maintained at pH2.0 with sulphuric acid. The rate and extent of copper bioleaching were proportional to the amount of added So. A maximum of 88% copper was extracted after 9weeks of bioleaching with 13.3kgS added/t of ore. Cu extraction was more efficient if sulphur was uniformly mixed with the ore than if the sulphur was added only to the upper zone of the ore column. There was no evidence that acid leaching of Cu from this ore was far more efficient in ore crushed by a high pressure grinding rolls (HPGR) compared to a conventional jaw crusher.Biooxidation of metal sulphide ores and concentrates is practiced at industrial scale in stirred tank reactors and in heaps ( Conversely, much less work has been done on leaching of acid-soluble metals from ores by biogenic sulphuric acid. The acid is most efficiently produced biologically via oxidation of elemental sulphur by This reaction produces 530 Metals from contaminated soils, sediments or sewage sludge can be leached by biooxidation of S Microbial production of sulphuric acid is relevant to the mining industry as sulphuric acid is used extensively, particularly in heap and dump leaching of copper. The Chilean mining industry is the world's most intensive sulphuric acid user ( Microorganisms may also be used to biooxidize S As compared to application of sulphuric acid solutions to heaps, the localized generation of sulphuric acid from S The in situ biological production of sulphuric acid may begin with conditioning of S Other than this Zaldivar work, little has been published showing the extent that acid-soluble copper can be leached from ores agglomerated with S Additionally, we tested whether grinding of ore with high pressure grinding rolls (HPGR) could improve copper extraction from leaching with biologically produced acid. HPGR introduces micro-fractures in the ore particles, improving access of leach solutions to the interior of the particles. However, the HPGR product can produce more fines during the leaching process that could have adverse effects on heap percolation ( Two microbial cultures were used in the tests. One was a pure culture of A mixed culture of mesophilic metal sulphide-oxidizing bacteria was also utilized. The culture originally contained Bacterial cell numbers in solutions were determined by phase contrast microscopy using a Thoma counting cell. A 200 The ore sample contained 0.64% Cu ( Subsamples of the bulk ore removed for column tests were crushed with a jaw crusher or with high pressure grinding rolls (HPGR). The crushed ore was screened to a particle size of 12.7 Elemental sulphur was added (10 to 40 Ore (3.0 The 3.0 Leach solution was applied to the top of the ore at a rate of 10 The pH and oxidation–reduction potential (ORP) of the leach solution reservoir were measured 4 to 5 times weekly. Periodically, solution samples (20 Leaching tests were ended when dissolved copper concentrations stopped increasing. At the end of a test, the column was rinsed with 2.0 The percentage extraction of Cu was determined as follows: The amount of Cu removed from sampling was included. Copper mass balances were also determined by comparing the mass of Cu in the starting ore sample to the mass of Cu in the final solids plus the mass of Cu in solution. The daily rate of copper extraction was calculated in tests with various amounts of S The acid consumption of ore was determined to be 7.8 One of the columns contained ore that was leached with deionized water only. The pH of this recirculating leach solution was 6.32 after one day, slowly increasing to 7.03 after 11 We compared copper extraction from ore 1) by addition of sulphuric acid to leach solution to maintain a pH of 2.0 and 2) by biological formation of sulphuric acid from S The pH of leach solution began decreasing 17 Coincident with the pH decline was an increase in copper extraction into solution in the inoculated columns ( Copper extraction was higher with acid produced from biooxidation of sulphur than it was with sulphuric acid addition ( Based on solution sulphate analysis, 76% ( Leaching of copper as a function of the amount of sulphur agglomerated with the ore (3.33, 6.67 and 13.3 After a lag period of 1 to 2 The increase in dissolved copper concentration was linear in all columns from about day 17 to day 34 to 38, then gradually decreased and virtually ended after 63 Copper leaching in the column to which S The above column tests were done at room temperature. A second set of bioleaching tests was done with columns maintained at 30 Another set of column tests was operated under the same conditions (30 Biooxidation of sulphur by a blend of Thus, there was no evidence that HPGR crushing resulted in more efficient extraction of Cu from this ore compared to conventional jaw crushing. This is due to availability of the whole elemental sulphur to be oxidized on the surface of copper ore particles, and, in addition, the sulphuric acid is produced all around those particles, which makes the dissolution of soluble copper bearing species more effective no matter what crushing operation used. HPGR may be more suited to improve the economics of lower-grade, semi-refractory, acid-consuming copper ores, as opposed to the type of ore we tested. Copper could be extracted from a Brazilian copper ore by sulphuric acid produced from biooxidation of elemental S and sulphur-oxidizing microorganisms added to the ore. Higher amounts of added S