A composite coating, containing 1.35wt.%RE, 5.46wt.%W, 3.82wt.%B, 15wt.%SiC and Ni was electrodeposited on the matrix by use of appropriate bath composition and process parameters. The addition of RE(CeO2) enhanced the hardness and wear resistance of the coating remarkably. The hardness and wear resistance of the coating increase with a rise in heat treatment temperature, and the hardness reaches the optimum value at 400°C, while the coating has the best wear resistance at 500°C. The wearing tests show that the wear resistance of the coating is four to five times as high as that of hard chromium, and the corrosion tests indicate that the corrosion resistance of the coating is superior to that of 1Cr18Ni9Ti stainless steel in various corrosive media, except for nitric acid. X-ray diffraction shows that the 1.35wt.%RE–5.46wt.%W–3.82wt.%B–15wt.%SiC–Ni as-deposited composite coating is mainly amorphous, except a few Ni, W, CeO2, B and SiC phases.Composite materials are important new materials used today. Several materials with different properties can be combined to form new type of composite materials to meet various requirements. Composite electrodeposition is a new surface-strengthening process by which some inorganic or organic particles can codeposit with metal or alloy to form composite coatings with many special properties, such as wear resistance, high temperature oxidation resistance, corrosion resistance and electrical contact function The existing electrodeposited composite coatings are mostly based on nickel or copper, e.g. Ni–SiC or Cu–SiC coatings. The wear resistance of these coatings is higher than that of pure nickel or copper The bath composition and electroplating parameters were shown in The specimens were Boron content in the coating was determined by Auger Electron Spectrum (AES); RE content was examined by an electron spectrometer, and SiC, Ni and W contents were measured by a chemical analytical method, and average of five point values was used. The coating hardness was determined by means of a D32 Hanemann microhardometer under a load of 28.8 The corrosion resistance of the coating against 10%H The relationship between the hardness of composite coating and the heat treatment temperature is shown in As shown in The hardness and mass loss by abrasion test of several coatings are measured under the same conditions, and the results are shown in From the self-corrosion potential data shown in  The corrosion resistance of Ni–B base composite coatings against alkaline solution is rather good as shown in   In comparison to  The structure of RE–Ni–W–B–SiC composite coating is affected by boron content and heat treatment temperature. The as-deposited coating is in a thermodynamical nonequilibrium state, and its structure is oversaturated solid solution when boron content is low. With a rise in boron content the coating structure transits gradually to amorphous state, and changes to equilibrium crystalline state after heat treatment. At about 400 The hardness of the as-deposited 1.35 The corrosion resistance of RE–Ni–W–B–SiC coating is lower than that of Ni–W–P–SiC composite coating, but higher than that of 1Cr18Ni9Ti stainless steel.