The present work studied the softening and melting properties of different burden structures including pellet, sinter and mixed burden (pellet mixed with sinter) with a pellet ratio of 33.65%. The content of high chromic vanadium titano-magnetite in sinter and pellet was different. The experimental results indicated that the compositions of the burden have an important effect on the softening and melting properties. The softening and melting properties of pellet burden structure were improved when the high basicity sinter was added into the acid pellet forming mixed burden. The softening and melting properties of mixed burden with a pellet ratio of 33.65% were better than other burden structures. The initial softening temperature, the temperature interval of softening, the starting melting temperature, the temperature interval of melting, and maximum differential pressure were 1100°C, 130°C, 1250°C, 130°C and 15.7kPa, respectively. By comparing the contents of Ti, V and Cr of iron that had dripped through the different burden structures, the content of valuable components (Ti 0.349%, V 0.244% and Cr 0.094%) was highest of the pig iron collected from the mixed burden.Vanadium and titanium which are widely used in metallurgy, aerospace, national defense and military fields are recognized as important strategic resources ( The blast furnace with an efficient countercurrent exchanger of heat, mass and oxygen is the most common means of producing hot metal. Now the process of blast furnace is the main operating means for melting vanadium titano-magnetite to separate iron, vanadium and titanium. Actually, the cohesive zone was identified as a dominant factor for blast furnace operation according to subsequent studies ( To improve the quality of the blast furnace burden, considerable effort has been invested in studies of softening and melting properties. A number of laboratory tests have been developed to obtain information about softening and melting characteristics of iron-bearing materials. In order to reveal the effect of high chromic vanadium–titanium magnetite on the melting characteristics of the burden structures, softening and melting tests of pellet, sinter and mixed burden have been carried out in the laboratory. Samples for experiments were sinter and pellet which were composed of the high chromic vanadium titano-magnetite and other common iron powdered ores. The composition of samples is shown in    The volumetric expansion of the burdens took place at the temperature below 1000  The chemical composition of burden has an important effect on the softening and melting temperatures. The content of SiO After the pig iron was dropped from graphite crucible, the residual substances were analysed by X-ray diffraction and the results are shown in According to the relationship between shrinkage and temperature, the positional distribution of cohesive zone of different burden structures could be acquired, which is shown in  The possible reasons are as follows: The contents of Ti, V and Cr in the pig iron that had been dripped through the samples were analysed by the method of chemical analysis and results are shown in The contents of Ti, V and Cr in pig iron of mixed burden were highest in these three kinds of burdens. There may be some reasons for this result. The higher temperature is beneficial to the reduction of the oxides of Ti, V and Cr. The pellet burden has the lowest melt-down temperature about 1340 Based on this study, the burden structures with high softening temperature, narrow soften-melting temperature range and good air permeability are required in the actual process of blast furnace melting. The softening and melting characteristics of three different burden structures containing high chromic vanadium–titanium magnetite were obtained in the experiment. The burden structure of pellet had the lowest softening temperature range (1090  There was considerable difference of characteristic temperatures of different burdens in the experiment. The compositions of the burden have an important effect on the characteristic temperatures. The high basicity sinter was added in the acid pellet, which could improve the melt-down temperature of the pellet burden. The content of CaO and SiO The permeability and the positional distribution of cohesive zone of different burden structures were considered simultaneously. The softening and melting characteristics of mixed burden with a pellet ratio of 33.65% were better than other burden structures, with the T The permeability of sinter burden was the worst in the experiment. To some extent, the permeability of sinter burden was improved when the pellet was added to the pellet forming mixed burden. The permeability of mixed burden and pellet burden didn't appear to be much different. By comparing the contents of Ti, V and Cr of iron that had dripped through different burden structures, the content of valuable components (Ti, V and Cr) was highest in dropped pig iron collected from the mixed burden with a pellet ratio of 33.65%. The authors are especially grateful to the