Migration and differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are known to be involved in various regenerative processes such as bone healing. However, little is known about the pharmacotherapeutical options aiming at the mobilization and differentiation of MSCs. The present study therefore focussed on cannabinoids which have been demonstrated to exhibit tissue healing properties. Using Boyden chamber assays, the non-psychoactive phytocannabinoid cannabidiol (CBD) was found to increase the migration of adipose-derived MSCs in a time- and concentration-dependent manner. CBD-induced migration was inhibited by AM-630 (CB2 receptor antagonist) and O-1602 (G protein-coupled receptor 55 [GRP55] agonist). Moreover, the promigratory effect of CBD was antagonized by inhibition of the p42/44 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway which became activated upon CBD treatment. In line with this data, AM-630 and O-1602 attenuated CBD-induced p42/44 MAPK phosphorylation. A p42/44 MAPK-dependent promigratory effect was likewise demonstrated for the GPR55 antagonist O-1918 and the selective CB2 receptor agonist JWH-133. Additional evidence for a functional effect of CBD on MSCs was provided by experiments demonstrating long-term stimulation with CBD to induce differentiation of MSCs into the osteoblastic lineage as evidenced by increased mineralization assessed by cresolphthalein complexone assay and enhanced activity of alkaline phosphatase. Collectively, this study demonstrates CBD to promote the migration of MSCs via activation of the CB2 receptor and inhibition of GPR55 and to induce osteoblastic differentiation. CBD may therefore recruit MSCs to sites of calcifying tissue regeneration and subsequently support bone regeneration via an osteoanabolic action on MSCs.During the last decade cannabinoid compounds have been demonstrated to confer a broad range of pharmacological effects. Recent studies suggest the endocannabinoid system, consisting of the G protein coupled receptors CB In past years, a number of studies reported various structurally unrelated cannabinoids to confer wound healing properties via enhancement of cellular migration resulting in maintenance of vascular integrity MSCs have been described as an important factor contributing to tissue repair. Due to their multilineage potential, these cells have emerged as a target of diverse pharmacotherapeutical approaches The present study was initiated to evaluate the impact of CBD on the migration of MSCs and to define the contribution of cannabinoid-modulated receptors to this process. To substantiate the findings on MSC migration in the context of tissue regeneration, further investigations were carried out to quantify stem cell differentiation into the osteoblastic lineage. Here we provide first-time proof for CBD to enhance the migration of MSCs via activation of the CB (−)-Cannabidiol, JWH-133, O-1602, PD98059 and PP2 were obtained from R&D Systems (Wiesbaden-Nordenstadt, Germany). AM-251, AM-630 and O-1918 were bought from Biomol GmbH (Hamburg, Germany). Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's medium (DMEM, high glucose, GlutaMAX™), trypsin–EDTA and penicillin–streptomycin were obtained from Life Technologies GmbH (Darmstadt, Germany). Foetal calf serum (FCS) was from PAN Biotech (Aidenbach, Germany). Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), EDTA, glycerol, glycine, H Subcutaneous adipose samples were acquired by liposuction. The donors had been informed about the establishment of cellular models from their tissue and had given informed consent. Adipose tissue was digested in collagenase NB4 standard grade solution (6 Short-term incubations (up to 48 For analysis of CBD-induced osteogenic differentiation in long-term experiments ( Test substances were dissolved in ethanol or DMSO and diluted with PBS to yield final concentrations of 0.01% (v/v) ethanol (for CBD and O-1918), 0.1% (v/v) ethanol (for JWH-133), 0.01% (v/v) DMSO (for AM-251, AM-630, capsazepine, O-1602 and PD98059) or 0.1% (v/v) DMSO (for LY-294.002 and PP2). As vehicle control PBS containing the respective concentration of ethanol or DMSO was used. The effect of test substances on the transmigration of MSCs was determined using a modified Boyden chamber assay according to the manufacturer's instructions (BD Biosciences, Becton Dickinson GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany) as described previously To visualize migration of cells into artificial wounds, human MSCs were seeded into 24-well plates and allowed to grow for 24 For analysis of gene expression ( Following incubation of cells obtained from 3 donors with vehicle or CBD (3 For analysis of phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated protein levels, human MSCs were seeded into 6-well plates and grown to confluence. Western blot analyses were performed as described previously Proteins were separated on a 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel. Following transfer to nitrocellulose (Carl Roth GmbH) and blocking of the membranes with 5% milk powder, blots were probed with specific antibodies raised to β-actin (loading control; Sigma, Taufkirchen, Germany) or p42/44, phospho-p42/44, FAK, phospho-FAK, Akt and phospho-Akt (all obtained from New England BioLabs GmbH, Frankfurt, Germany). Subsequently, membranes were probed with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated Fab-specific anti-mouse (β-actin) or anti-rabbit IgG (New England BioLabs GmbH, Frankfurt, Germany). The following antibody dilutions were used: 1:5000 (β-actin), 1:1000 (p42/44, phospho-p42/44, FAK, anti-mouse IgG, anti-rabbit IgG), 1:500 (phospho-FAK, Akt) and 1:250 (phospho-Akt). Antibody binding was visualized using chemiluminescence solution containing 1.25 Densitometric analysis of band intensities was done by optical scanning and quantifying using the Quantity One 1-D Analysis Software (Bio-Rad Laboratories GmbH). Activation of p42/44 MAPK, FAK and Akt was calculated by normalizing densitometric values of blots exposed to phospho-specific antibodies to densitometric values of the bands obtained from blots exposed to the respective antibodies against the respective non-phosphorylated kinases. For detection of cannabinoid-modulated receptors, membrane fractions of proteins were obtained using the Proteo Extract™ Native Membrane Protein Extraction Kit according to the manufacturer's instructions (Calbiochem Crystal violet staining was performed as internal cell number standard as described elsewhere Quantification of ALP (tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase [liver, bone, kidney]) activity was carried out as described elsewhere For quantification of calcium deposition, the o-cresolphthalein complexone assay was performed as described elsewhere Comparisons between 2 groups were performed with Student's The migration of MSCs obtained from different donors was increased by a 6-h incubation with 3 A promigratory effect of CBD was confirmed using the scratch wound healing assay. As shown in Time-course experiments yielded an increase of migration by 3 In an attempt to determine upstream targets of the CBD-induced migration, MSCs were treated with vehicle or 3 The efficacy of PD98059 was proven in Western blot experiments that demonstrated a significant inhibition of the CBD-induced p42/44 MAPK activation in the presence of the inhibitor ( To investigate a possible involvement of cannabinoid-modulated receptors in the CBD-mediated increase of migration and MAPK phosphorylation, cells were pretreated with antagonists to CB Similar results were obtained from Western blot experiments. Accordingly, both AM-630 and O-1602 attenuated the CBD-induced p42/44 MAPK activation ( In contrast to O-1602 and all other receptor antagonists, the TRPV1 antagonist capsazepine exhibited inhibition of basal migration ( The presence of CB In order to substantiate the finding of CBD acting promigratory via antagonizing GPR55, a further GPR55 antagonist, O-1918, was evaluated for its impact on migration and p42/44 MAPK activation. As shown in To further confirm the role of CB To identify further upstream targets conferring the promigratory action of CBD, MSCs were tested for a time-dependent activation of Akt and FAK in parallel to p42/44 MAPK. Western blot experiments revealed the CBD-induced migration to be associated with an activation of Akt, FAK and p42/44 MAPK within a 6-h incubation period with maximum activations after 45 To analyze a causal involvement of FAK and Akt in the promigratory effect of CBD, the impact of specific inhibitors of both pathways was investigated using the Boyden chamber setup. In these experiments LY-294.002, an upstream inhibitor of Akt, diminished the CBD-induced migration, whereas PP2, a Src family kinase inhibitor that has been demonstrated as upstream inhibitor of FAK phosphorylation As time-course experiments revealed an activation peak of Akt prior to the peak of p42/44 MAPK activation, inhibitor-based experiments were carried out to determine a probable causal link between CBD-induced Akt and downstream p42/44 MAPK activation. Using this approach, a partial inhibition of CBD-induced p42/44 MAPK activation in the presence of LY-294.002 was observed ( Densitometric analyses of Western blots monitoring the influence of a 1-h treatment of cells with PD98059 or LY-294.002 on basal Akt phosphorylation revealed the following results: 41 To evaluate cellular responses following treatment of MSCs with CBD in an extended time frame, proliferation was tested by crystal violet staining and differentiation of MSCs was monitored by detection of ALP activity and o-cresolphthalein complexone assays. According to In a first attempt, a potential osteoanabolic effect of CBD on MSCs was tested by measuring the activity of ALP, an established parameter to quantify the differentiation of MSCs into the osteoblastic lineage Finally, mRNA pools obtained from cells of different MSC donors were used for analyses of osteogenic markers regulated in response to CBD. Among the genes upregulated in MSCs challenged with 3 Recent studies have provided evidence that cannabinoids may possess wound healing properties that are mediated through increased migration of regenerative cells to sites of tissue regeneration Initial experiments demonstrated a promigratory impact of CBD on MSCs obtained from different donors. Although MSC populations have been described as heterogenous referring to their proliferative and differentiation potential, developmental plasticity and pharmacological characteristics Concerning the mechanism underlying CBD-induced migration of MSCs, upstream activation of the CB Our findings are in agreement with recent reports demonstrating the promigratory effect of cannabinoids on human corneal epithelial and human embryonic kidney cells to be mediated via p42/44 MAPK activation Regarding the role of GPR55 in cellular migration, the cannabinoids 2-arachidonoyl glycerol Clearly, more research is needed to understand potential crosstalks between CB CBD is known to exhibit a low affinity to cannabinoid receptors Our data further suggest no contribution of TRPV1 to CBD-induced migration of MSCs. These findings are in contrast to other studies reporting TRPV1 as mediator of CBD-induced effects, such as antihyperalgesia As a further regenerative mode of action of CBD, the present study found CBD to cause differentiation of MSCs into the osteoblastic lineage. Accordingly, long-term incubation of MSCs with CBD was associated with an increase of ALP activity and enhanced mineralization. These results were confirmed by mRNA analyses that revealed upregulation of several genes by CBD that have been described as osteogenic markers With its sequential effects on MSCs including (i) a fast activation of stem cells leading to migration within hours and (ii) a differentiation of these cells into the osteoblastic lineage as response to a prolonged exposure in a time frame of weeks, CBD, at least under the vitro conditions of the present study, achieves properties of an osteoanabolic drug. In view of the urgent need for osteoanabolic strategies in the management of osteoporosis To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report on CBD's impact on migration and osteoblastic differentiation of human MSCs. Based on the findings presented here, CBD may cause recruitment of MSCs to sites of calcifying tissue regeneration and subsequently support bone regeneration via an osteoanabolic action on regeneratively active mesenchymal cells. In consideration of the fact that CBD acts as a drug with lesser adverse side effects as compared to current pharmacotherapeutical options for the treatment of osteodegenerative disorders, studies aiming at the bone healing properties of CBD are recommended.