This study demonstrates the utility of a modified postero-medial surgical approach to the knee in treating a series of patients with complex tibial plateau injuries with associated postero-medial and postero-lateral shear fractures. Posterior coronal shear fractures are underappreciated and their clinical relevance has recently been characterised. Less-invasive surgery and indirect reduction techniques are inadequate for treating these coronal plane fractures.
                  Our approach includes an inverted ‘L’-shaped incision situated within the posterior flexor knee crease, followed by the retraction or incision of the medial head of the gastrocnemius tendon, while protecting the neurovascular structures. This provides a more extensile exposure, as far as the postero-lateral corner, than previously described.
                  Our case series included eight females and eight males. The average age was 53 years. The majority of these injuries were sustained through high-energy trauma. All patients’ fractures were classified as Schatzker grade 4, or above, with a postero-medial split depression. Eight patients had associated postero-lateral corner fractures. Two were open, two had vascular compromise and one had neurological injury.
                  The average time to surgery was 6.4 days (range 0–12), operative time 142min (range 76–300) and length of stay 17 days (range 7–46). A total of 11 patients were treated using the postero-medial approach alone and in five the treatment was combined with an antero-lateral approach. Two patients suffered a reduced range of movement requiring manipulation and physiotherapy, and three patients had a 5-degree fixed flexion deformity. Two patients developed superficial wound infections treated with antibiotics alone. Anatomical reduction and fracture union was achieved in 15 patients.
                  These are complex fractures to treat, and our modified posterior approach allows direct reduction and optimal positioning of plates to act as buttress devices. It can be extended across the midline to the postero-lateral corner and also allows excellent exposure of the popliteal vessels should concurrent vascular repair be required.High-energy tibial plateau fractures are infrequent and technically demanding to treat. They are commonly classified by the Schatzker system, which is based on the appearance on the antero-posterior (AP) radiograph The use of a direct surgical approach with anatomical reduction and absolute stability is the preferred and historical method of treating such intra-articular fractures The purpose of this study is to describe a modified postero-medial surgical approach to the knee. A case series and cadaveric dissection are presented highlighting the relevant anatomy and our experience using this approach in treating a series of patients with complex tibial plateau injuries with associated posterior shear fractures (ethical approval was not required for this study). Under general anaesthesia, the patient is placed prone on a flat radiolucent table with all pressure points protected and the patient secured safely. Intravenous antibiotics are administered. A bolster is placed under the ankle of the affected limb. A tourniquet can be applied for a bloodless operative field. The knee is flexed to highlight the flexor knee crease and an inverted ‘L’-shaped incision is made running along the crease and distally along the medial side of the calf (see Careful superficial dissection permits identification of the short saphenous vein (SSV) in the midline of the calf. The sural nerve (SN) is found immediately lateral to the SSV. The deep calf fascia is incised in line with the skin incision, avoiding injury to both the SSV and the SN. Distally, the incision through the fascia runs along the interval between the medial gastrocnemius muscle and the postero-medial border of the tibia. The long saphenous vein may be encountered during this dissection; some branches may need ligation but the vein is preserved. From here, the SN is followed proximally to its source, the tibial nerve (TN), as seen in Once the main neurovascular complex is identified within the popliteal fossa, the SSV and SN are retracted laterally out of the surgical field. The popliteal artery (PA), popliteal vein (PV) and TN are identified and protected (see The PV runs medial to the PA, moving posteriorly then laterally as it descends across the popliteal fossa. Note that the PA has five branches within the fossa: superior and inferior medial genicular arteries, superior and inferior lateral genicular arteries and a middle genicular artery. Some of these branches may need to be ligated should the artery require mobilisation. The medial head of the gastrocnemius muscle (MHG) is identified. The semimembranosus (SM) and semitendinosus (ST) muscles are identified forming the supero-medial border of the popliteal fossa. By retracting the muscle belly of the SM medially, the tendinous origin of the MHG is isolated (see If a more extensile exposure is required, then the MHG can be incised close to its origin on the femur and reflected infero-laterally. A stay suture is placed and the tendon and muscular origin incised approximately midway between its site of insertion and the vascular pedicle. This point is approximately 2.5 On reflecting the muscle infero-laterally, the posterior joint capsule, as well as the NV structures within the popliteal fossa, are extensively exposed. This approach can be used if the fracture is associated with injury to the artery that requires repair as it gives excellent exposure of the vessels. The popliteus muscle and tendon runs obliquely across the popliteal fossa in a supero-lateral direction. The popliteus is incised along its medial attachment to the tibia and the muscle and its covering fascia are elevated from the posterior tibia using a periosteal elevator to reveal the posterior joint line. When retracted laterally, the exposure is extended to reveal the postero-lateral joint line and the head of the fibula. Retractors can be carefully placed around the lateral border of the fibula head (not the neck due to risk of common peroneal nerve damage) to maintain exposure during fracture reduction with the body of the popliteus muscle lying between the retractors and vessels, to protect them (see An anatomical reduction of the fracture is achieved through direct reduction techniques: the prone position greatly aids the reduction as the femoral condyles move anteriorly (with gravity). Plates can be positioned to act as a buttress, greatly improving the biomechanical stability of any fracture fixation. The posterior joint capsule, posterior cruciate ligament, posterior meniscal injuries and popliteal NV-bundle injuries can be repaired under direct vision. On closure, the MHG is repaired if divided and the tourniquet is released to confirm vascular integrity. Haemostasis is achieved and the soft tissues are closed in layers. Postoperatively, we recommend that the foot and ankle be splinted in a neutral position to prevent equinus deformity. Between May 2008 and May 2011, 16 patients sustaining complex tibial plateau fractures with a postero-medial shear fragment (see There were eight female patients. The mean age was 53.1 years (range 25–77). Six patients were active smokers and one patient was an ex-smoker (of 12 years). No patients suffered medical co-morbidities requiring steroid treatment at the time of injury. The majority of these injuries were sustained through high-energy trauma. Patient demographics are summarised in All patients were admitted to our Major Trauma Centre and resuscitated according to the standard trauma protocol. The knee injury was assessed clinically and radiographically. Adequate AP and lateral radiographs were obtained ( The timing of the surgery was dependent on the soft tissue status and other associated injuries. Three patients were treated with spanning external fixation prior to definitive surgery due to unstable subluxation of the knee and soft tissue swelling. All patients were treated either with a single postero-medial approach as described or by a dual incision including an antero-lateral approach. The anatomical reduction of the articular surface and absolute stability of the fracture was achieved using Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen (AO) principles, and simultaneous repair of the knee ligament and meniscal injuries was performed when necessary. Postoperative regimes included early range-of-movement exercises with physiotherapy. The patients remained non-weight bearing in a hinged knee brace for at least 8 weeks post surgery. Operative details are listed in The average time to definitive surgery was 6.4 days (range 0–12). The average operative time was 142 All patients suffered Schatzker grade 4–6 fractures with an associated postero-medial shear fragment, and eight patients had associated postero-lateral corner fractures. One patient suffered a Gustillo and Anderson type IIIA open injury and one patient had a type IIIC open injury with a PA tear and TN injury. The lateral position was used in one patient, who was treated with dual postero-medial and antero-lateral approaches to avoid repositioning during surgery. The remaining patients were positioned prone. If dual approaches were used ( Three patients with associated ligament and meniscal injuries had additional soft tissue repair at the time of fracture surgery. This included capsular repairs, two posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) repairs and two lateral meniscal repairs (see Complications were recorded during the immediate and early postoperative period (see One patient had a postoperative neuropraxia injury to the TN, which had fully resolved within 2 weeks of the surgery. Two patients suffered superficial wound infections that were successfully treated with antibiotics. Two patients required manipulation under anaesthesia (MUA) for knee stiffness. Three patients suffered a persistent fixed flexion deformity of 5°. The average length of stay was 17 days (range 7–46). Six patients had an inpatient stay of 20 days or more. In 15 out of 16 cases, the fractures were reduced anatomically (see High-energy tibial plateau fractures are uncommon and difficult to treat Historically, AO principles describe the need for anatomical reduction of intra-articular fractures with direct reduction and fixation with absolute stability. These fractures have been treated by dual plating through a single, anterior mid-line incision with extensive soft tissue dissection. However, severe complications were common Lateral locking plates provide adequate stability to both condyles in a bicondylar fracture pattern However, the displaced or multifragmentary postero-medial shear fracture is unstable and stable fixation with a lateral locking plate alone is not possible. Two recent studies have assessed the incidence and morphology of a postero-medial fragment in high-energy tibial plateau fractures The anatomical shape of the proximal tibia together with the design constraints of lateral locking plates make it impossible to fix many postero-medial fractures with a lateral locking plate. Luo et al. also recognised the importance of the posterior coronal fractures and introduced a three-column principle to aid planning for the treatment of these fractures using a combined anterior and posterior approach Our experience of using a postero-medial approach has been successful with anatomical reduction achieved in all but one patient in our case series. We had two cases of postoperative arthrofibrosis requiring MUA and continuous passive motion (CPM) therapy. Ultimately, patients achieved The postero-medial approach used here is a variation of the approach first described by Trickey in 1968, and later by Burks and Schaffer in 1990 Two studies reported the successful use of the approach described by Trickey for fracture fixation, with functional outcome scores that were better than expected for patients with lower limb trauma and a significant correlation between the fracture reduction achieved and functional outcome scores Although incision and mobilisation of the medial gastrocnemius origin is ideally avoided, the most extensive exposure is achieved by undertaking this step. Our approach not only affords excellent exposure of the postero-medial aspect of the tibia, it is also easily extended to view the lateral joint line, as far as the head of the fibula, whilst protecting the popliteal neurovascular bundle. The senior author has also used this approach to perform postero-lateral intra-articular osteotomy for malunion. An alternative approach to the postero-lateral corner is a direct approach via a postero-lateral incision Dual-incision approaches have been reported in the past. Complications have ranged from a 5-degree fixed flexion deformity, to superficial wound dehiscence to transient saphenous nerve neuropraxia As we have not seen complication rates comparable to that reported in the literature, it is important to state the limitations with our case series. We have a small sample size, with patients followed up over a short period of time. Although this is a complex surgical approach, the demonstration of the technique on a cadaveric model will benefit both orthopaedic surgeons in training as well as surgeons unfamiliar with the approach. A full clinical and radiological assessment of patients with high-energy tibial plateau fractures will permit the early recognition of the posterior shear fractures and aid comprehensive preoperative planning. With such an approach, we feel that this is a safe and practical method of treating such patients with good outcomes. There are no conflicts of interest to be declared.