The iron removal process by goethite is an important part of zinc hydrometallurgy. In existing works, the goethite process is often modeled as a lumped parameter system, where the spatial distribution information of reactants is not involved. In this paper, the spatiotemporal modeling of the goethite process and its optimal control problem are studied. To make the infinite-dimensional distributed parameter system easier to solve, space–time separation is adopted to transform it into a finite-dimensional system. Then, a multi-scale local least squares support vector machine is proposed to establish the temporal model. This method uses multi-scale kernel learning to deal with different trends of the process and establish a local model to track the state change of the system. Through space–time synthesis, the established spatiotemporal model can approximate the distributed parameter system of the goethite process. Moreover, an optimal control strategy based on the spatiotemporal model is designed to reduce the cost of oxygen and zinc oxide consumed in the process. Finally, simulation experiments on the goethite process demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed modeling method and optimal control strategy.Zinc and its alloys are widely used in many fields, and hydrometallurgy is the main method for zinc production nowadays Reasonable operation of control variables, especially the addition of oxygen and zinc oxide, is the key to achieve the desired goal for the iron-removal process. Especially, the accurate modeling of the goethite process provides important theoretical guidance for adjusting its control variables. In recent years, the modeling of the goethite process has usually been studied based on the continuously stirred tank reactor In practice, the goethite process is essentially a distributed parameter system (DPS), whose strong spatiotemporal dynamics make it difficult to model and control Therefore, in this paper, a KL-multi-scale local LSSVM (KL-MS-LLSSVM) based spatiotemporal modeling method is developed for the goethite process. First, KL decomposition is utilized to separate the spatiotemporal variables of the goethite process into a set of spatial basis functions and the corresponding temporal coefficients. To estimate the acquired temporal coefficients, multi-scale kernel learning, local modeling technique and LS-SVM are employed. Then, an optimal control strategy is employed such that the outlet iron-ion concentration is stabilized to the expected range with the lowest cost of oxygen and zinc oxide. Finally, the effectiveness of the proposed modeling method and the control strategy is verified by simulation experiments. In summary, the main contribution of this paper is threefold. First, a spatiotemporal modeling method is proposed for the goethite process with various working conditions. Second, it is proven that the proposed modeling method can achieve comparable performance and less time consumption than SVM, and better performance than LSSVM. Third, an optimal control strategy is proposed and verified by simulation experiments that the control strategy has similar performance and less operation time comparing with model predictive control. The rest of this paper is arranged as follows. In Zinc hydrometallurgy is realized by the atmospheric direct leaching technology under oxygen-rich conditions, where the goethite process is a critical part. In a typical zinc hydrometallurgy plant, the main production facilities of the goethite process are four reactors arranged with orderly descending height. The simplified flow sheet of the goethite process is shown in In the goethite process, oxygen and zinc oxide are added to each reactor to meet the process requirements. The three major reactions, i.e., oxidation, hydrolysis and neutralization, are shown as follows: Oxidation reaction: Hydrolysis reaction: Neutralization reaction: The oxygen that fed to the bottom of the reactors partially dissolves in the solution, to oxidize ferrous ion into ferric ion. Subsequently, the iron-removal is realized by hydrolyzing ferric ion into goethite (FeOOH) precipitation. Meanwhile, zinc oxide is added to neutralize the excess hydrogen ion in the solution such that its pH value is kept within a certain range conducive to the formation of goethite. The solution passed through all the reactors is then disposed by a thickener to obtain the purified solution for the next process. Simultaneously, the underflow of the thickener contains the generated goethite that can be separated by press filter, while a portion of the underflow is circularly utilized to the #1 reactor as seed crystal. In the goethite process, the oxidation rate is of vital importance. If the oxidation reaction rate is too fast, the overabundance ferric ion would generate ferric hydroxide (Fe(OH) According to the analysis of the reactor structure in The flowing direction of solution would affect the spatiotemporal distribution of the components in it. Meanwhile, the radial stirring of the stirrer makes all components in the solution thoroughly mixed in the horizontal direction. On this basis, the following assumptions can be carried out. The reactor is a standard cylinder. The temperature in the reactor remains constant. Solution in the reactor is mechanically stirred thoroughly, and the concentration of reactants (mainly ferrous ion, ferric ion, hydrogen ion, dissolved oxygen and zinc oxide) has no difference in the horizontal direction. The chemical reactions are considered as only happening in reactors, since the chute between the reactors is relatively short The involved physical characteristics, kinetic parameters and diffusion coefficients are treated as constants or the averaged value. The DPM of goethite process can be constructed according to the solute mass balance over a differential volume element in the reactor The formula After some mathematical manipulation of Therefore, the spatiotemporal distributions of the Fe In In Due to the infinite-dimensional nature of the DPM for goethite process, it is difficult to use online estimation and control directly. Thus, a KL-multi-scale local LSSVM based spatiotemporal modeling method is proposed for the process. First, KL method is utilized to separate the spatiotemporal variables into a set of spatial basis functions and the corresponding temporal coefficients. Second, a multi-scale local LSSVM is proposed to estimate the temporal coefficients. For the DPM First, the spatiotemporal variable Among them, Therefore, the spatiotemporal variable is separated into According to KL method, there is, After the First, by evaluating the distance and similarity between historical samples and query samples, samples for local-modeling are selected according to the similarity to the query sample. Define The closer the distance between historical sample and query sample is, the larger the similarity is. The After sample selection for local modeling, the model parameters can be obtained from the trained MS-LLSSVM, the local-modeling samples can be mapped into a higher dimensional feature space. Then, the nonlinear function estimation of the temporal coefficients can be transformed into the linear function estimation in the high-dimensional feature space. After eliminating In The multi-scale kernel At last, some parameters in MS-LLSSVM need to be obtained. The parameters that affect the MS-LLSSVM accuracy include the weight coefficient By using the spatial BFs and temporal coefficients, a new spatiotemporal model of the goethite process can be obtained by the following space–time synthesis, i.e., The major assignment of the goethite process is managing the additive rates of oxygen and zinc oxide to perform iron-removal with the lowest cost. Meanwhile, goethite with the highest iron content possible is also desired. For the purpose of improving the quality of the generated goethite, the value of oxidation rate and pH in the reactors should be smaller. Therefore, the additive rates of oxygen and zinc oxide should be tightly manipulated to ensure the oxidation rate and pH value are within reasonable limits. In the goethite process, the requirements of iron-removal at the lowest cost of oxygen and zinc oxide can be converted into the optimization objective function in the # Step 1: Code the control rates of oxygen and zinc oxide as particles. Step 2: Initialize each parameter of the particle swarm, including population size, the initial position and velocity of the particle, the historically best position of an individual, ( Step 3: Evaluate the fitness of each particle. Step 4: For each particle, compare its current fitness and with the fitness of individal Step 5: For each particle, compare its current fitness value and the fitness value corresponding to Step 6: Update the velocity and position of the particle. Step 7: If the stop condition is not satisfied, return to Step 3. The proposed spatiotemporal modeling method and optimal control strategy are applied to the goethite process in a zinc hydrometallurgy plant. In this section, to test the KL-MS-LSSVM algorithm, it is validated on data samples collected from a real goethite process. Subsequently, several comparison experiments are conducted to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed optimal control strategy. To evaluate the performance of the proposed modeling method, the industrial data used to estimate the model parameters are sampled from a goethite process. Nevertheless, the internal space of the reactor is isolated from the outside practically, making sampling at random position impossible. Therefore, a specific sampling experiment on a smaller scale is carried out to obtain data samples of different heights and times of the reactors. Taking the #1 reactor as an example, a total of 200 samples are obtained by sampling experiments and off-line analysis. One sample includes To further investigate the performance and efficiency of the proposed method. This paper gives some comparisons between the proposed method, KL-LSSVM and KL-SVM. The time consumption of the modeling phase is used as the efficiency indices. For the #2-#4 reactor, the performance and efficiency indices at heights The spatiotemporal distributions of Fe In the experiments, the proposed optimal control strategy is applied to the goethite process. According to the expert experiences, the set-points of the outlet Fe The steepest descent method is used to solve For comparison, the nonlinear model predictive control (NMPC) is also used for the optimal control problem in the iron removal process. The objective function of nonlinear model predictive control is given in the following equation.: Taking the #1 reactor as an example, the proposed control strategy, NMPC and the PID control are performed within 140 h. In order to obtain a better solution, the PSO algorithm is operated 5 times. The best solution in the operations has been used for experiments. The oxygen and zinc oxide control comparison results are shown in It can be seen from the comparison results that the proposed optimal control strategy can save oxygen and zinc oxide consumption. Compared with manual operation, the consumption of oxygen and zinc oxide is reduced by about 14% and 11%, respectively. The #4 reactor outlet Fe In this paper, the spatiotemporal modeling and optimization control for the iron removal process by goethite are studied. The distributed parameter model of the process is established by analyzing of the structure of the iron removal reactor. Considering that the distributed parameter model described in partial differential equations is difficult to solve directly, a spatiotemporal modeling method based on KL-MS-LLSSVM is proposed. The spatiotemporal modeling method first uses KL method to approximate the spatiotemporal variables by a set of spatial basis functions and the corresponding temporal coefficients. Then, the model of the temporal coefficients is established by a multi-scale local LSSVM which combines local modeling techniques, multi-scale kernel learning and LSSVM. After space–time synthesis of the spatial basis functions and the temporal coefficients, the proposed modeling method can reflect the spatiotemporal dynamics of the goethite process. According to the spatiotemporal model of the process, an optimal control strategy was developed to control the concentration of the outlet ions to the desired value with the lowest oxygen and zinc oxide costs. Finally, the simulation results show that the proposed spatiotemporal modeling method can accurately describe the ferrous ion concentration at different heights of the reactors. Compared with the PID control and manual operation, the proposed optimal control strategy can save the consumption of oxygen and zinc oxide. The fluctuations of the outlet Fe The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported in part by the Program of