In this paper we describe the synthesis and characterization of a homologous series of linear polyglycol-based frothers comprising alkyl, propoxy (propylene oxide, PO), and ethoxy (ethylene oxide, EO) groups. The identities were confirmed by proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and total organic carbon analysis. Characterization used three parameters, bubble size, gas holdup and water overflow rate, measured in a bubble column. The results indicate that increasing number of PO groups led to significant decrease in bubble size, and increase in gas holdup and water overflow rate. Increasing the alkyl chain length, gave similar but less pronounced trends; the least effect was increasing the number of EO groups. Changing the relative position of the PO and EO group had a significant effect on all three parameters. To account for the effect of PO/EO position, a mechanism based on effect of structure on molecule packing at the air/water interface is proposed.Frothers are surfactants used in mineral flotation to enhance performance through control of pulp zone hydrodynamics and froth properties ( Reagent optimization is a central ambition of flotation chemistry research. It entails modification of existing structures or designing new ones to provide improved performance compared to currently marketed products. Most work has been on collectors followed by modifiers with relatively little on frothers ( The search for new frother chemistries would become less daunting if a frother structure-property relationship approach could be used. The structure represents the type, number and position of functional groups in the molecular architecture. For the property, basic work largely uses such parameters as bubble size, bubble rise velocity and gas holdup, which affect particle collection kinetics, and froth height and water overflow rate, which affect particle entrainment. One of the first investigations into frother structure-property relationships is by The work quoted above was largely in two-phase (air-water) systems. The evidence is that solid particles have little impact on bubble size in the pulp ( There have been periodic attempts to create new frother chemistries in anticipation of tailored flotation properties. From the preceding, it is noted that new chemistries tend to be reaction products of alcohols and polyglycols, either alkyl-propoxylates (abbrev: C There is limited data on surfactants from this family used as frothers, the study noted by The reagents used in the synthesis are listed in By stepwise substitution, we synthesized five nonionic linear polyglycol-based products with varying numbers of repeating units in each group (alkyl, PO and EO) and varying position of EO and PO groups. The chemical structure, formulae and names of the five synthesized frothers are listed in To illustrate the synthesis procedure, we take dipropoxy monoethoxy propanol (DPMEPro) as an example. The three-step reaction is shown in In the product purification stage, first the solution was evaporated under vacuum on a rotary evaporator for 2 Proton NMR ( To perform TOC analysis (Dohrmanns DC 80, TELEDYNE Instruments) appropriate amounts of product were weighed and diluted in deionized water (ca. 18 A bubble column ( To operate, underflow rate was fixed at 1600 The test work was performed in two-phase (air/water). The water source was Montréal tap and the temperature was equilibrated to room temperature (20–22 The Since the signals associated with methyl units represented in alkyl and PO groups were observed in the spectrum, the integration ( As shown in Bubble size (D The results for the two compounds with n The results for the two compounds with m The results for the two compounds with n  The bubble size (D Our eventual goal is to create a guideline through frother structure-property relationships for designing formulations which can be used to fine-tune properties for a given application. As a contribution, this series of compounds, four linear alkyl-ethoxy-propoxylates and one linear alkyl-propoxy-ethoxylate, were synthesized with structural variations 3 and 5 carbons in the alkyl group, 2 and 3 PO, 1 and 2 EO, and by switching the PO, EO sequence. Structure verification was accomplished through interpretation of Characterizing the compounds considered three parameters: bubble size, gas holdup and water overflow rate. As shown in  The greater effect of PO compared to EO reflects the magnitude of the ratio of hydrophobic CH Perhaps the most intriguing result is the marked effect of changing the position of PO and EO revealed in Our previous work ( The mechanism is illustrated in This explanation does not rule out other mechanisms, which invites molecular modeling to try to comprehend. It does mean that attempts to use molecular weight (MW) and hydrophilic-lipophilic balance (HLB) to correlate against frother properties ( From the flotation practice perspective, based on CCC none of the new structures offer any immediate advantage over the commercially available frothers. The CCC is perhaps the most useful new metric to emerge in characterizing frother functions, the lower the value the lower the dosage required to reduce bubble size, a major role of frother in flotation. In that regard the most effective new compound, DETPPro (CCC Five potential frothers were synthesized combining three chemical groups, alkyl, propoxy (PO) and ethoxy (EO). Frother characterization was through measurement of bubble size, gas holdup and water overflow rate. The general effect of increasing number of carbons in the alkyl chain (n), and increasing the number of PO (m) and EO (l) was to decrease bubble size and increase gas holdup and water overflow rate, the relative magnitudes of the effect being m The relative position of PO and EO had a notable effect: the C Based on critical coalescence concentration, the most effective new structure, DETPPro (C The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support through the Chair in Mineral Processing sponsored by Vale, Teck Resources, Barrick Gold, Xstrata Process Support, Shell Canada, SGS Lakefield, COREM and Flottec, and through the Amira International P9O project, both under the NSERC (Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada) CRD (Collaborative Research and Development) program.