Workability is concerned with the extent to which a material can be deformed in a specific metalworking process without the initiation of cracks. The ductile fracture of components is the most common mode of cracks in any metalworking processes. Workability is the complex technological concept, depends upon the ductility of the material and the details of the process parameters. An experimental research work was preformed for the understanding of the working behaviour of Al–Al2O3 composite under various stress state conditions, namely uniaxial, plane and triaxial stress states. Upsetting of Al–Al2O3 powder metallurgy compacts with various aspect ratios and initial preform densities were carried out and the working behaviour of the powder compacts at various state conditions was computed. The curves plotted for different components such as axial strain vs. formability stress index, relative density vs. axial strain, fracture strain vs. formability stress index and stress ratio parameters vs. axial strain were analyzed, using the true strains induced during upsetting with the consideration of bulging effect.Powder metallurgy (P/M) is a highly developed method of manufacturing precision metal parts. Over the last seven decades, the technology has matured from making self-lubricating bearings for autos to complex carrier gear set in automobile transmissions and high strength powder-forged connecting rods in engines. P/M technology includes the basic steps: mixing of elemental powders, compaction and sintering or heating the shape in a controlled atmosphere furnace to bond the particles together metallurgically. After sintering the but prior to a specifically designed thermal treatment to effect homogenization, mechanical working is carried out to introduce the lattice defect which would increase the inter-diffusion coefficient and to alter the dimensions of the particles in the compact as well as overall geometry of the microstructure of the compact. The worldwide popularity of powder metallurgy lies in the ability of producing such complex shapes with exact dimensions with an excellent surface finish of between 32 and 48 micro inches at a very high production rate and low cost. Workability is the term used to evaluate the capacity of a material to withstand the induced internal stresses of forming before the splitting of material occurs. It is a complex technological concept that depends both material and process parameters. The workability of a material purely depends on the amount of ductile fracture presented in the material. To understand the workability criteria of any material, a clear concept on fracture criterion for ductile fracture must be established. Kuhn and Downey Shima and Oyane Narayansamy and Ponalagusamy Landre et al. In this paper, a complete investigation on the workability criteria of Al–Al The mathematical expressions used and proposed for the determination of various upsetting parameters of upsetting for various stress state conditions are discussed below: In the compression of a P/M part, under frictional conditions, the average density is increased. Friction enhances densification and at the same time decreases the height reduction at fracture. The state of stress in a homogeneous compression process is as follows: According to Abdel-Rahman and El-Sheikh When the compression continues, the final diameter increases and the corresponding hoop strain, which is tensile in nature, also increases until it reaches the fracture limit. Once the fracture is initiated, the forming limit strain is the same as the effective strain. It is determined from: As an evidence of experimental investigation implying the importance of the spherical component of the stress state on fracture according to Vujovic and Shabaik This index determines the fracture limit as explained in According to Narayanasamy and Pandey Since the radial stress The hoop strain ( According to Narayanasamy and Ponalagusamy From the above Eq. In the above Eq. Since The effective stress can be determined from the following relation as explained elsewhere Atomized aluminium powder was procured and analyzed for its purity and was found to be 99.7%. The characterization of aluminium and alumina powder was studied by determining the flow rate, apparent density, tap density and particle size distribution as shown in       The curve fitted results for axial strain and formability stress index are shown in  The stress formability index increases with increase in initial preform fractional density and lower the aspect ratios. Parabolic curve fitting shows the better results for the plot between the axial strain and the stress formability index. Among the curve fittings, the parabolic type one shows a very good correlation coefficient (minimum of 0.997 and maximum of 0.998) for the plot between the relative density and the axial strain. For the compacts with higher value of the aspect ratio and with higher initial preform density, the initiation of crack appeared at a very high fracture strain For the case of the compacts with lower value of the aspect ratio and with very high initial preform density, a very high stress ratio parameter is obtained.