In the numerical simulations of highly fractured geological formations, discrete approaches are considerably promising and adequate to describe fluid flow in detail. However, the computational complexity increases dramatically with a greater number of fractures. This becomes the primary limitation for field-scale applications. In this study, a correlation index is for the first time introduced to evaluate the significance of individual fractures, and an equivalent model is proposed to mimic the original domain with a density-reduced one. By an equivalent permeability factor, the suggested model simplifies computational complexity, but compromises result precision to minor extent. This approach is validated in typical discrete fracture networks generated with stochastic fractal models. Effects of fracture geometry are discussed based on various distribution patterns. This method improves mesh quality when dealing with a fracture-matrix domain. It is also capable of optimizing reservoir design through fast and accurate estimations of gas productivity under different boundary conditions.Discrete fracture networks Embedded discrete-fracture modeling Equivalent discrete fracture networks Limit state design Naturally fractured reservoir Representative elementary volume Two-point flux approximation Length exponent in a power law distribution of fracture length Fracture aperture Normalized hydraulic aperture of fracture Average permeability of density-reduced domain with reduction rate Normalized average permeability of density-reduced domain Fracture length Individual fracture length Upper and lower bounds of fracture length Probability density function of fracture length Percolation coefficient in a power law distribution of fracture length Dimension of order in a fractal model of fracture centers Length ratio between the side of a parent domain and its subdomain Poisson's ratio Equivalent permeability factor of domain with density reduction rate Fractal dimension in a fractal model of fracture centers Young's modulus Equivalent domain with corresponding fracture-density reduction A random number in the range of [0, Fisher constant Stress intensity factor Domain size Enveloped area of the permeability curve of density-reduced domain with reduction rate Normalized intersection number of fracture Density probability of fracture Probability of fracture centers in the corresponding subdomain Normalized density probability of fracture Cumulative probability function of fracture length Density-reduced domain with corresponding fracture-density reduction Correlation index of fracture Total number of subdomains in a parent domain in a multiplicative cascade process Normalization factor in a power law distribution Significance factor of fracture density Significance factor of fracture aperture Mean value in a log-normal distribution of fracture aperture Standard deviation in a log-normal distribution of fracture aperture Variance in similarity between the equivalent and original permeability curves Individual fracture orientation Mean value of fracture orientation in a Fisher distribution Rock masses are lithologically heterogeneous and anisotropic. They contain discontinuities of various scales and types, including cracks, fissures, joints, faults, and fault zones (generally referred to as fractures). Fractures embedded in rock masses consist of the principal conduits for a fluid flow ( The number of fractures is the primary contributor to the computational complexity in discrete methods. The density reduction of fractures has been widely discussed in discrete fracture networks (DFN) models. They neglect flow in rock matrix and only concern the contribution of fracture networks as rocks have high contrast in permeability. Conventional methods reduce the number of fractures by neglecting isolated fractures and trimming the nonflowing dead ends ( The uncertainty of fracture data deteriorates computational complexity. It is due to the fact that a practical means to use discrete models is to generate a series of stochastic realizations based on the data collected and conducting statistical analysis ( The constraints of discretization add another computational burden to discrete models. When modeling a fractured porous medium, most discrete methods rely on the high quality of meshes ( This study proposes a discontinuity equivalence approach that extends the density-reduced technique to more general engineering practices. It for the first time defines a correlation index based on the geometric configuration of fracture networks. This index evaluates the significance of individual fractures to the domain transmissibility quantitatively. The overall flow rate in a fractured medium is dominated by the connectivity between boundaries and the hydraulic aperture of individual fractures ( In this paper, we introduce the generation of the stochastic fractured domain with extreme heterogeneity and anisotropy. Then, a density-reduction process is introduced to a typical DFN model based on the correlation index. Multiple cases are tested and discussed to validate the improved equivalent model according to different fracture configurations. This model also demonstrates its applicability to practical problems, such as the simulations of fracture-matrix systems and reservoir-design optimization. As reported in the literature, the fractures in two-dimensional rock masses are regarded as fractal-like tree networks. Hence, the cumulative size distribution of fracture length follows a power law distribution ( Hence, the normalization factor and the length of individual fractures The aperture also significantly impacts the hydraulic properties of the fracture. Three types of distributions are discussed. The fracture aperture Two types of distributions are adopted in the generation of fracture centers, namely, multiplicative cascade ( The fracture orientation categorizes fractures into different sets. A Fisher distribution is adopted in this study. The orientation of individual fracture The fundamental concept of this equivalent method is that the contribution of individual fractures to the hydraulic properties in fracture networks is evaluable based on their geometric characteristics. The direct relations between geometric data (e.g., pore size and void ratio) and hydraulic conductivity have been widely accepted in wide range of sediments ( In this paper, a correlation index Based on the correlation index, the fracture density can be reduced accordingly. The tow-point flux approximation (TPFA) is utilized to generate the directional permeability curve that represents the transmissibility of a domain. Because an impermeable rock matrix is assumed, the flow field can be readily determined by a pipe-network method ( Conventional methods represent the permeability anisotropy of fractured media through the ratio of the maximum and the minimum values among different directions ( The unique pattern of the permeability curve illustrates the hydraulic properties of the fractured domain. The enveloped area of this curve indicates the overall transmissibility, while the irregular perimeter shape represents the heterogeneity and anisotropy. During fracture density reduction, the domain transmissibility declines, while the loss of heterogeneity and anisotropy shows a lag effect. As shown in As the density reduction increases, the hydraulic characteristics all fade away. We define the variance in similarity This parameter is regarded as the error due to information loss and determines the validity of this equivalent method. As shown in This parameter also describes the result confidence of the simplified domain, and hence, it can be used in the limit state design (LSD) method. In practice, a lower bound exists in the number of the most critical and deterministic fractures that meets the requirements of precision and certainty. For example, if the limit of error based on design requirements is set at 0.100 in the demonstrated case, at least 32% of the most significant fractures should be included in the simulation. In addition to the extent of density reduction, the result accuracy also varies with different realizations based on the same statistics of fracture distribution. The certainty of the error range is a function of the reduction level and the distribution models. Two types of distribution patterns are considered in the following three cases to examine the fracture aperture effect. For the first, fracture apertures are related to their length since the in-situ stress tends to enhance the hydraulic aperture of the long fracture. The other two cases are designed to compare the effects of standard deviations when a log-normal distribution is applied to the fracture apertures. The standard deviations are assumed as 20% and 50% of the mean value, respectively. The detailed parameters of aperture distributions are listed as below:    The geometric configuration of fracture networks is identical with the previous case, which has a constant aperture distribution. Ten realizations are conducted to present stable results from log-normal distributions. As illustrated in The distribution of correlation factors can explain the fracture aperture effects. Both constant apertures and log-normal distributions will reduce the significance of long fractures. This is especially noteworthy in log-normal distributions as the increasing randomness in apertures will narrow the difference of the correlation factor among individual fractures. These arguments will all weaken the applicability of this proposed method. In this study, the locations of fracture centers follow a fractal model and are generated by a multiplicative cascade process. The fractal dimension of centers determines the extent of clustering. When it equals to 2, the fractures are evenly distributed across the simulation domain. As the fractal dimension decreases, fractures tend to cluster, and the domain is more likely heterogeneous. Three cases with different fractal dimensions are designed and compared with the DFN models generated from a Poisson process. In each case, ten realizations are simulated to stabilize results. Although each realization has significant randomness, the similarity in the shape of permeability curves exists independently during the process of density reduction. As shown in In a classic fractal model, the number density of fractures varies with the fractal dimension of length and the detectable minimum length. The mass density of fractures is also a function of the percolation coefficient. With constant upper and lower bounds of fracture lengths included in simulations, four cases are designed to compare the effects of length distributions. In these cases, the Poisson process is utilized to generate the fracture center locations, while other parameters of the DFN configurations remain identical to those in  With consideration for the rock matrix, reducing the fracture density with the equivalent model is even more significant. In this part, a fractured porous medium is generated containing 3, 340 discontinuities in a 5  The effects of density reduction on the local pressure distribution are also compared in The gas production in an NFR is simulated to validate a possible application of this equivalent model to a practical problem. The geometric configuration of the experiment model is illustrated in Several designs are conducted and compared based on different production wells to optimize the gas production in the reservoir. As shown in  This paper proposes an improved equivalent DFN model to generate a skeleton of fracture networks that can sufficiently represent the original domain. The fundamental concept of this study is to quantitatively analyze the contribution of individual fractures on the hydraulic properties of a fractured medium. We define the correlation factor to determine the significance of fractures, from which the density-reduced fracture networks are derived.The fracture skeleton retains most characteristics of the original domain and can restore its transmissibility by a simple parameter of equivalent permeability factor. The equivalent model improves the computational efficiency by reducing the number of fractures and depressing the total degree of freedom in the simulation domain. Furthermore, the sparser fracture density will ease the computational burden in the discretization of a fracture-matrix system and elevate the quality of meshed elements through the reduction in ill-conditioned intersections. Since the fracture skeleton is preserved, the connectivity and transmissibility of the original domain can be conveniently restored with a manageable level of error and uncertainty. In this paper, the following works have been done: Stochastic DFN models are generated in two dimensions based on a set of fracture-distribution parameters of length, location, orientation, and aperture. A case is investigated to assess the similarity of permeability curves generated from equivalent models with different fracture density, and thereafter, the result accuracy is validated. The effects of fracture configurations on the applicability of the equivalent model are also studied by adjusting the parameters of fracture distributions in DFN generation. This model is adapted in the preprocessing of mesh generation in a fracture-matrix domain. The fracture skeleton not only significantly reduces computational complexity but also preserves overall transmissibility and local details of distorted pressure field with negligible errors. We also apply the density reduction scheme to fast and robust production estimations in the optimization of gas reservoir designs. It is noted that the proposed approach is preferred in reservoirs with fracture clustering, in which the fracture networks cannot be treated as an equivalent continuum. We should emphasize that the accuracy of our equivalent model is highly dependent on the accessibility of site information in engineering applications. For the time being, characterizing distribution models and regenerating discrete fracture networks from site data are frequently difficult if not impossible. Another challenge for the equivalent model is the certainty analysis of simulation results. Results uncertainty is not only induced among various iterations of fracture networks regenerations but also deteriorated by fracture reduction processes. The effects of result uncertainty on the computational complexity is not included in this study. Furthermore, in terms of mechanical behavior, the significance of individual fractures is crucial but still inconclusive. Hence, future works would extend the correlation index to evaluate effects of fracture on rock strength and deformability. In addition, error induced by fracture density reduction remains inevitable. Implementations that further improve the model accuracy and result confidence need to be discussed. This research was supported by the Research Training Program (RTP) scheme at the