 Professor Masakatsu Nomura has been involved in research and education in the areas of hydrocarbon chemistry for over 40 years in the Department of Applied Chemistry in the Faculty of Engineering, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan. He has authored or co-authored over 280 refereed research publications, with over 230 journal articles in coal research, petroleum research and organic reaction processes, and published several books in Japan and US related to industrial organic chemistry and the chemistry of heavy hydrocarbon resources. Until his recent mandatory retirement from Osaka University in March 2004, he was one of the most active researchers in coal chemistry in Japan and is a well known leading researcher in the international community in the chemistry of energy and fuels. The idea of developing a special issue in a related international research journal in honor of Professor Nomura, when first proposed by us in 2004, was enthusiastically supported by many researchers in Japan, US, China, and Turkey, and by the editor and the publisher of this journal. On behalf of the colleagues, graduate students as well as postdoctoral scholars who have had the opportunity to work with him, we are very pleased to dedicate this special issue of Fuel Processing Technology to honor Professor Masakatsu Nomura for a distinguished academic career. Masakatsu Nomura was born on June 3rd, 1940 in Osaka, Japan. In junior high school he became really interested in chemical phenomena with the influence of an excellent teacher, Mr. Nakade who organized a Chemistry Club in which he was a member and had an experience to display fire works for all the students. For the college study, he initially tried to apply for Electronic Engineering, but then he changed the direction to apply for the Applied Chemistry Department in the Faculty of Engineering of Osaka University. At that time Applied Chemistry was also a very popular major among the engineering students due to the rapid development in the petroleum and petrochemical industries. He was interested in organic synthesis and he spent much time to learn synthesizing organometallic compounds involving tin atom in the laboratory. He received his bachelor degree in 1964, Master degree in 1966, and doctoral degree in 1969 from the Department of Applied Chemistry, Osaka University, Japan. His doctoral dissertation, under the supervision of Professor Sumio Matsuda, focused on the synthesis and structure of Immediately upon finishing the doctoral study, he became an instructor in 1969 in the research laboratory of Professor Shoichi Kikkawa in the Department of Applied Chemistry, Osaka University. His initial work dealt with organic reactions in molten salts, organic reaction through glow discharge and halogenation reaction, and was promoted to lecturer in 1973 and an associate professor in 1975, Japan. The oil shocks in 1973/1974 and 1978/1979 had a major impact on his research in chemical sciences, as his research focus has subsequently shifted to coal chemistry and coal conversion. Molten salt catalysis for coal liquefaction was the research topic of his first international student and his first PhD student in 1984. In April 1984 he was promoted to full professor and was the chair holder in industrial organic chemistry until the mandatory retirement in March 2004. He has also served as the Chairman of the Department of Applied Chemistry in Osaka University.  B.S. in Applied Chemistry, Faculty of Engineering, Osaka University Ph.D. in Applied Chemistry, Faculty of Engineering, Osaka University Assistant Professor, Department of Applied Chemistry, Osaka University Lecturer, Department of Applied Chemistry, Osaka University Associate Professor, Department of Applied Chemistry, Osaka University Visiting Researcher, University of Alberta, Canada Professor, Department of Applied Chemistry, Osaka University Visiting Professor, Pennsylvania State University, USA Lecturer, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University—1996.9 Retired from Osaka University Emeritus Professor, Osaka University Part-time Professor, Nihon Pharmaceutical University Professor, Nihon Pharmaceutical University  Editorial Board Member, Fuel Processing Technology Advisory Board Member, Energy & Fuel Technical councilor, National Petroleum Association Vice Editor, Journal of JSER (Japan Society of Energy & Resources) International Vice Chair, International Pittsburgh Coal Conference Advisory Board Member, International Pittsburgh Coal Conference Vice President, Japan Institute of Energy Editor, Journal of Japan Society of Energy and Resources Co-chair of the 21st International Annual Pittsburgh Coal Conference, Osaka, Japan Director, Institute for Promotion of Production and Technology, Osaka. Professor Nomura has been one of the most active and leading coal chemical researchers in Japan. In the 1970s and 1980s, he was actively involved in developing new molten salts catalysts and elucidating molten salt catalysis for the hydrocracking of polyaromatic hydrocarbons and for coal liquefaction. Starting in the late 1980s, he began to focus his attention on the structural chemistry of heavy hydrocarbon resources. He has made outstanding contributions to the fundamental research in coal chemical structure with emphasis on understanding the coal reactivity and conversion chemistry involved in liquefaction, carbonization, and pyrolysis. His research group has carried out a series of systematic studies using a combination of the computer-assisted structural modeling, spectroscopic characterization (solid-state C-13 NMR, pyrolysis-GC-MS, dual-side microscope, etc.), and molecular-probe chemical reactions such as ruthenium ion-catalyzed oxidation (RICO) and hydrogen transfer to elucidate the aromatic unit structure and the connecting linkages between the cluster units as well as the quantitative differentiation between naphthenic CH These structural studies have also translated into his studies on smart design of conversion processing for obtaining chemicals from coal and coal-derived liquids, such as short-residence-time coal liquefaction followed by catalytic dealkylation of coal, and catalytic dehydrogenation of coal-derived liquids for structural simplification. His more recent studies until his retirement involved pyrolysis and carbonatization with an emphasis on the fundamental understanding of fluidity and hydrogen transfer during coal carbonization and metallurgical coke-making process. These studies have been widely published in leading journals (such as Energy & Fuels, Fuel, Fuel Processing Technology, Journal of Petroleum Institute of Japan, and Bulletin of Chemical Society of Japan) and have provided detailed structural and reactivity information that is needed for understanding the plasticity, fluidity and chemistry of coal conversion. In addition, he has collaborated with his colleagues at Osaka University on the synthesis of various useful organic intermediates. For his original research in hydrocarbon and coal chemistry, he received the Research Career Progress Award from The Japan Institute of Energy in 1982. In 1997, he received The Japan Institute of Energy Award, the highest award of this scientific society. In 1998, he was honored by the Pitt Award for Innovation in Coal Conversion at the International Pittsburgh Coal Conference for his outstanding research contributions in coal chemistry. In 2001, he received the Japan Petroleum Institute Award, the highest honor from the Japan Petroleum Institute which is a professional society. He also served as an advisory board member for several leading journals such as Energy & Fuels, Fuel Processing Technology, Applied Energy, and the Japanese Society journal Energy and Resources. In addition, he has served as a co-chairman for several sessions in the International Pittsburgh Coal Conference during 1998–2000, and for an American Chemical Society Symposium in 2003. In September 2004, he served as the Chair of the 21st International Pittsburgh Coal Conference held in Osaka, Japan. Numerous students benefited from his teaching and supervision in lecture rooms and in the research laboratory. He supervised 19 doctoral dissertations, in which 13 doctoral students including one of the co-editors for this special issue (CS) carried out their experimental studies in his laboratory. 75 graduate students completed their MS thesis studies under his supervision. In addition, 46 undergraduate students graduated from Osaka University with a BS thesis research in his laboratory. As of 2007, about 12 former graduate students or former postdoctoral scholars from his laboratory are active faculty members in universities in Japan, US, Turkey, China, Thailand and Indonesia. Some of them have become leaders of a research institute or academic department at universities. Another important reflection of Professor Nomura's achievement is that some of his former graduate students and former postdoctoral scholars are now actively working in the area of fuel and hydrocarbon chemistry in the industry. He has nurtured many young minds who later became leading researchers. We sincerely thank all the authors in many countries not only for their important contributions to this special issue, but also for their patience in the long process of developing this special issue. We are grateful to all the researchers around the world who served as peer reviewers and provided many helpful comments on the manuscripts. We also appreciate the support of Professor Jerry Huffman, the former editor, and Professor Andre L Boehman, the current editor of the journal, and the editorial assistance of the staff members in Elsevier. Professor Masakatsu Nomura is still actively involved in chemical education and is currently serving as the Director for the Institute for Promotion of Production and Technology, which is an Osaka University related Institute, and we wish to thank him for his contributions to the chemical profession and wish him all the best.