It is well-known that lab tests on wear-rate of grinding media cannot precisely represent its industrial performance due to complex grinding conditions. Nevertheless the lab data provides reference to the industrial data. Therefore, a reproducible test method on wear-rate in lab is necessary.
                  By providing detailed data, this paper challenges the traditional wear-rate testing methods. Two commonly used methods on wear-rate test, self-wear in water and grinding with mineral slurry, are respectively employed. However, obvious fluctuation of wear-rate/time curves indicates neither of the two normal methods is reliable.
                  This paper introduces a wear-rate testing method on lab scale which combines self-wear in water and grinding with mineral slurry. By this method, some repeatable wear-rate/time curves are displayed after a few hours. The mechanism will be discussed in detail in this paper.Wear-rate is one of the most important factors when evaluating the overall performance of grinding media. Therefore, extensive tests on media wear have been carried out by many media suppliers, users and labs ( In this paper, we designed a rapid wear-rate testing method on lab scale which took the advantages of the above two mentioned common methods, and comparatively, repeatable results can be drawn from this new method. Vertical stirred mill 1200.0 1200.0 Both wear-rate test methods are applied in vertical stirred mill and rapid pot mill, with consecutive grinding for 1 Combined grinding method, which was proceeded in the rapid pot mill, includes two steps: (1) grinding with mineral slurry: the same ceramic media of 500.0 Three kinds of ceramic media with different densities of 3.32, 4.05 and 4.23 The media wear-rate can be calculated by equation “wear-rate Self-wear is a simple and easy method, so it is widely used. But it cannot simulate the grinding conditions of practical operation.  Grinding in mineral slurry is usually used as a relatively reasonable method for testing wear-rate. The wear-rate curves of different ceramic media grinding with mineral slurry can be found in Another way to examine the reliability of wear tests is to obtain the reproducible curves by several parallel tests. To magnify the wear-rate and minimize the systematical error, wear tests were only deployed in rapid pot mill.  In the case of self-wear, impact force among different media plays an important role to destroy the media surface structure. Firstly impact induces defects on the surface due to plastic deformation of crystal particles ( During grinding with mineral slurry, the frictional force from slurry plays more important role ( After analyzing and comparing the abrasive process of self-wear and grinding with mineral slurry, it can be proposed that the formation of defects does not synchronize with structure collapses, which makes the wear-rate unstable. If the fast process of defects formation when grinding with mineral slurry and the fast process of surface collapses in self-wear are combined, a fast and reliable method for testing wear-rate may be found. Basing on this assumption, the combined method is proposed as following steps (also in rapid pot mill): (1) grinding in mineral slurry for 1  Wear-rates of different grinding media are determined by two commonly used methods of self-wear in water and grinding with mineral slurry. After the analysis of all results, we design an improved testing method on wear-rate, which combines the fast process of defects formation when grinding with mineral slurry with the fast process of surface collapses of self-wear in water. The method proves to be reliable in terms of stability and objectivity. However, it is worthwhile mentioning that due to the complication of the grinding process, a further in-depth investigation on wear mechanism is needed in the future. The authors wish to thank our cooperative partner of East China Normal University for the testing work during the course of these experiments. This work has been carried out with the help of working staff of Q&C Center and R&D Center of KING’S CEREMICS’s. Their support is also gratefully acknowledged.