The effects of strain rate and temperature on the yield and flow stress of AA5754 sheets are presented under uniaxial (tension and compression), dynamic (tension), and simple shear loading conditions. The present study investigates the anisotropic behavior of AA5754 sheets through experiments performed in the rolling (RD), 45° to rolling (DD), and transverse to rolling (TD) directions at room and elevated temperatures. The experimental results show that the strain rate sensitivity varied from negative at room temperature to positive at elevated temperatures (>150°C), and the anisotropy was inversely proportional to the strain rate. Texture analysis was conducted on the specimens after uniaxial tension and simple shear deformation, using the neutron diffraction and electron back-scattered diffraction (EBSD) techniques. Rotation rate maps and orientation stability parameters, determined by the rate-sensitive model, were used to explain the kinematic stability of the initial texture components in AA5754 sheets during uniaxial tension and simple shear deformation. A visco-plastic self-consistent (VPSC) polycrystal model was used to simulate the evolution of the initial texture components in AA5754 sheets during uniaxial tension and simple shear deformation.The increasing use of aluminum in the automotive industry is mainly governed by the need for lower fuel consumption, which requires reducing the weight of the vehicle, thus providing the most energy efficient solution ( Uniaxial tension experiments have been carried out on 5xxx series alloys by several researches ( High strain rate tension experiments by Texture measurements on AA5754 alloy have been reported by The main objective of the present study was to provide comprehensive experimental results for AA5754 sheets over a wide range of strain rates and temperatures using the same batch of material. This includes strain hardening, flow behavior and anisotropy under quasi-static, dynamic and simple shear loading conditions. The comprehensive experimental results provided the temperature dependence of SRS under various loading conditions such as uniaxial (tension and compression) and simple shear loading conditions. Texture measurements were performed to explain the evolution of the initial texture components in the RD- and TD-oriented samples during uniaxial tension and simple shear loading conditions. Moreover, a rate-sensitive polycrystal model ( All specimens were machined from a commercial grade 1.4 Sub-sized dogbone-shaped tension specimens were machined using ASTM-E8 with a gage length of 31.0 The moderately high strain-rate tensile experiments were performed at room temperature using a direct tensile split Hopkinson bar (TSHB) apparatus ( Neutron diffraction measurements were carried out on the as-received specimen using the BT8 residual stress diffractometer at the Center for Neutron Research, National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), Gaithersburg, MD, USA. Due to the instrument design, with a variable take-off angle ( The EBSD technique was used to analyze the evolution of texture in the RD- and TD-oriented samples during uniaxial tension and simple shear loading. The EBSD scan data were obtained after the occurrence of failure strain under uniaxial tension and finite deformation ( The stability of crystallographic orientations has been used to explain texture evolution during the plastic deformation of polycrystalline materials ( The deformation of rate-sensitive polycrystals is usually modeled by a power law relationship between the shear rate The lattice rotation rate, The kinematic stability of an orientation can be estimated using two parameters. The first parameter is the condition for either convergence or divergence of an orientation in 3-D Euler space. The condition can be expressed by divergence of the rotation field, The conditions for convergence and divergence are The exp(5) in Eq. (5) was selected so that the maximum value of In order to simulate the texture evolution of the AA5754 sheets during uniaxial tension and simple shear deformation, the VPSC polycrystal model ( The self-consistent model relies on the fact that  Like most metallic alloys, there was a decrease in flow stress and hardening and an increase in failure strain with elevated temperatures. The temperature sensitivity increased at a slow strain rate, which emphasizes the shifting balance between dynamic recovery (large temperature effect at low strain rate; strain rate in line with dislocation mobility and annihilation rate) and strain hardening (increase in dislocation density and entanglement). The strain rate sensitivity changed from negative to positive at 150 It is also evident from It is clear from      In order to evaluate the orientation stability of the initial texture components in the AA5754 sheets, rotation rate maps for uniaxial tension and simple shear deformation were calculated using a rate-sensitive polycrystal model, as explained in Section 3.1.  To simulate the texture evolution in the AA5754 sheets deformed at a strain rate of 10  To simulate the texture evolution in the AA5754 sheets deformed at a strain rate of 10 The results presented in this study included comprehensive stress–strain responses and post-failure texture results for AA5754 sheets at different strain rates and temperatures in through-thickness and in-plane directions. The material showed negative strain rate sensitivity (SRS) at room temperature and a positive strain rate sensitivity at more than 150 The financial support for this research from GMC through Dr. Raj Mishra is sincerely appreciated. Certain commercial firms and trade names are identified in this report in order to adequately specify aspects of the experimental procedure. Such identification is not intended to imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, nor is it intended to imply that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose.