Enhancements to energy storage systems developed for solar thermoelectric technologies can yield considerable increases in efficiency for this type of renewable energy. Important improvements include the design of innovative storage fluids, such as molten salts possessing low melting points and high thermal stabilities.
                  This research examines the design of an innovative quaternary molten nitrate mixture, with the goal of improving the solar salt used currently as an energy storage fluid in CSP plants. This quaternary salt, which contains different weight percentages of NaNO3, KNO3, LiNO3 and Ca(NO3)2, exhibits better physical and chemical properties than the binary solar salt (60% NaNO3+40% KNO3) currently used. The melting points, heat capacities and thermal stability of the quaternary mixtures were studied by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). In addition to DSC and TGA tests, viscosity and electrical conductivity measurements were carried out for the quaternary mixtures at different temperatures.
                  The new salt was designed by taking into consideration the risk of solid species formation at high temperatures when calcium nitrate is present (which requires that the wt% does not exceed 20%) and the costs of LiNO3. These boundaries set the maximum wt% of LiNO3 to values below 15%.
                  Finally it was determined that the proposed quaternary mixture, when used as a heat transfer fluid (HTF) in parabolic trough solar power plants, is able to expand plants׳ operating range to temperatures between 132 and 580°C.In recent years, the study of renewable energy and its practical applications has greatly expanded. Solar energy is one of the technologies that has benefited most from international commitments geared toward reducing and controlling the emissions of CO In the context of advanced industrial development and with high levels of energy efficiency, Concentrated Solar Thermal Energy (CSTE) could supply up to 7% of global energy needs by 2030 and 25% by 2050 An important component of Thermal Energy Storage (TES) systems is the choice of heat transfer fluids used in a solar plant. The main challenges to electrical power generation from solar thermal plants with more profit are the following: reducing the investment, operational and maintenance costs; extending the hours of operation and energy supply; increasing the temperatures in the thermal cycle; increasing the lifetime of power plants. Research and development in the solar energy sector has focused on reducing the high cost associated with the operation and maintenance of these plants. One of the most important lines of research in this respect is the study, design and characterisation of the salts that are used as energy storage fluids. The objective of our study was to design new salt mixtures that can replace the current binary salt (composed of 60% NaNO The potential for improving the salt resides in optimising its physiochemical properties, mainly its melting point, thermal stability and heat capacity, by developing new quaternary mixtures or by incorporating novel components. Raade et al. In light of several studies The melting point, maximum thermal stability and heat capacity of the proposed mixture were obtained by thermal characterisation (DSC, TGA and MDSC). Additionally, we studied the viscosity levels at temperatures near the melting point with the objective of identifying the lowest temperature at which the newly designed salts can properly flow through the pipes in a solar power plant. The novelty of this study lies in the implementation of a process that uses an electrochemical impedance technique to determine the electrical conductivity of the target salt. Theoretical models were employed to interpret the impedance spectra, allowing for the impedance to be calculated as a function of the frequency. These models were used to simulate the electrical behaviour of the system based on the electrolytes and the electrolyte–electrode interphases A functional electrochemical cell can be represented by an equivalent circuit composed of a set of passive elements that reproduce the behaviour of a material when it corrodes Additionally, it is important to know the electronic properties of a salt at the appropriate storage temperatures to improve the thermal conversion ratio in solar plant heat exchangers. The nitrate salts used in the study were NaNO Thermal assays were conducted with a Mettler Toledo calorimeter capable of simultaneous thermogravimetric readings to obtain thermal decomposition curves for the designed salt. Additionally, a DSC-Q20 calorimeter was used to obtain a pure DSC signal to determine the heat of fusion, melting point and Cp at 390 Two different crucibles were employed. The crucibles used in the TGA instrument were made of platinum, whereas the crucibles used in the DSC Q-20 instrument were made of aluminium and were hermetically sealed. Both tests were conducted in a flowing inert nitrogen atmosphere (50 To study the viscosity of the new quaternary salt, measurements were performed at temperatures of 150, 175, 200 and 300 A special experimental setup was required to measure the electrical conductivity by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). To perform the electrochemical measurements, stainless steel specimens were soldered to a conductive wire with a composition of 50% Ni–50% Cr which was protected by a ceramic shaft to prevent corrosion. The space between the specimen and the shaft was sealed with a mixture called ceramabond, an alumina-based paste that hardens into a ceramic solid, preventing the molten salt from penetrating into the shaft, corroding the conductive wire and interfering with the measurement signals. Austenitic stainless steel AISI 316 (a very noble steel at this temperature) was used for this test, given that the objective was not to monitor the corrosion but rather to determine the resistivity of the molten salt and consequently its electrical conductivity. To determine the electrical conductivity, measurements were taken during the first 6 h of contact with the developed quaternary salt at 2-h intervals at 200, 300, 390 and 500 Impedance measurements were performed using three electrodes (auxiliary, working and reference electrodes) and by applying a sinusoid signal with a perturbation amplitude of 10 The thermal curve shown in The signals obtained at temperatures above 300 The transitions observed in the thermal study at temperatures above 300 In this work we defined the maximum stability temperature as the temperature at which the sample, after being stabilised via the elimination of water, lost 3% of its overall weight. Based on this criterion the maximum stability temperature for this salt is 580.36 The analysis performed using the modulated DSC (  The most representative values obtained at the maximum shear velocity (100 As indicated by the thermal study the components (although molten) have a certain amorphous character (not crystalline), arising from the high viscosity exhibited by the mixture at 150 The results of the electrical conductivity study conducted using EIS, represented by the Nyquist diagrams obtained after 0, 2, 4 and 6 The temperatures used to test the quaternary salts were 200, 300, 390 and 500 The research described in this paper concerns the development of an innovative heat transfer fluid for CSP technology. The proposed quaternary fluid was broadly characterised in terms of its thermal properties, which are important for the design of solar power plants. The designed mixture extends the working temperature of energy storage systems used in solar energy plants utilising parabolic collectors to between 132 and 553 The most notable property of the quaternary mixture is its heat capacity (1.518 Therefore, the proposed fluid exhibits higher electrical conductivity at higher storage temperatures, which is another important factor for improving the thermal conversion ratio of solar plant heat exchangers. This novel molten salt establishes the basis for the study of new quaternary mixtures of calcium, lithium, sodium and potassium nitrates, which possess great potential for use as a HTF with improved working range, heat capacity and viscosity that can be implemented in the further development of solar plant technology. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support provided by