During the solvent extraction process, the bioleaching solution undergoes changes. Basically these changes consist of an organic phase incorporation as well as changes in temperature and pH profiles. The resulting conditions have an effect on the following stages and more importantly on the behavior of the microbial community.
                  The influence of the increase in temperature and acidity during solvent extraction on a mixed culture of bioleaching microorganisms was investigated. The effect of both factors was tested separately and together, where temperature was increased from 20 to 30°C and pH was decreased from 2.0 to 1.5 and then to 1.0 (according to SX plant data). At the same time, the effect of an organic phase composed of 24% LIX 84IC as the extractant and Oxform SX12 as the solvent on the same microbial community was studied. Quantitative and qualitative changes of the microbial population were investigated using optical microscopy, MPN (Most Probable Number) and qPCR.
                  Decreasing pH had a stronger negative effect on biomass numbers and activity (oxidation of ferrous iron) than temperature that showed almost no effect. Total cell number and activity decreased around one and one and a half orders of magnitude respectively when pH decreased to 1.0.
                  The number of active ferrous iron-oxidizing cells was reduced more by contact with the organic phase than by the decrease in pH, and the detrimental impact of both stress factors together was even greater (decrease of over two orders of magnitude at pH 1.0). The increase of the SX agent concentration further decreased the number of active iron-oxidizing cells. On the other hand, the decrease in the organic extractant concentration did not show a significant improvement in the measured iron-oxidizing activity. Relatively constant cell numbers were recovered from the organic phase after contact, with the predominance of Acidithiobacillus thiooxidans.
                  
                  
                     Sulfobacillus thermosulfidooxidans and Alicyclobacillus spp. showed the smallest decrease in cell numbers of all the species quantified when acidity was increased and during contact with the organic extractant.
                  The results gathered in this study show the clear impact of SX on bioleaching communities, and therefore possible influences on subsequent downstream stages. Preventing the leakage of organic extractant from the SX step to the following stages is essential to minimize the deteriorating effect of this agent on the overall microbial activity.Heap leaching of oxide copper ores, bio-heap leaching of secondary copper ores, and cathode copper recovery by solvent extraction have been targeted as primary low-cost hydrometallurgical copper recovery processes ( Bioleaching microorganisms are generally sensitive to organic solvents and there are few studies on solvent extraction reagents that have shown negative effects on microbial activity ( The aim of the present work was to report the effect of the commercial solvent extraction process (and its operational variables) on the activity and biomass numbers of a bioleaching mixed microbial population. For this, the process of SX was emulated using LIX 84IC (at the actual concentration used in several SX plants), and increasing the acidity and temperature during mixing with a pregnant leaching solution (PLS) for the same period of time that organic contact lasts during SX. A higher and a lower concentration of the SX reagent were tested as well in order to determine the effect of the concentration on the further deterioration or improvement of microbial activity. A mixed culture of acidophiles was maintained under batch conditions (in a blend of copper concentrate and pyrite) and used as the inoculum for these tests. The inoculum consisted basically of PLS from a copper sulfide bioleaching operation in Escondida mine (Chile) was used for the contact process with the organic extractant, as well as the acidity and temperature increase tests. The PLS physiochemical characteristics are shown in The copper extractant used at the Escondida mine secondary sulfide heap-leach operation, and used in this study, corresponds to a blend of LIX 84IC (24% v/v) and Oxform S-X12. The PLS sample was first filtered-sterilized (0.2 Basal salt medium ( The effect of organic extract concentration during contacting was also studied, following the same experimental procedure described above, by changing the organic/liquid phase (O/L) ratios from 1:1 to 1:3 and 3:1. The pH for this analysis was set at 2.0. Cells were counted by optical microscopy using a Thoma chamber. The MPN technique was used to enumerate the metabolically active acidophilic Fe(II)-oxidizers according to the methodology previously described by The DNA was extracted from the total working volume used in the experimental procedures. Samples were filtered (0.2 The influence of the acidification and temperature increase during SX on the cell concentration and viability of a mixed population of acidophiles is shown in The results from the increase in temperature only were not show in The decrease in pH from 2.0 to 1.5 and to 1.0, clearly reduced the initial cell numbers determined by qPCR, in comparison with the increase in temperature where biomass numbers remained almost unchanged (data not shown). Total qPCR cell numbers decreased around one order of magnitude when the pH decreased from 2.0 to 1.5. In the case of pH The amount of active iron oxidizers was clearly affected when the pH was decreased. Numbers decreased in half, and one and a half orders of magnitude when pH decreased from 2.0 to 1.5 and to 1.0, respectively. The increase in temperature had a negligible effect on MPN numbers (data not shown). In addition to the above described, qPCR analysis of each species present in the mixed inoculum was performed ( The influence of the organic extractant (at a 1:1 O/L ratio) on bacterial numbers was tested under three different fixed pHs: 2.0, 1.5 and 1.0. After contacting, the two phases were separated and the organic solvent was washed thoroughly (acidified water at the same contacting pH). The microbial population was counted before and after the contact with the SX reagent, as well as the washing solution, and the relative iron-oxidizing active cell numbers were measured ( The cell numbers, measured by optical count and qPCR, obtained from the washing step were all in the range of 10 The influence of higher and lower concentrations of organic extractant on the microbial population was also tested in this study. The same experimental procedure was used as in previous tests but establishing different ratios between organic extractant and liquid phase of 1:3 and 3:1. The initial cell concentration determined by microscopy and qPCR were around 10 The number of cells recovered from the washing step was similar to the results obtained for the 1:1 O/L ratio ( The qPCR results when analyzed by species showed only a slight further decrease in cell numbers for higher concentrations of the extractant over lower ( During SX treatment, the acidity of the leachate solution decreases (commonly to pH The plant solvent extraction reagent, LIX 84IC 24% v/v in the diluent Oxform S-X12, had a clear effect on the relative iron-oxidizing activity where the number of active iron-oxidizing cells decreased by more than an order of magnitude at pH When the organic extractant proportion to the liquid phase was increased (from 1:1 to 3:1 ratio), the decrease in the amount of active iron oxidizers was larger and close to half an order of magnitude more. A lower concentration of extractant did not increase the number of active iron-oxidizing cells considerably. The total cell numbers by qPCR demonstrated only a modest decrease from the initial concentration independent of the ratio of organic to liquid phase in this study. In all the organic tests performed, the cell recovery from the organic extractant was in the range of 1–3 Overall, the decrease in pH and the presence of the copper extractant have a direct and measurable effect on the cell number and iron-oxidizing activity. The deteriorating effect of the copper extractant on the viability and activity of the iron oxidizing microbes is larger than the increase in acidity, although it is enhanced when both are combined. Different species exhibited different responses, in terms of their biomass, to either increasing acidity or copper extractant concentration. These results show the tangible effect that SX has on a bioleaching mixed microbial population that would translate into a decrease in the total cell numbers and viability of the microbial community that is recycled back to the heap, possibly influencing the performance at the following stages. The removal of the organic extractant that could remain in the raffinate solution after SX treatment is highly important in order to minimize the detrimental effect on the microbial population. The pretreatment of the raffinate solution, for example by the use of activated carbon ( This work was fully funded by