The Touissit-Bou Beker district mineralization is located in a lower Jurassic condensed series on top of a major basement horst. Field and laboratory data from several ore deposits indicate that Pb–Zn mineralization took place in dolomite strata by ascending hot, saline fluids probably during the Late Jurassic. The geochemistry of the ore fluid and the mineralization have been tentatively modelled with “Geochemist's Workbench™”
                  Two-dimensional (2D)-modelling of fluid flow at the regional scale has been undertaken, after reconstitution of regional structure, using a code of coupled heat and fluid transport (METIS), in order to give an image of hydrothermal circulations at the time of ore deposition. The horst structure causes convective circulation driving sedimentary fluids down through Triassic saline beds and up through basement rocks into the top of the horst.The Touissit-Bou Beker metallogenic province of eastern Morocco and western Algeria totals 4–5 In all deposits of economic interest, the stratiform sulfide-bearing orebodies are found exclusively within a dolomitic Aaleno-Bajocien condensed series. This sedimentary cover overlies unconformably a Paleozoic basement made up of igneous rocks (granodiorite and rhyodacite) and low-grade schists. All major deposits are presently located in a structural depression, the Missiouine graben, corresponding to the top of the Touissit-Bou Beker paleostructure known as the “Môle de Touissit” ( In the Beddiane and Hassi Ennyag deposits, mineralizations are essentially lead bearing, rarely with zinc and copper. But in Bou Beker, Oued Mekta and El Abed deposits they are essentially lead–zinc bearing. They form stratiform orebodies in the upper part of dolomitic series and are overlain by a thick sedimentary cover. They form a small number of steeply dipping veins along tensional faults ( Two main types of orebodies have been distinguished in the Beddiane deposit. Type I corresponds to massive and rather discordant mineralizations with a structural control by Late Jurassic tensional faults. This type of orebody is ascribed to ascending fluids. These fluids were chemically aggressive to the dolomitic host rock which has been strongly dissolved. Type II corresponds to more stratiform orebodies where mineralization has almost replaced the carbonate host rock without destroying sedimentary structures (this type is also observed in Hassi Ennyag, Oued Mekta and Bou Beker deposits). In this type, mineralizing fluids were probably near equilibrium with the surrounding sediment, and their flow was guided laterally due to permeability contrasts in the series. The sulphides-bearing veins found in the crystalline basement are related to the generation of extensive structures which control orebodies in the cover. Their similar paragenesis also testifies of a unique episode of mineralization in the cover and in the basement. The main characteristics of the ore fluids have been identified through fluid inclusions in the sphalerite and quartz which are associated to galena in massive orebodies, and in the recrystallized dolomite present in the mineralized areas. This study of 91 inclusions in dolomite, 61 inclusions in sphalerite and 25 inclusions in quartz, indicates trapping temperatures around 100°C (88.8–124.1°C), and very high salinity values: >23.3% The geochemistry of the ore fluid and the mineralizing process has been tentatively modelled using the computer code “Geochemist's Workbench™” ( These results provide a good basis for a regional metallogenic model, but they also raise some important issues: (1) the temperature seems too high for the geological setting at the time of mineralization; (2) the origin of mineralizing brines; (3) the cause of circulation and the flow pattern of hydrothermal fluids; (4) the source of the metals. These issues have been tentatively answered through the use of a coupled code of heat and transport (METIS) ( Five different lithologic -and hence physical-mediums have been distinguished: (1) Paleozoic schists; (2) Visean ignous rocks (rhyodacite); (3) Triassic unit (sandstones and evaporites); (4) Carbonate rocks, representing the dominantly dolomitic Aaleno-Bajocien formations; (5) Upper argillaceous unit representing Middle to Upper Jurassic sediments. The simulation gives an image of possible flow patterns at the time of the formation of the deposit. They show that the presence of a positive structure (horst) of the highly heat-conductive crystalline basement ( This regional model accounts for the structural position of deposits and for the apparently abnormal temperatures as well. It also explains the origin of the mineralizing brines and enables one to discuss the source of the metals. This source should be located optimally at the base of the descending branches of the circuit, within the Paleozoic schists. A geochemical investigation has moreover confirmed in the series the presence of several lead and zinc enriched volcano-sedimentary layers that probably acted as the source of metals in the Touissit-Bou Beker district. The conclusion is that convective circulations are normally induced by such block-faulted structures because they generate local anomalies of geothermal gradient. Convective cells have been described in many geothermal fields and are well known for their ability to transport metals and form ore deposits. The modelling of structure-induced circulations in MVT deposits hence appears to be of valuable help in understanding various metallogenic problems like the origin of fluids, circulation pathways and possible source of metals. Financial support of this work was provided by Ecole Nationale Superieure des Mines de Paris (France), Compagnie Minière de Touissit (Morocco), and Nato Project.