Starch is a natural polysaccharide that is used or exploited as a depressant/flocculant in the mineral processing industry. Native starch is typically digested with caustic soda or boiling water before use in such applications. How the digestion procedures affect the properties and functions of the starch has not been fully understood. In this study, zeta potential measurements, titration, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopic analysis, and turbidity measurements were utilized to detect and quantify the acidity of starch digested with different concentrations of caustic (sodium hydroxide or potassium hydroxide). The results revealed the formation of acidic groups on the starch after digestion by the alkali hydroxide. The generated acidic groups on starch seem to have contributed to the adsorption of starch on mineral surfaces.Uses of native starches are limited by some undesirable characteristics such as the lack of fluidity and the difficulty to form stable suspensions or colloidal systems ( Most of the applications of starches in minerals industry utilize their functional properties after gelatinization, which is achieved by heat or alkali treatment. Alkali is used to induce starch swelling at room temperature. In fact, the common methods to prepare starch solution for use in mineral flotation are caustic digestion using sodium hydroxide or potassium hydroxide at room temperature ( The gels of starch digested with alkali have been extensively studied in the food and agriculture industries. It is known that the alkali treatment causes degradation of starch in aqueous solutions. It has been reported that gelatinization occurs when the alkali adsorbed on starch exceeds a certain critical level, which depends on the sources of starch and the type of alkali ( Although the use of gelatinized starch in mineral processing by digesting with sodium hydroxides is commonly practiced, the mechanisms of the gelatinization and the changes in starch properties after the digestion are not sufficiently understood, much less the effects of the digestion on the adsorption mechanisms of the resulting gel of starch on mineral surfaces. It is known that new chemical species can be produced during alkali digestion of starch. However, the rate of enolisation can be influenced by the concentration of an intermediate carbonyl form of the sugar ( In this study, the acidity of a corn starch after treatment by different concentrations of alkali hydroxide (sodium hydroxide and potassium hydroxide) was studied at room temperature, with the objective of determining if acidic species were generated at room temperature alkali digestion and how the acidic species on the starch, if any, could affect the adsorption of the digested starch on mineral surfaces. Corn starch, with a product number S-4180, was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. It was found to contain 12.3% moisture. Sodium hydroxide (98.8%), S318-1, was purchased from Fisher Scientific. Potassium hydroxide (88%), P-6310, was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Sodium chloride (99.8%), S271-500, potassium chloride (99.4%), P217-500, hydrochloric acid (36.5–38%) and sulfuric acid (96.8%) were purchased from Fisher Scientific. Iron (III) chloride hexahydrate (FeCl The zeta potentials of starch were measured with the use of a ZetaPALS zeta potential and particle size analyzer manufactured by Brookhaven Instruments Corporation, USA. The technique is based on electrophoretic light scattering (ELS), also known as Laser Doppler Velocimetry (LDV). To prepare samples for the zeta potential measurements, a 100 The turbidities of starch suspensions were measured by a model 66120–200 turbidity meter manufactured by VWR Scientific. To prepare the starch suspensions for the turbidity measurements, 50 The carboxyl content of causticized starch was determined according to the procedure of Mattisson et al. ( To measure the adsorption density of the causticized starch on mineral surfaces, 100 A pre-determined amount of ferric chloride solution was adjusted to pH 7 and mixed with a causticized starch solution digested with sodium hydroxide at different concentrations which was also adjusted to pH 7 before mixing, so that the final concentration of ferric ion was 0.001 The FTIR spectra of several samples were recorded by a Nicolet-Thermo 8700 Fourier transform infrared spectrometer in the range from 4000 To prepare the causticized starch as a titrant, 100 To measure the settling rate of the flocs resulting from the causticized starch adsorption on hematite, 100   The zeta potentials of starch shown in When the concentration of sodium hydroxide was above 0.5% (i.e., NaOH/starch weight ratio above 1), however, it became very difficult to measure the zeta potential of the causticized starch. It was difficult to detect starch particles above this NaOH/starch weight ratio (see next section on turbidity measurements). It was reported that Iwasaki and Lai ( As can be seen from It is also seen from  In addition, it is also interesting to note that a higher content of carboxyl groups was detected in starch that was treated with 0.25% KOH than with 0.25% NaOH. This was consistent with the zeta potentials results as shown in We had some prior experience with titrating carboxylmethyl cellulose (CMC) solutions with lead nitrate solutions, which revealed some useful information about how the carboxyl groups in the CMC reacted with different Pb ionic species. Therefore, in the present work we used a similar approach and titrated the starch solutions with lead nitrate.  It can also be seen from    It was shown that a corn starch digested with different concentrations of sodium hydroxide possessed different isoelectric points, provided that the concentration of sodium hydroxide was not too high to completely dissolve the starch. Thus, when 100 MT acknowledges the