In this study the flotation recovery of silica using air, and molecular and electrolytically-generated hydrogen was investigated. For comparison of air and molecular hydrogen recoveries, a laboratory Denver, type D12, flotation machine was used. For both gases, pH of the suspension, gas flow rate, concentration of collector and frother, solids concentration, particle size and speed of impeller were kept constant. Almost identical recoveries were obtained for both gases, suggesting that gas composition played no significant role in silica flotation. Electroflotation experiments were carried out using 12.6μm mean diameter silica particles. While fine particles had very poor recovery in the Denver cell, greater than 70% recoveries were achieved in the electroflotation cell. This was thought to be the result of the very small (less than 40μm) bubbles generated by the electroflotation process. A population-balance model, incorporating the hydrogen generation process, supported the conclusion that increased recovery for electroflotation, for very fine silica particles at least, was attributed to the reduced bubble size and not by the composition of the gas.cross-sectional area of the cell (m diameter of particle corresponding to 25% particle less than that (m) diameter of particle corresponding to 50% particle less than that (m) diameter of particle corresponding to 75% particle less than that (m) diameter of bubble (m) Sauter mean bubble diameter (m) diameter of particle (m) gas fraction (–) Faraday’s constant, 96485.3 (C/mol) absolute current (A) flotation rate constant (s particle-bubble attachment rate constant (m particle-bubble detachment rate constant (1/s) molar gas generation rate (mol/s) total number of bubbles (1/s) number concentration of free particles (1/m pressure of the system (N/m volumetric gas flow rate (theoretical) (m measured gas flow rate of bubbles (m gas constant (J/mol bubble surface area flux (1/s) temperature of the system (K) time (s) induction time (s) relative velocity between the bubble and particle (m/s) critical Weber number (–) particle-bubble collision frequency (m average bubble loading parameter (–) average energy dissipation per unit mass (W/kg) contact angle (°) density of pulp (kg/m gas–liquid interfacial tension (N/m) In the literature there are studies that report improved flotation recovery using hydrogen bubbles formed by electrolysis. Examples of improved recovery include that for cassiterite The aim of this study was to compare the flotation recovery of silica using air and hydrogen gas. Firstly, a laboratory-scale Denver cell was used to compare the flotation performance of sparged air and hydrogen gas at the same superficial gas velocity and bubble size to determine the influence, if any, of gas composition only. Secondly, similar flotation experiments were carried out using electrolytically-generated hydrogen, to determine the influence, if any, of the smaller bubbles. Finally, the flotation recoveries are compared with model analysis based on supplied current and generated bubble size. The kinetic equation for the number concentration, Koh and Schwarz Eqs. The value of Relevant to this study is the diffusion of hydrogen molecules from the electrode surface and into the bulk solution. Vogt The experimental program included Denver flotation experiments using both air and molecular hydrogen as the sparged gases. An electrochemical cell was also used to float silica using electrochemically generated hydrogen gas. The silica (supplied by Unimin, Australia) used was 60G for the Denver cell and 400G for the electrochemical cell. The corresponding average particle sizes, For the actual electroflotation experiments, a steel mesh (99.99%) supplied by Sigma–Aldrich was used as the cathode while a carbon rod was used as the anode. For bubble imaging experiments, steel wire was used as the cathode and platinum wire was used as the anode. Cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB; Sigma–Aldrich) and methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC; 4-methyl-2-pentanol; Merck, Germany) were used as collector and frother, respectively. The water used was produced by a Millipore filtration system, with an internal specific resistance of 18.2 The silica surface was treated in the same way as Kern and Puotinen At first, steel wire was cleaned mechanically by a soft and clean cloth or tissue. The cell was then filled with 0.1 A 2.4 Volumetric flow rate of gas was measured using a rotameter, corrected for the density of the gas. The cell was mechanically agitated at a constant impeller speed of 630 A 250 A microscope (ZEISS Stemi 2000-C) was used to measure the hydrogen bubble diameters produced in the electrochemical cell. The setup comprised of an electrochemical cell (50 A computer-controlled apparatus OCA 20 from DataPhysics (Germany) was used to determine the contact angle of air–silica–water and hydrogen–silica–water interfaces. A Perspex cell was filled with surfactant solution and placed in the path of a collimated light beam. A cleaned glass slide was placed over the cell. The glass slide was allowed to soak for 7  Sodium sulphate was used as electrolyte in electroflotation. Therefore, the depression effect of sodium sulphate to float silica was investigated here.   The results in The Sauter mean diameter, ( The induction time, Example images of hydrogen bubbles forming on the surface steel cathode surface are shown in The percentage recovery of silica after 2 In applying Eq.      The measured recoveries were used to calculate flotation rate constant, A plot of the flotation rate constant versus bubble surface area flux is given in It was found that there was no measurable difference between molecular hydrogen and air in the flotation recovery of silica. This implied that there was no interaction between the gas phase and the solids surface, which was supported by very similar contact angle measurements for the two systems. Flotation experiments utilising electrolytically-produced hydrogen gave flotation recoveries much higher than those obtained in the Denver flotation cell. This increase can be directly attributed to the generation of very small bubbles which are known to increase flotation recovery, especially for the 12.6 Shahjahan Sarkar gratefully acknowledges the financial support from