Hot uniaxial compression tests were carried out on Cu-0.8Cr-0.05Zr-0.05Ti (wt%) alloy specimens with three different grain sizes: 30 μm, 150 μm and 450 μm to study the effect of initial grain size on hot workability of the alloy. The deformation temperature and applied strain rate ranges were 600–900 °C and 0.001–1 s−
                     1 respectively. At higher deformation temperatures, fine grained specimens exhibited early onset of dynamic recrystallization (DRX) as compared to coarse-grained specimens. Conversely, the work hardening plots of coarse-grained specimens exhibited plateaux at higher strain rates indicating occurrence of deformation twinning. Microstructure examination revealed a decrease in the extent of DRX and an increase in deformation twinning with increase in initial grain size. The failure in coarse-grained specimens was in the form of wedge cracking observed at triple junctions at lower deformation temperatures. The higher stress values exhibited by coarse-grained specimens as compared to fine grained specimens was found to be a result of absence of DRX and the strain being accommodated by deformation twinning rather than grain boundary sliding (GBS) due to limited grain boundary area. Processing maps using the dynamic material model (DMM) were plotted for all three initial grain sizes and were validated with optical microstructures. The ‘unstable/unsafe’ deformation domain was found to be wider with increase in initial grain size. The present study explicates that there is an increase in difficulty of hot working and reduced control of microstructure in the alloy with increase in initial grain size.One of the primary objectives of thermomechanical processing is to achieve microstructural control in metallic materials. This is primarily achieved by optimising the hot working parameters such as temperature and strain rate by studying their effect on the microstructural evolution in a material. Different deformation, softening and failure mechanisms have been known to operate at different temperature-strain rate combinations [ Cu-Cr-Zr-Ti alloy is one of the candidate materials to manufacture the inner wall of regeneratively cooled thrust chamber of the rocket engine of satellite launch vehicles. Strengthening of this alloy is achieved by Cr-rich ordered bcc precipitates, while Zr provides resistance to softening at engine operating temperatures (~500 °C–600 °C) and Ti prevents sulfur embrittlement [ The present work is an attempt to characterize the hot deformation behaviour of the Cu-Cr-Zr-Ti alloy by investigating not just the effects of process parameters but also the initial grain size (which again depends on alloy's prior process history) on the evolution of microstructure in the alloy. This work intends to provide a template to be followed while hot working the alloy in order to achieve microstructural control in the alloy. In view of this, the present study was undertaken with the following specific objectives: to analyse the stress-strain and work hardening behaviour, to ascertain the dominant microstructural restoration mechanism and to establish deformation processing maps of Cu-Cr-Zr-Ti alloy as a function of process parameters and initial grain size. The Cu-0.8Cr-0.05Zr-0.05Ti (wt%) alloy was received in the form of a hot forged plate having an initial grain size of ~30 μm. Cylindrical specimens with dimensions of 15 mm ×   Three principal inferences can be drawn from the observations stated above. First, the higher yield stress exhibited by the coarse-grained specimens as compared to the fine-grained specimens indicates break down of Hall-Petch relationship and the strengthening mechanism other than grain boundary strengthening being operative in the alloy at the deformation temperatures employed in the present study [ Work hardening plots obtained from true stress-true strain curves of the specimens tested at 700 and 800 °C and at strain rates of 0.1 and 1 s  The specimens with initial grain sizes of 30 and 150 μm compressed at 600 °C and 0.1 s As it can be observed in Significant grain growth was observed in specimen with initial grain size of 30 μm upon compression under low From the above noted microstructural observations it is apparent that DRX, deformation twinning and GBS are the microstructural deformation mechanisms operative in the alloy during deformation depending on the initial grain size, deformation temperature and the applied strain rate. The difference in true stress values is due to the varying contributions of DRX, twinning and GBS to accommodate strain which depends on the initial grain size. The higher true stress values exhibited by coarse-grained specimens are a result of the contribution of deformation twinning being higher to that of DRX and GBS. Further, the onset temperature and the critical strain for DRX are found to increase with an increase in initial grain size. In the absence of DRX, in specimens with largest initial grain size, the strain is accommodated through extensive deformation twinning. The extent of this is found to be higher at low temperatures and high strain rates. Wedge cracking observed at triple junctions in specimens with largest initial grain size indicates GBS being dominant at low strain rates for the same deformation temperature. Inverse pole figures (IPF) and grain boundary maps generated using EBSD for specimens with three different grain sizes compressed at 800 °C and 0.1 s In boundary map of the deformed specimen with initial grain size of 30 μm shown in  These maps can be validated using the microstructural observations presented in the previous sections. In domains demarcated as unsafe, the corresponding microstructures can be characterised as inhomogeneous (non-recrystallized). These further can be classified into four types: simple deformation (deformed microstructure with no signs of DRX), flow localization, twinning and wedge cracking along grain boundaries depending on initial grain size, deformation temperature and strain rate. The first type can be observed in specimens with initial grain sizes 30 μm and 150 μm compressed under high As discussed earlier, DRX is one of the restoration mechanisms operating in the alloy depending on the initial grain size, deformation temperature and strain rate. Hence, it becomes imperative to investigate the possibility of a relationship existing between dynamically recrystallized grain size ( In the present study, DRX was observed to be more dominant in specimens with initial grain size of 30 μm in the deformation temperature and strain rate range. Hence, only the grain size measurements made from the specimens with initial grain size of 30 μm were used to establish the power law relationship for the alloy under present study. Post compression grain sizes were obtained from the IPF maps shown in Furthermore, the above relationship was used to calculate the grain size at There exists another well-established relationship known as the Derby law which is used to extrapolate the steady state grain size for any deformation condition [ It can be observed from Eq. The effect of initial grain size (30 μm, 150 μm and 450 μm) on hot deformation behaviour of Cu-0.8Cr-0.05Zr-0.05Ti (wt%) alloy was investigated and following are the conclusions from this study: Increase in initial grain size led to an expected reduction in DRX kinetics as evidenced from absence of a clear stress peak in true stress-trues strain curves of coarse-grained specimens. Microstructural observations reveal DRX, deformation twinning and GBS as the principal deformation mechanisms operative in the alloy depending on the initial grain size, deformation temperature and applied strain rate. The higher true stress values exhibited by coarse-grained specimens as compared to fine grained specimens are a result of: absence of DRX and strain being accommodated by deformation twinning rather than GBS due to limited grain boundary area. The unsafe hot working domain in the processing map is found to get wider with increase in initial grain size and this implies that the hot workability of the alloy goes down with increase in initial grain size. The mode of material failure in coarse grained specimens is found to be wedge cracking at triple junctions at low temperatures and low strain rates, while flow localization at high temperatures. Power law relationship between the final DRX grain size ( The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors wish to acknowledge The raw/processed data required to reproduce these findings cannot be shared at this time as the data also forms part of an ongoing study.