The distribution of frother reporting to the concentrate along a bank of cells and the adsorption of collector to valuable particles are important as they determine the froth structure and flotation performance. An understanding of this is required in order to formulate better reagent addition strategies. Techniques to measure the frother concentration in samples taken from industrial flotation circuits, including dynamic surface tension measurements, have proven inconclusive due to the low concentrations used and the effects of hydrophobic particles.
                  In this study, a method of measuring the concentration of non-adsorbed reagents on a laboratory scale has been developed. Batch flotation experiments were carried out on an industrial sulphide ore. The adsorption of the collector (SIBX) and frother (Dowfroth 200) to the solid particles was determined by measuring the concentration remaining in filtered liquid samples taken from the concentrate and tails. Analysis was carried out using UV spectrometry and TOC analysis. It was found that 20% of the frother is lost in the presence of the SIBX and that after 2min, 63% of the SIBX had adsorbed to particles. The results also showed that an increase in the initial concentration of SIBX, and an increase in the conditioning time yielded a higher concentrate grade.Froth flotation is a separation process widely used in the mining industry that depends on differences in particle surface properties to separate valuable materials from undesired gangue. The efficiency of the separation is strongly dependent on the degree of hydrophobicity of the particles to be floated, which is achieved by the adsorption or chemisorption of collectors onto the surface of the particles. The degree of hydrophobicity depends on the amount of reagent adsorbed onto the solid particle surface, and is known to affect the flotation recovery ( The adsorption of the collector on the solid particles is the most important factor affecting the floatability of sulphide minerals. Alkyl xanthates are commonly used collectors for sulphide mineral flotation and their adsorption onto various minerals has been widely studied. The effect of adsorption on flotation performance, however, has not been reported and will be considered in this work. Many techniques have been used to measure the adsorption of collectors, on minerals in flotation systems. Techniques for measuring the adsorption of xanthate directly on the surface of a particle include surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) spectroscopy ( The decomposition of xanthate collectors has been studied by many authors, and many of the above techniques have been used to study the nature of the adsorption between xanthate and sulphide minerals. For the purposes of this study, the main focus was the amount of collector adsorbing, rather than different xanthate species present. Measurement of the concentration of frother remaining in solution has not been widely reported. The use of the maximum bubble pressure to determine the dynamic surface tension of frother solutions is discussed by Interactions between frothers and collectors have been widely reported ( Appropriate techniques to quantify frother and collector adsorption were developed for this study, and the adsorption kinetics studied for initial collector loading and conditioning time. Further, the dependence of the flotation performance on initial collector concentration and conditioning time are reported here. A South African platinum group metal ore was used, with sodium isobutyl xanthate (SIBX) and a polyglycol (Dowfroth 200) as collector and frother, respectively. The ore was rod milled immediately prior to each experiment. The milling time for all experiments was 55 Two series of experiments were carried out using a standard Denver laboratory flotation machine. The first series of experiments determined the adsorption behaviour of the collector and the frother on the ore. The second series studied the effects of changing initial collector loading and conditioning time on the flotation separation performance. The adsorption of the reagents to the solid particles was inferred by measuring the amount of reagent remaining in filtrate, using the analysis techniques described below. Adsorption kinetic experiments were carried out in a 3 The concentrations of SIBX and frother in the filtered solutions were determined by the use of a UV spectrophotometer (UV Mini 1240) and a TOC (Total Organic Carbon) analyser, respectively. The absorbance peak for SIBX using UV spectrometry is 301 The sulphur content of feed, concentrate and tails samples were determined using a Leco SC32 analyser. Analyses were repeated in triplicate and averaged. The particle size distribution was measured using a Malvern Mastersizer, 2000 (Hydro 2000 MU), and the BET surface area measured using a Quantachrome NOVA 2200 series volumetric gas adsorption instrument. Before measurement was started, moisture and gas adsorbed on the particles or trapped in the open pores was removed under reduced pressure at 100 The flotation experiments were conducted using the same equipment and procedure as the adsorption experiments. Following the required conditioning time, the airflow was started, and remained constant at 6 Adsorption tests were carried out for SIBX and frother both separately and together.  In terms of SIBX adsorbed per gram of solid, after 10 The results of the adsorption tests on frother both alone and with 15 This is further highlighted by the results of experiments in which one reagent was added, followed by the other 2 or 3 Batch flotation tests were carried out with initial concentrations of SIBX of 10, 15 and 25 In previous work (  This can be explained by considering the froth stability, since flotation froths are particle stabilised. Considering  As the froth becomes unstable, valuable particles and water are released from the bubble lamellae into the associated Plateau borders, displacing the gangue. It can be postulated that at 10 The flotation performance was measured with conditioning times of 0, 2 and 3 From observations made of the experimental technique, it appears that when no conditioning time is allowed and the air is started at the same time as the reagents are added, there is insufficient time for the reagents to be fully mixed into the slurry. As a consequence, the reagents overflow the weir at the beginning of flotation. It is therefore difficult to draw valid conclusions from the results for no conditioning time. The grade effect with an increase in conditioning time between 2 and 3 A technique has been developed in which the concentration of reagents remaining in solution during batch flotation tests can be measured. The technique is a useful tool for studying the distribution of reagents in simple systems during flotation tests on a laboratory scale. Adsorption kinetic experiments showed that the adsorption of SIBX continues for considerable time, with only 90% of an initial loading of 15 The results of the flotation experiments show that increasing the initial collector concentration and increasing conditioning time have the same effect on the performance and can be used to upgrade a froth without a simultaneous decrease in recovery. Furthermore, a link between particle hydrophobicity and froth stability has been shown. As the hydrophobicity of the valuable particles increases past a certain, critical point, they destabilise the froth, which leads to more drainage, higher Plateau border grades, higher concentrate grades and lower water recoveries.