The concept of leaching copper–gold ores using leach solutions which contain Cu(CN)3
                     2− was investigated. Gold leaching occurs in air saturated Cu(CN)3
                     2− solutions at a much slower rate than in free cyanide solutions. A similar gold leach rate is observed when copper is alloyed with the gold. The dissolution of several common copper minerals in Cu(CN)3
                     2− also occurs at significantly slower rates, and in some cases not at all. This has the advantage of reducing copper dissolution and hence cyanide consumption. When leaching chalcocite (Cu2S) in free cyanide solution, the dissolved sulfide ions significantly hinder gold leaching. However, when leaching chalcocite in Cu(CN)3
                     2− solutions, little sulfide was dissolved and gold leaching was found to be more rapid than for the free cyanide solution. Preliminary test work with gold ore samples containing CuO indicated that the initial kinetics of gold dissolution in air saturated Cu(CN)3
                     2− solutions were comparable to free cyanide. However, some gold was not leached when the leaching of the copper minerals was incomplete.For the past century, cyanidation has been the dominant means of recovering gold from its ores. Native gold is commonly found associated in ore deposits with pyrite and arsenopyrite. However, many gold ore deposits contain substantial quantities of copper minerals. Some copper minerals are readily soluble in cyanide which can have a detrimental effect on the process efficiency and economics due to high cyanide consumption, reduced gold leach rates and poor gold recovery ( When ores containing soluble copper minerals are leached using cyanide to recover the gold, copper also dissolves to form various copper(I) cyanide complexes: CuCN, Cu(CN) Technologies have been proposed in order to recover gold economically from deposits that contain significant soluble copper minerals (> Another approach, which has been investigated and trialled for slimes, is leaching with deficient free cyanide where the copper cyanide complexes are also considered to contribute to gold dissolution ( This paper investigates the concept of leaching copper–gold ores using leach solutions which contain free cyanide or Cu(CN) All experiments were carried out using solutions prepared from analytical grade reagents and Millipore water. Metal and alloy dissolution rates were measured using the rotating electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (REQCM), which is described elsewhere ( Prior to each experiment, metal or alloy was electroplated onto the REQCM electrode. Gold was electroplated at 25 A·m All REQCM experiments were conducted using a rotation rate of 300 rpm and at a temperature of 20 °C. Solutions were buffered at a pH of 10 using 10 mM Borax and sodium hydroxide. Linear sweep voltammetry was carried out using a Radiometer PGP201 potentiostat, and a scan rate of 1 mV·s The copper oxide minerals were obtained from BDH, and the copper sulfides were obtained from Cerac. All these samples were > In aerated cyanide solutions, gold dissolves to form the soluble gold cyanide complex Au(CN) In a previous study by the authors ( In this case, the Cu(CN)  Using the REQCM, the polarisation curve for the gold oxidation half reaction was measured after the leaching experiments shown in  Using the REQCM, the leaching of various electroplated metals and gold alloys was also studied. Silver dissolution is similar to the gold–silver alloy, with faster leaching kinetics in free cyanide solutions. In comparison, the dissolution of copper is rapid for both free cyanide and Cu(CN) It has been previously suggested that the presence of dissolved copper could catalyse the oxidation of cyanide ( A solution containing 5 mM NaCN buffered at pH 10 using 10 mM Borax A third experiment was also conducted with no free cyanide and 5 mM Cu(CN) Given the observed reduction in gold leaching rates using Cu(CN) The dissolution of ground CuO in a free cyanide solution requires a reductive dissolution mechanism in which cyanide is most likely oxidised to cyanate with the overall reaction being that shown in Eq. Similarly, one would expect the dissolution of CuO in a Cu(CN) A comparison of CuO dissolution kinetics in free cyanide and Cu(CN) The dissolution of Cu Cu XRD analysis of the undissolved leach residue from the initial experiment showed major d-spacings characteristic of tenorite (CuO – d-spacing 2.52(1), 2.32(0.96), 2.53(0.49)). Whilst the original sample had major d-spacings characteristic of cuprite (Cu These results are consistent with the dissolution of Cu Like CuO, the dissolution of malachite in free cyanide or Cu(CN) The dissolution of ground Cu In comparison, the dissolution of Cu As for CuO, the dissolution of CuS in a free cyanide or Cu(CN) In summary, from all the copper mineral dissolution experiments, the cyanide consumption and amount of copper dissolved are both reduced if a Cu(CN) At the completion of the mineral leaching in free cyanide and copper cyanide solutions, the gold leach rates, as measured using the REQCM, were as expected with the exception of the dissolution of Cu Having studied the leaching of gold and copper minerals separately in Cu(CN) The first ore investigated was a gold ore containing 1 g/t Au and 0.34% Cu as copper oxide from Boddington. The initial dissolution kinetics of gold from this ore was similar for the free cyanide, deficient cyanide and Cu(CN)  Gold leaching occurs in air saturated Cu(CN) Preliminary test work with copper–gold ore samples indicates that the initial kinetics of gold dissolution in air saturated Cu(CN) Unpublished work by one of the reviewers has indicated that when Cu(CN) This leaves a passivating CuCN layer on the surface of the copper mineral which has been identified and could account for the incomplete leaching of copper–gold ores with Cu(CN)