Introduction
                  This study was to determine the angle of bend that can be placed in a ball-tip guide wire while still allowing passage of reamers and nails of several commonly utilized nailing systems.
               
                  Methods
                  Ball-tip guide wires, opening reamer tips, femoral nails, and tibial nails were collected from several manufacturers. Guide wires were incrementally bent 3cm from the tip and passed through the reamer tip, tibial nail, and femoral nail until unable to pass.
               
                  Results
                  All systems tested demonstrated that the reamer, with its relative smaller diameter cannula as compared to the nails themselves, determined the smallest tolerable bend to be able to pass the bent guide wire. The bend angle tolerated by reamer tips was on average 7° (4–9°). The bend angle tolerated by femoral nails was more consistent between the tested systems and was on average 15.5° (12–18°). The bend angle tolerated by tibial nails had the most variability between manufacturers and was on average 16° (13–21°).
               
                  Discussion
                  Knowing the degree of guide wire bend which is tolerated can save time in equipment preparation as well as allow one to pre-bend the guide wire and know the intramedullary nail and/or reamers will likely pass. We hope the information provided in this work increases awareness of the potential technical issues with guide wire over-bending and that surgeons may err on the side of minimizing the bend in order to save time in the OR, decrease frustration and eliminate intraoperative complications that can occur.Tibia and femur fractures are some of the most common long bone fractures treated by orthopedic surgeons, with an estimated 492,000 tibial shaft fractures occurring annually in the U.S. and an estimated annual incidence of 10/10,000 for femoral shaft fractures Most modern nailing devices utilize a cannulated system where reamers and implants can be passed over a ball-tip guide wire. After fracture reduction is obtained and the medullary canals are grossly re-aligned, a ball-tip guide wire is passed across the fracture site to not only maintain reduction but to facilitate passage of cannulated reamers and implant The purpose of this study was to determine the angle of bend that can be placed in a ball-tip guide wire while still allowing passage of reamers and nails of several nailing systems. The hope is to be able to identify the tolerable angle of bend for several commonly used manufacturers in order for surgeons to save time in the OR, decrease frustration and eliminate intraoperative complications that can occur. Intramedullary nail systems were collected from Stryker (Mahwah, NJ), Synthes (Raynham, MA), Biomet (Norwood, MA), and Smith & Nephew (Andover, MA). Equipment tested from each manufacturer included a ball-tip guide wire, opening reamer tip, femoral nail, and tibial nail. The diameter of each wire and ball-tip ( The diameter of the different systems’ guide wires were found to be within a fairly narrow range measuring 2.75–3.08 All systems tested demonstrated that the reamer, with its relative smaller diameter cannula as compared to the nails themselves, determined the smallest tolerable bend to be able to pass the bent guide wire. The range of bend tolerated by reamer tips was 4–9° (avg. 7°) ( All Smith and Nephew nails were able to tolerate 16° of bend to the guide wire regardless of nail diameter with the opening reamer tolerating 4° of bend ( Tibial and femoral shaft fractures are some of the most common orthopaedic traumatic injuries treated surgically. Intramedullary nails have proven to be safe, effective, and less invasive than other surgical fixation techniques. In order to facilitate ultimate nail placement, a ball-tip guide wire is used to maintain reduction and allow reaming of the medullary canal. Bending of the tip of the guide wire is sometimes required based on fracture type which is not without potential difficulty as bending the wire may cause difficulty passing reamers and nails. In this study, we demonstrate that all systems tested tolerate some degree of bend to the ball tip with the opening reamer tolerating the least amount of bend as compared to the nails. This does not necessarily mean that this is the limit to which one should bend the wire, but that one may not be able to ream to the distal tip of the guide wire. For most diaphyseal fractures, reaming to the distal most end of the guide wire may not be necessary as the metaphysis is relatively wider than the reamer and reaming past the isthmus is more important for diaphyseal fit of the nail Our study demonstrates that the guide wires can tolerate a larger bend when passing the nail as opposed to the reamer, whose inner diameter appears to be the limiting factor for angular tolerance. However, this only applies for fractures where the treating surgeon decides to ream the intramedullary canal. While reaming the canal has been demonstrated to be beneficial for multiple reasons including implant strength, structure rigidity, and improved/faster fracture healing The amount of bend tolerated by femoral nails was more consistent between systems as compared to the tibial nails although there was variation amongst companies. One manufacturer demonstrated increased tolerated bend angle for the femoral nail as compared to the tibial nail while another manufacturer demonstrated the opposite and the remaining 2 companies demonstrated the same tolerated bend angle for both femoral and tibial nails. While all systems did demonstrate the ability to tolerate a bend to the guide wire and still pass their intramedullary nails, significant differences were indeed noted both between companies as well as within a company between the type of nail. There are several limitations to this study. Although the nails and reamers were stabilized during testing, guide wire removal was performed manually without quantification of force used. Therefore a surgeon applying greater force than what was used in our testing may be able to remove a guide wire despite the degree of bend. While quantifying the force applied may have been more scientifically sound, it would have been of limited utility in clinical practice as the force needed to remove a stuck guide wire in the OR would not be easily quantifiable. Additionally, our studies were not performed in-vivo nor were cadavers utilized. Given the cannulated nature of these systems, bone fragments and other tissue may become lodged in the implant further influencing the ability of a surgeon to remove a guide wire regardless of bend. In conclusion, knowing the degree of guide wire bend which is tolerated can save time in equipment preparation as well as allow one to pre-bend the guide wire and know the intramedullary nail and/or reamers will likely pass. While a metal protractor can be added to any surgical kit to allow precise measurement of the bend, this may not be necessary. Instead, we hope the information provided in this work increases awareness of the potential technical issues with guide wire over-bending and that surgeons may err on the side of minimizing the bend in order to save time in the OR, decrease frustration and eliminate intraoperative complications that can occur. No authors have any relevant conflicts of interest and no funding was sought for this project Thanks would like to be offered to Stryker, Synthes, Biomet, and Smith and Nephew for donating de-sterilized ball tip guide wires, reamer tips, femoral and tibial nails in order to complete this study.