Tunnelling applications are increasing day by day due to challenging topographic conditions. During tunnel excavation, the primary stresses caused mainly by the overlying weight of rock mass together with the geological factors are replaced by secondary stresses. Thus, tunnel deformations occur around the face but also at and beyond the face in the longitudinal direction as this is truly 3D phenomenon. Determination of deformations behind the advancing face is very important for the design of support systems in tunnel engineering. The researchers emphasized that deformations around the circular tunnels depend on the distance to the face and recommended different equations to construct longitudinal deformation profiles (LDP). In this paper, circular tunnels excavated in weak rock masses with a total of 162 different conditions comprising material properties, tunnel dimensions and depth of cover were modelled by using finite difference method. The data obtained from the models were normalised with different parameters and statistical tests were performed. The equations and response surfaces of maximum and tunnel face deformation for different depths were suggested for weak rock masses. Therewithal, a prediction equation of longitudinal deformation profile (LDP) for weak rock masses was proposed. Assessment of radial deformations around a circular tunnel is possible by using these equations. The suggested equations were verified by means of analysis of variance and previous equations recommended by different researchers.The need for underground structures for various purposes led to the opening of tunnels using different methods. Modelling studies used as a decision-making tool in solving problems have also increased with the increase of tunnels. There are several studies related to physical and numerical modelling of tunnels by using different methods in the literature. In a few of these studies, the deformations occur around an underground opening were examined. The analyses of deformations around the underground openings and interaction with applied support systems were carried out by many researchers with analytical methods 3D numerical modelling studies were carried out by some researchers to determine the radial deformations ahead and behind the face of underground opening.  In a specific design case, we need to know maximum deformation behind the face of a tunnel to apply current LDP equations. To determine maximum deformation, numerical modelling for each case takes time. Basarir et al. In this paper, circular tunnels excavated in weak rock masses with a total of 162 different conditions comprising 9 different weak rock mass properties, 3 different tunnel radius and 6 different depth of cover were modelled by using finite difference method. Deformations were recorded at the roof of modelled circular openings at 1 m intervals. Multiple regression analysis was performed to predict the radial deformations around the tunnel. As a result of modelling and multiple regression analyses, models were developed predicting the maximum and advancing face deformation for different depths. In addition, the equation predicting the deformation at any point behind the tunnel face has been suggested. The effect of different parameters on radial deformations was investigated with analyses of variance and can be examined by generated response surfaces and LDP curves. With this study, the radial deformations according to face at any point behind the tunnel can be easily predicted by using the rock mass properties (GSI), rock material properties ( When determining the strength of the rock masses, the sample size representing the rock mass should be very large. It is difficult task to arrange test cells to be used to determine the strength as well as the sampling in these dimensions. Rock mass classification systems are empirical design approaches and are widely used for characterization of rock masses. Some of these systems are Rock Mass Rating (RMR) proposed by Bieniawski The compressive strength of the rock mass is strongly dependent on the uniaxial compressive strength of rock material as well as the discontinuities. Hoek and Brown The In determining the weak rock mass properties, minimum, average and maximum value of each parameter were preferred. 3 different values for GSI (15, 25, 35), 3 different values for uniaxial compressive strength ( When maximum-minimum principal stress graphs are examined, it is seen that some of them are overlapping. The modelling of tunnels opened in rock masses showing similar failure characteristics leads to the same results. The overlapping curves were eliminated and it was decided that 9 different rock masses would be suitable representing the properties of the weak rock masses for this parametric modelling study. Maximum-minimum principal stress graphs for these weak rock masses used in the models are given in The generalized Hoek-Brown failure criterion is given in Eq. The average Poisson's ratio ( Tunnels are opened at different diameters according to their purpose of use. In this study, 3 different excavation diameters, which are widely used in tunnel excavation with TBM, were modelled. Inner diameter of segments in the metro tunnels excavated with TBM in Istanbul is generally 5.7 m. The tunnels are opened at different depths depending on the intended use and topographic and geological conditions. The metro tunnels for transportation in the cities are opened in shallow depths as possible. But the depths of the tunnels outside the cities have increased even more due to topographic conditions. In order to consider the effect of different depths on the deformation around the face of tunnels, model tunnels were arranged at 50, 100, 150, 200, 250 and 300 m depths. Besides the rock mass properties and tunnel dimensions, modelling conditions such as model zone numbers, dimensions and boundary conditions should also be determined well. For this purpose, parametric studies were carried out by arranging different model zones. One of these studies is to determine the boundary conditions where edge and corner effects are not observed. It was determined that no edge and corner effects are observed when the boundaries of models set at 7–8 times the tunnel radius. Therefore, at least 10 times the excavation radius by considering the previous works A finer mesh around the periphery of the tunnel opening was formed. Mesh size was increased from the opening towards the model boundaries. The number of zones for tunnel models opened at 3.20, 6.63 and 9.44 m excavation diameters is 91648, 145792 and 201536, respectively. Model boundary conditions are illustrated in In this study, a finite difference method based software FLAC3D was used for modelling. The openings were excavated instantaneously and solving was performed until steady state condition is reached. The model Hoek-Brown was used for determining failure state of material. Unsupported circular tunnels excavated in weak rock masses with a total of 162 different conditions comprising 9 different weak rock mass properties, 3 different tunnel radius and 6 different depth of cover were modelled. In order to investigate the effect of depth change on deformation around the tunnel, deformation contours of models were plotted. As an example, the deformation contours of different depth tunnels excavated 6.63 m in diameter in a weak rock mass (GSI = 25, Radial deformations around the tunnel are used to establish the longitudinal deformation profiles (LDP). LDP is important design component in convergence-confinement method, provides insight into how quickly the support begins to interact with the rock mass behind the face of tunnel. Deformation of the rock mass around the tunnel starts at 4 times the tunnel radius ahead of the face and continues up to 8 times the tunnel radius behind the face. It was observed that there was a significant increase in deformation around the tunnel with the increase in depth. The radial deformations increase from the face to a point behind the face where maximum deformations occur. The multiple regression analysis was performed to estimate radial deformations depending on the distance to the face, rock mass properties, tunnel radius and depth of cover. The radial deformations obtained from the models were normalised with the excavation radius and this dependent parameter was used in the analysis for prediction. The first independent parameter is taken as The radial deformations towards to behind of the tunnel face increase in a circular tunnel up to the distance where maximum radial deformation occurs. Multiple regression analysis was also performed to estimate the distance-dependent change of these radial deformations. Radial deformation behind the tunnel face is subtracted from the radial deformation at the tunnel face and this value is normalised with maximum deformation value which is subtracted from the radial deformation at the tunnel face. As seen, both equations proposed in the literature and Eq. As a result of the analyses of the data obtained from the models that radial deformations behind the face increase with increase in distance from the face and relationship is significant. The change of normalised deformations depending on the distance from face normalised with excavation radius is shown in Using the suggested equation given in Deformations around the tunnel can be determined by recommended LDP equations. With this study, maximum and advancing face deformations could be estimated depending on GSI of rock mass, the uniaxial compressive strength ( Different rock mass classification systems are used for determining the characteristics of the rock mass on tunnel route. GSI based on basic geological properties is one of these classification systems and has wide range of rock engineering applications. When estimating deformations towards to behind of a circular opening face for different rock masses, maximum deformation values are needed and these values determined by using plain-strain analysis or other methods. So, it is a time-consuming design tool. In this study, the circular tunnel with 162 different conditions excavated in weak rock masses were modelled by using FLAC3D based on finite difference method. A model condition for a weak rock mass was given as an example. The deformation contours and Longitudinal Deformation Profiles (LDP) using the data obtained from the models for different depths were plotted. Regression analyzes were performed by using the deformation data recorded around the tunnel. The effects of independent variables on prediction equations were checked by analysis of variance. The high correlation coefficients show that the equations give meaningful results. As a result of this study, the equations of maximum and advancing face deformation for circular unsupported tunnels at different depths are suggested. These suggested equations are based on rock mass and intact rock material properties and tunnel conditions. An equation is also developed for determining the radial deformations around the circular tunnel in weak rock masses. By using the equations suggested in this study, radial deformations towards to behind of a circular tunnel can be determined without the need for other tools. Longitudinal Deformation Profile (LDP) for a circular opening condition was plotted using suggested equations in this study and other equations suggested by researchers. Comparing the suggested equation with others, it is seen that the equation gives approximate results with equations obtained from elasto-plastic analyses and different results with equations obtained from elastic analysis. Isotropic rock masses are modelled with this study. When rock mass includes joints such as fault and fracture, these equations should not be used. Non-isotropic metarials can be modelled with discontinuum models. The authors would like to thank gratefully for financial support of the SDU, Coordination of OYP Institution with Project No: OYP05714-DR-14. The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at