In this work, molecular modeling simulations are used to study the flotation process of copper, cadmium and zinc ions present in wastewater, acid mine drainage and others, with xanthate collector. Simulations were conducted by DFT technique, with M06 functional at 6-31G(d,p)/LanL2DZ level. Characterizations of the molecular and electronic structures of the complexes formed applying NPA, AIM and CLPO analysis of the coordination bonds show the kind of main interactions between metals and the ligand. Results confirm the experimental evidence and show the ability of this technique to study this process. The interaction energy of the studied complexes is −56,39 kcal/mol for Cu, −25,86 kcal/mol for Cd and −7,29 kcal/mol for Zn complex. It was found that xanthate binds to copper over zinc and cadmium elements. Experimental results show that for copper, cadmium and zinc, the flotation effectiveness are 94,68%; 67,18% and 36,92% respectively.Heavy metals are environmental priority pollutants [ Several methods are available to remove heavy metals ions from wastewater; they include chemical precipitation, ion-exchange, adsorption, electrochemical treatment technologies, ion flotation and others [ In this sense, the flotation processes of minerals and metals play an important role [ The process is based on supplying hydrophobic character to the ionic metal species in wastewaters by use of surfactants and subsequent removal of these hydrophobic species by air bubbles [ At the same time, the modeling of chemical processes using computational chemistry tools has emerged as an efficient procedure to understand the intramolecular aspects related with the efficiency of these [ The interaction of xanthate, a common collector used in ionic flotation for recovering and removing metal ions from dilute aqueous solutions by complexes formations, can be modeled by computational chemistry tools, as show some investigations [ The interaction energies between metal ions with selected collector anions, in order to understand the influence of collector structure on interaction with metal cations it has been reported, showing that the strength of the interaction depends mostly on the electronic nature of the group attached to the thiol group [ In this work we report a theoretical study on the molecular structure of theoretical models of xanthate metal complexes of Cu, Zn, and Cd ions commonly present in wastewater, acid mine drainage and others, as well as the calculation of the interaction energy between xanthate and these ions taking into account the solvent effect. Charge transfer and the nature of the interaction that explain the selectivity order are also discussed. Density functional theory in combination with the effective core potential technique is used; a common combination to study transition metals compounds. At the same time, we report experimental results to validate theoretical findings. Models for complexes with xanthate ligands were constructed considering Winter’s work [ Interaction energies were calculated with respect to the sum of the electronic energies of structures according to the following definition: E(M,L) = E(ML Electronic structures of the optimized complexes were characterized applying Mulliken Population Analysis (MPA) [ Experimental conditions for the flotation process were established by Ramirez [ Geometrical parameter, summarized in Optimized geometry of xanthate was reached using standard gradient techniques by simultaneous relaxation of all geometrical parameters, starting from the experimental structure [ For metal complexes the bond distances for all calculated models appears in the range of the experimental value reported, obtained from an X-ray structure analysis [ C–S bond distances increase in the complexes respect to the ligand due to the expected rearrangement of electron densities in the coordination process. A comparison between the C–S bond in complexes and in the free ligand shows that this value is shorter in the free ligand (1701; 1693 Å) than the values in the complexes in all cases, as a consequence of coordination process and the charge transfer from the ligand to metal, which is one of the key components that stabilize the complexes. NPA charges and electron populations for xanthate complexes are in For all metals ions, NPA charges in the complexes are less than 2 as a consequence of the charge transfer from ligand to metal ions. The charge transfer of copper ion is the highest, whereas in the case of zinc and cadmium ions are similar. The gained electrons in complexes are 1.16 ē for copper, 0.75 ē for zinc and 0.76 ē for cadmium and the electronic population shows that copper gain 0,54 ē and 0,59 ē to their 4s and 3d orbital, zinc and cadmium gain 0,68 ē and 0,73 ē in 4s and 5s orbital respectively while lose 0,03 ē and 0,08 ē in your 3d and 4d orbitals. These effects enhance the covalent character of the M-L bond. Occupations of “d” orbitals are consistent with an oxidation state 2+ of the metal ion. Comparing the population in the complexes with those for the corresponding free ligand shows that the NPA charge for the sulfur atom decreases by 0.11 units from the free to the coordinated ligands. This is consistent with electron donation toward the metal atom. That effect is reflected in the C–S bond distances which is shorter (1701; 1693 Å) for the free ligand than the values to the coordinated ligand (1707–1720 Å) in all cases.  CLPO analysis indicates that electronic population on the lone pair orbitals of sulfur atom have an occupation significantly lower than two electrons, at the same time the orbital with antibonding character of the M − S bond has a high level of occupation as consequence of the sulfur lone pair delocalization over the metal atom. Note that occupation of this lone pair and the orbital with antibonding character practically adds up to two electrons. This behavior can be depicted as a charge transfer and it is more acute in the case of copper complexes. Molecular graphs of the complexes are shown in The nature of the bonding interaction was analyzed in terms of the properties of electron density and its derivative as provided by the AIM approach [ Laplacian of ρ(r) is related to the bond interaction energy by a local expression of the virial theorem. For M By comparing the electron density at BCP for M-X bond is clear that for copper complex the electron density is greater than in Cd and Zn complexes which suggest that the binding of xanthate to copper ion is stronger. The small values of ρ(r) and the positive values of ∇ Model complexes presented in this paper can be considered as involved in the general reaction: Taking into account the hydrolysis process, the reaction is modeled according to: For this reaction the interaction energy can be obtained by Values of the interaction energy employing C-PCM model and water as solvent are −56,39 kcal/mol for Cu complex, −25,86 kcal/mol for Cd complex and −7,29 kcal/mol for Zn complex. These results indicate that xanthate binds to copper over zinc and cadmium elements. The frontier molecular orbital energy gap for the complexes are 2,25 eV, 5,16 eV and 5,45 eV for Cu, Cd and Zn complexes in correspondence with the interaction energy and reinforce the idea of preference formation of the copper complex over the zinc and cadmium counterparts. To verify the theoretical findings, we compared with flotation experimental results of a solution containing copper, zinc, cadmium and other elements presents in wastewater at the AMD of Mina Grande del Cobre in Cuba. Concentrations of the elements are presented in Flotation results at pH of 4.5 indicate that, for all experimental conditions of the design, it is possible the removal of ions by ionic flotation with amilxanthate [ Final concentration of copper ion is reduced below the limits established by the Cuban standard NC-27 [ Experimental results presented here confirm theoretical findings about selectivity of xanthate by cooper ion. Although during the flotation process a precipitation of copper(I) complexes with xanthate takes place and it is floated, the formation of this depends on the existence of the copper(II) complex, and therefore the copper flotation depends on the preference of xanthate for the Cu In the present work, an investigation by theoretical models of the molecular structure of copper, cadmium and zinc complexes with xanthate were developed. Results show that xanthate binds to copper over cadmium and zinc. Theoretical results presented here agree with the experimental evidence for the flotation of these metals with xanthate. Calculated interaction energy for the formation of these complexes shows that under the same conditions, the copper formation complexes are preferred. These results are in correspondence with the effectiveness of the flotation process. In this case, 94,68%; 67,18% and 36,92% of the initial concentration of the copper, cadmium and zinc ions are floated by xanthate respectively. The authors have no competing interests to declare. The authors are grateful to HPC support of Universidad de Oriente from Santiago de Cuba, for computer hardware facilities. The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at