Kaolin, known as china clay, is a fine white clay with industrial usage. Kaolinite is the most common mineral in kaolin ores and iron, titanoferrous, and carbonate minerals are the major impurities. Calcium oxide (CaO) in carbonate form (CaCO3) is the recent critical issue for Zonuz kaolin plant located in the North West of Iran. Therefore, a number of practical and inexpensive processing methods were tried on a raw crushed Zonuz kaolin sample. The sample contained 3.56% CaO. First, sizing based methods like sieve screening and hydrocyclone were tested, because of the smaller size of kaolinite particles compared with most other impurities. However, CaO was removed poorly, much Al2O3 was wasted, and Fe2O3 was enriched in the product. Then, flotation tests were performed on the raw ore. The results were remarkable, because of the highest calcite removal with the lowest Al2O3 loss and Fe2O3 enrichment. Although CaO content was reduced to 1.33% or even less in finer sizes using flotation, these finer sizes led to more Al2O3 loss. Acidic leaching was not evaluated, due to intense reaction between acids and CaCO3, and damaging corrosive acidic conditions.Kaolinite (Al Carbon dioxide (CO More than 70% of calcite was floated in Syrian kaolin ore by As a result, iron and titanium widely are removed from kaolin by various processing methods. However, calcite removal from high-calcite kaolin ore has rarely been investigated and reported. Recently, increase in calcite content in Zonuz kaolin ore (Marand, Iran) resulted in decreasing product quality. Therefore, removing of calcite in the kaolin processing plant is necessary. This research primarily emphasizes on the evaluation of appropriate methods for calcite removal from a high-calcite Zonuz kaolin ore. The studied methods include sizing (screening and hydrocyclone) and flotation. A representative high-calcite kaolin sample (≈ Bond work index (W Screening was performed on the crushed sample using ASTM E11 standard sieves. Sizing by hydrocyclones is the principal processing method in Zonuz kaolin plant. Therefore, numbers of tests were conducted using a laboratory hydrocyclone. Feed size and hydrocyclone drop pressure were selected as variable parameters. The internal and underflow (apex) diameters of the used hydrocyclone are 25 Reverse flotation was used to remove calcite, because of its lower grade in contrast to kaolinite, and consequently lower need for chemical agents rather than direct flotation. Reported points of zero charge (PZC) for calcite by Wet screening and chemical analysis was applied to the crushed kaolin ore sample in order to find out the distribution of minerals in different size fractions (see The grade of aluminum oxide (Al The Mohs hardness of calcite and kaolinite, the main CaO and Al In the case of There is not any considerable change in One step hydrocyclone tests resulted a decrease in CaO content, with low recovery of Al Because of the lowest CaO amount in overflow of test III, another 2-step test, like test IV and V, was performed to increase the recovery of Al A test with regrinding of tailing stream was designed to improve the recovery of Al Ten flotation tests were designed in full-factorial experimental design system with two central points. The experimental conditions and their responses are listed in In four tests with high level of sodium silicate, CaO removal was insufficient, and its content was higher than the other tests. Changes of CaO grade and CaO removal versus oleic acid dosage and pH in 500 A simultaneous optimization technique was used (by DX7 software) to optimize multiple responses. One goal for each response was set before starting optimization process. The goals were minimization of CaO grade and Al Two additional tests were carried out in the optimized flotation condition. The parameters of this test were pH Washed kaolin is currently produced in the plant using hydrocyclones in four steps. The crushed ore is milled in the vertical roller mill to − Sizing and flotation were applied to remove CaO in calcite form from Zonuz kaolin. Wet screening indicated a decrease in CaO content with increasing Fe Froth flotation was other method of CaO removal. At the optimum flotation test condition, CaO content reduced to 1.33%, with only wasting 6.93% of Al We gratefully acknowledge the support and generosity of Iran China Clay Industries Company ( The following KML file contains the Google map of the most important areas described in this article. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version, at doi: