Introduction
                  Distal clavicle fractures have low rates of union when treated with conservative measures. Operative treatment is generally recommended for Neer type II and V. Multiple fixation methods exist with no clear gold standard. The goal of the current study is to assess the outcomes and complications of distal clavicle fractures treated with one of three fixation methods: standard clavicular plate, hook plate or suture fixation about the coracoid.
               
                  Methods
                  This is a retrospective cohort study of surgically-treated unstable Neer type II and V distal clavicle fractures in adults. These operations were performed by multiple surgeons within a single healthcare system between January 2010 and September 2012. Patients were divided into three cohorts: pre-contoured clavicular locking plates, hook plates, and suture-only fixation methods. Univariate and mulivariate modeling analyses were performed.
               
                  Results
                  A total of 74 distal clavicle fractures comprised the final cohort. Fifty-eight (77%) of these fractures were Neer type II; the remaining 16 (21.6%) were Neer type V. Median follow-up time was 12 months (range 10–28). BMI, smoking status, diabetes, and ASA class were similar among all cohorts. Twenty-one patients were treated with suture fixation alone (28.3%), 37 with a contoured clavicular plate (50%) and 16 with hook plate fixation (21.6%). Twenty-one patients (28.4%) experienced complications, including two hardware failures requiring revision surgery. A total of 10/16 (62.5%) patients with hook plates required hardware removal for irritation, compared to 6/37 (16.2%) with a contoured clavicular plate (OR=8.61, p value=0.001), and none with sutures alone. A total of 3/21 patients (14.2%) treated with suture fixation methods were diagnosed with adhesive capsulitis post-operatively; no patients in the plate fixation groups received this diagnosis. The Neer V group had a higher proportion of any complications (37.5%) compared to Neer II (25.9%), and a higher rate of stiffness (12.5% v. 1.7% in Neer II).
               
                  Conclusion
                  This study compared the outcomes of three different fixation methods for unstable distal clavicle fractures. The overall union rate with any method of operative intervention was very high (98.6%), consistent with previous studies. Hook plates had a much higher re-operation rate, mostly owing to a higher incidence of hardware removal, an expected outcome owing to the prominence of these plates in the subacromial space. Contoured clavicular plates were associated with a lower incidence of irritation and hardware removal than hook plates, although one patient in this group experienced loss of fracture fixation and went on to asymptomatic radiographic non-union. Suture-only fixation methods had the lowest rate of re-operation, with only one of 21 procedures resulting in failure and requiring revision. However, there was a significantly higher rate of adhesive capsulitis in the suture fixation cohort, perhaps due to the tethering effect of the clavicle to the coracoid or violation of the rotator interval. While this study supports that most distal clavicle fracture fixation methods can achieve stable union, there is a highly variable complication profile associated with each fixation method. The routine use of hook plate fixation cannot be recommended.Distal clavicle fractures as described by Neer in 1963 present a clinical challenge. The proximal pull of the trapezius coupled with the downward force imparted to the distal fragment by the weight of the arm result in fracture displacement. There is a 20–30% rate of non-union or delayed union with non-operative treatment Neutralization of the deforming forces is complicated by the relatively small volume of bone in the distal fragment for surgical fixation. A multitude of treatment options have been described in the literature with no “gold standard” procedure Distal clavicle fractures are uncommon, comprising only 28% of all clavicle fractures A retrospective cohort study was conducted after institutional review board (IRB) approval. Patients were identified using ICD-9 and CPT codes for distal clavicle fracture and internal fixation of clavicle fracture, respectively from institutional databases and the electronic medical record of an integrated healthcare system. Patient demographics, comorbidities, and procedure details of interest were decided a priori and extracted from the operative reports and electronic medical record by the authors. Inclusion criteria were all operatively-treated distal clavicle fractures between January 2010 and September 2012, inclusive, by providers within an integrated healthcare system. Pathologic fractures, non-unions, and infections were excluded. The study participants were limited to unstable Neer type II and V distal clavicle fractures as identified on radiographs interpreted by a trained orthopedic surgeon. Patients were divided into three cohorts based on their fixation method: pre-contoured clavicular plates, hook plates, or fixation methods utilizing only heavy sutures from the coracoid to the clavicle. The primary outcome studied was need for revision surgery due to loss of fracture fixation. Secondary outcomes included post-operative infection or wound complication, symptomatic hardware removal, and a post-operative diagnosis of adhesive capsulitis. Differences in patient demographics and clinical characteristics by fixation type were examined. The average differences for continuous variables were assessed by comparing means via Missing data on gender (1% of patients), smoking status (4% of patients), BMI (3% of patients), and American Society of Anesthesiology (ASA) class (13% of patients) were excluded from univariate analyses case-wise. As the baseline and surgical characteristics appeared to be neither related to fixation type nor complications (see Seventy-four distal clavicle fractures comprised the final cohort, consisting of 72.6% males with median age of 33.1 years (ranging from 11.7 to 78.6 years). Fifty-eight (77%) of these fractures were Neer type II, 16 (21.7%) were Neer type V, and 1 (1.3%) was a Neer type III and excluded from subsequent analyses. The median follow-up time was 11 months. Among the 74 patients with Neer types II and V, 21 patients were treated with suture fixation alone (28.3%), 37 were treated with a contoured clavicular plate (50%), and 16 were treated with hook plate fixation (21.6%). In terms of patient demographics, there were no statistical differences between groups in terms of ASA class, gender, diabetes status, smoking status, age or body mass index (BMI). The only demographic factor that was different between groups was that Hispanic patients tended to have hook plates at a higher proportion to Caucasians or others ( Overall, 21 individuals (28.4%) had post-operative complications. These complications included two hardware failures requiring revision surgery, one each in the pre-contoured clavicular plate cohort, and another in the suture fixation cohort. The rate of failure between the groups was not statistically significant ( Three of twenty-one patients (14.2%) treated with suture fixation methods were diagnosed with adhesive capsulitis post-operatively; zero patients in the two plate fixation groups received this diagnosis ( In terms of fracture type, the Neer type V cohort had a higher proportion of any complications (37.5%) compared to the Neer type II cohort (25.9%), though this was not statistically significant ( In 1963, Neer described an uncommon pattern of clavicular fracture in which the proximal segment of the clavicle becomes unstable as a result of bony discontinuity of the coracoclavicular ligaments from the rest of the clavicle Non-operative treatment has been recommended as a potential treatment option by some authors. This recommendation is typically based on studies that revealed acceptable functional outcomes despite a high non-union rate (up to 33%) in non-operatively treated patients Most authors align with Neer's original recommendation and advocate surgical fixation of unstable distal clavicle fractures to achieve a higher rate of union. Across multiple studies and meta-analyses, a union rate of Several treatment modalities for unstable distal clavicle fractures have been described, including intramedullary fixation This series retrospectively analyzed 74 distal clavicle fractures treated via either hook plate, pre-contoured clavicular plate, or suture fixation methods. Historically, all three treatment methods have displayed high union rates but with varying incidence of complications. A recent meta-analysis of 350 operatively-treated patients reported a 98% union rate across 4 different treatment modalities and revealed a much higher risk of complications for hook plate fixation as compared to suture-only methods of fixation Despite the high rate of radiographic and clinical union in our series, nearly two-thirds of patients (10/16; 62.5%) treated with hook plates required hardware removal for irritation or impingement symptoms. By comparison, only 6/37 (16.2%) of patients with pre-contoured clavicular plates exhibited irritation requiring removal. No hardware removal was required in the suture fixation group (21 patients), however one fracture fixed with a tightrope method failed and required revision with a pre-contoured plate. This patient went on to union after locking plate fixation. Additionally, three suture-fixed patients suffered from adhesive capsulitis. All three were treated successfully with physical therapy and required no further surgical treatment. It has been suggested that suture fixation of distal clavicle fractures avoids the need for metal implants, minimizes the need for re-operation, and has equivalent functional outcomes as compared to plate fixation methods Well-documented complications associated with hook plate fixation include acromial osteolysis, impingement, pain, hardware failure, and plate migration Overall, this case series displayed a high rate of union and low infection rate across all three studied fixation methods. Pre-contoured plate fixation and suture fixation methods had significantly lower re-operation rates compared to hook plate. Trans-osseous sutures had a higher rate of post-operative stiffness, but otherwise had the fewest complications of the three groups. Given the findings of this study, the authors would advise against the routine use of hook plates for primary surgical fixation of unstable distal clavicle fractures. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. None. All co-authors contributed to the collection of data and writing of this article.