In situ measurements of soil and rock compressibility through radioactive marker techniques (RMT) are here discussed. Compressibility is the main parameter governing compaction of sediments undergoing stress state variations, particularly when fluid withdrawal is considered. Numerical analyses of land subsidence phenomena from underground fluid extraction are strictly linked to the material parameters adopted, and consequently the results are strongly affected by the compressibility values used in the mathematical model. It is here proved that the presence of a fully cased hole generates perturbations of the deformations in a large area around the borehole, even accepting an elastic behaviour of the surrounding rocks. Additionally, elasto-plasticity is taken into account to further confirm the statement.Subsidence phenomena above exploited water, gas and oil reservoirs are observed in many parts of the world. These environmental effects are mainly induced by human activities, and are particularly harmful if geological events and other slow evolving phenomena (e.g. eustatism) combine with the former to produce a lowering of the ground level with respect to the mean sea level. Measurement of subsoil and reservoir compaction can be a useful contribution to quantify subsidence. In some cases it is possible to have information on the evolution of subsidence versus time, providing valuable indications to undertake possible actions of environmental protection. Most subsidence models applied in the past, and still currently employed, assume a linear elastic behaviour of the solid skeleton and/or do consider an uncoupled set of governing equations ( Additionally, as also recognized in In the following pages numerical analyses of compaction of a homogeneous formation undergoing a uniform pressure drawdown are discussed and the casing influence while measuring in-situ reservoir compaction studied, which could help in evaluating the effectiveness of in situ measurements. RMT was originally designed to monitor the subsidence of the Champion oil field offshore Brunei ( In order to evaluate the possible compaction in the very early stage of production, the markers should be implemented before casing operations. The positions of each marker can be determined by specialised wireline Gamma Ray (GR) logs, which are run at regular time intervals to estimate the possible temporal changes in the distance between the markers. In fact, moving a set of radioactivity detectors at a constant speed results in a correlation of the GR count rate versus time, which can be transformed in distance. RMT adopts a marker spacing of the order of 10 m, a distance dictated by the geometry of the logging tool. The markers are characterised by a radioactive source (Cs The critical stage of RMT can be split into two major points: (a) the detection of markers positions and (b) the measurement of relative distance between each pair of adjacent markers. The location of each marker can be calculated by using several methods, either based on numerical techniques, or on the physical principles of GR measurements (see for details In 1992, a campaign to control formation compaction due to gas production was started in the Adriatic Sea, and today several offshore fields are instrumented with radioactive markers. Marker position is determined by FSMT (Formation Subsidence Monitoring Tool, Schlumberger) and CMI (Compaction Monitoring Instrument, Baker Atlas). Marker spacing is periodically surveyed every 1 or 2 years, depending on the reservoir depressurisation. During the measurements the static reservoir pressure is recorded for each interval, which is necessary for the estimation of From the measurements, The value of In this way, It is known that Additionally, from the measurements a large RMT data scattering was observed, as well as a high variability of the associated standard deviation. It is thus necessary to acquire much more experience before RMT can be used to predict land subsidence in the Adriatic gas fields ( Subsidence analyses based directly on RMT measurements have been widely demonstrated ( However, the problem is not on the accuracy or reliability of RMT but on the following aspects: (a) the cementation between casing and formation induces a smaller compaction in proximity of the borehole (where markers are generally located) than the one far from the borehole itself, as already observed by The present study is aimed to further investigate the above observations through elastic and elasto-plastic numerical analyses of formation compaction around a borehole performed with the fully coupled Finite Element code PLASCON ( The flow of an incompressible fluid through a deformable porous medium is considered in the F.E. code PLASCON, mathematically described here using the general model of This model is based on averaging theories which recover the classical Biot's theory (   It is assumed that the medium is homogeneous and isotropic, small strains are further considered and inertial effects neglected.  In case of a fully saturated medium, as assumed here, Terzaghi's principle of effective stress applies ( The effective stress tensor variation generates deformations of the solid skeleton; the relation between effective stress rate and strain rate In general, the constitutive tensor The constitutive model here adopted for soil materials is recalled in the following paragraph. The well-known Critical State Model introduces a distinction between yielding and ultimate collapse by using the concept of critical state line in conjunction with a strain-dependent yield surface. A soil is at the critical state if, during continuous deformation, there is no change in both the void ratio and the effective stress components. In this model, a soil undergoing shear deformation can pass through a yield point without collapse and continue to deform until eventually the critical state line is reached, where ideal plasticity conditions exist. The soil continues to deform without further change of void ratio or stress. In the following we consider the Roscoe and Burland assumption regarding the dissipation of energy during plastic yielding, leading to the “modified Cam-Clay model” ( The yield surface is an ellipse in the (mean effective stress) The yield surface is strain dependent and expands or contracts as the soil hardens or softens. The recoverable changes in volume accompanying the mean effective stress variations It is supposed that any deviatoric stress variation q is accompanied by recoverable shear strains ( In ultimate states when the plastic strain evolves indefinitely without volume or effective stress changes (perfect plasticity) we say to be at a critical state, developing together with the conditions These critical states develop with an effective stress ratio The critical states locus in the All the analyses developed here consider the reservoir as a homogeneous formation; however, this assumption does not affect the validity of the results or the final conclusions. In fact, assuming a linear elastic formation behaviour, it is the ratio In accordance with the Cam-Clay model, the load of all the soil strata overlying the reservoir has been considered in the numerical analyses of perforation-induced disturbance; further, in the pressure-induced compaction analyses (elastic) the mechanism is driven by the applied excess pore overpressure Δ Following the lines described by The medium has been first supposed to behave as linear elastic and the whole domain (hole Additional sources of errors on the accuracy of in situ measurements (apart from the technique adopted and the accuracy of the investigations) are here demonstrated to reside in the presence of a cemented casing to protect the borehole. Two cases have been analysed, considering the presence of a steel casing, cement plus formation, with (a) formation and cement having comparable rigidities, and (b) cement with fixed rigidity. The study has been performed considering a borehole of external radius In the following, The analyses considered a variation of the The relative compaction Δ  The trend of relative compaction is shown in Hence, the lower the cementation degree of the reservoir (or, correspondingly, the lower the overconsolidation or the depth of the reservoir) the lower the relative compaction: e.g., with a rigidity ratio around 13 the maximum percentage error (percentage deviation of the relative compaction from unit) is of the order of 2, but it reaches 65 when the ratio is around 1300 ( In the petroleum production practice well completion involves installation of a steel casing and the cementation of the surrounding annulus to provide borehole stability and to ensure hydraulic seal between drilled formations. The casing is perforated at the level of the “pay zone” to allow oil or gas to flow into the wellbore. The “pay zone” may also be stimulated or “treated” to increase productivity. The cement has generally a rigidity which differs from the one of the formation: it is here assumed as fixed. Similarly to what previously elaborated, the analyses considered a variation of two orders of magnitude in the  The trend of relative compaction is depicted in A comparison between the percentage errors associated to in situ measurements for the studied scenarios ( The drilling processes have been numerically reproduced through a sequential variation of the hydro-mechanical characteristics of the finite elements which are used to discretize the wellbore. In this way, a stress and strain state variation for the borehole and the surrounding rock has been simulated, initially in presence of the borehole filled by the drilling fluid, then supported by a steel casing and the cementing material. It is now supposed that the discretization previously adopted can be representative of typical formations located at about 3000 m depth. The maximum radial distance has now been increased up to 10 The material data adopted in the elasto-plastic analyses are shown in  Moreover, it is evident that at the interface (node 137) the vertical (y) and the radial (x) stress components do not change sign, whilst the circumferential (z) one goes from tensile values to compressive ones; the tangential component on the vertical plane is different from zero, but it is negligible with respect to the previous ones: this effect is due to the plasticity criterion adopted which limits this component, with development of corresponding high strain (see Strain behaviour in time is depicted in  Additionally, the variation of the shear strain–vertical strain ratio with distance after casing and cementation of the wellbore can be seen in However, in the vicinity of the borehole ( Further results of the modified Cam-Clay model are shown in  In correspondence of the zone at 15 Correspondingly, the crucial results are reported in the following: A cylindrical volume coaxial to the borehole, not extending radially more than about 5 Beyond 5 Additional sensitivity elasto-plastic analyses (corresponding to Cases 2, 3 and 4 of In situ measurements of soil and rock compressibility through Radioactive Marker Techniques (RMT) have been here discussed. It has been shown that the presence of a cased and cemented hole generates perturbations of the deformations in a large area surrounding the borehole, even accepting a pure elastic behaviour of the soil strata. Additionally, elasto-plasticity has been taken into account to further confirm the statement. Once elasticity is taken into account, the relative compaction around a cased hole has been found to be much smaller than the one of the undisturbed formation. These perturbations are more evident in the close vicinity of the borehole and in the case of loose or unconsolidated formations (clay, silt and poorly consolidated sand), characterised by a rigidity much smaller than the one of the cased hole. These considerations are less evident in consolidated formations (cemented sandstone, limestone, dolomite), whose rigidity is comparable to the one of the casing. Moreover, simulating the drilling and casing operations using an elasto-plastic model for the formation shows more in detail that around the wellbore a “disturbed” area exists. Consequently, the operation of marker positioning (but, most of all, the consequent marker survey) can be considered as performed inside a disturbed zone. Varying the Cam-Clay's parameters, the above conclusions maintain a general validity. In other terms, the disturbed zone, i.e. the zone at collapse and under plastic flow, does not sensibly change in extension. The exception arises when the Poisson's ratio increases: the higher This work does not want to have the presumption of reconsidering all the current RM technology, but the aim is to suggest caution in using such technical data, particularly in subsidence analyses. Consequently, the following final statements arises: the rock (reservoir), subjected to drilling and casing, necessarily undergoes plastic deformations which are distributed within a certain volume around the borehole: any subsequent operation, analysis or in-situ measurement in its vicinity must consider that the formation is no more undisturbed; in accordance with the above results, elastic analyses of compaction of a reservoir (already drilled and cased) can give qualitative information only; anyway, if correctly performed, they are sufficient to possibly challenge the validity of compressibility values derived from RMT; hence, most of the subsidence analyses recently performed to evaluate compaction above gas fields starting from the mentioned compressibility values should be appropriately reconsidered, in the sense that a numerical-experimental re-adjustment is to be somehow proposed to take into account the coupled effects taking place in the close proximity of a cased hole before gas extractions.