Batch anaerobic biodegradation tests with different alkylbenzene sulphonates (LAS) at increasing concentrations were performed in order to investigate the effect of LAS homologues on the anaerobic digestion process of sewage sludge. Addition of LAS homologues to the anaerobic digesters increased the biogas production at surfactant concentrations ⩽5–10g/kg dry sludge and gave rise to a partial or total inhibition of the methanogenic activity at higher surfactant loads. Therefore, at the usual LAS concentration range in sewage sludge, no adverse effects on the anaerobic digesters functioning of a wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) can be expected. The increase of biogas production at low surfactant concentrations was attributed to an increase of the bioavailability and subsequent biodegradation of organic pollutants associated with the sludge, promoted by the surfactant adsorption at the solid/liquid interface. When the available surfactant fraction in the aqueous phase instead of the nominal surfactant concentration was used to evaluate the toxicity of LAS homologues, a highly significant relationship between toxicity and alkyl chain length was obtained. Taking into account the homologue distribution of commercial LAS in the liquid phase of the anaerobic digesters of a WWTP, an EC50 value of 14mg/L can be considered for LAS toxicity on the anaerobic microorganisms.Currently, special attention is paid to the environmental acceptability of those detergent surfactants which are readily biodegradable under aerobic conditions but not under anaerobic conditions. The most used anionic surfactant, a commercial mixture of linear alkylbenzene sulphonates (LAS) ( Linear sodium alkylbenzene sulphonates were synthesized by Petresa (Spain). The alkyl chain distribution, determined by gas chromatography after desulphonation, for each LAS homologue was: C Sludge samples from the anaerobic digester of a municipal WWTP (Manresa, Barcelona) were used as inoculum. Total and volatile solids of the anaerobic sludge samples were determined according to Standard Methods ( A batch test system based on the ECETOC test ( Specific analysis of LAS both in the supernatant liquor and in the settled sludge was carried out to determine the extent of primary biodegradation. The LAS extraction procedure was based on the method described by Surface tension measurements were made at 36 The effect of the alkyl chain length of LAS on the anaerobic digestion process was investigated performing batch degradation tests with different alkyl chain length homologues (C The evolution of the biogas production in the digesters spiked with different amounts of surfactant is represented in The toxicity of LAS homologues on the anaerobic microorganisms was assessed from the reduction of the maximum biogas production for each surfactant concentration. The surfactant concentration estimated to reduce 50% of the biogas production (EC Primary biodegradation of LAS homologues in the anaerobic tests was determined from the specific analysis of the surfactant in liquid and solid phases. All the percentages obtained over the test period ranged from 0% to 12%, in good agreement with the results of the LAS mass balance over full-scale anaerobic digesters (0–35%) reported in monitoring studies ( CMC values were determined in the supernatant of the anaerobic digesters. Measurements of surface tension were carried out at 36 For the digesters spiked with low surfactant amounts, not only was toxicity on methanogenic bacteria not detected but the biogas production was also increased ( Surprisingly, toxicity seems to decrease with increasing hydrophobicity of the surfactant molecule ( Due to the different sorption intensity of LAS homologues, their available fraction in the aqueous phase will present significant differences on basis of the alkyl chain length. Considering the surfactant concentration in the aqueous phase instead of the total added surfactant, the EC From the results here obtained and taking into account the LAS average background concentration in the anaerobic sludge samples from the WWTP (∼4 In the aqueous phase of the anaerobic digester of a WWTP, different LAS homologues are present and, as mentioned above, each of them has a different degree of toxicity. In a previous work ( It is worth to remark that no adverse effects on the anaerobic microorganisms and even stimulation of the methanogenic activity were observed in the anaerobic batch digesters for surfactant concentrations corresponding to the usual LAS concentrations in anaerobic sludge of WWTPs. In the toxicity context, this phenomenon could be attributed to acclimation, understood as a higher tolerance to this surfactant as a result of the prolonged exposure of the anaerobic biomass to this chemical. However, in the biodegradation context, acclimation, understood as the period of time before a clear disappearance of a chemical is observed, is not produced because no evidence for LAS removal was obtained. The addition of LAS homologues to the anaerobic digesters resulted in an increase of the biogas production at surfactant concentrations ⩽5–10 When the available surfactant fraction in the aqueous phase instead of the nominal surfactant concentration was used to evaluate the toxicity of LAS homologues, a highly significant relationship between the toxicity and the alkyl chain length was obtained. Taking into account the homologue distribution of commercial LAS in the liquid phase of the anaerobic digesters of a WWTP, an EC This research was supported by the Spanish Ministerio de Ciencia y Tecnología (MCYT) Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo Regional (FEDER), project PPQ2001-2322.