A physically based universal functional is shown to uniquely correlate the fatigue crack growth data of metals in high-cycle fatigue, generated at various stress ratios, extremely well. The functional is proposed based on the hypothesis that at any stage during fatigue, the remaining fraction of fatigue cycles required for final fracture is proportional to the fractional uncracked section size that remains to be severed by the fatigue crack. The basis for such a hypothesis is that the microscopic mechanism of fracture, such as striation formation in fatigue, is largely independent of the details (e.g. mean stress or stress ratio) of high-cycle fatigue loading. Experimentally, the functional is found to be a simple power law relating the fractional remaining uncracked section (net-section) size to the fractional (normalization by total fatigue life) remaining fatigue life. It is also shown that the surrogate form of the functional provides excellent descriptions of the raw crack-length-versus-cycles data generated in high-cycle fatigue experiments. The functional seems to provide a new physical basis, which is different from fracture mechanics, to characterize the effect of stress ratio on fatigue crack growth in materials.Growth rates of fatigue cracks in metallic materials are strongly affected by the mean stress or stress ratio, R (σ In an attempt to find a physical basis for fatigue crack growth, it has recently been shown It is hypothesized that there should be a relationship between the normalized ligament size and the fractional remaining cycles for fatigue fracture, independent of stress ratio or loading condition. The principal argument is that the microscopic mechanism of fracture, such as striation formation in fatigue, is largely independent of the details of high-cycle fatigue loading (for a given material and under mode-I). The basis for the existence of such a relationship can be argued using the schematic S-N fatigue curve presented in The objective of this work is to show that there is indeed a universal relationship (also called functional here) that uniquely correlates the fatigue crack growth data under a wide range of stress ratios, extremely well. The functional is extensively validated using a large set of experimental data on aluminum, titanium, and steel alloys generated on CCT specimens. A surrogate form of the functional is also shown to provide excellent descriptions of fatigue crack growth data (crack-length-versus-cycles or a-N data) for all stress ratios. The fatigue crack growth functional, independent of the stress ratio or mean stress in a fatigue test, is expressed as which states that In Eqs. Eqs. Several sets of fatigue crack growth data, generated using CCT samples, under various stress rations, are used here to show the validity of the proposed physical functional to characterize the fatigue crack growth data in various materials. The experimental crack-length-versus-fatigue-cycles (a-N) data, reported in literature, have been reconstructed in terms of the normalized remaining ligament size and the normalized remaining fatigue life and are presented in  The raw crack length data as a function of fatigue cycles (  The fatigue crack growth data obtained from 35  The excellent agreements of the fatigue crack growth data, reconstructed in terms of the remaining uncracked section size versus the remaining fatigue life, with the proposed functional, as well as the excellent agreement of the raw crack length data with the surrogate form of the functional, for several different materials considered here, are indeed compelling. What this means is that regardless of stress ratio, fatigue cracks grow to sever the uncracked ligament in a unique way, a finding that implies the universality of the functional form. They confirm beyond doubt that the effect of stress ratio on fatigue crack growth, in high-cycle fatigue, can be strongly correlated on the basis of the functional. It is to be noted that N A remarkable aspect of the functional is that the macroscopic mechanics of crack growth in a material, over a wide range of crack length, stress, and stress ratio, can be represented by one material constant, k. The validity and the independence of the parameter k from applied elastic stress, for R~0 constant amplitude fatigue loading, was demonstrated extensively in the author's works published elsewhere It is to be noted that this is the first observation of a physical relationship between the remaining or uncracked section of a fatigue specimen and the remaining fraction of cycles to fracture it in fatigue, and its independence from the stress ratio of the fatigue test. It may provide a path to develop new approaches or tools for the determination fatigue life of a cracked component or structure in engineering and industry. The physical functional proposed in this study may be used as a basis for the development of such new approaches. Additionally, the simple surrogate form derived from the functional can be used to reliably fit the crack-length-versus-cycles data for the determination of crack growth rates, instead of the standard practice of polynomial fitting, which needs a larger numer of co-efficients for accuracy.  A universal functional, relating the remaining fractional number of fatigue cycles for specimen fracture to the remaining fractional uncracked section size, has been shown to provide a sound physical description of fatigue crack growth, under high-cycle fatigue. The proposed functional is shown to correlate extremely well the fatigue crack growth data, independent of stress ratio of fatigue test, in several materials. The surrogate form of the functional is shown to be an excellent descriptor of the raw crack-length-versus-cycles data of fatigue crack growth tests, for all the stress ratios. It can serve well as a physically based fitting function for crack growth rate calculations. The functional seems to describe accurately the macroscopic physics of fatigue crack growth under high-cycle fatigue, without the need for any detailed considerations of the microscopic mechanism. Since it is independent of loading condition (stress level or stress ratio), it presents new opportunities for further research toward adopting this for fatigue life predictions of engineering components.