In the current research, pressureless melt infiltration (PMI) was applied to study the effect of different processing conditions on the final properties of Al/SiC composites, fabricated through the infiltration of aluminum melt into SiC particulates porous preforms. Charpy impact test was used to explore the impact behavior of the Al/SiC composites, obtained from variable processing conditions. Conducting the process at a higher infiltration temperature (1350°C) increased the final relative density of composites up to the value of 0.97 of theoretical density (TD). The application of a post sintering procedure in nitrogen atmosphere after the completion of infiltration resulted in a slight increase (∼1) in the final density of composites compared to the only infiltrated ones. Instead, the final density of argon sintered composites has undergone a 0.41% reduction. This can be originated from the occurrence of chemical reactions in the N2 atmosphere resulting in the formation of consequent phases, contrary to the argon neutral gas. Results concerning with the impact resistance demonstrated a remarkable superiority for the impact energy of the composites subjected to the combined infiltration and sintering (MIS) procedure compared to the infiltrated ones. While such an observation was found to be identical through sintering in both atmospheres, the appearance of brittle phases formed through sintering procedure in nitrogen gave rise to higher impact energy for the argon sintered composites.The remarkable focus on the hybrid composites, through the recent decade is originated from the combined effects of metallic and ceramic materials relative to the corresponding monolithic alloy. Remarkable properties of these composites such as high strength and modulus accompanied with the excellent high temperature resistance represent these materials as appropriate candidates for automotive and aerospace applications Aluminum composites based on SiC preforms are among the most reputed composites, with a considerable efficiency in the fields of technology due to their high modulus, high specific stiffness, low thermal expansion coefficient, good workability and wear resistance On the other hand, combined melt infiltration and sintering (MIS) method has been, recently, initiated to manufacture composites with a high tensile ductility and the probability to attain ductile-phase-toughened composites. As some of the available investigations In the present work, however, bearing in mind that composites include higher volume fractions of the aluminum (60 The silicon carbide (SiC) powder (Carborex, Germany), used in the current investigation, was purchased with the mean particle size of 90 Density assessments of composites were performed after the mechanical polishing of the specimens up to 1 The significant factor influencing on the relative density of melt infiltrated composites is the processing condition in which the infiltration process has been conducted. Therefore, in order to shed light on the characteristics of infiltration trend in different processing regimes, final density of composites have been compared as an assessment tool in this regard. Final density of composites (90 As can be observed in The abnormal upper shift of the final density graph at 1350 To explore the effect of different processing methods on the impact behavior of the composites, the specimens were subjected to the impact energy experiment. Final relative density and impact behavior of the melt infiltrated Al/SiC composites have been studied, in the present investigation, through the application of four variable processing conditions, named MI1, MI2, MIS1 and MIS2. The most substantial conclusions can be outlined as below: Composites fabricated by the MI2 procedure have represented the highest values of final density among all other examined methods. Presence of the AlN phase in the microstructure of these composites implies the occurrence of an intense reaction between the Al melt and nitrogen atmosphere in the interstices of the porous preform. It also, demonstrates the most significant effect on the enhancement of final density of the composites sintered in nitrogen after the infiltration stage (MIS2), compared to MI1 produced ones. The additional sintering stage, under the argon atmosphere, results in a moderate decline in the final density of MIS1 produced composites after the infiltration. This must have been caused by the evaporation of aluminum through soaking the specimens at the sintering temperature. Superior impact resistance of MIS composites, compared to MI ones must be attributed to the convenient interface formation in these materials. While formation of the interface in composites is highly depended on the diffusive mechanisms, the sintering stage after the infiltration provides extended time and high temperatures for the activation of these mechanisms. The lower impact energy of MIS2 composites in comparison with their MIS1 counterparts can be only originated from the presence of the brittle AlN phase in their microstructure. The authors of the present article would like to express their profound gratitude to Prof. R. Emadi, Mr. M. Haghighatzadeh and Mr. M.G. Haghighi for their valuable comments and helpful cooperation during the course of this research.