A prospective study of 21 triplane fractures of the distal tibia is presented. Nineteen cases (90.5%) had lateral triplane fractures, while the other two (9.5%) had medial triplane fractures. Two fragment fractures were encountered in 12 cases (57%); three fragment fractures in six cases (29%), and four fragment fractures in the remaining three cases (14%). Fourteen cases (67%) were managed non-operatively, while in seven cases (33%), open reduction and internal fixation was performed. Twenty patients (95%) were pleased with the final outcome. Objectively, 14 cases (67%) achieved excellent results.The original description of triplane fractures is attributed to Bartl (1957) The triplane fracture is defined as having fractures in the sagittal, coronal and axial anatomical planes Several anatomical variants have been identified including those with two to four principal fracture fragments, lateral and medial, and intra and extra-articular variants. Nevertheless, all have triplanar geometric configurations. Such a sub-classification is important since each type may require a specific mode of fracture reduction and management The aim of this study is to identify the relationship between the different types, and configurations of triplane fractures and their prognosis. Attempts were made to determine how far these factors and treatment might affect the risk of premature physeal closure. This prospective study included 21 cases of triplane fracture of the distal tibia, treated in Princess Alexandra Hospital, Harlow, U.K. Fourteen patients (67%) were male and seven (33%) were female. The age ranged from 10.5 to 15.3 years. The mean age was 13.8 years and 11.6 years for males and females, respectively. The right ankle was involved in nine cases (43%), and left ankle in 12 (57%). The mean follow-up period was 28 months (ranged from 14 to 36 months). All patients gave a history of a twisting injury of the ankle with varying degrees of severity. Radiological examination revealed 19 patients (90.5%) with lateral triplane fractures, 11 (58%) with two-fragment fractures, five (26%) with three-fragment fractures, and three (16%) with four-fragment fractures ( The lower tibial growth plate was found to be partially fused in 18 cases (86%). In the remaining three children, the growth plates were, completely open, radiologically (14%) ( The aim of treatment was absolute anatomical reduction after thorough clinical and radiological evaluation. All cases in this study were subjected to a special management protocol. All fractures were manipulated under general anaesthesia, with image intensifier guidance. If an adequate reduction was achieved with no or minimal displacement (less than 2 mm) in all planes cast immobilisation was continued for 6 weeks. A check radiograph was usually obtained seven days after cast application to verify that reduction had been maintained. Partial weight bearing was usually allowed at 4 weeks. If closed reduction was unsuccessful, leaving more than 2 mm of displacement in any plane, operative reduction and internal fixation was contemplated. After surgery, treatment was continued in plaster as for the undisplaced fractures. Radiographic examination was carried out at 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months and 12 months after injury and at the time of final follow up assessment in all cases. In this series, seven cases (33%) were managed surgically (five lateral triplane fractures, and two medial triplane fractures). The remaining 14 cases (67%) were managed non-operatively. Preoperative CT scans were obtained in order to improve preoperative planning. For lateral triplane fractures an anterolateral approach was used. An additional anteromedial incision was necessary in one case. An anteromedial incision was used for the two medial triplane fractures. Reduction was usually confirmed through direct observation and by image intensification. Most of fractures were initially stabilised with K wires, then by two or three screws. No transphyseal screws were inserted in this group of patients. At the final assessment and inaddition to physical examination, the patients filled in a questionnaire in order to identify their symptoms and their degree of satisfaction. Radiological examination included lateral view and bilateral A–P orthoradiographic measurement of the tibia. Based on the subjective, objective, and radiological criteria in ( Subjectively, at final follow-up, the results in 16 patients (76.2%) were classified as excellent, four (19%) as good and one (4.8%) as fair. None of the patients complained of pain, swelling or limping or claimed symptoms that interfered with their daily life activities. All patients had unrestricted walking and sport abilities except one (4.8%), who had to modify his favourite sport (Rugby) to a less vigorous one (classified as a fair result). Four patients (19%) had a mild occasional sense of stiffness (classified as a good result). There was no need, in any of the patients to use analgesia or insoles. Fourteen patients (66.7%) had been free of symptoms within 6 months after injury. Twenty patients (95.2%) were pleased with the outcome, and one (4.8%) was moderately satisfied. Objectively, the result in 14 patients (66.7%) was classified as excellent, six (29.5%) as good, and one (4.8%) as fair. None of the patients had localised tenderness, swelling or abnormal gait. Three patients (14.3%) had restricted ankle movements by less than 15°. Four (19%) had a mildly reduced subtalar arc of movement (5–10°). There was no clinically apparent deformity in any of the cases. All of the patients had stable ankle joints with negative anterior drawer, and varus and valgus stress tests. Clinically, two patients (9.5%) had shortening of the tibia measuring less than 10 mm. Nevertheless, orthoradiographic measurement revealed length discrepancies of less than 5 mm in three patients (14.3%), and from 5–10 mm in two (9.5%). Radiologically all fractures united with smooth regular articular surfaces. In one patient (4.8%) the physis completely closed on the affected side, while the opposite side was still completely open (classified as a fair results). In four patients (19%) the growth plates closed, while the other side was still partially open. Radiographs of two ankles (9.5%) revealed varus deformity of the distal tibia measuring less than 5°. In three cases (14.3%) there was valgus deformity of the distal tibia, which ranged from 3 to 7°. In the remaining 16 patients (76.7%) the growth plates on the affected ankles exactly similar to the opposite uninjured side. Both patterns and orientations of distal tibial epiphyseal injuries depend on the maturity and degree of fusion of the growth plate, which has a characteristic asymmetric pattern of fusion. In 1984, Feldman and associates When the medial portion of the distal tibial physis is stabilised by fusion or local irregularities, the forcible external rotation (lateral, outward), of a supinated foot (in planter flexion) at the ankle results in the classical two-fragment triplane fracture. As the external rotation force continues, the tightened, intact anterior tibiofibular ligament avulses the unfused anterolateral corner of the distal tibial epiphysis and separates it together with an attached metaphyseal fragment. Thus, fracture lines and fragments having a triplane configuration are produced. The talus may further force the lateral malleolus laterally and posteriorly producing an oblique fibular fracture. A fibular fracture is not a constant feature but implies that there has been a more severe external rotational force, and this should not be underestimated because of the associated increased incidence of an unsuccessful closed reduction and an increased likelihood of the need for open reduction. In the presence of axial loading three and four-fragment fractures are to be expected. Our findings are largely compatible with that of Healy et al. In 1985, von Laer Two-transmalleolar (extra-articular) triplane fractures (9.5%) were encountered in our group. In this type the sagittal fracture line extends through the medial malleolus and not into the ankle joint. Feldman et al. proposed that, in such cases, less than an anatomical reduction could be acceptable. The need for surgical management to restore articular congruity could therefore, often be avoided The medial triplane fracture was originally described by Marmor Treatment of the distal tibial triplane fracture is still controversial and addressed with wide variations in the literature. There is still no agreement on management. von Laer The theoretical risk of partial premature epiphyseal closure resulting in an angular deformity and/or limb-length discrepancy was not realised in our series or in the literature. The prognosis was always surprisingly good Although it was statistically insignificant there was a tendency for less than excellent results to occur in younger patients (less than 11 years in girls and 12 in boys) ( Very few studies have followed patients up for more then 10 years In this study, the time lapse before management, the accuracy of reduction, associated other injuries, and pre-existing foot or ankle problems did not affect the outcome. Treatment started within hours of injury in all patients. Only a perfect anatomical reduction was accepted. The type of management (non-operative or operative) had no statistically significant influence on outcome ( Sub-optimal results reported in the literature have always been associated with inadequate reduction or loss of reduction with a residual displacement of 2 mm or more  The complexity of the triplane fractures is often underestimated and its significance overlooked. Triplane fractures are relatively benign, if the correct diagnosis is made and accurate reduction achieved. Growth disturbance has no or only minimal influence on the final subjective results particularly in older children with the lateral type of fracture and partial physeal closure. Open reposition and careful osteosynthesis is recommended, if anatomical reduction cannot be achieved or maintained by non-operative means. Optimum outcome measurement can only be made, some years after complete skeletal maturity and cessation of growth.