A new method for acid leaching mixed nickel–cobalt hydroxide precipitate (MHP) is proposed; whereby nickel is largely dissolved while cobalt and manganese are stabilised in the solid phase by preferential oxidation. The relevant oxidation thermodynamics are presented. Metal extraction and leaching kinetics were not significantly affected by temperature over the range tested (30–80°C), or by the length of MHP ageing prior to leaching (three months vs. four years). Calcium and magnesium are the major solution impurities (0.1g-Ca/L, 3g-Mg/L). A portion of the calcium and magnesium can be selectively leached from the MHP at pH7. Thermodynamic analysis indicates that the leaching of nickel and the onset of copper and zinc leaching can be predicted assuming MHP is an ideal solid solution. Both thermodynamic analysis and chemical assay confirm that the nickel hydroxyl-sulphate stoichiometry is approximately Ni7(OH)12SO4. The Gibbs energy of formation of metastable Ni7(OH)12SO4 at 80°C (353K) was estimated to be −3356kJ/mole.Hydrometallurgical processing of nickel laterite ore is complicated by impurities such as chromium, iron, aluminium, manganese and cobalt. Cobalt, in particular, is a value metal which is always present in the unweathered precursor igneous rock ( Nickel laterite ore is typically processed by variations of two flowsheets; ammonia leaching of roasted ore, or direct sulphuric acid leaching, with industry favouring the latter in recent times. Nickel and cobalt are recovered from acidic pregnant leach solutions (PLS) by one of three methods; (i) precipitation of a mixed nickel–cobalt sulphide; (ii) precipitation of a mixed nickel–cobalt hydroxide (MHP) or (iii) direct solvent extraction (DSX). Nickel and cobalt are then separated from each other and subsequently recovered from the resulting solutions by hydrogen reduction, electrowinning or precipitation. Nickel–cobalt separation technologies are summarised in Although mixed sulphide precipitation excludes more of the common impurities, mixed hydroxide precipitation is becoming increasingly popular as it “eliminates the costly and undesirable H One method of refining MHP, employed at the Queensland Nickel and Cawse refineries, is an ammonia ammonium–carbonate leach. In the leach, nickel and cobalt are recovered to solution along with copper, zinc and manganese (to a lesser extent); however, the majority of the iron, aluminium, magnesium, calcium, chromium and silicon remain in the solid phase ( Ammoniacal leaching of MHP is more selective towards nickel and cobalt when compared to acid leaching; however, it is sensitive to MHP oxidation and ageing ( Cobalt is the most problematic issue in the use of the LIX84I solvent extraction circuit. As the oxidation of Co(II) to Co(III) is never complete, any unoxidised cobalt loads with nickel onto the organic ( Nickel recovery via ammoniacal leaching and SX presents two clear challenges; process sensitivity and impurity rejection. It is in these areas that selective acid leaching of MHP provides advantages. In this process as shown in One industrial sample of MHP was used in all the experiments, except for investigating the effect of MHP ageing on leach performance. The fresh MHP was approximately three months old and had been stored in a sealed container and plastic bag to minimise drying and/or oxidation. The MHP sample has an average moisture content of 43.5 wt. % and composition as given in Leaching experiments were performed in a covered 1.2 Wet MHP and deionised water was slurried in the reactor and heated to the desired temperature. Oxidant (crystalline sodium peroxydisulphate, 98 wt. % pure) was then added at the stoichiometric requirement to oxidise all manganese and cobalt from the divalent to trivalent form (Eqs. For all experiments, the first acid addition was taken to be time zero. The reactor temperature was maintained within +/- 3 At the end of the experiment, solid leach residues were isolated by batch vacuum filtration, and dried at 60 To investigate the effect of pH on metal deportment, acid was added to the reactor every 30 To investigate leaching kinetics, the total acid required to reach the target slurry pH was added to the reactor immediately following oxidant addition. Slurry samples were taken every 30 The oxidation–reduction potential (ORP) was monitored during these experiments, but was not particularly helpful as the reaction is taking place at the MHP solid–solution interface not at the Pt electrode. Carrying out the reaction based on the known stoichiometry rather than a target ORP, is more effective in terms of achieving a reproducible experiment. The element recovery to solution (R, %) during the leaching process at given sampling time was based on the calculated head assay as follows (Eq. The recovery of major (> At pH These results indicate that a single stage selective acid leach of MHP at pH Below pH Above pH The calcium and magnesium leach prior to nickel, therefore separation between these elements by selective acid leaching is not possible. In contrast, a clean nickel–manganese separation was achieved for the entire pH range tested. The calcium and magnesium concentration however, may be reduced by a prewash of MHP. As shown in The recovery of chromium shows a distinctly different dependence on pH in comparison to all other elements. As shown in A comparison of batch leaching tests conducted at 30 The stability of nickel hydroxide precipitate has been observed to increase with time ( Acid leaching of aged MHP was shown to decrease the nickel recovery by 5% to approximately 85% ( The dependence of nickel extraction on residence time at 30 As the reaction kinetics are relatively fast, an assumption of equilibrium can be made for all the experimental data obtained, and therefore be compared with thermodynamic predictions of the reaction equilibrium. At equilibrium, the leaching of divalent metal hydroxides in MHP (Eq. Assuming that water and metal hydroxide are pure phases (i.e. MHP however, is not a pure solid precipitate but rather a mixture of solids or a solid solution. Assuming MHP is an ideal solid solution, the activity of metal hydroxide in MHP is approximated as the mole fraction of metal hydroxide in MHP (equilibrium model 2: Eq. Basic nickel hydroxides have been shown to form when precipitated from an aqueous sulphate containing solution ( Using current thermodynamic data, equilibrium was calculated using the three models for nickel, copper and zinc. The behaviour of magnesium was more complex than for nickel, copper and zinc. The data did not permit interpretation as hydroxide solid solution, mainly due to the fact that there was insufficient magnesium in the system for the aqueous solution to become saturated at any of the experimental conditions. The reaction equilibrium constants used are provided in Comparison of the calculated and experimental equilibrium for Ni(OH) The leaching of both Zn(OH) The discrepancy between the experimental data for nickel and model 2, which takes into account solid solution effects, is attributed to the nickel being a nickel hydroxyl-sulphate compound ( The solid solution thermodynamic models (2 and 3) are in closer agreement with the experimental data than model 1, see The solid solution assumption (model 2) also agrees with the experimental data for zinc seen in In this study, manganese and cobalt are stabilised in the solid phase by preferential oxidation. The thermodynamic predictions for oxidative precipitation of divalent aqueous iron, manganese, cobalt and nickel are shown in The selective acid leaching of MHP provides a relatively simple means to recover and separate nickel from cobalt, manganese, copper and iron. These separations were achieved quickly (< In a thermodynamic analysis, it was found that the leaching of nickel from MHP can be predicted for the pH range of 6 to 8 with the assumptions of an ideal solid solution and that nickel is present a metastable nickel hydroxyl-sulphate with stoichiometry of Ni The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial assistance for this research provided by the