This paper addresses the two problems that arise in evaluating dimension-stone quarries: absence of a single quality variable and classification of blocks of stone. In constructing the single variable, an approach considering multivariate spatial relations of a number of variables that affect quality of dimension-stone is proposed. The multivariate spatial relations are defined by variogram matrices. In classification of the blocks, a decision analysis approach that rests on two key concepts, cumulative conditional distribution function and loss function, is introduced. The approaches are applied to an andesite quarry located in Ankara, Turkey: one level of the quarry is chosen to be a test area from which 108 rock samples are taken at 20m regular intervals. The rock samples are tested for some of the mechanical properties of andesite that control the economics of extraction process, and a quality index is produced using test data. The application area is then divided into 1862 5×5m square blocks, and the conditional distribution functions for these blocks are estimated by indicator kriging. Finally, the blocks are classified as exploitable and non-exploitable on the basis of minimization of economic losses.For production planning of natural resources the quality of the in-situ material prior to extraction needs to be assessed. This is usually made on the basis of estimates of a single variable such as grade. However, there are two problems associated with this type of assessment in dimension-stone quarries. The first problem is the absence of the single variable that defines stone quality. Indeed, the quality of stone is characterized by a number of variables such as hardness, strength, texture, structure, fracture, etc., and a multiplicity of variables makes exploitation planning impossible. The second problem is related to classification of blocks of stone into various quality groups. This is usually made on the basis of estimates of the quality variable. However, the estimated values are inevitably subject to error, and such errors may have a significant effect on the quarry plan for an operating property. This paper deals with these two problems. First, an approach that uses a multivariate spatial relationship in producing the quality variable from a number of original variables is introduced. Then, for classifying an unsampled block into various categories, a two-step approach in which the conditional cumulative distribution function of the the unknown block is derived by indicator kriging and a minimum expected loss concept is applied to this distribution is proposed. Finally, the approaches are applied to an andesite quarry. The problem of defining a single variable is a multivariate problem and can be solved by combining the original variables to produce an overall score that can be considered as a quality index. One such approach has been used by One of the tools most used in describing the spatial relationship for a single variable, Consider now a linear combination of the data: Calculate the Cholesky decomposition of the matrix Calculate the matrix multiplication, Calculate the spectral decomposition of the symmetric matrix, Take the eigenvector corresponding to the smallest eigenvalue as For quarry planning, blocks of stone need to be to classified into various categories (for example, exploitable or non-exploitable in the simplest way). At the planning stage, actual block values are not known, and they must be estimated from the available data. As a consequence, the classification can only be made on the basis of estimated values. For example, if the estimated value of a block satisfies a prespecified condition, this condition being constrained by technical and economical factors, the block is designated as exploitable otherwise non-exploitable. This approach has found many applications in evaluation of quarries. However, the estimated values are subject to error, and decisions made on this basis involve a certain degree of risk. Indeed, what is estimated as non-exploitable may well be exploitable and vice versa. This requires an evaluation of the risk associated with classification of the blocks. The risk is directly related to the magnitude of the error incurred or, better, uncertainty about the actual, but unknown, value and evaluation of the risk calls for quantification of uncertainty about the unknown value. Uncertainty can be quantified in essentially two ways. The first is based on a specific estimator (e.g. kriging) and assumes that estimation errors follow a normal distribution and that error variance is independent of data values. However, these assumptions are rarely met in practice [see, for example, Once the block conditional distribution function at location Once the conditional distribution function is known, the expected loss attached to the two types of classification is approximated as: There are essentially two approaches to estimating the conditional distribution functions: model-based and data-based. The latter has generally met with greater acceptance than model-based alternatives. So far, a number of methods for estimating the conditional distributions by the data-based approach have been developed [see, for example, Indicator approach for estimating the conditional distributions is based on defining an indicator variable as The study area is an andesite quarry located 60 In planning a quarry or any mine, cost is obviously a dominant factor. In hard-rock quarrying with a diamond wire saw, the costs are influenced mainly by the wear on the diamond, which depends largely on the characteristics of the rock material. Indeed, in the quarry under consideration, as the hardness and strength of a block of andesite increase, the wear on the diamond increases, and when the wear exceeds 0.0086 To provide detailed information for the methods previously described, one level of the andesite quarry is sampled on a 20 Perhaps the most delicate point in this procedure is the selection of the distances, Cut-off values are traditionally chosen to be the nine deciles of the quality index distribution: these are 17.13, 17.33, 17.55, 17.76, 17.99, 18.23, 18.53, 18.84 and 19.37. The cut-off values are very close. This is a natural consequence of the smoothing effect of the linear combination. The quality index values are transformed into indicator values at the nine cut-offs, and indicator variograms for each of the nine cut-offs were computed at various directions. The indicators were found to exhibit an anisotropic spatial variability. The directions of maximum and minimum variability are NS and EW, respectively. The indicator variograms for these two directions are shown in The study area was divided into 1862 square 5×5 Comparing the quality index distribution with the wear distribution given in The identification of a single quality index and the classification of blocks are two major challenges to dimension-stone quarry planning. For the former problem, an approach that is based on simultaneous decomposition of two variogram matrices is proposed. The advantage of this approach is that it accounts for multivariate spatial correlations of the variables that affect the quality of dimension-stone, and it is also invariant under the linear transformations of these variables. In classifying the blocks into various quality groups, a decision-making approach is presented that derives the conditional distribution function for the unknown block value and minimizes an economic loss function that is case-specific. The advantage of this approach over traditional classification algorithms is that it does not depend on a single estimate of quality index and is based on financial costs. Processing of the mechanical properties of the rock samples from the andesite quarry illustrates the applicability of the methodology to real data sets.