The treatment of acetabular fractures in geriatric patients provides a unique set of challenges to the orthopaedic surgeon. Treatment strategies often differ from those employed to treat younger patients with acetabular fractures in order to minimize morbidity and mortality following these injuries. Treatment strategies to address these injuries include a repertoire of innovative methods for percutaneous or limited-open reduction and fixation in addition to traditional non-operative or open reduction and internal fixation methods. The purpose of this article is to discuss the challenges associated with the management of acetabular fractures in geriatric patients and to highlight current surgical techniques that can be applied to treat these patients.Treatment of geriatric patients with acetabular fractures is especially challenging. Medical comorbidities, perioperative risk factors, osseous insufficiency, and limited mobility of patients in this population demand a comprehensive approach addressing the multitude of medical, anesthetic, orthopaedic, and rehabilitative considerations involved in effectively managing and treating these often complex patients with complex injuries. Patients aged 55 years and greater represent the most rapidly expanding population of patients sustaining acetabular fractures. These fractures occur in an older population not only as the result of high-energy trauma, such as motor vehicle crashes, but are also more likely to occur as the result of low-energy trauma, such as ground-level falls. Acetabular fractures occurring in patients older than 55 years are classified according to the Letournel classification. Marginal impaction of the articular surface is a particularly common finding in geriatric acetabular fractures. In elderly patients, marginal impaction can occur in almost any location; however, it is particularly common in the acetabular dome (known as the “gull sign”) and along posterior articular surface edges. Periprosthetic fractures also occur more commonly in the older population ( Fractures of the acetabulum in elderly patients must be treated with significant consideration given to the patient's prefracture health status. Nonsurgical treatment options include bed rest with or without the use of skeletal traction, or the option of allowing patients out of bed with or without modification of their weight-bearing status. If the femoral head is not concentrically reduced within the acetabulum either because of the primary fracture configuration or through secondary congruence of the acetabulum, consideration should be given to manipulative treatment in the form of closed reduction and implementation of skeletal traction or surgery to achieve concentric reduction. Treatment of acetabular fractures through any form of bed rest with or without skeletal traction must be accompanied by an aggressive regimen of decubitus prophylaxis, pulmonary toilet, and venous thromboembolic prophylaxis. Postreduction radiographs must be obtained for patients in traction and monitored regularly to ensure the maintenance of reduction. Manipulative closed reduction in association with 10-20 lb of skeletal traction is typically sufficient for maintenance of reduction of the acetabulum. The amount of traction weight should be tailored to the size of the patient, perceived tolerance of the patient's bone quality to hold a skeletal traction pin, and the force deemed necessary to maintain reduction of the femoral head concentrically within the acetabulum. Older patients who have sustained acute, displaced, or unstable acetabular fractures with acceptable risk profiles should be considered candidates for surgical treatment. As for any patient who is considered a candidate for surgery, risk stratification and medical optimization are crucial and should occur with assistance or direction from internal medicine and/or anesthesia services most qualified to treat the patient's medical conditions throughout the perioperative period. Preoperative planning to establish clear and reasonable goals for surgery is critical to determining the optimal approach and mode of fixation to address any acetabular fracture. The goals of treatment for acetabular fractures in elderly patients may differ significantly from the goals of treatment for similar fracture patterns in younger patients. For example, in certain cases, mechanical stabilization of the hemipelvis and concentric, but less-than-anatomic, reduction of the acetabulum may be an acceptable and reasonable goal that allows a patient to be out of bed with modified weight-bearing status as opposed to maintenance on bed rest with or without skeletal traction. Achievement of this goal may significantly improve this patient's chances of avoiding complications such as decubitus ulcerations, venous thromboembolic phenomena, and nosocomial pneumonia. Alternatively, some fracture patterns in older patients may demand the same type of surgical treatment as that required in younger patients to obtain an anatomic and concentric reduction of the hip, as well as stable fixation. Percutaneous reduction and fixation techniques for acetabular fractures have advanced significantly. Particularly complex and/or unstable patterns of acetabular fracture may not be amenable to percutaneous or limited open reduction and/or fixation techniques ( Particularly in the older population, any discussion about treatment of acetabular fractures must also incorporate total hip arthroplasty (THA). THA, with or without open reduction and internal fixation of the acetabulum, may be considered as a staged approach or primary treatment option for the treatment of amenable acetabular fracture patterns. The limited open and percutaneous reduction and fixation techniques mentioned previously are some of the most recent technical developments that have been successfully applied to the treatment of acetabular fractures in our aging population. These techniques, although not universally applicable to all patients or fracture types, can be of particular benefit when used to provide accurate reduction and stable fixation of the acetabulum in ways that reduce surgical time, blood loss, and stress to patients who must be maintained within a narrow physiological window. Safe and successful application of these techniques is critically dependent upon the surgeon's ability to restore normal osseous anatomy through anatomic reduction so that surgical implants can be placed into corridors of cancellous bone without damaging nearby pelvic organs or neurovascular structures. Limited open and percutaneous techniques for acetabular reduction and fixation will be discussed according to the regions of the pelvis or columns of the acetabulum that must be addressed. Anterior and posterior wall fractures as well as marginal impactions of the acetabulum are extremely difficult to address through limited open or percutaneous approaches. The anterior column of the acetabulum, including the iliac and superior pubic ramus components, can be reduced and stabilized through application of several of these limited open or percutaneous techniques. To perform manipulative reduction of anterior column fracture components, limited open approaches through the lateral window of an ilioinguinal approach can be used to reduce fractures extending into the iliac wing, quadrilateral surface, or pubic root. Iliac fractures can be reduced under direct visualization through this approach; quadrilateral surface and pubic root fractures would most likely be reduced without direct visualization using this approach. To address fractures of the anterior column involving the pubic root, psoas gutter, iliopectineal eminence, or quadrilateral surface under direct visualization, the middle window of the ilioinguinal approach between the external iliac vessels and iliopsoas/femoral nerve is particularly useful and versatile. The modified Stoppa approach, even when used in isolation, is significantly invasive but especially versatile for reduction and fixation of acetabular fracture components in the true pelvis, including the entire superior pubic ramus, quadrilateral surface, and posterior column of the acetabulum. Through these limited surgical windows, or through independent percutaneous incisions, numerous options for fixation of the anterior column of the acetabulum are available. The selection of particular fixation strategies is dependent upon fracture configuration, assessment of pre- and postfixation stability, and perceived safety of implant placement. To achieve reduction and fixation of the acetabulum using long screws, the corridors of bone through which these screws pass must be contained by reduced, intact, or at least sufficient cortical bone to allow safe passage of the necessary drill bits and screws, as well as obtain sufficient fixation to achieve adequate acetabular stability. Cortical lag screw fixation can be applied through several available bone corridors to reduce and/or stabilize anterior column components of an acetabular fracture. Such screws may be applied through limited open or percutaneous incisions along the periphery of the ilium, through the supra-acetabular corridor extending from the anterior inferior iliac spine toward the posterior superior iliac spine, as well as through antegrade or retrograde medullary ramus screws. Limited open or percutaneous surgical treatment options for the posterior column components of geriatric acetabular fractures are more limited. Surgical visualization and reduction of acetabular fractures involving the posterior column can be accomplished in limited fashion through a lateral window or middle window of the ilioinguinal approach. More direct visualization of these fracture components for reduction requires use of a more formal Stoppa and/or Kocher-Langenbeck approaches. An antegrade posterior column ilioischial screw application extending from the internal iliac fossa, into the ischium posterior to the acetabulum, can be accessed typically through a limited open or full lateral window of the ilioinguinal approach, but is very difficult in the obese patient because of interference from the abdominal girth. A retrograde screw application through the same bony corridor through a limited open approach to the caudal ischium has also been described. This approach to the ischial tuberosity in isolation rarely provides opportunities for clamp application or manipulative reduction, and again, it is exceedingly difficult in obese patients. Knowledge of a similar repertoire of fluoroscopic planes and their limitations in the supine, lateral decubitus, and prone positions is required for safe application of reduction tools and fixation options. Acetabular fractures are becoming increasingly common in the aging population and therefore represent an emerging challenge to the orthopedic surgical community. Because of the fragile physiology of many patients in this population, as well as the challenges created by higher rates of osteopenia, extensive fracture comminution, marginal impaction, and a delicate soft-tissue envelope, surgical management of the fractures is particularly complex. Nonsurgical treatment options exist for almost all acetabular fracture types; however, these options are associated with all the potential risks of long-term recumbency, prolonged residence in medical facilities, potential fracture or hip joint instability, and post-traumatic osteoarthritis. Surgical techniques for treatment of acetabular fractures in the geriatric population are rapidly evolving with the advent of advanced techniques for reduction and fixation of these fractures. Percutaneous and minimally invasive strategies are advantageous in a select subset of these patients. However, published outcome studies evaluating the efficacy of current and evolving techniques for treatment of these fractures remain few. Further study will be necessary to quantify the benefits for patients who require treatment of these complex fractures.