   Karl Albert Gschneidner Jr. was a first-generation American born to German immigrants on November 16, 1930 in Detroit, Michigan. Raised in Detroit, he graduated from the University of Detroit in 1952 with a BS in Chemistry and minors in Physics and Mathematics. He then started what, with a few minor interruptions, was his long association with Iowa State University, at that time Iowa State College of Agriculture and Mechanical Arts, in Ames, Iowa. Working at the Ames Laboratory under the supervision of laboratory director Frank H. Spedding and Adrian H. Daane, Karl completed his PhD in Physical Chemistry in 1957. Having completed his PhD and married Melba Gschneidner (nee Pickenpaugh), Karl and Melba undertook the long drive from Ames to the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory (now Los Alamos National Laboratory). As Karl sometimes reminisced, this was their honeymoon trip and a trip to his first job combined. Located on the Pajarito Plateau in the Jemez Mountains in north central New Mexico, Los Alamos was a dramatic change from central Iowa. Gschneidners arrived in Los Alamos just as the gates of the formerly closed community were opened. Karl worked as a scientific staff member at Los Alamos from November 1957 to September 1963 and was a section leader from September 1961. In 1962, Karl took a leave of absence from Los Alamos and served as an Assistant Professor in the Physics Department at the University of Illinois at Urbana. While Gschneidners were in Urbana, Adrian Daane took a position at Kansas State University and subsequently Karl was hired as an associate professor in the Metallurgy Department at Iowa State and a group leader in the Ames Laboratory. With the exception of a seven-month Faculty Improvement Leave as a visiting professor in the Institute of Pure and Applied Physical Sciences, University of California, San Diego in 1979–1980, conveniently timed to avoid the Iowa winter, Karl remained in Ames for the rest of his career. Shortly after returning to Iowa State, Karl wrote a 46-page pamphlet, Rare Earths—The Fraternal Fifteen, as part of the US Atomic Energy Commission's “Understanding the Atom” series. Published in 1964, this pamphlet remains a valuable introduction to the rare earth series. Aiming at wide ranging audience from advance high school students to graduate students, the monograph includes extensive lists of references appropriate for different levels of readers. The monograph described the 4f electrons with a simple analogy to a neighborhood of 15 almost identical tract homes shown in Using analogies such as those in the monograph, Karl was able to describe the role that 4f electrons play in determining the structure and properties of lanthanide alloys. Subsequently the development of density functional theory allowed theorists to quantify the interactions of the 4f electrons with both the 5d valence electrons of the individual atom and the interactions with neighboring atoms in alloys and compounds. While Karl's research continued to make significant advances in understanding the properties of rare earth materials, in 1966 he initiated an activity which provided a much wider audience with information on rare earth science and technology. The Rare-earth Information Center (RIC) was founded to track and distribute technical information on rare earth materials. The initial issue of the RIC News ( Long before the availability of affordable commercial data base programs, Karl commissioned the Ames Laboratory's computer group to write a data base program to provide searches of the technical literature on rare earth materials. For 30 years, Karl's colleagues knew not to look for him on Wednesday mornings as he was in the library identifying the most recent publications in the rare earth field. Long before the advent of pdfs or even cheap photocopying, the RIC collected reprints of these articles. Karl determined that the best response to reprint request was when the request arrived just as the author received the reprints from the publisher. From experience, Karl knew the approximate time between the publication and when the author received reprints for most journals and established a system so that the RIC staff mailed the reprint request so the author received the request at the optimum time. When the reprints were received, undergraduate students working as hourlies keyworded the papers, classifying them by composition of the materials investigated, the measurements performed, etc. This allowed rare earth researchers to efficiently search the literature. As the reputation of the RIC spread, authors mailed in articles, especially from journals not in the standard American university library. Conferences provided their proceedings which might otherwise have limited exposure. The RIC initially funded by the US Atomic Energy Commission, gradually shifted to state and private funding with a peak of about 50% of the budget coming from corporate sponsors. In 1988, Karl started the RIC Insight, a two-page newsletter to sponsors to keep them abreast of the latest developments. Karl personally wrote this newsletter. The activities of the RIC brought Karl in personal contact with the leaders of all major research groups as well as the leaders of the rare earth industries. He acquired an encyclopedic knowledge of the rare earth literature and industry and gained the title of Mr. Rare Earth. Karl directed the RIC for 30 In research, always an advocate of using high purity materials and in particular rare earths in the study of alloy systems, Karl studied the low-temperature heat capacity of many binary alloys of rare earth elements where impurity phases frequently result in large errors. With his interest in the binary phases of rare earths, he analyzed the 21 lanthanide binary systems that were known at the time. As a result, the majority of the rare earth binary phase diagrams in current handbooks and databases are attributed to Karl. The insight he gained from these systems can be used to predict the generalized phase diagram of most of the possible binary systems with the exceptions of the elements which may be divalent. Karl was always fascinated by apparent inconsistencies in the properties of related rare earth compounds. In 1996, he noted that while Gd Karl's interest in binary rare earth compounds led to a rather startling discovery in 2003. As a rule, intermetallic compounds are brittle. Typically, they can only be deformed a few percent before brittle fracture occurs. Karl and his Ames Lab coworkers discovered a dozen of rare earth intermetallic compounds which could be stretched up to nearly 25% before fracturing. These intermetallics, with a 50–50 mix of a rare earth atom and a nonrare earth atom, typified by YAg and DyCu form a stoichiometric compound where each atom of one element is surrounded by a cubic arrangement of the other element. In 1966 when Karl started the RIC, the rare earth mine in Mountain Pass, CA had reached full production and the first rare earth magnets, typified by SmCo Karl's impact on the scientific community extends far beyond his role as a professor who taught generations of undergraduates materials science, scores of graduate students rare earth science and was an outstanding resource for his colleagues. Karl's research activities made major contributions to both fundamental and applied science. From the understanding of intermetallic compounds to the realization of magnetic refrigeration laid the foundation for future advances. His contribution to the dissemination of knowledge through the Rare Earth Information Center and the first 41 volumes of the Handbook on the Physics and Chemistry of Rare Earths he edited influenced the entire rare earth community. Finally, as the most prominent spokesman of the importance of rare earths in the United States, if not the world, he has impacted the national science policy. In the 29  Alloy theory of metallic systems and the physical metallurgy of the rare earth elements. The preparation of high purity rare earth metals and single crystals of the pure metals, intermetallic phases, and refractory nonmetallic compounds; and low-temperature (1–350   American Chemical Society American Society for Materials International (Fellow) Phi Lambda Upsilon Society of the Sigma Xi American Crystallographic Association The Minerals, Metals, and Materials Society (Fellow) American Association for the Advancement of Science (Fellow) IEEE-Magnetics Society (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers) Iowa Academy of Sciences Materials Research Society (Fellow) American Physical Society (Fellow) Materials Research Society of India (Honorary Member) Cryogenic Society of America The Japan Institute of Metals (Honorary Member) National Academy of Engineering  Senior Chemistry-Major Achievement Award, University of Detroit, 1950–51. President of the Chemistry Club, University of Detroit, 1951–52. Chairman of Committee on Alloy Phases, Institute of Metals Division, Metallurgical Society of AIME, August 1965 to February 1968. Charter member, 1961 to date. Publications Committee, Institute of Metals Division, AIME, February 1969–January 1972. Member—Panel on Rare Earths, Committee on Technical Aspects of Critical and Strategic Materials, National Research Council of the National Academy of Sciences and National Academy of Engineering, June 25, 1969. Member of the Final Selection Committee for the Howe Medal and Grossmann Award for 1971, American Society for Metals. Member of the Editorial Advisory Board of the Journal of Nonmetals, 1971–1980 (journal founded in 1971). Member of the Hume-Rothery Award Committee, American Institute of Mining, Metallurgical and Petroleum Engineers, Institute of Metals Division, 1973–1976. Member of the Organization Committee of the 11th Rare Earth Research Conference, Traverse City, Michigan, October, 1974. Member—Ad Hoc Panel on Phase Diagrams, Numerical Data Advisory Board, National Research Council of the National Academy of Science and National Academy of Engineering, March 18, 1975. Appointed editor-in-chief of a four-volume treatise entitled “HANDBOOK ON THE PHYSICS AND CHEMISTRY OF RARE EARTHS” by the North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam (March 1975). Changed to an open-ended series in 1981. 1978 (Volume 1)–2011 (Volume 41). Appointed to the Board of Editorial Associates of Elected to the Executive Committee of Ames Section of the American Chemical Society (December 1976). Appointed to serve as a member of the Institute of Metals Lecture and Robert F. Mehl Award Committee, The Metallurgical Society of AIME (American Institute of Mining, Metallurgical and Petroleum Engineers) from February 1978 to February 1982. Chairman, 1980. Winner of the 1978 William Hume-Rothery Award of The Metallurgical Society of AIME (American Institute of Mining, Metallurgical and Petroleum Engineers) in recognition of outstanding scholarly contributions to the science of alloys (February 1978). Appointed to serve on the Board of Advisory Editors of the Appointed to serve on International Council on Alloy Phase Diagrams to assist the American Society for Metals and the US National Bureau of Standards in planning implementing and evaluation of a program to provide evaluated phase diagrams and related data, and bibliographic services related to these data (June 1978). Named Distinguished Professor in Sciences and Humanities, Iowa State University, Ames, Iowa, May 24, 1979; title changed to Anson Marston Distinguished Professor in 1986. Elected to the board of directors of the Rare Earth Research Conference, Inc., June 1979. Appointed to serve as a member of the William Hume-Rothery Award Committee, The Metallurgical Society of AIME (American Institute of Mining, Metallurgical and Petroleum Engineers) from February 1979 to February 1983. Cowinner of the Department of Energy's 1982 Materials Sciences Research Competition in the Metallurgy and Ceramics: Outstanding Scientific Accomplishment Category. Research was on “Quenching of Spin Fluctuations and Inducing of Magnetic Moments in Metamagnetic Materials.” Appointed to serve as a member of the Honors and Awards Committee, The Metallurgical Society of AIME (American Institute of Mining, Metallurgical and Petroleum Engineers) from February 1983 to 1986; and chairman of the Acta Metallurgical Gold Medal/Hume-Rothery Award subcommittee from February 1983 to February 1984. Appointed to serve as a member of the James Douglas Gold Medal Award Committee, (American Institute of Mining, Metallurgical and Petroleum Engineers) from March 1984 to February 1988. Chairman for 1987. The paper “Physical properties and interrelationships of metallic and semimetallic elements” ( Appointed to serve on the International Prize for New Materials Committee (American Physical Society) for 1988 (as vice chairman) and 1989 (as chairman). Appointed to serve on editorial board of Appointed to serve on Henry Marion Howe Medal and Marcus A. Grossmann Young Author Award Selection Committee (ASM International) for 1989 and 1990, Chairman in 1990. Elected President-Elect for 1989–90 and President for 1990–91 of the Iowa State University Chapter of Sigma Xi. Burlington Northern Award for Excellence in Research, Iowa State University, Ames, IA, May 12, 1989. Elected a Fellow of The Minerals, Metals and Materials Society, Warrendale, PA, February 20, 1990. Elected a Fellow of ASM (American Society for Materials) International, Materials Park, OH, October 9, 1990. Appointed Guest Editor for the special commemorative centennial volume of the Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials, August 31, 1990. Frank H. Spedding Award for distinguished contributions in the field of rare earth science, Rare Earth Research Conferences, Inc. (sponsored by Rhône-Poulenc Industries), July 15, 1991, 19th Rare Earth Research Conference, Lexington, Kentucky. Appointed to serve on the ASM International Technical Books Committee, September 1991–September 1994. A special symposium, named the “Karl A. Gschneidner, Jr. Symposium,” was dedicated to K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. in recognition for his “meritorious service to rare earth science and industry” at the International Conference on Rare Earths ‘92 in Kyoto, Japan, June 1–5, 1992. Named to the Board of Governors of Acta Materialia, Inc. as one of the representatives of ASM International. Acta Materialia, Inc. publishes Named an Honorary Member of the Materials Research Society of India, June 1993. Appointed to the Advisory Editorial Board of the Journal of Phase Equilibria, February 1995. Corecipient of the Russell B. Scott Award of the Cryogenic Engineering Conference (CEC) for the Best Research Paper presented at the 1993 CEC in Albuquerque, New Mexico, July 1993. The paper was entitled “New magnetic refrigeration materials for the liquefaction of hydrogen,” by K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., H. Takeya, J.O. Moorman, V.K. Pecharsky, S.K. Malik, and C.B. Zimm. The award was presented at the 1995 CEC in Columbus, OH, July 20, 1995. Life member of American Society for Materials International (1995). Elected to the Board of Directors of the Cryogenic Engineering Conference 1997–2003, July 1997. David R. Boylan Eminent Faculty Award in Research, College of Engineering, Iowa State University, September 4, 1997. Winner (along with Vitalij K. Pecharksy) of the Department of Energy's 1997 Materials Sciences Research Competition in the Significant Implication for Department of Energy Related Technologies in Metallurgy and Ceramics Category. Research was on “The Giant Magnetocaloric Effect Materials, Gd Elected an honorary member of the European Rare Earth and Actinide Society, September 1998. Award of Excellence for a Technical Paper, “Magnetic Cooling for Appliances,” presented at the 50th Annual International Appliance Technical Conference, May 10–12, 1999, West Lafayette, Indiana. The paper was authored by K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., V.K. Pecharsky, and C.B. Zimm. Named the Science Alumnus of the Year 2000, University of Detroit Mercy, April 1, 2000. Received an “Energy 100 Award” for research on magnetic refrigeration from the US Department of Energy as 1 of the 100 discoveries and innovations between 1977 and 2000 that resulted in improvements for American consumers (January 2001). Recognized by Iowa da Vinci Celebration and Conference for awards received in 1999—Excellence for a technical paper “Magnetic Cooling for Appliances,” and in 2000—Science Alumnus of the Year 2000, February 22, 2001. Received an Honorary Membership in The Japan Institute of Metals at the Annual Spring Meeting, Chiba, Japan, March 28, 2001. 2002 Federal Laboratory Consortium's Mid-Continent Award for Outstanding Regional Partnership between DOE's Ames Laboratory (AL) and Astronautics Corporation of America (ACA) on “Magnetic Refrigeration Technology”. In collaboration with V.K. Pecharsky (AL) and C.B. Zimm (ACA), September 19, 2002. Elected a Fellow of the American Physical Society, November 2002. The Ames Laboratory was named a winner of a “2003 Innovative Housing Technology Award—The Coming of Age Award for the Magnetic Refrigerator.” It was one of six worldwide innovations recognized in March 2003. Invited to contribute a paper to a special edition of Appointed to serve on the Editorial Board of the A special symposium named the Karl A. Gschneidner, Jr. Symposium on “Materials and Physics: Life on Earth With and Without the Rare Earths” in honor of 53 Excellence in Research Award, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Iowa State University, April 2006. Elected to the National Academy of Engineering, February 2007. Elected to the MSE Hall of Fame, Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Iowa State University, April 18, 2007. The Hon. Tom Latham, US Representative 4th District of Iowa, entered a letter of congratulations to Karl A. Gschneidner on being named the 2008 recipient of the Acta Materialia Gold Medal in the Listed on Iowa State University's Wall of Honor for Distinguished Professors, Northeast Wall of Beardshear, February 2008. Listed on Iowa State University's Wall of Honor for Members of the National Academy of Engineering or National Academy of Science, Northeast Wall of Beardshear, February 2008. 2008 Acta Materialia Gold Medal, for demonstrated ability and leadership in materials research, New Orleans, March 11, 2008. Elected a Fellow of the Materials Research Society, April 2011. “Critical Materials—The Rare Earths: The Demise of an Industry and Its Rebound (!)”, American Chemical Society's Panel Discussion for Congressional Staffers on Critical Materials Shortages: Opportunity for Competitive Innovation, Washington, DC, November 29, 2011. “Energy Critical Elements: The Rare Earths,” Oral Testimony presented at the US House of Representatives, Committee on Science and Technology, Hearing on Elected a Fellow of American Association for the Advancement of Science, December 2011. Granted Lifetime Membership to TMS (The Minerals, Metals and Materials Society), July 2012. Our 1999 paper “Magnetocaloric Effect and Magnetic Refrigeration” (V.·K. Pecharsky and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr.) September 21, 2013 presented a talk and interview about Prof. Frank H. Spedding's inventions (of two tons of uranium metal production for the first atomic pile [reactor] and the discovery of ion exchange method for making very high purity rare earth elements) on Iowa Public Radio's “River to River” talk show with Ben Kieffer as the host. 2014 Acta Materialia's Materials and Society Award: honors scientists who have made a major positive impact on society through materials science, February 25, 2014. March 17, 2014 one of three panelists who participated in an American Chemical Society (ACS) press conference on “Rare and Endangered Elements” which was primarily concerned with the rare earth elements, 2014 Spring ACS Convention, Dallas, Texas. Named a Lifetime Member of the AAAS (American Association for the Advancement of Science), January 2015.  Structures of Lanthanum Dicarbide and Sesquicarbide by X-ray and Neutron Diffraction, M. Atoji, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., A.H. Daane, R.E. Rundle, and F.H. Spedding, Crystal Structures of Some Rare Earth Carbides, F.H. Spedding, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., and A.H. Daane, The Lanthanum-Carbon System, F.H. Spedding, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., and A.H. Daane, Thermal Expansion of Delta and Epsilon Zirconium Hydrides, C.P. Kempter, R.O. Elliott and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Influence of Spin on Electronic Transformations, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., R.R. McDonald, and R.O. Elliott, Some Comments on the Ytterbium-Thorium System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Nuclear Coherent Scattering Amplitudes for Thorium, Uranium and Plutonium R.B. Roof, Jr., G.P. Arnold, and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Effects of Alloying Additions on the γ ⇔ α Transformation of Cerium—Part I, Pure Cerium, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., R.O. Elliott, and R.R. McDonald, Effects of Alloying Additions on the γ ⇔ α Transformation of Cerium—Part II, Effects of Scandium, Thorium and Plutonium Additions, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., R.O. Elliott, and R.R. McDonald, Effects of Alloying Additions on the γ ⇔ α Transformation of Cerium—Part III, Effects of Yttrium and Rare Earth Additions, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., R.O. Elliott, and R.R. McDonald, Departures from Vegard's Law, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and G.H.J. Vineyard, Prediction of Solid Solubility in Metallic Alloys, J.T. Waber, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., A.C. Larson, and M.Y. Prince, Influence of Alloying on the Negative Thermal Expansion of Delta Plutonium, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., R.O. Elliott, and J.T. Waber, Concerning the Valences of the Cerium Allotropes, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., and R.O. Smoluchowski, Melting Points of LaRu Concerning the Evidence for the Existence of the High-Temperature γ′ Phase of Cerium, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., and J.T. Waber, Rare Earth Intermetallic Compounds, O.D. McMasters, and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Rare Earth Oxides, F.H. Spedding and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Physical Properties and Interrelationships of Metallic and Semimetallic Elements, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Thermal Expansion of LaRu “Ytterbium-Magnesium System, O.D. McMasters and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Crystal Structures of Some Equi-Atomic Gadolinium Compounds, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Gold-Rich Rare-Earth-Gold Solid Solutions, P.E. Rider, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and O.D. McMasters, Solid Solubility of Magnesium in Some Lanthanide Metals, R.R. Joseph and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., The Solubility of Tantalum in Eight Liquid Rare-Earth Metals, D.H. Dennison, M.J. Tschetter and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., High-Temperature Heat Contents and Related Thermodynamic Functions of Eight Rare-Earth Metals: Sc, Gd, Tb, Dy, Ho, Er, Tm and Lu, D.H. Dennison, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and A.H. Daane, The Solubility of Tantalum and Tungsten in Liquid Rare-Earth Metals, D.H. Dennison, M.J. Tschetter and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Ytterbium-Lead System, O.D. McMasters, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., The Europium-Lead System, O.D. McMasters, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Concerning the Crystal Structure Sequence in the Lanthanide Metals and Alloys; Evidence for 4 Dysprosium-Lead System, O.D. McMasters, T.J. O’Keefe and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Lanthanum-Lead System, O.D. McMasters, S.D. Soderquist, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., The Debye Temperature and Radius Ratio of Laves Phases, R.R. Joseph, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., On the Stacking Sequence in Lanthanide Metals and Alloys Adopting Families of Polymorphic Structures: Possible Influence of 4 On the Interrelationships of the Physical Properties of Lanthanide Compounds: The Melting Point, Heat of Formation and Lattice Parameter(s), K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., On the Valences of Europium and Ytterbium in Compounds, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., The Gadolinium-Lead System, J. T. Demel, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Comments on ‘Experimental Multivalent Ionic Radii’, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., The Lutetium-Lead System, O.D. McMasters and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Factors Influencing the Formation of Silver-Rich Solid Solutions in Rare-Earth-Silver Alloy Systems, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., O.D. McMasters, D.G. Alexander and R.F. Venteicher, Comments on the Paper “Relative Stability of Various Stacking Orders in Close-Packed Metal Structures,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Crystallography of the Silver-Rich Rare-Earth-Silver Intermetallic Compounds, O.D. McMasters, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and R.F. Venteicher, Heat Capacity of a-Cerium Between 2.5 and 20°K, N.T. Panousis and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., The Ytterbium-Indium System, O.D. McMasters, C.L. Nipper and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Preparation of Lanthanide Single Crystals; Praseodymium, Neodymium and Lutetium, J.J. Tonnies, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Elastic Moduli and Thermal Expansion of Lutetium Single Crystals from 4.2 to 300°K, J.J. Tonnies, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.H. Spedding, Effect of the Sixth Period Elements on the Melting and Transformation Temperatures of Praseodymium. Part I. Experimental, R.B. Griffin and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Effect of the Sixth Period Elements on the Melting and Transformation Temperatures of Praseodymium. Part II. Thermodynamic Analysis, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., R.B. Griffin, Low Temperature Magnetic Behavior of Several Oxides of Gadolinium, A.E. Miller, F.J. Jelinek, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and B.C. Gerstein, Stoichiometry, Crystal Structures and Some Melting Points of the Lanthanide-Gold Alloys, O.D. McMasters, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., G. Bruzzone and A. Palenzona, On the Nature of 4 Systematik der Seltenerdmetall-Blei-Legierungen [Systematics of the Rare Earth-Lead Alloys], K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and O.D. McMasters, Low Temperature Heat Capacity of Some Rare Earth Aluminum Laves Phase Compounds: YAl Low-Temperature Heat Capacity of LaPt Low-Temperature Heat Capacity of β-Cerium and β-Cerium-Yttrium Alloys, N.T. Panousis, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Low Temperature Heat Capacity of LaRu Samarium-Gold and Dysprosium-Gold Alloy Systems, O.D. McMasters and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Lutetium, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Preparation of Single Phase β and α Cerium Samples for Low Temperature Measurements, D.C. Koskimaki, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and N.T. Panousis, Transition Into a Magnetic State Without Magnetic Scattering in a Rare Earth System: CeAl The Heat Capacity of β-Cerium Between 1.5 and 23 High-Temperature Enthalpies and Standard Gibbs Free Energies of Formation of Europium Chalcogenides: EuO, EuS, EuSe and EuTe, O.D. McMasters, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., I.E. Kaldis and G. Sampietro, Concerning ‘Another Indicated Phase Transformation in Ytterbium’, B.J. Beaudry and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., The Lanthanum-Indium System, O.D. McMasters and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Magnetic Excitations and Magnetic Ordering in Praseodymium, J.G. Houmann, M. Chappelier, A.R. Mackintosh, P. Bak, O.D. McMasters and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Heat Capacity and Magnetic Susceptibility of Single-Phase α-Cerium, D.C. Koskimaki and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., The Rare Earth Industry—The 1976–77 Outlook, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Entropies of Transformation and Fusion of the Metallic Elements, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Phase Boundaries and Thermodynamic Analysis of the Rare-Earth-Rich Alloys in the La-Tl and Pr-In Systems, O.D. McMasters and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Kondo Scattering in a Pure Metal-β-Cerium: I. Experimental, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., P. Burgardt, S. Legvold, J.O. Moorman, T.A. Vyrostek and C. Stassis, Kondo Scattering in a Pure Metal—β-Cerium: II. Theoretical, S.H. Liu, P. Burgardt, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and S. Legvold, The Praseodymium-Lead System, O.D. McMasters and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Elastic Constants of Neodymium Single Crystals in the Temperature Range 4.2–300° K, J.D. Greiner, D.M. Schlader, O.D. McMasters, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and J.F. Smith, Electrical Resistivity and Magnetic Susceptibility of β-Cerium from 2 to 300 Low Temperature Heat Capacity of Electrotransported Scandium, T.-W.E. Tsang, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.A. Schmidt, Redetermination of the Heat Capacity of Single Phase β-Cerium, T.-W.E. Tsang, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., D.C. Koskenmaki and J.O. Moorman, Low Temperature Magnetic and Electrical Properties of dhcp Ce-La Alloys, S. Legvold, T.S. Petersen, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., P. Burgardt and J.O. Moorman, Central Peaks and Soft Modes in Praseodymium, J.G. Houmann, B. Lebeck, A.R. Mackintosh, W.J.L. Buyers, O.D. McMasters and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Availability and Cost of Rare Earth Metals—Especially the Heavy Lanthanides, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Low Temperature Heat Capacities and Thermal Properties of DyAl Purification of the Rare Earth Metals. IV: Solid State Electrotransport Processing of Neodymium, P.G. Mattocks, C.M. Muirhead, D.W. Jones, B.J. Beaudry and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Electrical Resistivity of La, S. Legvold, P. Burgardt, B.J. Beaudry and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Influence of Hydrogen on the Low Temperature Heat Capacity of Lutetium-Rich Lutetium-Hydrogen Alloys, D.K. Thome, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., G.S. Mowry and J.F. Smith, Purification of Gadolinium by Electrorefining, H. Nagai, B.J. Beaudry and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Field Induced Magnetic Form Factor of γ-Ce, C. Stassis, C.-K. Loong, G.R. Kline, O.D. McMasters and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Magnetic Ordering in Ce-La and Nd-La Alloys, T.S. Petersen, S. Legvold, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., T.-W.E, Tsang and J.O. Moorman, Single Crystal Growth by the Horizontal Levitation Zone Melting Method, O.D. McMasters, G.E. Holland and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Fused Salt Electrorefining of Gadolinium: An Evaluation of Three Electrolytes, G. Zwilling and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Influence of Alloying on the Superconducting Transition Temperature of La Heat Capacity of Rare Earth Sesquisulfides, J.C. Ho, S.M.A. Taher, G.B. King, J.B. Gruber, B.J. Beaudry and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Superconductivity in a New High-Pressure Phase of Scandium, J. Wittig, C. Probst, F.A. Schmidt and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Low Temperature Heat Capacity Studies on Intermetallic and Semimetallic Rare Earth Compounds, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., T. Takeshita, B.J. Beaudry, O.D. McMasters, S.M.A. Taher, J.C. Ho, G.B. King and J.B. Gruber, The Rare Earths—Partners in Progress, M.E. Verkade and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Lattice and Spin Dynamics of γ-Ce, C. Stassis, T. Gould, O.D. McMasters, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and R.M. Nicklow, Measurements of the Heat Capacity of Neodymium in the Range 2–10 Compton Profiles of Lutetium and Lutetium Dihydride, R. Lasser, B. Lengeler, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and P. Palmer, Thermoelectric Power of Nd Anisotropic Fast Solute Diffusion of Heat Capacity Studies of RFe Heat Capacity Studies of RFe Electrowinning of Gadolinium Metal Below 1000°C, an Introductory Investigation, D. Bratland and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Magnetic Domain Structure in High Purity Single Crystal Terbium, W.D. Corner, H. Bareham, R.L. Smith, F.M. Saad, B.K. Tanner, S. Farrant, D.W. Jones, B.J. Beaudry and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Low-Temperature Heat Capacity of Sc-Zr and Sc-Mg Alloys, T.-W.E. Tsang, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.A. Schmidt, Low Temperature Heat Capacity Study of Haucke Compounds CaNi Influence of the Lattice and Electronic Factors on the Hydrogenation Properties of the RNi Effect of High Magnetic Fields on the Electronic Specific Heat in the Strongly Pauli-Paramagnetic Compound LuCo Influence of Lattice Instability on the Superconducting Properties of ‘La Auger Analysis of the Passivation of Gadolinium by Electropolishing, A.J. Bevolo, B.J. Beaudry and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Preparation of Gadolinium Metal by the Electrolysis of Gd Electrorefining and Electrowinning of Gadolinium in a Molten Fluoride Electrolyte Purified by Pre-Electrolysis, D. Bratland, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Disappearance of the Heat Capacity Peak of Sc Fused Salt Electrorefining of Gadolinium: An Evaluation of Three Electrolytes. II: Deposition Characteristics in LiCl-LiF-GdF Diffusion of High Pressure Hydrogen Absorption Study on YNi Heat Capacity and Thermodynamic Functions of the RFe Heat Capacity and Solid Solubility of Iron in Scandium. T.-W.E. Tsang, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Specific Heat of LuH Zone Refining of Rare Earth Metals: Lanthanum, Cerium and Gadolinium, D. Fort, D.W. Jones, B.J. Beaudry and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Low-Temperature Heat Capacities of Yttrium, Lanthanum and Lutetium Sesquisulfides, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., B.J. Beaudry, T. Takeshita, S.S. Eucker, S.M.A. Taher, J.C. Ho and J.B. Gruber, Influence of Electron Concentration on the Hydrogen Absorption by RM Quenching of Spin Fluctuations in Scandium, K. Ikeda, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., T.-W.E. Tsang and F.A. Schmidt, Heat Capacity in Superconducting and Normal-State LaS Electrical-Resistivity Studies in the LaS Quenching of Spin Fluctuations by High Magnetic Fields in the Heat Capacity of CeSn Heat Capacity and Magnetic Ordering of Two Cerium Sulfides, CeS Hyperfine Interactions, Magnetic Impurities and Ordering in Praseodymium, H.B. Møller, J.Z. Jensen, M. Wulff, A.R. Mackintosh, O.D. McMasters and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Current/Voltage Relationship in Molten LiF-GdF Electronic Structure and Surface Oxidation of the Haucke Compounds CaNi The Preparation and Some Properties of Pure Misch Metal, P.E. Palmer, H.R. Burkholder, B.J. Beaudry and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Heat Capacities of LaD Influence of High Magnetic Fields on the Low Temperature Heat Capacity of the Itinerant Electron Ferromagnet Sc Quenching of Spin Fluctuations in Highly Enhanced and Itinerant Magnetic Materials, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Quenching of Spin Fluctuations in Sc Excitations of Neodymium Ions in Praseodymium, M. Wulff, J. Jensen, A.R. Mackintosh, H. Bjerrum Møller, O.D. McMasters and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Phase Transitions and Polymorphism in LaH Magnetic Susceptibility and Electrical Resistivity of Electrotransport Purified Scandium Single Crystals From ≈ Study of Positron Lifetimes in α, β and γ Cerium at High Pressures, A.M. Boring, C.-Y. Huang, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., J.D. McGervey, M. Panigrahi and S.G. Usmar, Effect of High Magnetic Fields on the Heat Capacity of Strongly Pauli-Paramagnetic Pd-Ni Alloys, K. Ikeda, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and A.I. Schindler, Use of Systematics for the Evaluation of Rare-Earth Phase Diagrams and Crystallographic Data, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Silver Rare-Earth Systems, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Magnetoresistance of Sc Anisotropic Spin Fluctuations in Cubic CeSn Quenching of Spin Fluctuations in the Highly Enhanced Paramagnets RCo The Magnetic Susceptibility of Lutetium-Hydrogen Solid Solution Alloys From 2 to 300 Past, Present and Future of Rare Earth Metallurgy, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Magnetoelastic Properties of High-Purity Single-Crystal Terbium, D.C. Jiles, S.B. Palmer, D.W. Jones, S.P. Farrant and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Low-Temperature Heat Capacity of Electrotransport-Purified Scandium, Yttrium, Gadolinium and Lutetium, T.-W.E. Tsang, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., F.A. Schmidt and D.K Thome, Effect of High Magnetic Fields on the Heat Capacity of Single-Crystal Terbium, K. Ikeda, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., T. Takeshita, D.W. Jones and S.P. Farrant, Preparation of γ-LaS Influence of Composition on Some Physical Properties of the Narrow Band Material CeSn Tall Tales: Are Magnetic Susceptibility Tails Intrinsic?, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Influence of High Magnetic Fields (10 X-ray Debye Temperature of Ytterbium, N. Gopi Krishna, D.B. Sirdeshmukh, B. Rama Rao, B.J. Beaudry and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Pressure Dependence of the Intra Rare Earth Generalized Binary Phase Diagram, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Normal and Superconducting State Properties of U Superconductivity in Cubic and Tetragonal Phases of (La Superconductivity in Metastable bcc γ-La, J.W. Herchenroder, P. Manfrinetti and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Systematics of the Intra-Rare-Earth Binary Alloy Systems, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., GdMg High-Temperature Thermodynamic Properties of Alpha and Gamma Lanthanum Sesquisulfides and Related Compounds, T. Amano, B.J. Beaudry and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Influence of Martensitic Transformation on Carrier Concentration and Mobility in the Superconductor La The Arsenic-Rare Earth Systems, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, The Carbon-Rare Earth Systems, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Investigation of the Anisotropic Deuterium Ordering in α-LuD Single Crystals by Resistivity and Heat-Capacity Measurements, P. Vajda, J.N. Daou, J.P. Burger, K. Kai, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and B.J. Beaudry, Phase Equilibrium in the La-Mg (0–65 Mean Square Amplitudes of Vibration and Associated Debye Temperatures of Dysprosium, Gadolinium, Lutetium and Yttrium, N. Gopi Krishna, D.B. Sirdeshmukh, B. Rama Rao, B.J. Beaudry and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Dedication of the 17th Rare Earth Research Conference to the Memory of Frank H. Spedding, Sam Legvold and Wallace C. Koehler, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and J. Capellen, High Field Low Temperature Heat Capacity of CePd Magnetic Susceptibility and Heat Capacity of Ce Competition Between the Kondo Effect and Exchange Interactions in the System CeSi Spin-Fluctuation Effects in CeSi The Ultrapurification of Rare Earth Metals: Gadolinium and Neodymium, D. Fort, B.J. Beaudry and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Preparation of Single Crystals of Superconducting YBa The Heat Capacity of High-Purity Gadolinium from 0.5 to 4 High-Temperature Heat Contents, Thermal Diffusivities, Densities, and Thermal Conductivities of n-Type SiGe(GaP), p-Type SiGe(GaP), and p-Type SiGe Alloys, T. Amano, B.J. Beaudry, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., R. Hartman, C.B. Vining and C.A. Alexander, Magnetic Susceptibility of U Anisotropic Magnetization in Single Crystal YBa The Calcium-Rare Earth Systems, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Diffusion of H and D in Lutetium, J. Völkl, H. Wipf, B.J. Beaudry and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Effects of Crystal Anisotropy on Magnetization and Magnetic Order in Superconducting RBa High-Field Superconductivity in U Stable, Metastable and Nonexistent Allotropes, J.W. Herchenroeder and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., The Cadmium-Rare Earth Systems, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Thermoelectric Properties of Lanthanum Sulfide With Sm, Eu, and Yb Additives, J.F. Nakahara, T. Takeshita, M.J. Tschetter, B.J. Beaudry and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Structure of LaNi Single Crystal HoBa The Heat Capacity of High-Purity Dysprosium from 0.5 to 20 The Influence of Crystalline Electric Field on the Low Temperature Properties of CeCd The Barium-Rare Earth Systems, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, The AI-RE (Aluminum-Rare Earth) Systems, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, X-Ray Determination of Mean Square Amplitudes of Vibration and Associated Debye Temperatures of Scandium and Terbium, N.G. Krishna, D.B. Sirdeshmukh and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Resistance Anomaly Near the Localized-Delocalized Crossover Point in the CeSi Magnetic Susceptibility and Low-Temperature Heat Capacity of CePd Effect of Magnetic Field on the Heat Capacity of Ni Searching for New Heavy Fermion Materials in Cerium lntermetallic Compounds, J. Tang and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Magnetic Behavior in Mg-Stabilized bcc, β-Gd and, β-Dy, J.W. Herchenroeder and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Comments on the Papers “A Crossover from the Magnetic Kondo Compound CeCu Thermal Conductivity of La Metastable b.c.c. Mischmetal, A.L.R. Sabariz and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., A Most Unusual Occurrence—The Lanthanide Expansion, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Physical Metallurgy of Metastable Bcc Lanthanide-Magnesium Alloys for R Heat Capacities of LaD Anomalous Behavior of the Weak Itinerant Ferromagnet Sc The Bismuth-Rare Earth Systems, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Commercial ZrO Effects of Some Rare Earth Oxides and/or SiO Low-Temperature Behavior of Ni Anomalous Behavior of the Electrical Resistivity in Alloys Near the PrNi Systematics of the Thermochemistry of Rare Earth Compounds, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Met. Mater. Process., Low-Temperature Heat Capacity of Pd Lattice Parameter Values for Sc, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., High Pressure Phase Stability of U Low Temperature Magnetic Behavior in CePtGa False Heavy Fermions, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., J. Tang, S.K. Dhar and A. Goldman, Solid State Electrotransport of Erbium, D. Fort, B.J. Beaudry and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Pressure-Assisted Reaction Bonding Between a W Sheet and a Si Preparation of a Metastable High Temperature Phase (γ-Dy Comments on the Paper “DTA Determination of the Temperatures and Enthalpy Changes of the α CeCo The Crystal Structure, Heat Capacity (1.5–80 A Redetermination of the La-Ni Phase Diagram From LaNi to LaNi Low-Temperature Heat Capacity and Magnetic Properties of the Pressure-Assisted Reaction Bonding Between W and Si Quenching of Spin Fluctuations by High Magnetic Fields, K. Ikeda, S.K. Dhar, M. Yoshizawa and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., A Study of the Magnetic Properties of Gd Long-Range Magnetic Order in Ce(Cu Crystalline Electric Field Effects in CeCd An Odyssey Through the Rare Earths. A Quest for Knowledge, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Preparation of the Metastable High Pressure γ-R Comment: The Paper “Pr-S (Praseodymium-Sulfur)”, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Zero-Field and Magnetic-Field Low-Temperature Heat Capacity of Solid-State Electrotransport-Purified Erbium, V.K. Pecharsky, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and D. Fort, Systematics and Anomalies, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Metals, Alloys and Compounds—High Purities Do Make a Difference! K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Unusual Magnetic Properties of the Heavy-Fermion Compound CeCoGe YbNiSb—A Possible Heavy-Fermion Compound, S.K. Dhar, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and R. Vijayaraghavan, Observation of Superconductivity in LaRhSb, S.K. Malik, H. Takeya and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., (Dy Magnetic Behavior of YbNiSb, S.K. Dhar, S. Ramakrishnan, R. Vijayaraghavan, G. Chandra, K. Satoh, J. Itoh, Y. Onuki and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Magnetic Behavior of U The Lower Critical Field of U New Type of Magnetocaloric Effect: Implications on Low-Temperature Magnetic Refrigeration Using an Ericsson Cycle, H. Takeya, V.K. Pecharsky, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and J.O. Moorman, The Low Temperature Behavior of Some Light Lanthanide RRhSb and RPdSb Compounds, S.K. Malik, H. Takeya and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., The Taming of Palladium: The Influence of Cerium Additions on the Magnetic and Transport Properties of Palladium in the Composition Range of 5 to 16.7 Kondo and Crystal-Field Effects in the Compound YbPtGa, D.T. Adroja, B.D. Rainford, S.K. Malik, M. Gailloux and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., New Magnetic Refrigeration Materials for the Liquefaction of Hydrogen, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., H. Takeya, J.O. Moorman, V.K. Pecharsky, S.K. Malik and C.B. Zimm, Centrifugal Atomization of Neodymium and Er Magnetic-Susceptibility and Heat-capacity Measurements on PrRhSb, S.K. Malik, H. Takeya, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Thermoelectric Properties of Cu-Doped Dysprosium Sesquisulfide, S.H. Han, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and B.A. Cook, Influence of Temperature and Magnetic Field on Ferrimagnetic CePtGe Systematics in Lanthanide and Actinide Solids, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Superconductivity in LaCd Crystal Structures and Low-Temperature Behaviors of the Heavy-Fermion Compounds CeRuGe Ce Solid State Electrotransport Purification of Dysprosium, D. Fort, V.K. Pecharsky and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Physical Metallurgy and Magnetic Behavior of Cd-Stabilized b.c.c. β-Gd Alloys, J. Tang and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., The β to γ Transformation in Cerium—A Twenty Year Study, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., V.K. Pecharsky, Jaephil Cho and S.W. Martin, Systematics of the RAg Phases, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Cerium Intermetallic Compounds With Two Inequivalent Crystallographic Sites, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and V.K. Pecharsky, Superheating and Other Unusual Observations Regarding the First Order Phase Transition in Dy, V.K. Pecharsky, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and D. Fort, Comparison of the Magnetocaloric Effect Derived From Heat Capacity, Direct, and Magnetization Measurements, V.K. Pecharsky and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., New Er-Based Materials for Active Magnetic Refrigeration below 20 Utilization of the Magnetic Entropy in Active Magnetic Regenerator Materials, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., V.K. Pecharsky, M.J. Gailloux and H. Takeya, The (Dy Effect of Alloying on the Giant Magnetocaloric Effect of Gd Electrical Properties of Yttrium Sesquisulfide (Y Effect of Magnetic Fields on the Kondo Insulator CeRhSb: Magnetoresistance and High-Field Heat Capacity Measurements, S.K. Malik, Latika Menon, V.K. Pecharsky and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Antiferromagnetic Ordering in CeHg Novel Thermal Effects at the First Order Magnetic Phase Transition in Erbium, and a Comparison with Dysprosium, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., V.K. Pecharsky and David Fort, Giant Magnetocaloric Effect in Gd Tunable Magnetic Regenerator Alloys With a Giant Magnetocaloric Effect for MagneticRefrigeration From ~ Experimental Device for Studying the Magnetocaloric Effect in Pulse Magnetic Fields, S. Yu. Dan’kov, A.M. Tishin, V.K. Pecharsky and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Phase Relationships and Crystallography in the Pseudobinary System Gd Some Observations on the Gd-Rich Side of the Gd-C System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., A. Pecharsky and K.W. Dennis, Effect of Long Term Heat Treatment on the Electrical Properties of RSe A 3–350 Magnetic Phase Transitions and the Magnetothermal Properties of Gadolinium, S. Yu. Dan’kov, A.M. Tishin, V.K. Pecharsky and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., New Materials for Magnetic Refrigeration Promise Cost Effective, Environmentally Sound Air Conditioners, Refrigerators/Freezers, and Gas Liquefiers, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., V.K. Pecharsky and C.B. Zimm, Low-Temperature Behavior of Two Ternary Lanthanide Nickel Carbides: Superconducting LaNiC The Giant Magnetocaloric Effect in Gd The Influence of Multiple Magnetic Ordering on the Magnetocaloric Effect in RNiAl Alloys, B.J. Korte, V.K. Pecharsky and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Description and Performance of a Near-Room Temperature Magnetic Refrigerator, C. Zimm, A. Jastrab, A. Sternberg, V. Pecharsky, K. Gschneidner, Jr., M. Osborne and I. Anderson, Preparation and Processing of Rare Earth Chalcogenides, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Influence of the Crystalline Electrical Field on the Magnetocaloric Effect on DyAl The Correlation of the Magnetic Properties and the Magnetocaloric Effect in (Gd Anomalous Behavior of the Magnetic Entropy in PrNi Magnetocaloric Effect and Heat Capacity in the Phase-Transition Region, A.M. Tishin, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and V.K. Pecharsky, Letters—Cerium Transformations, Karl A. Gschneidner, Jr., Magnetic Refrigeration Materials, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and V.K. Pecharsky, Magneto-Optical Properties of RMn Magnetocaloric Effect From Indirect Measurements: Magnetization and Heat Capacity, V.K. Pecharsky and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Crystal Structure and Magnetic Properties of the New Ternary Compound Ce Neutron Scattering Studies on CeRhSb and PrTSb (T Elastic Properties of a High Purity Gadolinium Single Crystal, Y.I. Spichkin, A.M. Tishin and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Magnetic-Field and Temperature Dependencies of the Electrical Resistance Near the Magnetic and Crystallographic First-Order Phase Transition of Gd Magnetocaloric Effect and Magnetic Refrigeration, Vitalij K. Pecharsky and Karl A. Gschneidner, Jr., Magnetic Properties of RMn Heat Capacity Near First Order Phase Transitions and the Magnetocaloric Effect: An Analysis of the Errors, and a Case Study of Gd The Standard State of Cerium, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and V.K. Pecharsky, Magnetic Field and Temperature-Induced First-Order Transition in Gd Making and Breaking Covalent Bonds Across the Magnetic Transition in the Giant Magnetocaloric Material Gd The Nonpareil R The Influence of Magnetic Field on the Thermal Properties of Solids, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and V.K. Pecharsky, Magnetocaloric Materials, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and V.K. Pecharsky, Magnetocaloric Effect in GdAl Magnetothermal Properties of Dy Comment on “Direct Measurement of the ‘Giant’ Adiabatic Temperature Change in Gd Unusual Magnetic Behavior of Gd Preparation, Crystal Structure, Magnetic and Magnetothermal Properties of (Gd Transformations in the Gd Spontaneous Generation of Voltage in Gd Gd Magnetic Properties of Gd Thermodynamics of the Magnetocaloric Effect, V.K. Pecharsky, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., A.O. Pecharsky and A.M. Tishin, Crystallography, Magnetic Properties and Magnetocaloric Effect in Gd Some Common Misconceptions Concerning Magnetic Refrigerant Materials, V.K. Pecharsky and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Real and Imaginary Components of the Alternating Current Magnetic Susceptibility of RAl Electrical Resistivity, Electronic Heat Capacity, and Electronic Structure of Gd The Room Temperature Metastable/Stable Phase Relationships in the Pseudo-Binary Gd Performance of a New Regenerator Material in a Pulse Tube Cooler, A. Kashani, B.P.M. Helvensteijn, J.R. Maddocks, P. Kittel, J.R. Feller, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., V.K. Pecharsky and A.O. Pecharsky, Effects of Praseodymium Additions on the Magnetothermal Properties of Erbium, Y.L. Wu, A.O. Pecharsky, V.K. Pecharsky and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Preparation, Crystal Structure and Magnetocaloric Properties of (Tb Magnetothermal Properties of Single Crystal Dysprosium, A.S. Chernyshov, A.M. Tishin, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., A.O. Pecharsky, V.K.·Pecharsky and T.A. Lograsso, Influence of Pr on the Magnetic Structure of Er, O. Moze, W. Kockelmann, Y.L. Wu, A.O. Pecharsky, V.K. Pecharsky and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Magnetic, Magnetothermal, and Magnetoelastic Properties of Gd Magnetic Correlations Induced by Magnetic Field and Temperature in Gd Comparative Evaluation of Erbium and Lead Regenerator Materials for Low Temperature Cryocoolers, T.W. Wysokinski, J.A. Barclay, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., V.K. Pecharsky and A.O. Pecharsky, The Magnetic Properties of Tb(Mn The Fruition of 4f Discovery, the Interplay of Basic and Applied Research, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Uncovering the Structure-Property Relationships in R Memories of a Dear Friend, Professor Hiroshi Nagai, Karl A. Gschneidner, Jr., The Giant Magnetocaloric Effect of Optimally Prepared Gd Extraordinary Magnetomechanical Coupling as a Result of a Combined Magnetic Structural Transition in a New Class of Rare Earth Compound, D.C. Jiles, S.J. Lee, M. Han, C.C.H. Lo, J.E. Snyder, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., V.K. Pecharsky, A.O. Pecharsky, T. Lograsso and D. Schlagel, The Effect of Varying the Crystal Structure on the Magnetism, Electronic Structure and Thermodynamics in the Gd Effect of Interstitial Impurities on the Magnetic Transitions of Er-Rich Pr Magnetic Field Induced Phase Transitions in Gd A Family Of Ductile Intermetallic Compounds, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., A. Russell, A. Pecharsky, J. Morris, Z. Zhang, T. Lograsso, D. Hsu, C.H.C. Lo, Y. Ye, A. Slager and D. Kesse, Disappearance and Reappearance of Magnetic Ordering Upon Lanthanide Substitution in (Er Inelastic Neutron Scattering Study of the Intra-Lanthanide Alloys Er Preparation, Crystal Structure, Heat Capacity, Magnetism, and the Magnetocaloric Effect of Pr The Giant Magnetocaloric Effect Between 190 and 300 Optical and Magneto-Optical Properties of Tb(Mn Acta Metallurgica, Inc./Acta Materialia, Inc. 1953–2002, W.R. Hibbard, R.L. Fullman and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Massive Magnetic-Field-Induced Structural Transformation in Gd Decoupling of the Magnetic and Structural Transformations in Er Electronic and Crystal Structures, Size (ECS Interplay Between Reversible and Irreversible Magnetic Phase Transitions in Polycrystalline Gd X-ray Powder Diffractometer for In Situ Structural Studies in Magnetic Fields From 0 to 35 Tracking and Understanding the First-Order Structural Transition in Er Reversible Spin-Flop and Irreversible Metamagneticlike Transitions Induced by a Magnetic Field in the Layered Gd Dynamic Magnetic Susceptibility of Gd Low Temperature Properties of Some Er-Rich Intermetallic Compounds, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., A.O. Pecharsky, Lucas Hale and V.K. Pecharsky, Mechanical Properties of Single Crystal YAg, A.M. Russell, Z. Zhang, T.A. Lograsso, C.C.H. Lo, A.O. Pecharsky, J.R. Morris, Y. Ye, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and A.J. Slager, Anisotropic Materials: A Way to Increase the Efficiency of Magnetic Refrigeration, A.L. Lima, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and V.K. Pecharsky, Ab Initio Calculation of Bulk and Defect Properties of Ductile Rare-Earth Intermetallic Compounds, J. Morris, Y. Ye, Y.B. Lee, B.N. Harmon, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and A.M. Russell, Phase Relationships and Low Temperature Heat Capacities of Alloys in the Y Phase Relationships and Structural, Magnetic, and Thermodynamic Properties of Alloys in the Pseudobinary Er Anisotropy of the Magnetoresistance in Gd Metastable Magnetic Response Across the Antiferromagnetic to Ferromagnetic Transition in Gd Evidence for a Coupled Magnetic-Crystallographic Transformation in Nd Fracture Toughness of Polycrystalline YCu, DyCu, and YAg, Z. Zhang, A.M. Russell, S B. Biner, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and C.C.H. Lo, Mechanical Properties of Single Crystal YCu and (Tb Preparation, Heat Capacity, Magnetic Properties, and the Magnetocaloric Effect of EuO, K. Ahn, A.O. Pecharsky, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and V.K. Pecharsk, Polymorphism of Gd Recent Developments in Magnetocaloric Materials, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., V.K. Pecharsky and A.O. Tsokol, Magnetic and Magnetocaloric Properties and the Magnetic Phase Diagram of Single-Crystal Dysprosium, A.S. Chernyshov, A.O. Tsokol, A.M. Tishin, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and V.K. Pecharsky, Magnetic Structure of Gd Magnetic Properties of Single-Crystal DyAl Hydrostatic Pressure Control of the Magnetostructural Phase Transition in Gd Phase Relationships and Structural Magnetic, and Thermodynamic Properties of the Yb Crystal Structure-Magnetic Property Relationships of Gd Magnetic Cooling, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Neutron Diffraction Studies of the Magnetoelastic Compounds Tb Influence of Oxygen on the Giant Magnetocaloric Effect of Gd Reducing the Operational Magnetic Field in the Prototype Magnetocaloric System Gd Magnetic and Crystal Structures of Er Electron Correlation Effects on the Magnetostructural Transition and Magnetocaloric Effect, D. Paudyal, V.K. Pecharsky, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and B.N. Harmon, Temperature Dependence of the Ferromagnetic Order Parameter in Gd, Tb, and Dy, M.D. Kuz’min, A.S. Chernyshov, V.K. Pecharsky, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and A.M. Tishin, New 5 Spontaneous Generation of Voltage in Single-Crystal Gd Structural and Magnetothermal Properties of the Gd Correlating the Local Magnetic Properties of the Magnetic Phase Transition in Gd Valence and Magnetic Ordering in the Yb Training Effects in Gd Magnetic Anisotropy and Magnetic Phase Diagram of Gd Binary Rare Earth Laves Phases—An Overview, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and V.K. Pecharsky, Evidence of Magnetic Glass State in the Magnetocaloric Material Gd Magnetism of (Dy Short-Range Anisotropic Ferromagnetic Correlations in the Paramagnetic and Antiferromagnetic Phases of Gd Effects of Pressure on the Magnetic and Crystallographic Structure of Er Elastic Properties of Gd Advanced Magnetocaloric Materials: What Does the Future Hold?, V.K. Pecharsky and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Magnetic-Field-Induced Structural Transformation in Er Rare Earths and Magnetic Refrigeration, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and V.K. Pecharsky, The Theory of Phase Formation in Rare Earth Metal Systems, K.A. Gschneidner, Crystallography, Anisotropic Metamagnetism, and Magnetocaloric Effect in Tb Magnetocaloric Effect Near a Second-Order Magnetic Phase Transition, A.M. Tishin, A.V. Derkach, Y.I. Spichkin, M.D. Kuz’min, A.S. Chernyshov, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and V.K. Pecharsky, Magnetism of Gd Dynamics of Magnetic Phase Cluster Formation in the Field-Driven AFM-FM Transition in Gd Experimental Investigation of the Electronic Structure of Gd Determination of Slip Systems and Their Relation to the High Ductility and Fracture Toughness of the B2 DyCu Intermetallic Compound, G.H. Cao, D. Shechtman, D.M. Wu, A.T. Becker, L.S. Chumbley, T.A. Lograsso, A.M. Russell and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Devitrification of the Low Temperature Magnetic-Glass State in Gd Role of Ge in Bridging Ferromagnetism in the Giant Magnetocaloric Gd Thermodynamic Features of Magnetization and Magnetocaloric Effect Near the Magnetic Ordering Temperature of Gd, Y.I. Spichkin, A.V. Derkach, A.M. Tishin, M.D. Kuz’min, A.S. Chernyshov, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and V.K. Pecharsky, Unusual Magnetism of Er Effect of Hydrostatic Pressure Upon the Magnetic Transitions in the Gd Phase Relationships and the Structural, Magnetic, and Thermodynamic Properties in the Sm Field Dependence of the Magnetocaloric Effect in Gd and (Er Structure, Magnetism, and Thermodynamics of the Novel Rare Earth-Based R Magnetic and Structural Transitions in Dy Field Step Size and Temperature Effects on the Character of the Magnetostructural Transformation in a Gd Angular Dependence of the Spin-Flop Transition and a Possible Structure of the Spin-Flop Phase of Gd Advanced Materials for Magnetic Cooling, V.K. Pecharsky and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., 1982–2007: 25 In-Situ Powder Diffraction in High Magnetic Fields, V.K. Pecharsky, Ya. Mudryk, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Magnetostructural Transition in Gd Pressure Tuning of the Magnetic Transition in Gd Linear Microstructural Features in R Unusual Magnetic Properties of (Er Spin-Flop Transition in Gd Temperature and Magnetic Field-Dependent X-ray Powder Diffraction Study of Dysprosium, A.S. Chernyshov, Ya. Mudryk, V.K. Pecharsky and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Interplay Between Er and Co Magnetism in ErCo Origins of Ferromagnetism and Antiferromagnetism in Gd Dislocation Core Structures in YAg, a Ductile B2 CsCl-Type Intermetallic Compound, S. Xie, A.M. Russell, A.T. Becker and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Field-Induced Magnetostructural Transition in Gd Oxidation Resistance of B2 Rare Earth-Magnesium Intermetallic Compounds, B. Stumphy, Y. Mudryk, A. Russell, D. Herman and K. Gschneidner, Jr., Magnetic Phase Transitions and Ferromagnetic Short-Range Correlations in Single-Crystal Tb Thirty Years of Near Room Temperature Magnetic Cooling: Where We Are Today and Future Prospects, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and V.K. Pecharsk, Microstructure and Mechanical Properties of the Dy Visual Evidence of the Magnetic Glass State and Its Re-crystallization in Gd Magnetic Spectroscopy at High Pressures Using X-ray Magnetic Circular Dichroism, D. Haskel, Y.C. Tseng, N.M. Souza-Netro, J.C. Lang, S. Sinogeikin, Ya. Mudryk, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and V.K. Pecharsky, Understanding the Extraordinary Magnetoelastic Behavior in GdNi, D. Paudyal, Ya. Mudryk, Y.B. Lee, V.K. Pecharsky, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and B.N. Harmon, Local Probing of Arrested Kinetics in Gd Overview No. 145 Metamagnetic Transitions, Phase Coexistence and Metastability in Functional Magnetic Materials, S.B. Roy, P. Chaddah, V.K. Pecharsky and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Pressure-Induced Removal of Magnetostructural Inhomogeneity in Ge-Rich Gd The Magnetocaloric Effect, Magnetic Refrigeration and Ductile Intermetallic Compounds, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Low Temperature Properties of Some RIn The Crystal Structures of Some RM and RM Magnetostructural Transition in Ho Electron Microscopy Examination of R Magnetocaloric Effect of Er On the RMgSn Rare Earth Compounds, P. Manfrinetti, A. Provino and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Making the Most of the Magnetic and Lattice Entropy Changes, V.K. Pecharsky, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Ya. Mudryk and Durga Paudyal, The Magnetothermal Behavior of Mixed-Valence Eu Metamagnetism Seeded by Nanostructural Features of Single-Crystalline Gd Influence of the Electronic Structure on the Ductile Behavior of B2 CsCl-Type AB Intermetallics, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Min Ji, C.Z. Wang, K.M. Ho, A.M. Russell, Ya. Mudryk, A.T. Becker and J.L. Larson, Single-Crystal Neutron Diffraction Study of Short-Range Magnetic Correlations in Tb Phase Relationships and Crystallography of Annealed Alloys in the Ce Magnetic, Magnetocaloric and Magnetoresistance Properties of Nd Spontaneous Generation of Voltage in the Magnetocaloric Compound La(Fe Electrical Resistivity and Magnetoresistance of Single-Crystal Tb Magnetostructural Transition in Gd Spontaneous Generation of Voltage in the Magnetocaloric Compound Tb Multiple Magnetic Ordering Phenomena Evaluated by Heat Capacity Measurements in Er Phase Relationships, and Structural, Magnetic, and Magnetocaloric Properties in the Ce Microstructure and Magnetocaloric Effect in Cast LaFe Thermally Mediated Multiferroic Composites for the Magnetoelectric Materials, S.G. Lu, Z. Fang, E. Furman, Y. Wang, Q.M. Zhang, Y. Mudryk., K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., V.K. Pecharsky and C.W. Nan, Magnetic Properties of Er Magnetocaloric Effects in Er Influence of Y Substitutions on the Magnetism of Gd Magnetic and Magnetothermodynamic Properties of Ho Magnetostructural Properties of Ho Mechanical Properties and Determination of Slip Systems of the B2 YZn Intermetallic Compound, G.H. Cao, A.T. Becker, D. Wu, L.S. Chumbley, T.A. Lograsso, A.M. Russell and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Structure and Thermal Stability of the RMgPb Rare Earth Compounds, and the Anomalous Melting Behaviour of SmMgPb, A. Provino, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and P. Manfrinetti, Controlling Magnetism of a Complex Metallic System Using Atomic Individualism, Y. Mudryk, D. Paudyal, V.K. Pecharsky, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., S. Misra and G.J. Miller, Experimental and Theoretical Study of the Magnetic and Structural Properties of Er Consequences of the Magnetocaloric Effect on Magnetometry Measurements, B.R. Hansen, C.R.H. Bahl, L. Theil Kuhn, A. Smith, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and V.K. Pecharsky, Competing Crystal and Magnetic Structures in Gd Enhancement of the Glass-Forming Ability of Zr Microalloying and Its Influence on the Magnetocaloric Properties of Bulk Amorphous Gd-Co-Al, H. Fu, M. Zou, Ya. Mudryk, V.K. Pecharsky and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Structural and Magnetic Transitions in Gd Magnetic Field Dependence of the Maximum Magnetic Entropy Change, J. Lyubina, M.D. Kuz’min, K. Nenkov, O. Gutfleisch, M. Richter, D.L. Schlagel, T.A. Lograsso and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Effect of Ca on the Microstructure and Magnetocaloric Effects in the La A Rare Opportunity Beckons, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Replacing the Rare Earth Intellectual Capital, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Effect of Si Doping and Applied Pressure Upon Magnetostructural Properties of Tb Crystal Structure and Magnetic Properties of R First Order Transition In Dy Magnetic Properties of Gd Transmission Electron Microscopy Study of the Microstructure of a YCu Ductile Intermetallic Compound, the Influence of the Start Metal Purity, G.H. Cao, A.M. Russell and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Microstructure and Magnetocaloric Effects in Partially Amorphous Gd Use of Stevens Coefficients for the Prediction of Magnetic Transitions in Pseudobinary R Evidence for Spin Mixing in Holmium Thin Film and Crystal Samples, I.T.M. Usman, K.A. Yates, J.D. Moore, K. Morrison, V.K. Pecharsky, K.A. Gschneidner, T. Verhagen, J. Aarts, V.I. Zverev, J.W.A. Robinson, J.D.S. Witt, M.G. Blamire and L.F. Cohen, Rare Talents, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., The Rare Earth Crisis—The Supply/Demand Situation for 2010–2015, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., The Role of Demagnetization Factor in Determining the ‘True’ Value of the Curie Temperature, V.I. Zverev, R.R. Gimaev, A.M. Tishin, Ya. Mudryk, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and V.K. Pecharsky, Electronic Structure, Magnetic Properties, and Magnetostructural Transition in Tb The Magnetic Structures of RMgSn Compounds (R Magnetic and Thermal Properties of Er Spin Reorientation Transitions in Ho Magnetism of Ho Extraordinary Responsive Intermetallic Compounds: The R The Effect of Er Doping on the Spin Reorientation Transition in Ho Low-Temperature Crystal Structure and Magnetic Properties of Gd Magnetism and Magnetocaloric Effect of Single-Crystal Er Doping-Induced Valence Change in Yb Anisotropic Magnetic Deflagration in Single Crystals of Gd Magnetic and Structural Properties of Single-Crystalline Er Crystal Structure of Tb New Magnetic Configuration in Paramagnetic Phase of HoCo On the Nature of the Magnetocaloric Effect of the First-Order Magnetostructural Transition, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Y. Mudryk and V.K. Pecharsky, Barocaloric Effect in the Magnetocaloric Prototype Gd Effects of Mechanical Grinding and Low Temperature Annealing on Crystal Structure of Er Structural Disorder and Magnetism in Rare-Earth Unusual Magnetic Frustration in Lu-Doped Gd Magnetic Properties of Ho The Crystal Structure and Magnetic Properties of Pr Crystal Structure Magnetic Properties, and the Magnetocaloric Effect of Gd Identifying the Critical Point of the Weakly First-Order Itinerant DyCo Anomalous Schottky Specific Heat and Structural Distortion in Ferromagnetic PrAl Ferromagnetic Ordering and Griffiths-Like Phase Behavior in Gd Unusual Magnetic and Structural Transformations of DyFe Electronic Contribution to the Enhancement of the Ferromagnetic Ordering Temperature by Si Substitution in Gd Understanding and Prediction of Electronic-Structure-Driven Physical Behaviors in Rare-Earth Compounds, D. Paudyal, A.K. Pathak, V.K. Pecharsky and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Magnetocaloric Effect of Pr Short-Range Magnetic Correlations and Parimagnetism in RCo Effects of Pressure on the Magnetic-Structural and Griffiths-Like Transitions in Dy Systematics and Anomalies in Formation and Crystal Structures of RScSb and R On the Magnetic Order of Gd In Situ X-ray Powder Diffraction Study of Ho Low Temperature Crystal Structure and Magnetic Properties of RAl Growth and Characterization of Pt-Protected Gd Magnetic and Magnetothermal Properties and the Magnetic Phase Diagram of High Purity Single Crystalline Terbium Along the Easy Magnetization Direction, V.I. Zverev, A.M. Tishin, A.S. Chernyshov, Ya. Mudryk, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and V.K. Pecharsky, Electronic Structure, Magnetic Properties, and Magnetostructural Transformations in Rare Earth Dialuminides, D. Paudyal, V.K. Pecharsky and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Antiferromagnetic Cluster Spin-Glass Behavior in Pr Observations in a Dynamical-to-Kinematic Diffraction Transition in Plastically Deformed Polycrystalline Intermetallic YCu, S.H. Williams, D.W. Brown, B. Clausen, A. Russell, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Self-assembled Nano- to Micron-Size Fibers From Molten R New Structures Formed by R Unexpected Magnetism, Griffiths Phase, and Exchange Bias in the Mixed Lanthanide Pr The Nature of the First Order Isostructural Transition in GdRhSn, S. Gupta, K.G. Suresh, A.K. Nigam, Y. Mudryk, D. Paudyal, V.K. Pecharsky and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Electronically- and Crystal-Structure-Driven Magnetic Structures and Physical Properties of RScSb (R Magnetocaloric Effect of Pr Formation of Co Moment in the Paramagnetic Phase of RCo Spin-Glass Behavior in a Giant Unit Cell Compound Tb Negative to Positive Magnetoresistance and Magnetocaloric Effect in Pr The Structural and Magnetic Properties of Pr Multiple Phase Transitions and Magnetoresistance of HoFe Magnetostructural Phase Transformations in Tb Magnetic and Magnetothermal Properties, and the Magnetic Phase Diagram of Single-Crystal Holmium Along the Easy Magnetization Direction, V.I. Zverev, A.M. Tishin, M. Zou, Ya. Mudryk, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and V.K. Pecharsky, The Nano-Microfibrous R Correlations Between Magnetism, Microstructure, Crystallography, and Phase Stability in GdNi Cerium: An Unlikely Replacement of Dysprosium in High Performance Nd-Fe-B Permanent Magnets, A.K. Pathak, M. Khan, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., R.W. McCallum, L. Zhou, K. Sun, K.W. Dennis, C. Zhou, F.E. Pinkerton, M.J. Kramer and V.K. Pecharsky, Metamagnetic Transition and Magnetothermal Properties of ErCo Magnetic Structures of Complex Magnetism of Lanthanide Intermetallics and the Role of Their Valence Electrons: Ab Initio Theory and Experiment, L. Petit, D. Paudyal, Y. Mudryk, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., V.K. Pecharsky, M. Lüders, Z. Szotek, R. Banerjee and J.B. Staunton, Magnetic Properties of Bulk, and Rapidly Solidified Nanostructured (Nd The Effect of Boron Doping on Crystal Structure, Magnetic Properties and Magnetocaloric Effect of DyCo Magnetic Structures of R The Effect of Boron Doping on Crystal Structure, Magnetic Properties and Magnetocaloric Effect of DyCo High Performance Nd-Fe-B Permanent Magnets Without Critical Elements, A.K. Pathak, K.A. Gschneidner, M. Khan, R.W. McCallum and V.K. Pecharsky, Balancing Structural Distortions Via Competing 4f and Itinerant Interactions: A Case of Polymorphism in Magnetocaloric HoCo New R Gd Tunable Magnetism and Structural Transformations in Mixed Light- and Heavy Lanthanide Dialuminides, A.K. Pathak, D. Paudyal, Y. Mudryk, K.A. Gschneidner and V.K. Pecharsky, Anisotropy Induced Anomalies in Dy New R Magnetic Properties of Gd Intermetallics, L.Z. Szotek, J. Jacson, M. Luders, D. Paudyal, Y. Mudryk, V. Pecharsky, K.A. Gschcneidner, Jr. and J.B. Staunton,  Rare Earths. The Fraternal Fifteen, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., United States Atomic Energy Commission, Division of Technical Information, Washington, DC, 46 pp. (1964). Rare Earth Alloys, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., D. Van Nostrand, Princeton, N.J., 449 Metallurgy at High Pressures and High Temperatures, Edited by K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., M.T. Hepworth and N.A. Parlee, Gordon and Breach, New York, 409 Scandium – Its Occurrence, Chemistry, Physics, Metallurgy, Biology and Technology, C.T. Horovitz, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., G.A. Melson, D.H. Youngblood and H.H. Schock, Academic Press, London, 598 Industrial Applications or Rare Earth Elements, Edited by K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., ACS Symposium Series No. 164, American Chemical Society, Washington, DC, 297 Proceedings of the International Conferences on Materials and Mechanisms or Superconductivity, Edited by K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and E.L. Wolf, North-Holland Publishing, Amsterdam, 533 xii pp. (1985). Magnetism in the Nineties, Edited by A.J. Freeman and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., North-Holland, Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., Amsterdam, 581 3rd International Conference of IIR on Magnetic Refrigeration at Room Temperature, Edited by P.W. Egolf, E. Brück, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., A. Kitanovski, Y. Mudryk, V.K. Pecharsky, A. Poredos and K.G. Sandeman, International Institute of Refrigeration, Paris, 508 Handbook on the Physics and Chemistry of Rare Earths, Edited by K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and L. Eyring, North-Holland, Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., Amsterdam.  “Behavior of Some Delta-Stabilized Plutonium Alloys at High Pressures,” R.O. Elliott, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 243–62 in Extractive and Physical Metallurgy of Plutonium and Its Alloys, W.D. Wilkinson, ed., Interscience, New York (1960). “Crystallography of the Rare Earth Metals,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 190–214 in The Rare Earths, F.H. Spedding, A.H. Daane, eds., Wiley, New York (1961). “Principles of the Alloying Behavior of Rare Earth Metals,” J.T. Waber, K.A. Gschneidner. Jr., pp. 386–427 in The Rare Earths, F.H. Spedding. A.H. Daane. eds., Wiley, New York (1961). “Electrical and Magnetic Properties of the Rare Earth Metals and Their Alloys and Compounds,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., B.T. Matthias, pp. 158–164 in Rare Earth Research, E.V. Kleber, ed., MacMillan, New York (1961). “Effects of Alloying Additions of Sc, Y, Rare Earths, Th and Pu on the γ - α Transformation of Cerium,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., R.O. Elliott, R.R. McDonald, pp. 278–287 in Rare Earth Research, E.V. Kleber, ed., Macmillan, New York (1961). “Principles of the Alloying Behavior of Plutonium. Part II. Quasi-Thermodynamic Approaches,” J.T. Waber, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 109–134 in Plutonium 1960, E. Grison, W.B.H. Lord, R.D. Fowler, eds., Cleaver-Hume, London (1961). “Physical Factors Influencing the Stability of Plutonium Phases. Part I. Delta Plutonium,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., R.O. Elliott, V.O. Struebing, pp. 134–142 in Plutonium 1960, E. Grison, W.B.H. Lord, R.D. Fowler, eds., Cleaver-Hume, London (1961). “Thermal Expansion of Some Delta Plutonium Solid Solution Alloys,” R.O. Elliott, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., C.P. Kempter, pp. 142–155 in Plutonium 1960, E. Grison, W.B.H. Lord, R.D. Fowler, eds., Cleaver-Hume, London (1961). “Lattice Spacings of Some Cerium-Rich, Cerium-Rare Earth Alloys.” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., R.O. Elliott, M.Y. Prince. pp. 71–86 in Rare Earth Research, J.F. Nachman, C.E. Lundin, eds., Gordon and Breach, New York (1962). “Structural and Physical Properties of Alloys and Intermetallic Compounds,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 222–258 in Progress in the Science and Technology of the Rare Earths, Vol. I, L. Eyring, ed., Pergamon, New York (1964). “Influence of Magnesium on Some of the Physical Properties of Cerium,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 181–197 in Rare Earth Research II, K.S. Vorres, ed., Gordon and Breach, New York (1964). “An Experimental Approach to a Simplified Band Structure of the Rare Earth Metals,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 153–185 in Rare Earth Research III, L. Eyring, ed., Gordon and Breach, New York (1965). “Application of Vacuum Metallurgy in the Purification of Rare-Earth Metals,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 99–135 in Transactions Vacuum Metallurgy Conference, 1965, L.M. Bianchi, ed., American Vacuum Society, Boston, Mass. (1966). “Alloying Behavior of Plutonium,” F.H. Ellinger, C.C. Land, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 191–247 in Plutonium Handbook, A Guide To The Technology, J.O. Wick, ed., Gordon and Breach, New York (1967). “Cerium,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 119–127 in Encyclopedia of the Chemical Elements, C.A. Hampel, ed., Reinhold Book Corp., New York (1968). “Ytterbium,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 805–810 in Encyclopedia of the Chemical Elements, C.A. Hampel, ed., Reinhold Book Corp., New York (1968). “Alloy Theory of the Rare-Earth Metals,” K.A. Gschneidner. Jr., pp. 81–87 in Les Éléments Des Terres Rares. Vol. I, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Paris (1970). “Physical Metallurgy and Alloy Theory of Rare Earth Alloys and Intermetallic Compounds,” K.A. Gschneidner. Jr., pp. 7–11 in RARE EARTHS AND Actinides: Conference Digest No. 3. Durham 1971, The Institute of Physics, London (1971). “Low Temperature Heat Capacity of Rare Earth Intermetallic Compounds,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 668–678 in Proceedings of the 9th Rare Earth Research Conference, Vol. 2, October 10–14, 1971, P.E. Field, ed. Virginia Polytechnical Institute and State University, Blacksburg, VA (1971); CONF-71001 (Vol. II), National Technical Information Service, U.S. Department of Commerce, Springfield, Virginia 22151. General Review of Scientific and Technological Aspects of the Utilization of RE Materials,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 1–7 in Analysis and Application of Rare Earth Materials, O.B. Michelsen, ed., Universitetsforlaget, Oslo, Norway (1973). “Fundamental Properties of RE El elements and Their Implications on the Analytical Chemistry of RE Materials,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 9–24 in Analysis and Application Of Rare Earth Materials, O.B. Michelsen, ed., Universitetsforlaget, Oslo, Norway (1973). “Miscellaneous Uses of RE Materials (Ceramics, Glasses, Nuclear Applications, etc.),” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 271–280 in Analysis and Application of Rare Earth Materials, O.B. Michelsen, ed., Universitetsforlaget, Oslo, Norway (1973). “The Production, Quality Control, and Application of Pure RE Metals and Alloys,”“K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 351–358 in Analysis and Application of Rare Earth Materials, O.B. Michelsen, ed., Universitetsforlaget, Oslo, Norway (1973). “Low Temperature Heat Capacity of Some Rare Earth Laves Phases,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., R.R. Joseph, R.E. Hungsberg, D.C. Koskimaki, pp. 32–33 in Redkozemel’nye Metally Splavy I Soedineniya [Rare Earth Metals, Alloys and Compounds], E.M. Savitskii, ed., Izdatel’stvo Nauka, Moscow (1973). “Cerium,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 248–50 in Chemical and Process Technology Encyclopedia, D.M. Considine, ed., McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York (1974). “Ytterbium,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 1173–5 in Chemical and Process Technology Encyclopedia, D.M. Considine, ed., McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York (1974). “Neutron Scattering and Magnetization Measurements on the Kondo Compound CeAl3,” A.S. Edelstein, T.O. Brun, G.H. Lander, O.D. McMasters, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 428–9 in Magnetism and Magnetic Materials − “Thermodynamic Stability and Physical Properties of Metallic Sulfides and Oxysulfides,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 159–77 in Sulfide Inclusions in Steel, J.J. deBarbadillo and E. Snape, eds., American Society for Metals, Metals Park, Ohio (1975). “Magneto-Resistivity of Beta-Cerium,” P. Burgardt, S. Legvold, J.H. Queen, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 527–8 in Magnetism and Magnetic Materials − “The Preparation of Gadolinium Metal for Thermoelectric Devices,” B.J. Beaudry, P.E. Palmer, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 1556–60 in Eleventh Intersociety Energy Conversion Engineering Conference Proceedings, September 12–17, 1976, State Line, Nevada, American Institute of Chemical Engineers, New York (1976). “Rare-Earth Information Center (RIC),” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., B.L. Evans, pp. III.2.1–III.2.9 in Materials Information Programs, An Interagency Review of Federal Agency Activities on Technical Information about Materials, S.A. Rossmassler. ed., NBS Spec. Publ. No. 463 (January 1977). “Physical Properties and Behavior of Allotropically Pure α-, β- and γ-Ce,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 89–100 in Valence Instabilities and Related Narrow-Band Phenomena (1977), R.D. Parks, ed., Plenum Publishing Corp., New York (1977). “Influence of Crystal Field Interaction on the Thermal Behavior of ErAl2,” T. Inoue, S.G. Sankar, R.S. Craig, W.E. Wallace and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 143–147 in Crystal Field Effects in Metals and Alloys, A. Furrer, ed., Plenum Press, New York (1977). “RIC in Phase With Rare-Earth Constitutional Diagrams,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., M.E. Verkade and B.L. Evans, pp. 226–8 in Applications of Phase Diagrams in Metallurgy and Ceramics, Vol. 1, G.S. Carter, ed. Natl. Bur. Standards, SP-496 (March 1978). “An Explanation for the Schottky-Like Anomaly in the Low Temperature Heat Capacity of Lu-H Alloys,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and D.K. Thome, pp. 75–80 in The Rare Earths in Modern Science and Technology, G.J. McCarthy and J.J. Rhyne, eds., Plenum Publishing Corp., New York (1978). “The Effect of Oxygen and Hydrogen on the Transition and Melting Temperature of Samarium,” B.J. Beaudry and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 303–307 in The Rare Earths in Modern Science and Technology, G.J. McCarthy and J.J. Rhyne, eds., Plenum Publishing Corp., New York (1978). “The Fascinating World of Rare-Earth Research,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 1–10 in Rare Earths and Actinides, 1977, W.D. Corner and B.K. Tanner, eds., Institute of Physics (Conf. Ser. No. 37) Bristol (1978). “The Scandium Puzzle: What are its Intrinsic Properties?,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., T.-W.E. Tsang, J. Queen, S. Legvold and F.A. Schmidt, pp. 23–27 in Rare Earths and Actinides, 1977, W.D. Corner and B.K. Tanner, eds., Institute of Physics (Conf. Ser. No. 37) Bristol (1978). “Preparation of Single Crystals of Praseodymium and Neodymium,” D. Fort, D.W. Jones, B.J. Beaudry and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 28–34 in Rare Earths and Actinides, 1977, W.D. Corner and B.K. Tanner, eds., Institute of Physics (Conf. Ser. No. 37) Bristol (1978). “Preparation and Basic Properties of the Rare Earth Metals,” B.J. Beaudry and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Chap. 2, pp. 173–232 in Handbook on the Physics and Chemistry of Rare Earths, Vol. 1. K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and L. Eyring, eds., North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam (1978). “Cerium,” D.C. Koskenmaki and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Chap. 4, pp. 337–377 in Handbook on the Physics and Chemistry of Rare Earths, Vol. 1. K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and L. Eyring, eds., North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam (1978). “Cerium (Ce),” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and B.J. Beaudry, pp. 722–723 in Metals Handbook, 9th Ed., Vol. 2. Properties and Selection: Nonferrous Alloys and Pure Metals, American Society for Metals, Metals Park, Ohio (1979). “Dysprosium (Dy),” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and B.J. Beaudry, p. 733 in Metals Handbook, 9th Ed., Vol. 2. Properties and Selection: Nonferrous Alloys and Pure Metals, American Society for Metals, Metals-Park, Ohio (1979). “Erbium (Er),” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and B.J. Beaudry, p. 734 in Metals Handbook, 9th Ed., Vol. 2. Properties and Selection: Nonferrous Alloys and Pure Metals, American Society for Metals, Metals Park, Ohio (1979). “Europium (Eu),” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and B.J. Beaudry, pp. 734–5 in Metals Handbook, 9th Ed., Vol. 2. Properties and Selection: Nonferrous Alloys and Pure Metals, American Society for Metals, Metals Park, Ohio (1979). “Gadolinium (Gd),” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and B.J. Beaudry, pp. 35–6 in Metals Handbook, 9th Ed., Vol. 2. Properties and Selection: Nonferrous Alloys and Pure Metals, American Society for Metals, Metals Park, Ohio (1979). “Holmium (Ho),” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and B.J. Beaudry, pp. 738–9 in Metals Handbook, 9th Ed., Vol. 2. Properties and Selection: Nonferrous Alloys and Pure Metals, American Society for Metals, Metals Park, Ohio (1979). “Lanthanum (La),” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and B.J. Beaudry, pp. 760–1 in Metals Handbook, 9th Ed., Vol. 2. Properties and Selection: Nonferrous Alloys and Pure Metals, American Society for Metals, Metals Park, Ohio (1979). “Lutetium (Lu),” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and B.J. Beaudry, p. 763 in Metals Handbook, 9th Ed., Vol. 2. Properties and Selection: Nonferrous Alloys and Pure Metals, American Society for Metals, Metals Park, Ohio (1979). “Mischmetal (MM),” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and B.J. Beaudry, p. 770 in Metals Handbook, 9th Ed., Vol. 2. Properties and Selection: Nonferrous Alloys and Pure Metals, American Society for Metals, Metals Park, Ohio (1979). “Neodymium (Nd),” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and B.J. Beaudry, p. 776 in Metals Handbook, 9th Ed., Vol. 2. Properties and Selection: Nonferrous Alloys and Pure Metals, American Society for Metals, Metals Park, Ohio (1979). “Praseodymium (Pr),” K.A. Gschneidner. Jr. and B.J. Beaudry, pp. 787–8 in Metals Handbook, 9th Ed., Vol. 2. Properties and Selection: Nonferrous Alloys and Pure Metals, American Society for Metals, Metals Park, Ohio (1979). “Promethium (Pm),” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and B.J. Beaudry, p. 788 in Metals Handbook, 9th Ed., Vol. 2. Properties and Selection: Nonferrous Alloys and Pure Metals, American Society for Metals, Metals Park, Ohio (1979). “Samarium (Sm),” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and B.J. Beaudry, pp. 792–3 in Metals Handbook, 9th Ed., Vol. 2. Properties and Selection: Nonferrous Alloys and Pure Metals, American Society for Metals, Metals Park, Ohio (1979). “Scandium (Sc),” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and B.J. Beaudry, pp. 793–4 in Metals Handbook, 9th Ed., Vol. 2. Properties and Selection: Nonferrous Alloys and Pure Metals, American Society for Metals, Metals Park, Ohio (1979). “Terbium (Tb),” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and B.J. Beaudry, pp. 806–7 in Metals Handbook, 9th Ed., Vol. 2. Properties and Selection: Nonferrous Alloys and Pure Metals, American Society for Metals, Metals Park, Ohio (1979). “Thulium (Tm),” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and B.J. Beaudry, pp. 810–1 in Metals Handbook, 9th Ed., Vol. 2. Properties and Selection: Nonferrous Alloys and Pure Metals, American Society for Metals, Metals Park, Ohio (1979). “Ytterbium (Yb),” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and B.J. Beaudry, p. 823 in Metals Handbook, 9th Ed., Vol. 2. Properties and Selection: Nonferrous Alloys and Pure Metals, American Society for Metals, Metals Park, Ohio (1979). “From Infinity to Zero and Back Again to Infinity (From Mixed Rare Earths to Ultrapure Metals to Pseudo-Lanthanides),” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 13–23 in The Rare Earths in Modern Science and Technology, Vol. 2, G.J. McGarthy, J.J. Rhyne and H.B. Silber, eds. Plenum Publishing Corp., New York (1980). “Zone Refining of High Purity Ge and Gd Metals,” D. Fort, B.J. Beaudry, D.W. Jones and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 33–7 in The Rare Earths in Modern Science and Technology, Vol. 2, G.J. McGarthy, J.J. Rhyne and H.B. Silber, eds. Plenum Publishing Corp., New York (1980). “Preparation and Purification of GdCl3,” Y.S. Kim, F. Planinsek, B.J. Beaudry and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 53–8 in The Rare Earths in Modern Science and Technology, Vol. 2, G.J. McCarthy, J.J. Rhyne and H.B. Silber, eds. Plenum Publishing Corp., New York (1980). “Low Temperature Heat Capacity Studies on Hydrogen Absorbing Intermetallic Compounds, T. Takeshita, G. Dublon, O.D. McMasters and K.A Gschneidner. Jr., pp. 563–7 in The Rare Earths in Modern Science and Technology. Vol. 2, G.J. McCarthy, J.J. Rhyne and H.B. Silber, eds. Plenum Publishing Corp., New York (1980). “L.S. (Larry) Darken's Contributions to the Theory of Alloy Formation and Where We are Today,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 1–39 in Theory of Alloy Phase Formation, L.H. Bennett, ed., The Met. Soc. AlME, Warrendale, PA (1980). “Preparation and Purification of Rare Earth Metals and Effect of Impurities on Their Properties,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 25–47 in Science and Technology of Rare Earth Material, E.C. Subbarao and W.E. Wallace, eds., Academic Press, New York (1980). “Phase Relationships in Rare Earth Metal Alloy Systems - Contributions to the Theory of Alloy Formation” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 51–75 in Science and Technology of Rare Earth Materials, E.C. Subbarao and W.E. Wallace, eds., Academic Press, New York (1980). “Mixed Valent Properties of CeSn “Some Thermoelectric Properties of Light Rare Earth Sesquiselenides (R “Rare Earth Specialty Inorganic Chemicals,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 403–443 in SPECIALTY INORGANIC CHEMICALS, R. Thompson, ed., The Royal Society of Chemistry, London (1981). “The Rare Earth Sulfides R “Preparation and Thermoelectric Properties of Some Rare Earth Chalcogenides,” T. Takeshita, B.J. Beaudry and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 255–6 in The Rare Earths in Modern Science and Technology, Vol. 3, G.J. McCarthy, H.B. Silber and J.J. Rhyne, eds., Plenum Publishing Carp., New York (1982). “Low Temperature – High Magnetic Field Heat Capacity Studies of Weakly and Nearly Ferromagnetic and Mixed Valence Rare Earth Materials,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., K. Ikeda and O.D. McMasters, pp. 299–300 in The Rare Earths in Modern Science and Technology, Vol. 3, G.J. McCarthy, H.B. Silber and J.J. Rhyne, eds., Plenum Publishing Carp., New York (1982). “Lattice Instability (BCC-Tetragonal Transition) and Superconductivity in “La “The Wonderful World of Rare Earths—Its Science, Technology and Industry,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 11–22 in Rare Earths, 1982 [1], The Rare Earth Society of Japan, Department of Applied Chemistry, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan. “Positron Lifetimes in α-, β- and γ-Cerium,” J.D. McGervey, S.G. Usmar, N. Panigrahi, O.D. McMasters, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and C.-Y. Juang, pp. 240–1 in Positron Annihilation, P.G. Coleman, S.C. Sharma and L.M. Diana, eds., North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam (1982). “Thermoelectric Properties of Ytterbium Sulfides,” T. Takeshita, B.J. Beaudry, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 240–244 in Proceedings of the 18th Intersociety Energy Conversion Engineering Conference, Vol. 1, American Society of Mechanical Engineers, New York (1983). “Some Observations on the Effect of GaP on the Grain Growth of SiGe Alloys,” B.J. Beaudry, T. Takeshita and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 158–160 in Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Thermoelectric Energy Conversion, K.R. Rao, ed., University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington, (1984). “Quenching of Spin Fluctuations in Highly Enhanced Magnetic Materials,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and S.K. Dhar, pp. 177–182 in Magnetic Excitations and Fluctuations, S.W. Lovesey, U. Balucani, F. Borsa and V. Tognetti, eds., Springer-Verlag, Berlin (1984). “Rare Earth Chemical and Physical Metallurgy,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 5–10 in New Frontiers in Rare Earth Science and Applications, Vol. 1, G. Xu and J. Xiao, eds., Science Press, Beijing, People's Republic of China (1985). “Intra Rare Earth Binary Alloys: Phase Relationships, Lattice Parameters and Systematics,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Chap. 54, pp. 1–161 in Handbook on the Physics and Chemistry of Rare Earths, Vol. 8, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and L. Eyring, eds., North-Holland Physics Publishing, Amsterdam (1986). “Crystal Chemistry of the Rare Earth-Noble Metal Ternary Intermetallic Compounds,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 325–334 in Noble Metal Alloys, T.B. Massalski, W.B. Pearson, L.H. Bennett and Y.A. Chang, eds., The Metallurgical Society, Inc., Warrendale, PA (1986). “Systematics of Binary Rare Earth-Silver and -Gold Systems,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, pp. 335–344 in Noble Metal Alloys, T.B. Massalski, W.B. Pearson, L.H. Bennett and Y.A. Chang, eds., The Metallurgical Society, Inc., Warrendale, PA (1986). “Rare-Earth Metals Resources,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 4075–76 in Encyclopedia of Materials Science and Engineering, M.B. Bever, ed., Pergamon Press, Oxford (1986). “Stability of γ Phase La2S3-x,” B.J. Beaudry, M.J. Tschetter, J.F. Nakahara, T. Takeshita and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 20–24 in Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Thermoelectric Energy Conversion, K.R. Rao, ed., University of Texas at Arlington, Arlington (1986). “The Seebeck Coefficient and Electrical Resistivity of Some Rare Earth Ternary Sulfides La “Commercial Oxide Paints as Coatings for SiGe Thermoelectric Materials,” T. Amano, B.J. Beaudry and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 1394–96 in Proceedings of the 21st Intersociety Energy Conversion Engineering Conference, Vol. 2, Advancing Toward Technology Breakout in Energy Conversion, American Chemical Society, Washington, (1986). “Ultra Pure Rare Earth Metals and Compounds: Their Preparation, Properties and Effects of Impurities,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 27–39 in 31st Intern. Congress Pure Appl. Chem., Invited Lectures, Sect. 5—Inorg. Chem., July 13–18, 1987, Bulgarian Acad. Sci., Sofia, Bulgaria (1987). “Lanthanide Refractory Semiconductors Based on the Th3P4 Structure,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., J.F. Nakahara, B.J. Beaudry and T. Takeshita, pp. 359–70 in Novel Refractory Semiconductors, D. Emin, T.L. Aselage and C. Wood, eds., Mater. Res. Soc. Sym. Proc., Vol. 97, Pittsburgh, PA (1987). “The Effect of Sm, Eu and Yb on the Thermoelectric Properties of Th3P4-Type Lanthanum Sulfide,” J.F. Nakahara, B.J. Beaudry, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and T. Takeshita, pp. 379–84 in Novel Refractory Semiconductors, D. Emin, T.L. Aselage and C. Wood, eds., Mater. Res. Soc. Sym. Proc., Vol. 97, Pittsburgh, PA (1987). “Microstructure and Superconductivity in High TC Materials,” R.W. McCallum, R.N. Shelton, M.A. Noack, J.D. Verhoeven, C.A. Swenson, M.A. Damento, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., E.D. Gibson and A.R. Moodenbaugh, pp. 633–45 in Novel Superconductivity, S.A. Wolf and V.Z. Kresin, eds., Plenum Press, New York (1987). “Scandium,” J. Capellen and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 75–77 in McGraw-Hill Encyclopedia of Science and Technology, 6th Ed., Vol. 16, McGraw-Hill Co., New York (1987). “Magnetoresistive Effects in the Upper Critical Fields of Heavy Fermion Superconductors,” L.E. DeLong, G.W. Crabtree, L.N. Hall, D.G. Hinks, W.K. Kwok, S.K. Malik and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 375–78 in Theoretical and Experimental Aspects of Valence Fluctuations and Heavy Fermions, L.C. Gupta and S.K. Malik, eds., Plenum Press, New York (1987). “Physical Metallurgy,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and A.H. Daane, Chap. 78, pp. 409–484 in Handbook on the Physics and Chemistry of Rare Earths, Vol. 11, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and L. Eyring, eds., North-Holland Physics Publishing, Elsevier Science Publishers, Amsterdam (1988). “A Study of the Thermoelectric Properties of Ca, Sr and Hg Substituted Lanthanum Sulfides,” J.F. Nakahara, T. Takeshita, M.J. Tschetter, B.J. Beaudry and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Chap. 14, pp. 161–70 in the First European Conference on Thermoelectrics, D.M. Rowe, ed., Peter Peregrinus Ltd., London (1988). “Physical Properties of the Rare Earth Metals,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. B208–B215 in CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 69th Ed., edited by Robert C. Weast, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL (1988–89); updated and corrected some values in the 70th Ed. (1989–90). Also published as a slightly up-dated version in: Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams, 11, 216–224 (1990). Also published as a slightly up-dated version pp. 509–521 in: Handbook on the Physics and Chemistry of Rare Earths, Cumulative Index 1–15, edited by K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and L. Eyring, North Holland, Elsevier Science Publishers, Amsterdam (1993). “Recent Developments in Rare Earth Physical Metallurgy,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 34–41 of W-Ti-Re-Sb ‘88, Proceedings of the First International Conference on the Metallurgy and Materials Science of Tungsten, Titanium, Rare Earths and Antimony, C.-Y. Fu, J.-C. Li and S.-G. Li., eds., Volume 1, International Academic Publishers (A Pergamon-CNPIEC Joint Venture) Oxford (1988). “Process Variables in the Preparation of High Purity Rare Earth Metals,” B.J. Beaudry, P.E. Palmer and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 187–191 in Rare Earths, Extraction, Preparation and Applications, R.G. Bautista and M.M. Wong, eds., The Minerals, Metals & Materials Society, Warrendale, PA (1988). “Rare-Earth Metals Resources,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 293–294 in Concise Encyclopedia of Mineral Resources, D.D. Carr and N. Herz, eds., Pergamon Press, Oxford (1989). “High Purity Rare Earth Metals - Do We Need Them?,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 13–29 in Proceedings of the First Symposium Rare Metals Forum. Extra-High Purification Technology and New Functional Materials Creation of Rare Metals, Society of Non-Traditional Technology, Tokyo, Japan (1989); Japanese translation pp. 30–38. “Rare Earth Metals,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., B.J. Beaudry and J. Capellen, pp. 720–732 in Metals Handbook. 10th Ed., Vol. 2, Properties and Selection: Nonferrous Alloys and Special Purpose Materials, ASM International, Metals Park, Ohio (1990). “Properties of the Rare Earth Metals,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and B.J. Beaudry, pp. 1178–1189 in Metals Handbook. 10th Ed., Vol. 2, Properties and Selection: Nonferrous Alloys and Special Purpose Materials, ASM International, Metals Park, Ohio (1990). “Rare Earths,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 1037–1038 in Encyclopedia of Physics, 2nd Ed., R.G. Lerner and G.L. Trigg, eds., VCH Publishers, Inc., New York (1991); and pp. 2227–2230 in Encyclopedia of Physics, 3rd Ed., R.G. Lerner and G.L. Trigg, eds., Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany (2005). “Rare Earths in the Electronics Industry,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 63–94 in Fine Chemicals for the Electronics Industry II: Chemical Applications for the 1990s, D.J. Ando and M.G. Pellatt, eds., Royal Society of Chemistry, Science Park, Cambridge, UK (1991); partially translated (pp. 82–94) into Japanese—J. Soc. Non-Traditional Tech. 4, [2], 16–21 (February 1992). “Effect of the Doping Process on the Electrical Activity of Phosphorus in Si “Gas Atomized Er3Ni Powder for Cryocooler Applications,” I.E. Anderson, M.G. Osborne, H. Takeya and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 1120–1132 in Proceedings of the 7th International Cryocooler Conference, Santa Fe, New Mexico, 17–19 November 1992, Phillips Laboratory, Air Force Material Command, Kirtland Air Force Base, New Mexico (April 1993). “Centrifugal Atomization of Rare Earth Metal and Intermetallic Compounds,” M.G. Osborne, I.E. Anderson and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 65–73 in Advances in Powder Metallurgy and Particulate Materials - 1993: Powders, Characterization, Testing, and Quality Control, Vol. 1, A. Lawley and A. Swanson, eds., Metal Powder Industries Federation - American Powder Metallurgy Institute, Princeton, NJ (1993). “Pure Rare Earth Metals for Today's and Tomorrow's Advanced Technologies,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and T.W. Ellis, pp. 93–104 in Metallurgical Processes for Early Twenty-First Century, H.Y. Sohn, ed., The Minerals, Metals & Materials Society, Warrendale, PA (1994). “The Production and Characterization of High Purity Materials Produced at the Ames Laboratory,” Timothy W. Ellis, Fredrick A. Schmidt and Karl A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 76–85 in Ultra High Purity Base Metals, UHPM-94, K. Abiko, K. Hirokawa and S. Takaki, eds., The Japan Institute of Metals, Sendai, Japan (1995). “New Ternary Magnetic Lanthanide Regenerator Materials for the Low-Temperature Stage of a Gifford-McMahon (G-M) Cryocooler,” Karl A. Gschneidner, Jr., V.K. Pecharsky and M. Gailloux, pp. 685–694 in Cryocoolers 8, R.G. Ross, Jr., ed., Plenum Press, New York (1995). “Rare Earth Compounds,” B.J. Beaudry and Karl A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 339–348 in CRC Handbook of Thermoelectrics, D.M. Rowe, ed., CRC Press, Boca Raton (1995). “Magnetic Refrigeration,” Karl A. Gschneidner, Jr. and Vitalij K. Pecharsky, pp. 209–222 in Rare Earths: Science, Technology and Applications III, R.G. Bautista, C.O. Bounds, T.W. Ellis and B.T. Kilbourn, eds., The Minerals, Metals & Materials Society, Warrendale, PA (1997). “Influence of Alloying on the Behavior and Properties of Er3Ni,” V.K. Pecharsky, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., R.W. McCallum and K.W. Dennis, pp. 663–668 in Cryocoolers 9, R.G. Ross, Jr., ed., Plenum Press, New York (1997). “Processing and Testing of the Low-Temperature Stage Er “Magnetic Cooling for Appliances,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Vitalij K. Pecharsky and Carl B. Zimm, pp. 144–154 in Proceedings of the 50th Annual International Appliance Technical Conference, West Lafayette, Indiana, May 10–12, 1999, International Appliance Technical Conference, Inc., Largo, Florida. “Gd-Zn Alloys as Active Magnetic Regenerator Materials for Magnetic Refrigeration,” V.K. Pecharsky and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 629–637 in Cryocoolers 10, R.G. Ross, Jr., ed., Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York (1999). “Magnetocaloric Properties of Gd “Recent Developments in Magnetic Refrigeration,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., V.K. Pecharsky, A.O. Pecharsky and C.B. Zimm, pp. 69–76 in Rare Earths ‘98, R.C. Woodward, ed., Mater. Sci. Forum 315–317 (1999) (Trans. Tech. Publ., Switzerland). “Production of the Giant Magnetocaloric Effect Gd “History of the Hume-Rothery Award,” Karl A. Gschneidner, Jr. and James T. Waber, pp. 3–7 in The Science of Alloys for the 21st Century: A Hume-Rothery Celebration, E.A. Turchi, R.D. Shull and A. Gonis, eds., The Minerals, Metals & Materials Society, Warrendale, Pennsylvania (2000). “The Use of Alloy Theory for the Development of Active and Passive Magnetic Refrigerant Materials,” Karl A. Gschneidner, Jr., Vitalij K. Pecharsky and Alexandra O. Pecharsky, pp. 201–213 in The Science of Alloys for the 21st Century: A Hume-Rothery Celebration, E.A. Turchi, R.D. Shull and A. Gonis, eds., The Minerals, Metals & Materials Society, Warrendale, Pennsylvania (2000). “Magnetic Refrigerators/Freezers and Air Conditioners,” Karl A. Gschneidner, Jr., Vitalij K. Pecharsky, Carl B. Zimm and Alexander Sternberg, pp. 170–182 in Proceedings Domotechnica Appliance Engineering Conference, Cologne, Germany, March 7–9, 2001, International Appliance Technical Conference, Inc., Largo, Florida (2001). “Ductile, High Heat Capacity, Magnetic Regenerator Alloys for the 10 to 80 K Temperature Range,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., A.O. Pecharsky and V.K. Pecharsky, pp. 433–441 in Cryocoolers 11, R.G. Ross, Jr. ed., Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York (2001). “Manufacturing Considerations for Rare Earth Powders Used in Cryocooler and Magnetic Refrigerator Applications,” S.A. Miller, J.D. Nicholson, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., A.O. Pecharsky and V.K. Pecharsky, pp. 449–45 in Cryocoolers 11, R.G. Ross, Jr. ed., Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York (2001). “Magnetothermal Properties of Polycrystalline Gd “New Regenerator Materials for Use in Pulse Tube Coolers,” A. Kashani, B.P.M. Helvensteijn, P. Kittel, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., V.K. Pecharsky and A.O. Pecharsky, pp. 475–480 in Cryocoolers 11, R.G. Ross, Jr. ed., Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York (2001). “Magnetic Materials for the Conversion of Magnetic Energy to Cooling and Heating,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and V.K. Pecharsky, pp. 9–23 in EDP Congress 2002, P.R. Taylor, ed., and Fundamentals of Advanced Materials for Energy Conversion, D. Chandra and R.G. Bautista, eds., TMS (The Minerals, Metals & Materials Society), Warrendale, Pennsylvania (2002). “Magnetic Refrigeration,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and V.K. Pecharsky, pp. 519–539, Chap. 25 in Intermetallic Compounds: Vol. 3, Principles and Practice. J.H. Westbrook and R.L. Fleischer, eds., John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., New York (2002). “Low Temperature Cryocooler Regenerator Materials,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., A.O. Pecharsky and V.K. Pecharsky, pp. 457–465 in Cryocoolers 12, R.G. Ross, Jr. ed., Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York (2003). “Development of New Cryocooler Regenerator Materials—Ductile Intermetallic Compounds,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., A.O. Pecharsky and V.K. Pecharsky, pp. 363–371 in Cryocoolers 13, R.G. Ross, Jr. ed., Springer Science “Magnetocaloric Effect,” V.K. Pecharsky and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 236–244 in Encyclopedia of Condensed Matter Physics, G.F. Bassani, G.L. Liedl and P. Wyder, eds. Elsevier, Amsterdam (2005). “Magnetocaloric Effect Associated with Magnetostructural Transitions,” V.K. Pecharsky and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 199–222 in Magnetism and Structure of Fundamental Materials, A. Planes, L. Manosa and A. Saxena, eds., Springer, Heidelberg, Germany (2005). “Dedication to LeRoy Eyring,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., H.A. Eick, Z. Kang, M. O’Keeffe and E.F. Westrum, Jr., pp. xi–xxxix in Handbook on the Physics and Chemistry of Rare Earths, Vol. 36, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., J.-C.G. Bünzli and V.K. Pecharsky, eds., Elsevier, Amsterdam (2006). “30 Years of Near Room Temperature Magnetic Cooling,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and V.K. Pecharsky, pp. 9–21 in Proceedings of the Second IIF-IIR International Conference on Magnetic Refrigeration at Room Temperature, A. Poredos and A. Sarlah, eds., International Institute of Refrigeration, Paris (2007). “Dynamic Magnetocaloric Effect,” A.M. Tishin, Y.I. Spichkin, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and V.K. Pecharsky, pp. 35–45 in Proceedings of the Second IIF-IIR International Conference on Magnetic Refrigeration at Room Temperature, A. Poredos and A. Sarlah eds., International Institute of Refrigeration, Paris (2007). “Hall Probe Imaging of Specific Properties in the Antiferromagnetic to Ferromagnetic Transition in Gd “Magnetic Refrigeration: The Role of the Magnetocaloric Effect of First Order Transitions,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Y. Mudryk, A.O. Tsokol and V.K. Pecharsky, pp. 621–624 in Proceedings of the Twenty First International Cryogenic Engineering Conference, Volume 1, G.G. Baguer, R.S. Safrata and V. Chrz, eds, ICARIS Ltd., Praha, Czech Republic (2007). “Magnetocaloric Materials,” V.K. Pecharsky and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 2363–2377 in Handbook of Magnetism and Advanced Magnetic Materials, Volume 4: Novel Materials, H. Kronmüller and S. Parkin, eds, John Wiley & Sons Ltd., Chichester, UK (2007). “Progress in Understanding the High Ductility of Rare Earth B2 (CsCl-Type) Intermetallics,” A.M. Russell, A.E. Frerichs, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., S.B. Biner, L.S. Chumbley, S. Xie, S.H. Williams, Q. Chen and A.T. Becker, pp. 587–606 in TMS 2008, 137th Annual Meeting & Exhibition, Collected Proceedings, Warrendale, PA 15086–7514, “What Controls the Key Properties in Giant Magnetocaloric Magnetic Materials?,” L.F. Cohen, K. Morrison, J.D. Moore, K.G. Sandeman, A.D. Caplin, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and V.K Pecharsky, pp. 3–10 in The 3rd Intern. Conf. of IIR on Magnetic Refrigeration at Room Temperature, Des Moines, Iowa, USA, 2009; P.W. Egolf, E. Brück, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., A. Kitanovski, Y. Mudryk, V.K. Pecharsky, A. Poredos and K.G. Sandeman, eds. Intern. Institute Refrigeration, Paris, France (2009). “Phase Formation and Magnetocaloric Effects in LaFe “Influence of an Applied Magnetic Field on the Structural Transitions in RCo “Dynamic Magnetocaloric Effect in the Intermetallic R-M (M = Al, Co, Fe) Compounds,” Y.I. Spichkin, I. Zubkov, A.M. Tishin, K.A. Gschneidner Jr., V.K. Pecharsky, pp. 139–147 in The 3rd Intern. Conf. of IIR on Magnetic Refrigeration at Room Temperature, Des Moines, Iowa, USA, 2009; P.W. Egolf, E. Brück, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., A. Kitanovski, Y. Mudryk, V.K. Pecharsky, A. Poredos and K.G. Sandeman, eds., Intern. Institute Refrigeration, Paris, France (2009). “Magnetocaloric Effect of Gd “Magnetic Entropy Change From First Principles and Magnetothermodynamic Models,” D. Paudyal, V.K. Pecharsky, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 467–471 in The 3rd Intern. Conf. of IIR on Magnetic Refrigeration at Room Temperature, Des Moines, Iowa, USA, 2009; P.W. Egolf, E. Brück, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., A. Kitanovski, Y. Mudryk, V.K. Pecharsky, A. Poredos and K.G. Sandeman, eds. Intern. Institute Refrigeration, Paris, France (2009). “Influence of Heat Treatment on The Structure and Magnetic Properties of Gd “Rare Earth Intermetallics—A Fertile Field for New Discoveries,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., M. Khan, Y. Mudryk, D. Paudyal and V.K. Pecharsky, pp. 275–280 in Symposium on Rare Earths 2012, J.R. Goode, G. Moldoveanu, M.S. Rayat, eds., Proc. 51st Ann. Conf. Metal, CIM (2012). “Rare-Earth Elements” [Also short narratives of all the individual elements], Karl A. Gschneidner, Jr. and Vitalij K. Pecharsky, Encyclopedia Britannica 2012 (Only published electronically) “Two Exotic and Unique Families of Rare Earth Intermetallic Compounds,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., A. Provino, P. Manfrinetti, V.K. Pecharsky and Y. Mudryk, pp. 449–453 in Rare Earth Elements, I.M. London, J.R. Goode, G. Moldoveneanu, M.S. Rayat, eds., Proceedings of the 52nd Conference of Metallurgists (COM), Hosting by Materials Science Technology Conference (MS&T), October 27–31, 2013, Montréal, Québec, Canada. “R “Rare Earth Hydro- and Pyrometallurgy,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., Mineral Processing and Extractive Metallurgy—100 “Dy-Free, Reduced Nd, High Performance Nd “Better (Non)Rare-Earth Magnets—Using DFT Methods as a Computational Design Tool for Replacing Critical Materials,” D.D. Johnson, A. Alam, A. Pathak, V. Pecharsky, K. Gschneidner, Jr. and R.W. McCallum, Proceedings 23rd International Workshop on Rare Earth and Future Permanent Magnets and Their Applications (REPM 2014), G.C. Hadjipanayis, C.H. Chen, J.P. Liu, eds., pp. 450–453, Annapolis, Maryland, USA (August 17–21, 2014). “Critical Materials Institute's (CMI’s) Response to the Rare Earth Crisis,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., STO-MP-AVT-231 Scarcity of Rare Earth Materials for Electrical Power Systems, Paper Number KN-1, 7 pp (2014). “Systematics”, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 1–18 in Handbook on the Physics and Chemistry of Rare Earths, J-C. Bunzli and V.K. Pecharsky, eds. Chap. 282, Vol. 50, Elsevier (2016). “The Rare Earths as Critical Materials”, A.H. King, R.G. Eggert and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., pp. 19–46 in Handbook on the Physics and Chemistry of Rare Earths, J.-C. Bunzli and V.K. Pecharsky, eds. Chap. 283, Vol. 50, Elsevier, (2016).  Critical Evaluation of Binary-Rare Earth Phase Diagrams, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ce-La (Cerium-Lanthanum) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Dy-La (Dysprosium-Lanthanum) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Gd-La (Gadolinium-Lanthanum) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ho-La (Holmium-Lanthanum) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The La-Nd (Lanthanum-Neodymium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The La-Th (Lanthanum-Terbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ce-Dy (Cerium-Dysprosium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ce-Er (Cerium-Erbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ce-Ho (Cerium-Holmium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ce-Lu (Cerium-Lutetium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ce-Yb (Cerium-Ytterbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ce-Nd (Cerium-Neodymium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ce-Tb (Cerium-Terbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ce-Tm (Cerium-Thulium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The La-Lu (Lanthanum-Lutetium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The La-Sc (Lanthanum-Scandium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The La-Y (Lanthanum-Yttrium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ce-Eu (Cerium-Europium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ce-Gd (Cerium-Gadolinium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ce-Pr (Cerium-Praseodymium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ce-Sc (Cerium-Scandium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ce-Sm (Cerium-Samarium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ce-Y (Cerium-Yttrium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Gd-Pr (Gadolinium-Praseodymium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Pr-Nd (Praseodymium-Neodymium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Pr-Tb (Praseodymium-Terbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Pr-Y (Praseodymium-Yttrium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Nd-Sm (Neodymium-Samarium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Nd-Y (Neodymium-Yttrium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Dy-Nd (Dysprosium-Neodymium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Er-Nd (Erbium-Neodymium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Gd-Nd (Gadolinium-Neodymium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ho-Nd (Holmium-Neodymium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Lu-Nd (Lutetium-Neodymium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Nd-Sc (Neodymium-Scandium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Nd-Tm (Neodymium-Thulium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Nd-Yb (Neodymium-Ytterbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Dy-Y (Dysprosium-Yttrium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Er-Sc (Erbium-Scandium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Er-Y (Erbium-Yttrium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Eu-Sc (Europium-Scandium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Eu-Y (Europium-Yttrium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ho-Sc (Holmium-Scandium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ho-Y (Holmium-Yttrium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Dy-Tb (Dysprosium-Terbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Eu-Ho (Europium-Holmium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Eu-Yb (Europium-Ytterbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Gd-Lu (Gadolinium-Lutetium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Gd-Sc (Gadolinium-Scandium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Gd-Sm (Gadolinium-Samarium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Gd-Y (Gadolinium-Yttrium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Lu-Tb (Lutetium-Terbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Sc-Tb (Scandium-Terbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Sc-Y (Scandium-Yttrium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Sm-Y (Samarium-Yttrium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Tb-Y (Terbium-Yttrium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Tb-Yb (Terbium-Ytterbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Dy-Er (Dysprosium-Erbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Dy-Gd (Dysprosium-Gadolinium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Dy-Ho (Dysprosium-Holmium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Er-Gd (Erbium-Gadolinium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Er-Ho (Erbium-Holmium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Er-Lu (Erbium-Lutetium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Er-Tb (Erbium-Terbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Er-Tm (Erbium-Thulium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Gd-Ho (Gadolinium-Holmium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Gd-Tb (Gadolinium-Terbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Gd-Yb (Gadolinium-Ytterbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ho-Tb (Holmium-Terbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Lu-Yb (Lutetium-Ytterbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ag-La (Silver-Lanthanum) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ag-Lu (Silver-Lutetium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ag-Sc (Silver-Scandium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ag-Y (Silver-Yttrium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ag-Dy (Silver-Dysprosium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ag-Er (Silver-Erbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ag-Eu (Silver-Europium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ag-Nd (Silver-Neodymium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ag-Pr (Silver-Praseodymium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ag-Gd (Silver-Gadolinium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ag-Ho (Silver-Holmium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ag-Sm (Silver-Samarium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ag-Tb (Silver-Terbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ag-Tm (Silver-Thulium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ag-Yb (Silver-Ytterbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ag-Ce (Silver-Cerium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The As-Ce (Arsenic-Cerium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The As-Dy (Arsenic-Dysprosium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The As-Er (Arsenic-Erbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The As-Eu (Arsenic-Europium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The As-Gd (Arsenic-Gadolinium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The As-Ho″ (Arsenic-Holmium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The As-La (Arsenic-Lanthanum) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The As-Lu (Arsenic-Lutetium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The As-Nd (Arsenic-Neodymium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The As-Pr (Arsenic-Praseodymium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The As-Sc (Arsenic-Scandium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The As-Sm (Arsenic-Samarium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The As-Tb (Arsenic-Terbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The As-Tm (Arsenic-Thulium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The As-Y (Arsenic-Yttrium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The As-Yb (Arsenic-Ytterbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The C-Ce (Carbon-Cerium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The C-Dy (Carbon-Dysprosium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The C-Er (Carbon-Erbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The C-Eu (Carbon-Europium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The C-Gd (Carbon-Gadolinium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The C-Ho (Carbon-Holmium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The C-La (Carbon-Lanthanum) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The C-Lu (Carbon-Lutetium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The C-Nd (Carbon-Neodymium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The C-Pr (Carbon-Praseodymium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The C-Sc (Carbon-Scandium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The C-Sm (Carbon-Samarium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The C-Tb (Carbon-Terbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The C-Tm (Carbon-Thulium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The C-Y (Carbon-Yttrium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The C-Yb (Carbon-Ytterbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ca-Ce (Calcium-Cerium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ca-Dy (Calcium-Dysprosium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ca-Er (Calcium-Erbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ca-Eu (Calcium-Europium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ca-Gd (Calcium-Gadolinium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ca-La (Calcium-Lanthanum) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ca-Nd (Calcium-Neodymium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ca-Pr (Calcium-Praseodymium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ca-Sm (Calcium-Samarium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ca-Y (Calcium-Yttrium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ca-Yb (Calcium-Ytterbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Cd-Ce (Cadmium-Cerium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Cd-Dy (Cadmium-Dysprosium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Cd-Er (Cadmium-Erbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams, The Cd-Eu (Cadmium-Europium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Cd-Gd (Cadmium-Gadolinium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Cd-Ho (Cadmium-Holmium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Cd-La (Cadmium-Lanthanum) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Cd-Lu (Cadmium-Lutetium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Cd-Nd (Cadmium-Neodymium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Cd-Pr (Cadmium-Praseodymium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Cd-Sc (Cadmium-Scandium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Cd-Sm (Cadmium-Samarium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Cd-Tb (Cadmium-Terbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Cd-Tm (Cadmium-Thulium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Cd-Y (Cadmium-Yttrium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Cd-Yb (Cadmium-Ytterbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ba-Eu (Barium-Europium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ba-Nd (Barium-Neodymium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ba-Pr (Barium-Praseodymium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ba-Sm (Barium-Samarium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Ba-Yb (Barium-Ytterbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Al-Ce (Aluminum-Cerium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Al-Dy (Aluminum-Dysprosium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Al-Er (Aluminum-Erbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Al-Eu (Aluminum-Europium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The AI-Gd (Aluminum-Gadolinium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Al-Ho (Aluminum-Holmium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Al-La (Aluminum-Lanthanum) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Al-Lu (Aluminum-Lutetium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The AI-Nd (Aluminum-Neodymium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The AI-Pr (Aluminum-Praseodymium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The AI-Sc (Aluminum-Scandium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Al-Sm (Aluminum-Samarium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The AI-Tb (Aluminum-Terbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The AI-Tm (Aluminum-Thulium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The AI-Y (Aluminum-Yttrium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The AI-Yb (Aluminum-Ytterbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Bi-Ce (Bismuth-Cerium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Bi-Dy (Bismuth-Dysprosium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Bi-Er (Bismuth-Erbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Bi-Eu (Bismuth-Europium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Bi-Gd (Bismuth-Gadolinium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Bi-Ho (Bismuth-Holmium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Bi-La (Bismuth-Lanthanum) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Bi-Lu (Bismuth-Lutetium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Bi-Nd (Bismuth-Neodymium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Bi-Pr (Bismuth-Praseodymium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Bi-Sc (Bismuth-Scandium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Bi-Sm (Bismuth-Samarium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Bi-Tb (Bismuth-Terbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Bi-Tm (Bismuth-Thulium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Bi-Y (Bismuth-Yttrium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Bi-Yb (Bismuth-Ytterbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams The Be-Ce (Beryllium-Cerium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, pp. 38–40 in Phase Diagrams of Binary Beryllium Alloys, H. Okamoto and L E. Tanner, eds., ASM International, Metals Park Ohio (1987). The Be-RE (Beryllium-Rare Earth) Systems, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, pp. 170–175 in Phase Diagrams of Binary Beryllium Alloys, H. Okamoto and L.E. Tanner, eds., ASM International, Metals Park, Ohio (1987). The Be-Sc (Beryllium-Scandium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, pp. 184 in Phase Diagrams of Binary Beryllium Alloys, H. Okamoto and L.E. Tanner, eds., ASM International, Metals Park, Ohio (1987). The Be-Y (Beryllium-Yttrium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, pp. 216–218 in Phase Diagrams of Binary Beryllium Alloys, H. Okamoto and L.E. Tanner, eds., ASM International, Metals Park Ohio (1987). The Be-Yb (Beryllium-Ytterbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, pp. 218–219 in Phase Diagrams of Binary Beryllium Alloys, H. Okamoto and L.E. Tanner, eds., ASM International, Metals Park, Ohio (1987). The Au-Ce (Gold-Cerium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, T.B. Massalski and H. Okamoto, pp. 57–60 in Phase Diagrams of Binary Gold Alloys, H. Okamoto and T.B. Massalski, eds., ASM International, Metals Park, Ohio (1987). The Au-Dy (Gold-Dysprosium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., F.W. Calderwood, T.B. Massalski and H. Okamoto, pp. 96–98 in Phase Diagrams of Binary Gold Alloys, H. Okamoto and T.B. Massalski, eds., ASM International, Metals Park, Ohio (1987). The Au-Er (Gold-Erbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., F.W. Calderwood, T.B. Massalski and H. Okamoto, pp. 98–101 in Phase Diagrams of Binary Gold Alloys, H. Okamoto and T.B. Massalski, eds., ASM International, Metals Park, Ohio (1987). The Au-Eu (Gold-Europium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, pp. 101–102 in Phase Diagrams of Binary Gold Alloys, H. Okamoto and T.B. Massalski, eds., ASM International, Metals Park, Ohio (1987). The Au-Gd (Gold-Gadolinium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., F.W. Calderwood, T.B. Massalski and H. Okamoto, pp. 118–121 in Phase Diagrams of Binary Gold Alloys, H. Okamoto and T.B. Massalski, eds., ASM International, Metals Park, Ohio (1987). The Au-Ho (Gold-Holmium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., F.W. Calderwood, T.B. Massalski and H. Okamoto, pp. 139–141 in Phase Diagrams of Binary Gold Alloys, H. Okamoto and T.B. Massalski, eds., ASM International, Metals Park, Ohio (1987). The Au-La (Gold-Lanthanum) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., F.W. Calderwood, T.B. Massalski and H. Okamoto, pp. 157–159 in Phase Diagrams of Binary Gold Alloys, H. Okamoto and T.B. Massalski, eds., ASM International, Metals Park, Ohio (1987). The Au-Lu (Gold-Lutetium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., F.W. Calderwood, T.B. Massalski and H. Okamoto, pp. 162–164 in Phase Diagrams of Binary Gold Alloys, H. Okamoto and T.B. Massalski, eds., ASM International, Metals Park, Ohio (1987). The Au-Nd (Gold-Neodymium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., F.W. Calderwood, H. Okamoto and T.B. Massalski, pp. 191–193 in Phase Diagrams of Binary Gold Alloys, H. Okamoto and T.B. Massalski, eds., ASM International, Metals Park, Ohio (1987). The Au-Pr (Gold-Praseodymium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., F.W. Calderwood, T.B. Massalski and H. Okamoto, pp. 228–232 in Phase Diagrams of Binary Gold Alloys, H. Okamoto and T.B. Massalski, eds., ASM International, Metals Park, Ohio (1987). The Au-Sc (Gold-Scandium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, pp. 261–263 in Phase Diagrams of Binary Gold Alloys, H. Okamoto and T.B. Massalski, eds., ASM International, Metals Park, Ohio (1987). The Au-Sm (Gold-Samarium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., F.W. Calderwood, H. Okamoto and T.B. Massalski, pp. 275–278 in Phase Diagrams of Binary Gold Alloys, H. Okamoto and T.B. Massalski, eds., ASM International, Metals Park, Ohio (1987). The Au-Tb (Gold-Terbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., F.W. Calderwood, T.B. Massalski, H. Okamoto, pp. 294–297 in Phase Diagrams of Binary Gold Alloys, H. Okamoto and T.B. Massalski, eds., ASM International, Metals Park, Ohio (1987). The Au-Tm (Gold-Thulium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., F.W. Calderwood, T.B. Massalski, H. Okamoto, pp. 317–319 in Phase Diagrams of Binary Gold Alloys, H. Okamoto and T.B. Massalski, eds., ASM International, Metals Park, Ohio (1987). The Au-Y (Gold-Yttrium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.W. Calderwood, pp. 327–328 in Phase Diagrams of Binary Gold Alloys, H. Okamoto and T.B. Massalski, eds., ASM International, Metals Park, Ohio (1987). The Au-Yb (Gold-Ytterbium) System, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., F.W. Calderwood, T.B. Massalski and H. Okamoto, pp. 328–331 in Phase Diagrams of Binary Gold Alloys, H. Okamoto and T.B. Massalski, eds., ASM International, Metals Park, Ohio (1987).  U.S. Patent No. 3,043,727, Plutonium Alloys Containing Controlled Amounts of Plutonium Allotropes Obtained by Application of High Pressures, R.O. Elliott and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. (July 20, 1962) U.S. Patent No. 3,149,966, Oxidation Resistant Cerium Alloys, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. (September 22, 1964) U.S. Patent No. 3,162,527, Plutonium Alloys Containing Controlled Amounts of Plutonium Allotropes Obtained by Application of High Pressures, R.O. Elliott and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. (December 22, 1964) U.S. Patent No. 4,824,826, Millimeter Size Single Crystals of Superconducting YBa U.S. Patent No. 5,435,137, Ternary Dy-Er-Al Magnetic Refrigerants. Karl A. Gschneidner, Jr. and Hiroyuki Takeya (July 25, 1995) U.S. Patent No. 5,462,610, Lanthanide Al-Ni Base Ericsson Cycle Magnetic Refrigerants, Karl A. Gschneidner, Jr. and Hiroyuki Takeya (October 31, 1995) U.S. Patent No. 5,537,826, Erbium-based Magnetic Refrigerant (Regenerator) for Passive Cryocooler, Karl A. Gschneidner, Jr. and Vitalij K. Pecharsky (July 23, 1996) U.S. Patent No. 5,743,095, Active Magnetic Refrigerants Based on Gd-Si-Ge Material and Refrigeration Apparatus and Process, V.K. Pecharsky and K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. (April 28, 1998) U.S. Patent No. 5,806,979, Calorimetric System and Method, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., V.K. Pecharsky and J.O. Moorman (September 15, 1998) U.S. Patent No. 5,887,449, “Dual Stage Active Magnetic Regenerator and Method, Vitalij K. Pecharsky and Karl A. Gschneidner, Jr. (March 30, 1999) U.S. Patent No. 6,318,090, Ductile Magnetic Regenerator Alloys for Closed Cycle Cryocoolers, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., V.K. Pecharsky and A.O. Pecharsky (November 20, 2001) U.S. Patent No. 6,589,366, Method of Making Active Magnetic Refrigerant, Colossal Magnetostriction and Giant Magnetoresistive Materials Based on Gd-Si-Ge Alloy, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., A.O. Pecharsky and V.K. Pecharsky (July 8, 2003) U.S. Patent No. 6,680,663, Permanent Magnetic Structure for Generation of Magnetic Fields, Seong-Jae Lee, David Jiles, Karl A. Gschneidner, Jr. and Vitalij Pecharsky (January 20, 2004) U.S. Patent No. 7,114,340, Method of Making Active Magnetic Refrigerant Materials Based on Gd-Si-Ge Alloys, A.O. Pecharsky, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and V.K. Pecharsky (October 3, 2006) U.S. Patent No. 7,549,296, Low Temperature Cryocooler Regenerator Materials of Ductile Intermetallic Compounds, K.A. Gschneidner, Jr., A.O. Pecharsky and V.K. Pecharsky (June 23, 2009) U.S. Patent No. 9,525,176, Method for Producing La/Ce/MM/Y Base Alloys, Resulting Alloys and Battery Electrodes,” K.A. Gschneidner, Jr. and F.A. Schmidt (December 20, 2016)