The Darcian flow law, which expresses a linear relationship between water pressure gradient and flow rate, is commonly used for interpretation of hydrogeological field tests The validity of the Darcy’s law and linear flow expressions for analysing water flow within rock fractures have been widely studied. Louis Reynolds number ( For single-phase flow through a given rock joint with width of Since the ratio of flow rate and pressure gradient is constant for the linear flow condition (Darcy flow), the transmissivity for linear flow is a constant value and can be calculated by the following equation, known as cubic law: Ranjith and Darlington In the present paper, nonlinear flow through rough fractures is studied in laboratory experiments on some standard roughness profiles. The laboratory tests were completed by flowing water through two matched Joint Roughness Coefficient (JRC) profiles. This study investigates the flow regimes for JRC profiles and explores the relationship between pressure gradient and flow rate for these profiles beyond the range of previously tested conditions by using advanced experimental techniques. The joint roughness coefficient, JRC, which is a tool for quantifying roughness of real rock joints, was originally introduced by Barton and Choubey The digitised information showed that the maximum asperity amplitudes for JRC profiles 0–2, 2–4, 4–6, and 6–8 are in the range of (0.6–1.71 In this regard, an advanced cutting technique called Electric Discharge Machining (EDM) was used to cut the real geometry of JRC profiles on aluminium blocks. Two-dimensional JRC profiles were extruded in depth to have a rough surface of 10×10 A custom designed jig was developed to adjust the inlet gap with high accuracy (0.05 For investigation of the hydraulic properties of JRC profiles under linear and nonlinear flow conditions, water flow tests were conducted with different opening (mechanical aperture) and different water heads for each sample. The test set-up also included an upper water tank, inlet and outlet reservoirs and a lower tank (as shown in For each JRC profile, flow tests were conducted for three mechanical apertures (opening between upper and lower surfaces) and different pressure gradients (112 flow tests). Although the designed set up has capability to apply a wide range of water pressure gradient, for this study it limited to pressure gradient of 0.05–2. In Lomize In this paper, the relative roughness is defined as the ratio between This equation is based on the cubic law and is valid for linear flow conditions. In The variation of measured transmissivity with Reynolds number and relative roughness ( The constant parameters of both equations have been determined by regression analysis for each JRC profile with different relative roughness. For the Izbash equation, the variation range of Nonlinear flow conditions can occur inside rock fractures during hydrogeological tests such as packer tests and well tests, particularly with high flow rates. However, the assumption of linear flow conditions for interpretation of these tests can significantly affect the results and underestimate the hydraulic conductivity. This paper presents a detailed investigation of nonlinear flow through rough fractures, quantifying the impact of nonlinear conditions on the relationship between hydraulic gradient and transmissivity. For this study, flow tests were conducted on JRC profiles which are commonly used to quantify fracture roughness. This study shows that the Reynolds number and relative roughness control nonlinear flow within rough fractures. The results from this study are consistent with previous studies The nonlinear relationship between pressure gradient and flow rate has been studied for rough fractures. The Izbash and Forchheimer equations were fitted to flow test results for each JRC profile. Both equations were demonstrated to have a similar ability to model nonlinear flow conditions. For the first time, the empirical constants of Izbash and Forchheimer equations were developed for each JRC profiles. It was shown that the variation range of constant parameter of