Microalgae are widely regarded as one of the most promising and sustainable raw materials, especially for biofuels. However, the full exploitation of microalgae resources is significantly hindered through the lack of the eco-friendly microalgae harvesting due to the microalgae cultures that are incredibly diluted, as well as the small particulate size of microalgae cells, thus hindering the production and commercialization of microalgae-based products. This chapter provides a brief summarization of current technologies of algal biomass harvesting and dewatering, components extraction, and products conversion. These technologies are aimed to reduce the cost of downstream processes and promote environmental protection. Also, common microalgae-derived products including biodiesel, hydrogen, biogas, syngas, pigments, and fatty acids are described.The following sponsors are acknowledged for supporting this work: the special fund for Fujian Ocean High-Tech Industry Development (No. FJHJF-L-2018-1), China; the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos.21506177; 21736009); the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (20720160077); the Natural Science Foundation of Fujian Province of China (Grant Nos. 2018J01017); the Energy Development Foundation of the College of Energy, Xiamen University (Grant No. 2017NYFZ02); and the Disciplinary Cluster of Energy Science and Engineering, World-Top Class Universities and Disciplines Development Program, Xiamen University, China. Microalgae resources are being believed as a prominent and sustainable feedstock for biofuels and other bioproducts production. The prominence and sustainability of microalgae are associated with their high productivity within a short period, leading to higher biomass yield, and the ability of cultivation and biomass harvesting round all the year by integrated cultivation modes, as compared with other energy crops. The most important advantage associated with microalgae utilization is that microalgal biomass production has no competition with food production. Microalgae exploitation is also considered as a solution of environmental protection where domestic, industrial wastewater is used as low-price sources of nutrients to replace artificial culture media for microalgal biomass production coupled with phycoremediation, which is considered as an environmentally friendly, innovative solution and sustainable bioenergy generation The most considered potential associated with microalgae as prominent feedstock is that the microalgae can accumulate a broad range of components as well as resilience and autoprotection to the harsh environmental conditions This chapter attempts to highlight and describe the current technologies published in recent studies, aimed to cut down on the cost of microalgae downstream process, which thus in return can lead to the price reduction of microalgae-derived products including bioenergy products. Downstream processes of microalgal biomass into bioproducts are subdivided into three parts: (1) harvesting and dewatering; (2) extraction; and (3) fractionation and conversion Microalgae harvesting is the intermediate process that comes after the cultivation process and precedes the extraction process. It aims to separate culture broth and microalgal cells that are referred to as biomass. Microalgae are typically cultured in a dilute medium, which makes microalgal biomass harvesting cost about a quarter of the total production process. There are various harvesting techniques/strategies including filtration, centrifugation, flocculation, flotation, and sedimentation (see The selection of the most appropriate microalgal biomass harvesting strategy considers several factors such as cell size, strain phenotype, biomass concentration, pH of culture medium, ionic strength, the final quality of harvested microalgal biomass, and recycling of spent medium There is no conclusive decision to a given harvesting technique that is effective, and it can independently be utilized for all microalgae species harvesting. Therefore, all these microalgae harvesting techniques have to be adequately selected and utilized to build an environmentally friendly and economically harvesting process and reducing energy consumption. The process of filtration is made up of a porous medium that retains solid particles and allows the escape of liquids Also, the polarization phenomenon becomes significant because of the surface charge of cells, affecting the nature of the cell, exogenous matter, and the membrane surface Centrifugation is a separation process with a principle based on the application of centrifugal force. Flocculation is a harvesting technique that promotes the aggregation of the microalgal cells to form flocs and assists in their settling process, which facilitates further dewatering steps such as sedimentation and filtration processes Chemicals (inorganic or organic coagulants) have been extensively used to induce flocculation, and the process has been exhibited adequate and plausible results in aggregating algae with low concentration from the culture media By specifying the initial concentration of microalgae and the concentration of flocculant, the above equation can be solved to obtain the mass concentration rate of flocculated microalgae under varying rate constants. Different theories describe the flocculation of microalgae in different ways Moreover, in the case of polymeric flocculants, such as chitosan, the high microalgal concentration favors the formation of flocs, and the flocculation process is done by “bridging” (cross-linking) between cells. The self-same surface charges of microalgal cells that cause the repulsion force among them are one of the principles of flocculants, and the adherence of microalgal cells in the presence of flocculants can prove this principle where flocculants prevent this repel by binding to each other at low pH Different flocculant types and dosages are critical factors that determine the rate of flocculation and further settling in conjunction with the optimum agitation. In other words, the optimal dosage of flocculants and sedimentation time (i.e., settling time) are two critical parameters in conjunction with initial microalgal biomass concentration that should be undertaken to evaluate the yield of flocculation process regarding the ratio of the output to the input of the process Flocculation often occurs spontaneously in microalgal suspensions due to changes in culture pH The negatively charged algal cells adsorb to the calcium and phosphate precipitates, and this results in heavy flocs that can settle down easily Sukenik and Shelef Also, some experimental studies at the laboratory level have suggested that the addition of NaOH to the microalgae cultures to reach specific pH values can initiate autoflocculation Autoflocculation by calcium and phosphate precipitation requires relatively high concentrations of phosphate, and the increasing cost of phosphate due to the declining phosphates reserves; therefore, this process is not suitable except in the case where microalgae are used for wastewater treatment and excess phosphate needs to be further separated Bioflocculation is known as one of the microbial-based harvesting processes by the action of certain bacteria and/or microalgae. Bioflocculation is a promising microalgae dewatering process that can significantly contribute to the process cost reduction because no costs associated with the use of chemical flocculants are incurred with little to no energy consumption Flotation is a separation technique rooted in the mineral industry. In various industries including biotechnology, it has great application potential in high-valued end products such as proteins The flocculation process can be classified into six flotation units/classes based on the methods of producing bubbles. Those classes are (1) suspended air flotation, (2) dispersed air flotation, (3) dissolved air flotation, (4) Jameson cell or jet flotation, (5) dispersed ozone flotation, and (6) electrolytic flotation For most processes, there are advantages and drawbacks. The flotation units also have some advantages and disadvantages linked to their applications. For instance, electrolytic flotation has shown numerous advantages, such as the high quality of formed gas bubbles and easy manipulation. However, there are also some drawbacks associated with the regular replacement of electrodes used during the electroflotation process; otherwise, they could affect the features of formed gas bubbles Apart from general advantages and disadvantages, Ndikubwimana et al. Under various studies, the flotation process is evaluated, described, and applied Some parameters need to be considered before selecting flotation methods/units for microalgal biomass The mechanism of the flotation process is presumed to be a first-order reaction, and linked kinetics for the removal rate of particles can be described by The number of particles to be floated is represented by the number of particles inside the flotation unit at Sedimentation process, also known as gravity settling, consists of settling the biomass on the bottom of the container from the remainder of the culture medium, as well as produced extracellular compounds. Generally, the sedimentation is coupled with other harvesting and dewatering strategies, such as flocculation and filtration; the flocculation is intended to improve the size of microalgal cells by forming flocs Based on recently published researches, it is apparent that the coupling of membrane bioreactor (MBR) with microalgae cultivation is promising. This coupling process will economically and environmentally contribute to the resolution of current microalgal biomass harvesting (which is mainly linked to the small size of microalgae species and dilute microalgal biomass concentration in culture broth/water), as well as the wastewater treatment and reuse Recent researches have revealed some upstream processes that facilitate and reduce the tasks in downstream processes Microalgae store energy in cells through photosynthesis where CO These energy sources can be extracted as raw materials for synthetic biofuels and bioactive and chemical products. The main energy sources are lipids. The microalgal lipid content varies from 2% to 75% Physical method is among effective extraction methods. It is suitable for most microalgae species for extracting microalgal lipids. The risk of contamination of lipid products is low, and sometimes, no solvent is needed during the extraction process. However, physical extraction methods require higher energy and cooling system, which can make them more expensive when applied at large scale. Ultrasonication, bead-beating, hydrothermal liquefaction, bead mills, expeller press, and microwave are among the physical extraction methods that are commonly used in microalgal lipids. Solvent-free Chemicals (such as alkalis, acids, and surfactants) are applied for chemical linkages on microalgal cell walls through the process known as chemical treatments. As results of chemical linkages, the permeability of microalgal cell walls is increased and thus leading to the disruption of cell walls Microalgae-derived energy sources can be extracted using solvent methods, where various organic solvents or a different combination of solvents is utilized for extracting lipids from microalgal biomass. Chloroform is an extracting solvent that is commonly used for effective extraction. The Folch, and the Blish and Dyer methods are well known and widely used as solvent methods for extracting lipids from homogenized cell suspension using extracting solvents. The 2:1 v/v ratio of coupled chloroform-methanol is used as an extraction solvent in the Folch method. The later method is similar to the Floch method except the ratio of solvents, which is interchanged into 1:2 v/v chloroform-methanol instead of 2:1 v/v. Both methods have a typical advantage of recovering a high amount of lipids at pilot-scale and large-scale extraction processes. Various modified methods based on both previous methods are being used for recovery of microalgae-derided lipids Mechanisms of solvent extraction methods are based on the following principles: (1) In the case of single solvent extraction method, selection of the solvent depends on the similarity to the lipids, and it facilitates to increase the rate of mass transfer, solvent accessibility, and reduction of the immiscible solvent dielectric constant. The extraction process takes place at high temperatures and high pressure. (2) In case of a combination of different solvents, for example, chloroform/methanol, one of them should be more polar cosolvent that facilitates the microalgal cell wall disruption, and the second less polar cosolvent facilitates lipid extraction, which is the reason why it should have similar polarity with the lipids to be extracted. For example, a combination of chloroform/methanol results in the extraction interaction of water/methanol greater than that of methanol/chloroform and greater than that of chloroform/lipid. The microalgal lipids require the cell wall disruption for their extraction. The enzymatic extraction method is one of the promising ways to extract microalgal lipids. This method is similar to solvent extraction; the only difference is to add the enzyme rather than the solvent. In other words, this method consists of adding enzymes that ease cell disruption, and then the intracellular lipids are easily released into extraction broth. It does not require additional physical methods for microalgal cell wall disruption. Microalgae biomass conversion technologies, also known as the third-generation options, commonly consist of transesterification, hydroprocessing, fermentation, gasification, anaerobic digestion, and pyrolysis. The thermochemical conversion and biochemical conversion are two groups of all conversion technologies. Selection of the conversion technology depends on the raw materials/feedstock and targeted end product. Some conversion process, such as anaerobic digestion, can combine both microalgae cell wall disruption and extraction processes. Transesterification is a catalytic reaction that converts lipids into fatty ester methyl esters and glycerol as coproduct through four steps. The first step is preparing the catalyst and mixing the catalyst with alcohol. The second step is the transesterification reaction that takes place through the reaction between the mixture of catalyst/alcohol and with the fatty acid (triglycerides). The optimum temperature range is about 40–60°C for transesterification reaction, and the rate of reaction Transesterification process facilitates the recovery of the high amount of mixture of fatty esters, but it requires a high amount of alcohol to prevent the production of soap, which is an unwanted reaction. Enzymes (i.e., enzymatic reaction) can be used instead of catalysts, but the lipases that are mostly used in the enzymatic reaction are expensive; thus the high cost makes the enzymatic reaction less effective than chemical reactions, and the reaction rate is slow and the productivity is low. The wet microalgal biomass contains about 75%–98% moisture that can be transformed into biocrude oil by hydrothermal liquefaction process. The process takes place at catalytic and high conditions (temperatures [200–500°C] and pressures [>20 Hydrothermal liquefaction process is efficiently high, but its development and application are still in the embryonic stage Bioethanol is one of the bioenergy products obtained through a fermentation process of the carbohydrate, which is a component of microalgal biomass. After the fermentation process, the bioethanol is concentrated through the distillation process, which is followed by the bioethanol recovery from the fermentation broth. The gasification process can also be applied to bioethanol production from algal resources Both the simplicity in processing and operation conditions and the low energy requirements of fermentation make bioethanol production more advantageous. However, compared with biodiesel production, as a biofuel production technology coupled with wastewater treatment, it gained little attention. Recent researches have proposed the perspective of other bioproducts such as biobutanol from the fermentation of microalgae Gasification is a thermochemical conversion method that is being used to convert microalgal biomass into biofuels. Gasification process produces gases such as hydrogen, methane, and carbon monoxide. Till now, it is obvious that the gasification of microalgae to biofuels is somehow expensive because the microalgal biomass contains the high moisture content. The catalytic gasification can rapidly convert microalgal biomass into gases Anaerobic digestion is classified as a biological conversion process that breaks feedstocks into CH Anaerobic digestion technology has shown potential as a key process for managing large quantities of biomass residues, including microalgal residue after extraction of high-value compounds and/or other metabolites. The microalgal biomass and microalgal biomass residues after extracting high-value compounds such as oil are sustainable raw materials for anaerobic digestion, which can be fed to the anaerobic digester. The microalgae-derived feedstocks are promising and sustainable feedstocks for biogas production through anaerobic digestion due to their high nutrients, carbon, and moisture content and absence of lignin Pyrolysis gives three kinds of products, including biooil, gases, and biochar In some cases, the downstream (including harvesting, dewatering, extraction, and conversion) techniques can be combined in a single step for the process cost reduction. For example, the culture broth can be transferred in the anaerobic digester or fermenter without harvesting and dewatering (see The microalgae fatty acids, like any other seed plant fatty acids, are produced in the plastid and then stored in triglycerides through the biochemical process between the plastid envelope and the endoplasmic reticulum Microalgal proteins can be used as food, feeds, fertilizers, industrial enzymes, bioplastics, and surfactants Microalgae also contain a multitude of pigments alongside chlorophyll, phycobiliproteins, and carotenoids being the most relevant. Carotenoids include astaxanthin, β-carotene, bixin, fucoxanthin, lutein, lycopene, zeaxanthin, etc. These compounds are used in food industry as natural food colorants and as an animal feed additive and in cosmetics. They also have many positive health effects including antiinflammatory properties Most algal products other than biofuels are considered high-value products. When bringing the production Biodiesel is an alternative to the conventional diesel fuel. It is a mixture of monoalkyl esters of oils (long-chain fatty acids) derived from a renewable lipid feedstock by transesterification Algal biodiesel production requires the release of lipids from their intracellular location, which should be done in the most energy-efficient and economical ways Glycerol, which is obtained as a by-product, can be utilized as a carbon source and converted into valuable metabolic products. This utilization constitutes another avenue to add value to the waste glycerol, including the optimization of high content lipid accumulation in microalgae cells Direct photolysis of water can achieve microalgae-based hydrogen generation, also referred to biohydrogen, by microalgae or by a dark anaerobic fermentation that converts microalgae carbohydrates to hydrogen. The later process is assisted by either photosynthetic bacteria or a combination of both photosynthetic and anaerobic bacteria. Some algal strains, including Biogas production is quite essential to promote the expansion and optimization of the entire biofuels production process at a low cost Microalgae biomass can by gasification be converted to both syngas (a combustible gas mixture composed of H On the top of algal carbohydrates such as starch, glucose, and cellulose/hemicellulose, microalgae contain also a variety of polysaccharides that are currently considered as a class of high-value products with wide applications in food, cosmetics, textiles, stabilizers, emulsifiers, flocculant, lubricants, thickening agents, and clinical drugs Although microalgal biofuels are of great potential in the future, processing is still one of the bottlenecks for microalgal biofuels at the moment. The downstream route of microalgal industry should be economically feasible, energy cost controllable, and environmentally friendly. The reduction of energy cost during harvesting, extraction, and conversion would be a potential means