The JKMRC has been studying and modelling industrial AG and SAG mills for over 40years, but the ability to simulate the effects of blending hard and soft components on mill performance remains quite limited. In an effort to quantify these effects for modelling purposes, a series of laboratory, pilot scale and full scale tests, using multi-component feeds were conducted under the AMIRA P9O project.
                  The obtained data shows a non-linear trend between the measured mill throughput and the proportion of soft component in the feed, as well as the effect of fresh feed composition in mill product size distribution and load. Therefore, a new multi-component AG/SAG mill model structure was developed to account for these observed effects, and it was validated using pilot and full scale data.The Run-of-mine composition strongly affects autogenous mill operation. However, the effects of a varying ratio of hard and soft components in mill performance are not described by the current generation of AG/SAG models ( The hard component typically limits the mill throughput, due to its slower breakdown characteristics, and preferentially accumulates in the mill contents; impacting the mill power when these components have different specific densities. Competent materials also affect the product size distribution because they comminute predominantly by abrasion and generate more fines, while soft or brittle materials produce a coarser product. Therefore, there is a clear need to quantify the behaviour of binary feeds in AG/SAG mill operations and to develop a multi-component model structure. The grinding media of autogenous mills derive from the feed ore size and composition ( A comprehensive experimental campaign was conduct with the AMIRA P9O project to understand the behaviour of multi-component ores in AG/SAG mills ( The AG/SAG Model in the JKSimMet simulation package is based on a framework developed by As shown in The mill discharge rate for each particle size is a product of the maximum discharge rate through the grate (h The grate classification function ( Particles up to size The fraction of the load presented to the grate per unit of time ( The appearance or breakage distribution function describes the progeny size distribution from each breakage event. According to The high energy breakage is ore specific and related to the breakage energy, and is defined by the equation below: The model calculates the specific comminution energy (Ecs) for each size fraction in the mill load using the highest energy reference level ( The low energy breakage function is also ore specific and defined by a single parameter The high and low appearance functions are combined proportionally, using the following relationship, which implies that abrasion will dominate for coarse particles and impact breakage for fines. The breakage rates can be back-calculated using Eqs. The breakage rate distributions are affected by a number of operating conditions. The proposed multi-component AG/SAG mill model is similar to, and based on, the current JKSimMet model. In the new version, the behaviour of each component is described using a separate perfect mixing model equation (see More accurate calculation of specific comminution energy (Ecs). Independent breakage functions ( Independent breakage and discharge rates for each component. Accounts for the effect of blending in the mill power draw calculation. According to the preliminary modelling findings, the breakage rates for each component vary according to their proportion in the mill fresh feed. The reason behind this variation is that different feed blends result in different compositions in the mill charge, which act as grinding media. Therefore, the model must determine the correct steady-state ratio between hard and soft components in the mill load, in order to provide realistic breakage simulations. Independent breakage function parameters ( The energy calculation in the new model was refined by using the specific gravity values of each component as well as their distribution and proportion in the mill load. The bulk SG in the mill load, and the coarsest 20% size ( Multi-component experimental data ( The new model uses the same iterative method adopted by The scale factors applied for The current discharge model is under review, but the implications of this simplification appear to be small given the validation presented later in this paper. However, the most recent advances in slurry transport research ( Breakage rates have been a controversial topic of discussion between researchers given their differing interpretations of what constitutes a breakage event. Rather than considering it as the rate of breakage events occurring to each particle per unit of time ( The same mill power draw model, present in the current version of JKSimMet ( By integrating between the limits It is clear that the net power draw calculation using this model is affected by the charge density, which is directly related to ore specific gravity. The current JKSimMet model does not account for the build-up of hard components in the mill contents, and therefore, considers the ore specific gravity in the mill load to be the same as in the feed. This can lead to significant errors when hard and soft components have significant differences in specific gravity. For example, in the LKAB operation treating magnetite and silicates, the difference between the feed blend and charge density could be as high as 15% depending on the blend. This translates to a 10% difference in mill power draw. The new model can describe very well the build-up effect, providing more realistic estimations of the true charge density, based on the balance between components and their respective specific gravities. Therefore, the effect of blending on mill power draw can now be described with more accuracy than has previously been possible. Multi-component data obtained during surveys at the LKAB Kiruna concentrator in Sweden and a related pilot plant campaign using mixtures of LKAB magnetite ore and silicate waste ( The ore deposit in Kiruna is composed of a single continuous high grade magnetite orebody, mined using a sublevel caving method, which inevitably leads to some dilution with gangue – typically hard rock textures of silicates associated with phosphates and magnesium oxides. The mined ore has a high percentage of magnetite and is further upgraded in a sorting plant (using magnetic separation techniques) before entering the mill concentrator. The characterization results from JKDWT ( The mill was operated in fully autogenous mode and open circuit configuration during all trials. The operational philosophy adopted in the pilot plant trials was to find the feed rate which resulted in a steady operation at a mill load level of 28%. Once steady-state conditions were reached, samples of feed, charge and product were collected and then analysed for size and composition distributions. Experimental data from three trials (T1, T4 and T5), where the entire mill contents were measured, were used to calibrate the model. A total of six parameters were fitted for each component: fine size ( The calculated breakage rates for both components were affected by the feed composition, as shown in The silicate breakage rates at coarse sizes were lower than magnetite in all three trials, explaining the build-up of hard material in the mill. However, the opposite effect was observed at smaller sizes, where at the same energy levels, light silicate particles experience higher levels of specific energy (kW The breakage rates of silicate at small sizes were not greatly affected by changes in feed blend, but magnetite breakage rates were reduced, due to a reduced level of energy provided by the less dense silicate dominated grinding media. The breakage rates were suppressed near the critical size (44 The effect of blend on breakage rates requires further investigation, and the new multi-component model is an ideal platform for this investigation. Meanwhile, the current model can still be used for simulation, once the effect of blend on breakage rates is measured using a few sets of pilot data. Alternatively, data from a recently developed SAG Locked Cycle Test ( Once calibrated, the multi-component model can reproduce the multi-component experimental data. A comparison between measured and simulated data for product and mill load in Test 1 is shown in It is clear from Ultimately, the model was able to describe very well the mill load and product size distributions for magnetite, silicate and bulk material for all trials. The variation in breakage rates according to blend, shown in The simulation results were very realistic, describing well known and expected effects such as: non-linear mill throughput response, linear relationship between specific energy and feed blend, increase in the amount of fines with more competent material, which is ground predominantly by abrasion, and build-up of hard material in the mill load. The modelling outcomes were also in strong agreement with the measured data. The only exception was the mill product size, which was coarser (P80) but at a marginally higher percentage passing 45 The LKAB KA2 concentrator in Kiruna was surveyed to obtain detailed multi-component data for every stream and mill load ( The models were almost equivalent when applied to the bulk data. The new model was more accurate when predicting the mill product and load size distributions, but the original model was marginally more accurate in predicting the amount of fines in the mill load, as shown in The extra value added by the new model became evident when it demonstrated the ability to simulate the distributions of magnetite and silicate in both the mill load and product, while the original model was limited to bulk data, as shown in The product size distribution for different phases is an excellent feature to use in assessing the impact of mill product on downstream processes, such as classifiers, magnetic separators and secondary milling. However, multi-component models for other processing units are required for a complete flowsheet simulation. This is an objective for future research within the JKMRC and AMIRA P9P project. Another valuable feature of the new model structure is the ability to describe the build-up of hard component material in the mill load. The simulated amount of hard silicate against measured data is presented in In the case of the LKAB ore, where hard and soft components have significant differences in SG, the ability to predict the mill load composition, and consequently the charge density, will have a significant impact on mill power calculations and throughput. By upgrading the current JKSimMet 1D model structure to a 2D data format, allowing for the specification of the feed on a component by size basis, a new simple and robust multi-component model has been developed. The model relies on independent breakage and discharge rates for each component, and when combined still observe the underlying discharge rate of the bulk solids and water. The model was refined and validated using multi-component data obtained through pilot tests and an industrial mill survey at LKAB in Sweden. It has been shown that the model is capable of correctly describing the changes in throughput capacity, mill load and product caused by changes in the mill feed composition. Further work is being carried out to implement the most recent advances in the fields of breakage energy calculation and slurry transport, as well as to model the effect of changes in feed blend on the mill breakage rates. Although the case studies presented were all AG related, the model is applicable to SAG mills and uses the same method as the previous JKSimMet model to account for the extra energy provided by steel balls. The model should find applications in the optimization of existing circuit operations with multi-component ores, and in the field of geometallurgical mine-to-mill optimization exercises. When other multi-component models are available (e.g. classifiers, HPGR and ball mill), it can be used to assess flowsheet alternatives to optimise the grinding performance specific to each ore component. This study was made possible through the Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre and supported by the AMIRA P9O Project. The authors wish to acknowledge the extensive financial and logistical support from LKAB and all the staff involved in obtaining the data presented in this paper. Special thanks are due to Michal Andrusiewicz, JKTech’s lead programmer who has made significant contributions towards programming this model in the JK MDK platform.