In order to optimize the current efficiency and power consumption of cobalt electrowinning, the electrical conductivity of the electrolyte needs to be known. Electrical conductivity depends directly on various variables including the chemical composition and acidity of the electrolyte. This study was carried out to determine the electrical conductivity and density of cobalt sulfate electrolyte with varying levels of cobalt and sulfuric acid, measured at different temperatures. The experiment conditions selected in this study simulated the range of modern industrial cobalt electrowinning electrolytes. From the experimental data, models were deduced, correlating temperature, cobalt concentration and sulfuric acid concentration to the electrical conductivity and density of the cobalt sulfate electrolyte. The models were developed using empirical formulas, which allowed for reasonable extrapolation, to produce a tool to study the major trends of the electrical conductivity and density. From these models, suggestions could be made to enhance the electrowinning process via increased current efficiency and decreased power consumption.Cobalt is a strategic and critical metal used in many diverse industrial applications. Cathode cobalt is used primarily to make superalloys for gas turbine engines, but is also extensively used in chemicals, carbide and diamond tools and magnets. In addition, cobalt finds applications in medical implants, oil desulphurization, ceramics and the computer industry, each requiring high purity cathode cobalt which is 99.8% pure ( Various forms of cobalt metal, including briquettes, cathode (electrolytic cobalt), fines, granules (shot), ingot, powder, and rondelles, have been produced and marketed. The most popular form is cathode cobalt involving sulfate medium from a pressure leaching operation ( The main media for cobalt electrowinning are sulfate or chloride solutions. In the electrowinning of cobalt from a sulfate solution, cobalt is deposited on the cathode coupled with oxygen evolution at the anode and in chloride solutions, the deposition is coupled with chlorine gas evolution at the anode. In the electrowinning of cobalt from sulfate electrolytes, the following main reactions occur at the cathode: The main anodic reaction in sulfate electrolytes is Review of literature indicates that there was very limited information available on the electrical conductivity and density of cobalt electrolytes for cobalt electrowinning from sulfate electrolytes. A number of studies have been reported for other electrowinning electrolytes such as copper ( This study is a follow up of Wu et al., which studied the electrical conductivities and density of nickel sulfate electrolytes. In The main objective of this investigation was to measure the electrical conductivities and density of cobalt sulfate electrolytes. The effects of cobalt concentration, sulfuric acid concentration and temperature on the electrical conductivities and density of the cobalt sulfate electrolytes were determined along with their corresponding trends. Based on these experimental results, empirical equations describing the measured values were also presented using linear regression methods. The experiments for measuring both the density and electrical conductivity were performed over the chemical composition and temperature ranges shown in A Jenway 4320 conductivity meter was employed to measure electrical conductivity. Prior to measurement, conductivity cell was calibrated via 3-point calibration using KCl standard solutions. The calibration procedure was taken from the data of the Horiba Group ( Density measurements were conducted by using 25 ml Fisher Scientific Gay-Lussac Specific Gravity Bottles. The thermal expansion of the specific gravity bottles was taken into considerations when measuring the absolute density of the electrolytes. For each experiment, a specific gravity bottle full of solution and another bottle with a thermometer were both placed inside the Haake water bath. Once the bottle with the thermometer reached the desired temperature, the bottle with solution was taken out of the bath to be weighed. Measurements were carried out over the temperature range 20–70 °C. Each experiment was repeated at least two times. The data was then averaged for creating empirical equations. As shown in Eq. The ohmic drop is proportional to the electrode gap, current density and is inversely proportional to the specific conductivity of the electrolyte as given by Eq. The results of electrical conductivity measurement are tabulated in The density values measured are reported in Electrical conductivities and densities of cobalt sulfate electrolytes at different temperatures have been measured. All conditions are similar to those in industrial electrowinning processes. The benefits of higher electrolyte conductivity are a decrease in the ohmic drop and a decrease in power consumption. The benefits of this would be decreased operational costs. The density of cobalt sulfate electrolyte increases with cobalt and sulfuric acid concentration, but decreases with temperature. The measurement of the electrolyte density provides data for engineering design and production. These results can be combined into empirical relationships. For the electrical conductivity and the electrolyte density, the empirical relationships can be respectively expressed as follows: Financial support for this work provided by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research of Canada (NSERC) and Integran Technologies Inc. is greatly acknowledged. The authors would like to thank Rudder Wu for assistance with some of the experiments.