The amount of tunnels excavated along stratified/sedimentary rock masses in Quangninh coal mine area, Vietnam, is gradually increasing. Rock mass in Quangninh is characterized by beddings between rock layers. The behavior of stratified rock masses surrounding the tunnels depends on both the intact rock and the beddings between rock layers. The main characteristics of stratified rock masses that need to be considered are their heterogeneity and anisotropy. Depending on the dip angle of rock layers, movements and failure zones developed surrounding the tunnels can be asymmetrical over the vertical axis of tunnel. This asymmetry causes adverse behaviors of the tunnel structures. The objective of this study is to highlight convergences and yielded zones developed in rock masses surrounding noncircular tunnels in Quangninh coal mine area using a finite element method. The presence of bedding joints is explicitly simulated. The numerical results indicated that with the increase in dip angle of bedding joints, the stress asymmetry over the tunnel vertical axis increases. It gradually leads to an asymmetry of the failure zone surrounding the tunnel. An increase of rock mass quality means a decrease of rock mass sensitivity to the discontinuities. In addition, a dip angle of the bedding joints of approximately 45° could be considered as the critical angle at which the rock mass mechanism changes between sliding and bending.In Quangninh Province, Vietnam, the number of open pit mines is decreasing and they are gradually transmitting into underground mines. In this case, the number of tunnels in coal mine area is therefore constantly increasing. Generally, rock masses in Quangninh are characterized by joints/beddings between rock layers. Unlike intact rock, the behavior of stratified rock masses surrounding the tunnels depends on the properties of both the intact rock and the joints/beddings between rock layers. Generally, the dip angle of bedding varies from 0° to 90°, corresponding to respectively a horizontal and a vertical stratification. The main characteristics of the stratified rock masses in Quangninh coal mine area are therefore the rock heterogeneity and anisotropy. In the literature, the effect of beddings on the behavior of rock mass is usually considered using explicit or implicit methods. With explicit methods, bedding joints are explicitly simulated using joint elements ( With implicit methods, bedding joints are implicitly considered as transversely isotropic material ( Obviously, most of previous studies focused on investigating the behavior of circular tunnels considering the influence of inclined stratification ( This paper aims therefore to highlight the effect of inclined beddings in rock masses and support structures on the displacement field developed around noncircular tunnels using a finite element method (FEM). The presence of bedding joints is explicitly simulated. The numerical results indicate that with the increase in dip angle of bedding joints, the stress asymmetry over the tunnel vertical axis increases. It gradually leads to an asymmetry of the failure zone surrounding the tunnel. An increase of rock mass quality means a decrease of rock mass sensitivity to the discontinuities. In addition, a dip angle of the bedding joints of approximately 45° could be considered as the critical angle at which the rock mass displacement mechanism changes between sliding and bending. In numerical calculations, a constitutive model using the Hoek-Brown failure criterion ( A range of geological strength index (GSI) values changing from 10 to 80 has been adopted, which covers rock mass conditions varying from very poor to very good. The uniaxial compressive strength of intact rock ( The deformation modulus of rock mass ( The shear moduli of intact rock ( Assuming that the rock mass is a combination of intact rock and discontinuities, the deformability properties of these elements are calculated through the following equations ( The values of The joint wall compressive strength (JCS) and joint roughness coefficient (JRC) are determined using the rock joint classification condition suggested by Because the support structure has a great impact on the behavior of tunnel excavated in stratified rock mass, two cases of tunnel with and without support structure are investigated in this study. FEM was used in this study to model the influence of rock joint on the stability of tunnel and subsequent estimation of parameters which influence the deformation and development of yielded zone produced in rock mass. FEM has been used previously by many researchers ( Three extensometers have been radially installed in the surrounding rock from the tunnel wall to monitor the displacements induced in rock mass after excavation (see Both two- (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) numerical models built using RS2 and RS3 software ( Measured displacements along the three extensometers installed at tunnel site are presented in It can be seen that the 2D numerical model gives displacements which are more or less similar to those obtained by the 3D numerical model, and both numerical models are relatively consistent with the monitored data. In this section, numerical analyses of tunnels without support structure in plane strain conditions have been conducted using the RS2 software ( The section used is not the same as that in the first part of the work. A typical section which is usually used in Quangninh coal mine area was adopted here. The tunnel cross-section was assumed as an arch-profile crown and vertical sidewalls with dimension of 4.5 m wide and 3.5 m high. A depth of 300 m from the ground surface has been chosen because this depth is now widely observed in Quangninh coal mine area. Typical parameters of intact rock and discontinuities in Quangninh coal mine area were adopted in this study ( The first calculation step of the numerical excavation process consists in setting up the initial stress state taking into consideration the vertical stress under the effect of gravity field. The ratio between the lateral and vertical stresses ( The other discontinuity strength parameters were chosen depending on the rock surface condition. The values of JRC changed from 2 (very poor) to 18 (very good). The JCS varied from 0.1 This section deals with the variations in convergences of the tunnel wall after excavation considering the influence of bedding angle, joint parameters and rock mass quality. These variations were determined at the final state when the unsupported tunnels have reached a steady state. To investigate the effect of joints/beddings on the displacement of the tunnel boundary, five observation points were chosen, as shown in  In order to investigate the effect of dip angle on the rock mass behavior, the ratio Using the same data from The values of As for the points 2 and 3, the dependence of the ratio In order to highlight the asymmetry of convergences, the deviation   In the case of poor joints condition ( Structure of steel rib type is widely used to support the tunnel excavated through inclined stratified rock mass in Quangninh coal mine area. Parameters of the reference case have been adopted to analyze the influence of joints on the behavior of supported tunnels. The tunnels are located at a depth of 300 m from the ground surface. Joint spacing is equal to 1 m. The lateral earth pressure coefficient (  Obviously, the support structure plays a role in reducing the deformation of the rock mass. The development of yielded zones is therefore reduced. In addition, the support structure causes reaction forces which help to increase the radial stresses in the rock mass, i.e. the minor principal stress The influence of the support structure on the tunnel wall radial displacement is presented in  Using the same numerical data from In order to highlight the deformation mechanism of rock layers considering the effect of lateral earth pressure coefficient ( When the For other cases of  In this study, numerical calculation has been conducted to investigate the effect of the dip angle, lateral earth pressure coefficient, and rock mass quality on the convergences of the surrounding rock. Some conclusions can be derived as follows: For intact rock without joints, the yielded zone is smaller than that observed in the case of stratified rock masses. In addition, the stress distribution around the tunnel excavated in an isotropic rock mass and in the case of horizontal and vertical stratifications is symmetric. However, in the case of inclined stratified rock mass, the asymmetry of the yielded zone developed surrounding the tunnel increases gradually when the dip angle is greater. The convergences induced in inclined layered rock masses are usually larger than those obtained in horizontally layered rock mass representing by the ratio An increase of the GSI value means an improvement of the rock mass quality and a decrease of the dependence of rock mass behavior on the discontinuities. Consequently, the scatter of the ratio The deviation of convergences at two sides of the tunnel is larger when the stratified rock mass quality decreases. It means that the higher the GSI value, the smaller the deviation. For the investigated cases in this study, when the uniaxial compressive strength of rock mass, The dip angle of the joint ( The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. This research is funded by the Vietnamese