This communication presents experimental results obtained in the column flotation of relatively coarse silica sand (d
                     80=l90 μm) conditioned with dodecylamine. It is shown that air bubbles might become completely covered with particles giving rise to bubble–particle aggregate densities close to that of water. Under these circumstances, mineralised bubbles do not have enough buoyancy to rise along the column and tend to accumulate close to the bottom, giving rise to a gas holdup profile that decreases from bottom (50–60%, v/v) to top of the column (around 20%, v/v), and to a decrease in solids recovery (as low as 30% for the more severe conditions: J
                     t=1.5 cm/s and 35% solids slurry). It is postulated that the drop in recovery observed is due to both bubble coalescence caused by overloading (loss of bubble surface area) and to entrainment of mineralised bubbles in the tails stream. The occurrence and magnitude of the phenomenon was photographically documented.Carrying capacity ( The experimental apparatus The measurements performed with the pressure transducers are used to estimate the gas holdup in the column and to control the depth of the froth zone by acting on the feed pump. The streams of the column are driven with Masterflex pumps. Air and wash water are measured with calibrated flow meters. The column was operated with recycle, that is, the concentrate and tails were returned to the conditioning tank. The wash water was taken from the conditioning tank making use of facilities to filter out solids, thus avoiding adding extra water into the flotation system. The flotation slurry was prepared using silica sand with a The estimation of the dispersed-phase holdup (air bubbles plus silica particles) was carried out by making use of Maxwell's model for a nonconductive dispersed phase, namely: The model and the above mentioned conductivity cells have been fully tested in a number of applications To estimate the gas holdup, the pressure technique makes use of two hydrostatic pressure measurements (conducted in two locations along the column) and   For the slurry containing 20% solids, gas holdup increases from bottom to top only for The results obtained with the slurry containing 25% solids The gas holdup profiles obtained with the slurry containing 35% solids clearly denote a poor operation   The holdup profiles of Results of the computations, presented in  The column flotation of relatively coarse silica sand ( carrying capacity, g/min/cm acceleration due to gravity, 980.7 cm/s collection zone height, m froth depth, m superficial velocity of gas, tails and wash water, cm/s axial separation between pressure tapping points, cm pressure difference between tapping points, dyn/cm gas (plus solids) holdup in the collection zone, volume fraction relative conductivity electrical conductivity of the three phase system, mS/cm electrical conductivity of the continuous phase (aqueous solution), mS/cm density of the bubble–particle aggregate, g/cm density of the slurry, g/cm density of the tails, g/cm density of water, 1 g/cm The authors thank CONACYT and SIPSA Peñoles for the financial support received. P. de Lira-Gómez thanks CONACYT for the scholarship provided to complete MSc studies. 