In order to tackle the dual challenge of utilizing highly refractory chalcopyrite (CuFeS2) while saving scarce freshwater resources, this study aimed to systematically understand the individual role of chemical lixiviant and bioleaching microorganisms in the complex Fe3+-Cu2+-SO4
                     2−-Cl− chalcopyrite leaching system. In general freshwater bioleaching conditions, the E
                     h level sharply increased, and the “high-E
                     h-bioleaching” became the major leaching driving force. In this case, the lowest Cu yield was obtained. The chalcopyrite leaching reaction responded differently to different salinity levels. At a low salinity of 0.5% NaCl, chemical Cl−-leaching effect resulted in a higher Cu yield than the fresh-water “high-E
                     h-bioleaching” system. The growth of tested microbes was observed at 0.5% NaCl, but partial deactivation of microbial Fe-oxidation suppressed the E
                     h level. Under this condition, synergism between the chemical Cl−-leaching effect and the “low-E
                     h-bioleaching” effect was found. At a high salinity of 2% NaCl, on the other hand, no active cell growth was observed, and thus pre-grown cells were used to mimic the presence of Cl−-tolerant cells. Chemical Cl−-leaching readily proceeded at 2% NaCl at low E
                     h, but quickly ceased upon the depletion of H+. The presence of bioleaching cells somewhat slowed down the speed of chemical Cl−-leaching, but the acid depletion was alleviated by microbial acid generation. Chemical Cl−-leaching, which favors low E
                     h condition, was the main driving force for chalcopyrite leaching at 2% NaCl. Therefore, the activity of Cl−-tolerant S-oxidizer alone, rather than mixed Fe- and S-oxidizing consortium, was shown to play a critical role in maximizing the chalcopyrite dissolution.Chalcopyrite (CuFeS So far, several bioleaching studies attempted to utilize saline waters at different temperature systems. The reactions taking place during chalcopyrite bioleaching in general Fe When considering replacing freshwater with saline waters, the effect of co-existing Cl  Owing to the stability of Cu Overall, the introduction of saline waters to chalcopyrite bioleaching would create a highly complex system where the above reactions may simultaneously come into effect to varying degrees, depending on the ion concentration, temperature and type of microbes used. The greatest synergism (between a variety of microbial and chemical reactions) may appear differently under different conditions. Hence, this study aimed to systematically explain the individual effect of chemical lixiviant and bioleaching microorganisms at different salinity levels. Chalcopyrite concentrate from Chile (20–106 μm; JX Nippon Mining & Metals) was washed with 1 M HNO Three bacterial strains ( Microbial Cl Mixed cultures containing all four Fe- and S-oxidizing strains were prepared by harvesting (10,000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C) and washing (dilute H Mixed cultures of all four strains, as well as pure cultures of S-oxidizing Additionally, a separate experiment was conducted by replacing 2% NaCl with an artificial seawater mix (Marine art SF-1; Osaka Yakken). The artificial seawater mix was added on day 10 after the pre-growth of the cells. The total amount of Cl Samples were regularly withdrawn to monitor pH, Abiotic tests were carried out in 500 mL Erlenmeyer flasks containing 200 mL pure water (pH 1.5 with H Cell density was monitored by direct counting (Thoma chamber). Liquid samples were filtered through 0.20 μm membranes to determine concentrations of total Fe and Fe Prior to bio- and chemical leaching tests, Cl The average seawater salinity is about 3.5% (mainly NaCl). Therefore, active cell growth of these bioleaching strains cannot be expected unless lower strength saline waters are used or the seawater is diluted prior to use for the biohydrometallurgical process. Elevating the NaCl dose from 0 to 3% clearly resulted in the increasingly greater chemical Cl The NaCl dose of ≥1% resulted in no active cell growth, and thus bioleaching reactions did not proceed. The cell density in NaCl-free mixed cultures readily increased to reach about 3 × 10 However, the effectiveness of higher salinity (> 1% NaCl) without microbial activity easily exceeded the synergism mentioned above (observed at 0.5% NaCl; The results from the previous section posed a question; it there any advantage of adding During the NaCl-free pre-growth period (day 0–9), usual cell growth was observed to reach the late exponential phase in all cases ( After the NaCl addition (at 2%) on day 9, the most rapid initial Cu dissolution rate (between day 9–21) was observed in cell-free controls, which constantly maintained the lowest In Fe- and S-oxidizing mixed cultures, the NaCl addition on day 9 caused an instant In pure cultures containing only S-oxidizing cells, the Overall, when using higher salinity waters, the chemical Cl Overall, when using higher salinity waters, the chemical Cl Efforts are being made by researchers to explore more halotolerant or halophilic Fe-oxidizers for the purpose of saline water bioleaching. However, such Fe-oxidizers would even further increase the The commercial significance of seawater (containing ~0.5 M Cl In the case of saline water bioleaching, its utility of seawater would come into light provided that a robust salt-tolerant/halophilic S-oxidizer becomes available as an H The findings of this study were schematically summarized in When NaCl-free freshwater media were used for bioleaching, the At lower salinity of 0.5% NaCl, the cell-free chemical Cl At higher salinity of 2% NaCl, no active cell growth of tested strains was observed, and thus pre-grown cells were used to mimic the existence of Cl  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest. This work was partly supported by