This prospective randomized trial compared a non-bridging external fixator with a bridging external fixator system for the treatment of severe comminuted intra-articular fractures of the distal radius. The results did not demonstrate a statistically significant difference in the radiological and clinical outcomes achieved with these two treatments.The management of unstable intra-articular fractures of the distal radius remains controversial. One method of treatment is external fixation, most commonly with static fixators that bridge the wrist and immobilize this joint as well as the fracture. Immobilization of the wrist has been associated with significant morbidity ( Between March 1997 and April 2000, 60 patients with intra-articular fractures of the distal radius, including complex comminuted fractures, were enrolled in the study. Patients were excluded if they were unable to give consent, suffered from any musculoskeletal or neurological disease, were unable to follow routine pin track care, had any other associated fractures of the hand, wrist or forearm or had a previous fracture of the same wrist. The study was approved by the Flinders Medical Centre Ethics Committee. After obtaining consent, patients were randomly allocated by a closed envelope method into one of two groups of 30 patients. Patients in one group were treated with an AO Delta frame ( An orthopaedic surgeon performed all the operations. All the fractures were reduced by closed manipulation aided by 5 All pins were inserted after incision and open dissection of the soft tissues down to bone to protect neurovascular structures and tendons. Pin sites were dressed with betadine-soaked swabs. Intravenous cephalosporin (cephazolin, 1 Instructions were given to all patients regarding finger, elbow and shoulder mobilization exercises. Those with a Delta frame were also instructed in wrist mobilization exercises commencing 2 weeks post-operatively. Patients with a Hoffmann frame did not commence wrist mobilization exercises until 6 weeks, when the frame was removed. Physiotherapy was prescribed for both groups. An orthopaedic surgeon reviewed all patients post-operatively at 1, 6, 12, 26 and 52 weeks and any complications were recorded. Wrist and hand function was assessed by a research physiotherapist weekly for the first 6 weeks, then at 12, 26 and 52 weeks following surgery. Assessments included measurements of pain using a 0–10 visual analogue scale, range of movement using a goniometer and grip strength using a Jamar dynamometer. Grip strength was expressed as a percentage of the uninjured side. An activity of daily living questionnaire was also used to assess the performance of 17 different unilateral and bilateral functional activities. These activities are listed in Standard antero-posterior and lateral radiographs were taken of the wrist pre-operatively and at 1, 6, 26 and 52 weeks post-operatively. An independent radiologist evaluated all pre- and post-operative radiographs. Pre-operative fracture classifications and post-operative measurements of palmar tilt, radial inclination, radial length and radial step were recorded. The results were compared with population-based reference ranges ( Differences between the two groups for pain, range of movement, grip strength and ability to perform activities of daily living were assessed using the Mann–Whitney Radiological differences between the two groups were assessed from the last set of radiographs of each patient using the Mann–Whitney Forty-one women and 19 men were included in the study. The average age was 56 (range of 18–83) years. Patient details and fracture classification are summarized in The median pain score decreased over time for both the Delta and Hoffmann groups with no significant difference between the two groups at any time. The greatest improvement occurred in the first 6 weeks following the operation with the Delta group's score on the visual analogue scale decreasing from 3.8 to 0.9 and the Hoffmann group's score decreasing from 4.5 to 1.4. By 12 weeks the Hoffmann group's median score was zero and by 26 weeks the Delta group had also reached zero. In general, there was a sequential improvement in all ranges of movements for the Delta and Hoffmann groups, with the greatest improvement occurring during the first 3 months. The results for grip strength are also summarized in Activities of daily living scores improved rapidly in the first 12 weeks, with both groups achieving almost maximum scores by this stage. The Hoffmann group were significantly better than the Delta group 2 weeks after the operation ( A total of 39 complications occurred in 33 patients ( Four patients required further surgery. One of the Delta patients had open reduction and internal fixation and a second required two separate manipulations under anaesthetic for stiffness of the finger metacarpophalangeal joints. The two Hoffmann patients requiring surgery included the patient described above and a second patient who had a distal ulna resection for persistent distal radio-ulnar joint pain. No significant differences were found between the two groups for any variable at any time. The median palmar tilt, radial inclination, radial length and radial step for the two groups, 12 months post-operatively, are summarized in Results from previous studies comparing static and dynamic external fixators for the treatment of distal radial fractures have been conflicting. In the study by In the study by In a subsequent study, The rate of pin site infection in the current study was similar for both the Delta and Hoffmann frame groups. Almost one-third of patients developed an infection despite the use of prophylactic antibiotics. This rate of infection is high but reflects our low threshold for treating pin site problems. Patients with pin site erythema, with or without positive bacterial culture, were considered to have an infection and were treated with antibiotics. In all but two cases, the infections were successfully treated with oral antibiotics. There were three cases of extensor pollicis longus rupture, all of which occurred in the Delta frame group. In the study by In conclusion, this study demonstrated that the outcomes of patients with complex unstable intra-articular fractures of the distal radius are similar, regardless of whether they are treated with a static bridging external fixator or a dynamic non-bridging external fixator.