The intensification of thiourea leaching of silver from a silver-bearing complex sulfide concentrate (Casapalca, Peru) using mechanochemical alkaline leaching as the pretreatment step was investigated. The leaching of “as-received” concentrate in an acid thiourea solution resulted in 5% Ag dissolution. After pretreatment, 90% of the silver was leached within 10 min. The mechanochemical pretreatment resulted in up to 78% of tetrahedrite degrading and an increase in the specific surface area of the concentrate from 0.3 to a maximum of 15.7 m2 g−1. The pretreatment was performed in an attritor using variable milling times and sample weights. The physicochemical changes in the concentrate as a consequence of mechanochemical pretreatment had a pronounced influence on the subsequent silver extraction.Complex sulfide ores represent the major source of both non-ferrous base and precious metals. Due to the complex nature of these ores, hydrometallurgical techniques seem to be the most convenient way of extracting these metals. Sulfides are a considerable natural resource of silver. There are at least 200 minerals bearing silver in major, minor and trace amounts. However, of these, only 10–12 minerals are of practical importance. In order of leachability, these are elemental silver, silver halides and silver sulfides The process of intensive milling for the pretreatment of minerals has been applied frequently in recent years Mechanical activation induces significant changes to both surface and bulk structures of minerals. It increases the fraction of fine particles and specific surface area, and decreases the crystallinity of mineral components of a concentrate. Mechanochemical leaching integrates milling and leaching operations into a single step. In addition to the improvement of milling performance (the leaching agent also acts as a milling additive), there is the possibility that a single milling and leaching step contributes to operational benefits and the economy of the overall process Alkaline leaching using Na The aim of this paper is to study the combined process of mechanochemical and chemical leaching of silver from a complex sulfide concentrate with tetrahedrite as the main silver-bearing component in the concentrate. The two-stage process comprises mechanochemical leaching in Na Silver-bearing complex sulphide concentrate from Casapalca, Peru was used to test the effect of mechanochemical pretreatment and subsequent thiourea leaching of silver. The chemical composition of the “as-received” concentrate is represented in The specific surface area ( The particle size distribution of the concentrate was measured by laser scattering in a Helos and Rodos granulometer (Sympatec, Germany). The mean particle diameter was calculated as the first moment of the volume size distribution function. X-ray diffractometry was accomplished by using a diffractometer DRON 2.0 with goniometer GUR-5 (Techsnabexport, Russia) equipped with an FeK For the mechanochemical pretreatment, a 2 Mechanochemical pretreatment of “as-received” concentrate was performed using a stirred ball mill, attritor (Molinex PE 075, Netzsch, Germany). The 500 mL milling chamber contained 24, 30, 45, 60 and 66 g of sample with 2000 g of 2-mm diameter steel balls and 200 mL of solution (80 g L The specific milling energy The leaching was investigated in a 1000-mL glass reactor into which 500 mL of leaching solution having 10 g L The leaching kinetics of silver were best fitted to the kinetic equation Thiourea CS(NH The solids remaining after mechanochemical leaching under the conditions mentioned in While there was a clear reduction of antimony in the residue, no reduction in the arsenic content was observed. This is in agreement with our previous papers on mechanochemical alkaline leaching of tetrahedrite The mechanochemical treatment of the complex concentrate is also characterized by an increase in specific surface area. The effect of specific milling energy on the surface area is shown in This manifold new surface area formation is correlated by the particle size analysis of the ground samples Clearly, the initial stage of milling reduces the particle size of the concentrate and this results in the rapid increase in surface area. As the particle size becomes more stable, only a small increase in specific surface area takes place. The particle size analyzer used in this study cannot measure below 700 nm, and it is likely that the smaller particles formed with increasing specific energy do not contribute to the size distribution shown in The dependence of silver recovery on milling time is shown in The degree of tetrahedrite decomposition D can be defined by the equation The silver leaching curves were fitted using Mechanochemical alkaline pretreatment of complex sulphide concentrate has a positive influence on silver leaching from tetrahedrite. An optimum Ag recovery of 90% was achieved from the mechanochemically treated samples after only 10 min of thiourea leaching. The leaching of “as-received” (non-treated) concentrate resulted in only 5% Ag dissolution. The thiourea leaching of silver from tetrahedrite is a structurally sensitive solid–liquid reaction, and the increase in This work was supported by the Slovak Grant Agency for Science (grant No. 2/2103/22). The authors wish to express their thanks to Dr. Boldižárová for the X-ray diffraction analysis.