The catalyzed thiosulfate leach of gold from oxide ores has been evaluated. The addition of fine activated carbon resulted in increased dissolution rates and gold recoveries. It was hypothesized that activated carbon and gold form galvanic couples, and that the rate of oxygen reduction increased due to the increased surface area available on activated carbon. The use of activated carbon as catalyst in the thiosulfate leach of gold is a process alternative that may not require the addition of surrogate oxidants (like copper), can work at temperatures as low as 30 °C, and thiosulfate degradations of 2.1 kg per ton of ore or lower, making it an attractive alternative for the leaching of gold.The lixiviant most commonly used in gold leaching is cyanide. However, the use of cyanide may not be possible in some instances due to environmental concerns, social pressure, high reagent consumption, or the presence of carbonaceous matter. Of the possible alternatives to cyanide, thiosulfate is perhaps the most promising option. The dissolution of gold in the presence of thiosulfate as lixiviant, and oxygen as oxidant, proceeds according to Eq. The dissolution of gold with thiosulfate has received extensive attention over the last three decades. Nevertheless, much of this attention has been devoted to the ammonia-thiosulfate system, which most commonly uses cupric ions as oxidant ( Ammonia-free thiosulfate systems are more attractive from an environmental point of view but limited research has been conducted in the past. The pretreatment reported by The three samples used in this work were ground in a rod mill using tap water and at a pulp density of 60 wt%. The particle size was targeted at a P Solids were assayed for gold by fire assay followed by acid digestion and analyzed by atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS). Some samples were also analyzed for carbon speciation; total carbon was determined by combustion of the samples and determination of CO CaTS-RIL experiments were performed in 1-L stainless steel stirred tanks. Unless otherwise specified, experimental conditions were: 50 °C, pH 8 (adjusted and maintained with a 20 wt% lime slurry), 0.1 M calcium thiosulfate, 20 ppm Cu(II) (CuSO The ore pretreatment conditions were obtained from The gold grade in samples S1, S2 and S3 was 1.41, 2.54 and 3.63 g/ton, respectively. Organic carbon was only found in sample S3 (1.56 wt%). The mineralogy of the three samples is shown in  An important observation in these tests was that some trithionate (20–40 ppm) and tetrathionate (15–25 ppm) were observed throughout the thiosulfate leach tests in which the ore had been pretreated with carbon, but not in the baseline experiment. This observation led to the hypothesis that some activated carbon fines were deporting to the thiosulfate leach, and that this carbon was related to the increase in gold recovery. In fact, the residue of the leach test where the feed was pretreated (test “CaTS-RIL C pretreatment 2” in The effect of adding fine activated carbon (1–10 g/kg) directly to the CaTS-RIL tests is shown in  Lastly, The leach results observed with the three samples support the hypothesis that fine activated carbon deporting to the thiosulfate leach test was the cause for the increased recoveries observed after the standard carbon pretreatment reported by Up to this point, it can only be concluded that the presence of activated carbon during the thiosulfate leach increased gold recovery, and that reproducibility in the leach tests can be achieved by controlling the content of carbon in these experiments. However, it was still desired to evaluate if the carbon pretreatment reported by Preventing carbon attrition during the pretreatment of the ore was difficult, but it was decided to conduct two experiments using sample S1 to try to separate the effect of the pretreatment from the effect of carbon during the thiosulfate leach. The first experiment consisted in using the experimental setup shown in The second experiment consisted of performing a carbon pretreatment on sample S1 followed by removal of the carbon from the solids by flotation prior to leaching with thiosulfate. After the flotation test, the Au grade of the flotation tails of the carbon pretreated sample was 0.55 g/t; the organic carbon content in the flotation tails was 0.06 wt%. Two RIL tests were conducted on the flotation tails; a baseline experiment with no carbon added, and a RIL test in the presence of 10 g/kg fine carbon (see The results of these experiments suggest that the pretreatment with carbon had no direct effect on thiosulfate leaching, and that the fine carbon generated during the pretreatment caused the increased recoveries observed during the thiosulfate leach. To explain the effect of carbon on the thiosulfate recovery of gold it is now hypothesized that carbon and gold form a galvanic couple where carbon acts as a cathode, thus providing an extended surface for the reduction of cupric ions or oxygen, and gold acts as anode and dissolves. Gold is the most noble metal in the absence of lixiviants. However, in the presence of lixiviants the reduction potential of gold is affected, which allows gold dissolution to occur in aqueous solutions, at least from a thermodynamic perspective. The standard potentials for gold in water and in the presence of thiosulfate are listed in  The effect of different variables on the robustness of the carbon catalyzed thiosulfate leaching of gold was evaluated in this section. The objective of the following experiments was not to optimize the process but to assess the sensitivity of the recovery to the concentrations of Cu(II) and thiosulfate, the addition of resin and temperature.  Oxygen has been commonly added to the thiosulfate leach system to regenerate the cupric ions, but the addition of oxygen has also been reported to accelerate the degradation of thiosulfate in the presence of Cu(II) species to trithionate and tetrathionate, which is why the addition of oxygen and the Eh of the system have to be controlled carefully (   Decreasing temperature to 30 °C (  The results presented until now (apart from the carbon pretreatment tests) correspond to tests performed in the presence of ground activated carbon. However, from a process point of view, this would mean that the added carbon would be lost to the leach tails, unless a separation step (as flotation, for instance) was used to recover it, although it may not be justified from an economic point of view. Therefore, it was decided to conduct a test where coarse carbon was added to the leach test so that it could be recovered afterwards. The degradation of thiosulfate is an important factor from economic and chemical points of view. The generation of tetrathionate, particularly, has been associated to gold losses due to gold precipitation reactions ( The effect of activated carbon in the thiosulfate leaching of gold was evaluated. It was shown that fine activated increased gold recovery and its dissolution kinetics in the calcium thiosulfate leach system. It is suggested that activated carbon and gold form a galvanic couple where the additional area provided by activated carbon increases the reduction of oxygen, thus increasing the electrochemical oxidation of gold. In the presence of fine activated carbon, the addition of cupric ions had no effect on either gold recovery or its dissolution rate; it was also possible to decrease the leach temperature from 50 to 30 °C and still obtain high gold recoveries. Coarse carbon could be used instead of fine carbon to decrease carbon losses to the tails, although process economics must be considered. The maximum thiosulfate degradation observed was 2.11 kg/ton, with trithionate and tetrathionate as the main degradation products. The present results make the use of activated carbon as a catalyst in the thiosulfate leaching of gold an attractive process alternative in situations where the use of cyanide is not possible. The authors wish to thank AuTec for the permission to conduct this work and for giving permission to publish the results. The authors have no competing interests to declare.