Most of beryllium production comes from beryl and therefore flotation properties of beryl are examined in detail by various research organizations. Because beryl is found in the form of large crystals in various ore types, recovery of beryl from these ores is accomplished by sorting and or selective grinding due to the fact that the hardness of beryl is 7.5–8 (Mohs scale); during grinding, most of the gangue is ground finer than beryl and beryl is left in the coarse fraction, which is recovered by screening.Introduction Ore and minerals of beryllium Beneficiation of beryllium containing ores Beneficiation of beryl Flotation of beryl Flotation of beryl from pegmatite ores Flotation of bertrandite and phenacite Flotation of bertrandite and phenacite from Mount Wheeler ore U.S Flotation of phenacite from complex beryllium, yttrium and REO ore Operating plants References Most of beryllium production comes from beryl and therefore flotation properties of beryl are examined in detail by various research organizations. Because beryl is found in the form of large crystals in various ore types, recovery of beryl from these ores is accomplished by sorting and or selective grinding due to the fact that the hardness of beryl is 7.5–8 (Mohs scale); during grinding, most of the gangue is ground finer than beryl and beryl is left in the coarse fraction, which is recovered by screening. From the fine grained ore, beryl is recovered using the flotation method, where either anionic or cationic flotation is used. Very little is known about flotation of other beryllium minerals such as phenacite and bertrandite. Research work carried out by some research organizations In nature, about 30 beryllium minerals are known of which six to eight have economic value. The main beryllium minerals are presented in Beryl is the most abundant in the other beryllium minerals and is mostly found as crystalline structures in several forms which include: Izumrud contains inclusions of chromium, which gives a bright green color. Aquamarine contains inclusions of two valent iron and has a greenish color. Rosterite is a colorless beryl form. It is known as alkaline beryl (about 0.5% alkalinity). Xrizoberyl: It is known as a gem mineral which comes from its bright green color. Usually xrizoberyl (1 Phenacite: It usually contains MgO, CaO, Al Gelvin is sometimes paramagnetic and often contains manganese and iron or zinc. It is soluble in hydrochloric acid. It has a yellowish color. Gelvin is usually found in pegmatite lenses in association with quartz and albite. In skarn deposits are associated with magnetite and fluorite. Bertrandite is usually found in pegmatite lenses in association with beryl, tourmaline, muscovite, and albite. In some deposits in USA, it is often found with beryl and fenekite. Beryllium deposits: The main types of beryllium containing deposits include pegmatites and hydrothermal-pneumatolytic deposits which can be divided into several subgroups depending on the types of beryl ores and also the types of other minerals Hydrothermal-pneumatolytic deposits are relatively complex. With beryl from these deposits, it is possible to recover wolframite, cassiterite, and molybdenite. These deposits have a relatively high concentration of beryl. The physiochemical characteristics of beryl as well as other beryllium minerals are similar to that of gangue minerals. Beryl has specific gravity of 2.6 to 3.0 hand sorting; selective grinding—flotation; and flotation.  The grade of beryl concentrate obtained by hand sorting is relatively high and ranges from 10% to 12% BeO During hand sorting the important parameter is the proper washing of the crushed ore before sorting.  Sometimes in the ores that contains talc, dolomite, and other soft minerals, by using selective grinding, about 40–50% of the gangue minerals may be removed with beryllium losses of about 10% BeO The primary method for beneficiation of fine beryl is the flotation method. There is an appreciable amount of information in the literature on beryl flotation. Beryl, however, can be floated using either anionic or cationic collectors in cationic flotation lauryl amine and some primary amines such as hexadecyl amine acetate. The anionic flotation method involves the use of oleic acid and fatty acid treated with amine. Either of the method is used; hydrofluoric acid, Na Using oleic acid, beryl is depressed in the presence of sodium silicate and sulfuric acid.  The typical flow sheet used in acid flotation is presented in The bulk flotation method in an acid circuit is also practiced and involves the following steps. Initially, mica is floated using amine. The mica tailing is treated with hydrofluoric acid plus sulfuric acid following flotation of beryl and feldspar with lauryl amine collector. The bulk concentrate is washed in a slightly alkaline pH and beryl is floated with fatty acid. Feldspar, after washing the bulk concentrate does not float with fatty acid. The flow sheet used in the bulk flotation method is presented in With this method, besides beryllium concentrate, silica and feldspar concentrates are produced. In the ore containing amfibol (aktinolit, termolit) calcium, magnesium, and ambligonite (LiO  Alkaline is added during grinding for high pulp density conditioning. The ore treated at Bik-Auori (US) containing beryl, feldspar, quartz, orthoclas with a little garnet and iron oxide is treated using an alkaline pretreatment method. The ground deslimed ore is treated with 2.5 When ores contain tourmaline and garnet with flotation properties better than beryl, it is possible to prefloat tourmaline and garnet before beryl flotation using small quantities of fatty acid. The tailings from tourmaline and garnet prefloat are treated with either NaOH or Na For depression of gangue minerals in some cases, Na In some cases the pulp is heated to 85 The alkaline flotation method has an advantage over the acid flotation method due to the fact that the use of HF and H The alkaline beneficiation method is most effective for ores that contain not only quartz and feldspar but also talc chlorites and carbonaceous gangue. Talc, chlorite, and carbonaceous gangue are first prefloated, followed by pulp pretreatment with NaOH; desliming and beryl is floated using a fatty acid collector at pH 8.5–9. Development testwork on beryllium flotation from pegmatite ores has been carried out over a considerable period of time In the research studies on the ore containing quartz, feldspar, mica, and beryl, the two following flotation methods were investigated.   The major problem with the use of sulfonate collectors is that in the presence of Ca and Fe ions random activation and depression occurs. The use of hexametaphosphate has a positive effect on beryllium flotation. Another method examined on Rapid City (US) ore involves two-stage flotation. In the first stage mica was floated using amine at pH 3.5, followed by reconditioning mica tailings with HF or NaF From the bulk concentrate, amine was removed using hypochlorite, and after subsequent washing beryl was floated using petroleum sulfonate collectors at pH 2.5. Studies carried out on the ore that contains heavy minerals have shown that the mixture of NaF:dextrin (1:1) would selectively float heavy minerals while beryl was depressed. The tailing from heavy minerals was conditioned with HF (700 Another method suitable for beryl recovery from the ore that contains spodumene is the alkaline bulk spodumene beryl flotation method followed by spodumene beryl separation. This treatment method is illustrated in The metallurgical results obtained in a continuous pilot plant operation are shown in There are several deposits of the ore deposits in United States, Canada, and Norway that contain phenacite as a main beryllium mineral and bertrandite to a lesser amount. These deposits have different mineral composition, and can be divided into three major groups. These are: Ore that contains phenacite and bertrandite with the gangue is composed chiefly of calcite, fluorite, and mica. Typical examples of these deposits are Mount Wheeler, Nevada, U.S. and Mount Antero Co. U.S. Ore that contains phenacite, Rare Earth Oxides (REO), and yttrium with the gangue is composed of feldspar, iron oxides, mica, and silica. An example of this ore type is Thor Lake, Northwest Territories, Canada. Ore that contains phenacite with gangue is composed of feldspar on quartz. Detailed research work on this ore was conducted by the U.S. Bureau of Mines The procedure for selective flotation of the beryllium minerals from the gangue minerals involves closely controlled preconditioning with sodium fluoride and sodium hexametaphosphate. Collector used was a mixture of oleic acid with kerosene fuel oil or turpentine. The grade and recovery of beryllium from this ore was affected by (1) quantities of HMP, (2) the HMP conditioning time, (3) collector conditioning time, and (4) quantities of NaF. The effect of HMP conditioning time on beryllium flotation is illustrated in These data have indicated that optimum conditioning time is about 30 The results obtained in a continuous pilot plant operation are considered satisfactory. During 1980 an extensive research work was performed Extensive laboratory development testwork was performed in which a number of optional reagent schemes were examined including bulk phenacite feldspar flotation followed by separation using sulfonate collectors for phenacite flotation. From the reagent schemes examined, acid pretreatment followed by phenacite flotation using fatty acid gave the best metallurgical results. The treatment flow sheet developed for beneficiation of phenacite is shown in This flow sheet was used in the continuous pilot plant operation. The final reagent scheme used in the pilot plant is presented in The SHQ is a slime dispersant and is composed of a mixture of low molecular weight acrylic acid and sodium silicate. The metallurgical results obtained in the laboratory and pilot plant are presented in The laboratory and pilot plant beryllium metallurgical results were similar. Most of the operating plants over the years were shut down and only a few plants are now in operation, treating mainly ores that contain beryl using the processes described in this chapter.