Geopolymer concrete is seen as a potential alternative to standard concrete, and an opportunity to convert a variety of waste streams into useful by-products. One key driver in geopolymer development is the desire to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from the production of concrete products. This paper presents an examination of the lifecycle cost and carbon impacts of Ordinary Portland Cement (OPC) and geopolymers in an Australian context, with an identification of some key challenges for geopolymer development. The results of the examination show that there is wide variation in the calculated financial and environmental “cost” of geopolymers, which can be beneficial or detrimental depending on the source location, the energy source and the mode of transport. Some case study geopolymer concrete mixes based on typical Australian feedstocks indicate potential for a 44–64% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions while the financial costs are 7% lower to 39% higher compared with OPC.Cement production is a significant industrial activity in terms of its volumes and contribution to greenhouse gas emissions. Globally, the production of cement contributes at least 5–7% of CO Fly ash and other by-products of the energy and minerals industry that are currently disposed of as waste, have been the focus of much research into reuse opportunities ( The current work seeks to build on the existing literature, by examining the life cycle impacts of geopolymers in comparison to OPC, incorporating the feedstock extraction and production impacts with an examination of the variability of data sourced from the literature. The recent studies that have been completed on geopolymer concretes indicate that there is a potential for 25–45% ( If geopolymers are to be a viable competing product to OPC-based concretes, they will be required to demonstrate a similar financial cost to the user and/or significant functional, manufacturing or sustainability benefits. In order to be able to compare geopolymers with OPC on a sustainability basis, three headline metrics were chosen. In this case, the energy (direct fuel usage and electricity usage), greenhouse emissions and cost were chosen as three key metrics which are considered to form the main argument for or against the use of geopolymers - notwithstanding the fact that other key indicators have a significant role to play – such as technical performance, leaching, water usage, hazardous materials content, other environmental emissions of production ( Any comparative assessment of geopolymers and OPC-based concrete should ideally be made on the same functional unit – i.e. a concrete, mortar or paste engineered to perform the same key function. For the purpose of providing information that can readily be scaled to any application, the current work examines the production of OPC and geopolymer paste, and the metrics associated with key feedstocks. Values are quoted per tonne of feedstock or per equivalent tonne of OPC. These values can then be readily used to calculate the sustainability impacts of a given formulation of geopolymer, and compared with the equivalent amount of OPC giving comparable performance. Some examples of geopolymer and OPC concretes are shown in this paper, based on mixes found in the literature. This gives an alternative comparison on a practical performance basis. The energy, cost and emissions metrics are derived using a life cycle approach. For the purpose of this assessment, this implies the impacts for the production of required feedstocks as well as the manufacture of the binder, and any relevant transportation. The importance of this approach is that it allows a valid comparison of the two materials - production impacts alone do not give the full picture of the required “embodied” energy and CO The approach taken in this work has not considered formally the durability or service life of geopolymers as opposed to OPC concretes. This was omitted on the grounds that the service life is still yet to be clarified for geopolymers as they are an emerging product. However, the testing of geopolymer concrete under a variety of applications has indicated that the durability and service life is likely to be better than that of traditional concretes. Hence the assumption of equal durability and service life is likely to underestimate the benefit of geopolymers over OPC-based concretes or overestimate the cost. This is especially relevant in applications such as railway sleepers, where a schedule of replacement is expected. Recycling of end-of-life products have also been neglected for this assessment. It may be assumed that, as for standard concretes, the utilisation of recycled geopolymer would largely be in the form of aggregate. There is potential for further research to examine the full life cycle for particular functions (e.g. railway sleepers, sewerage applications, etc.), and with a closer examination of average lifetime and recyclability. The material input diagrams and life cycle processes included in the analysis for geopolymers and OPC respectively are shown in The inventories of emissions, costs and energy usage were developed through a literature review of reported values and some theoretical estimates where no data was available. Attempts have been made to ensure that the data are used on a comparable basis, so that there is not a distortion of the boundaries of the analysis. Importantly, waste products (i.e. fly ash and silica fume Energy data have been obtained from the available literature – mostly this has been available as electricity and fuel or thermal energy usage. The energy usage has been vital to calculating the potential greenhouse gas emissions. Typically a high, average and low value have been available from the literature. Metakaolin was the most difficult material to develop an inventory for, as little if any verifiable life cycle data are available ( Transportation of materials at all life cycle stages leading up to the production of the binder is of key importance, as the cost and emissions metrics (especially for waste products) can be highly affected by the distance and mode of transport ( Transport distances were calculated for the most direct route from the typical source locations to the major centres, using a “great circle” calculation from the respective latitudes and longitudes (see Some feedstocks are reported in weight percentage of reactive material, while the actual form of the feedstock is a solution (e.g. – 50 wt% solution of NaOH and 37–40 wt% solution of sodium silicate). This does not affect the production impacts of the feedstock, however the extra mass of water has to be taken into account in the calculation of transport costs and emissions. While water content in feedstocks is acknowledged due to its impact on volume and therefore transport costs, the water added to the final geopolymer or OPC binder is not included at this stage, as it is assumed to be added at the site of use and quantification of associated transport is beyond the scope of this study. Water usage is another sustainability metric that should be included for further research, along with the embodied energy and emissions for the delivery of that water. The OPC production flowsheet presented in Once the inventory data were accumulated, the data were analysed in two ways. Firstly, the amount of each feedstock that would be equivalent to the entire inventory of greenhouse gases or cost for one tonne of OPC was calculated (refer to The key results from the study are presented in   Given the variability in the emissions and costs for geopolymers produced from feedstocks in Australia, it was thought to be important to find a typical value of the emissions and cost. This typical value could then be used as a ‘first guess’ estimate for comparison with OPC products. Based on an understanding of the various feedstock production drivers, it was determined that the transportation distances to find the “typical” value in an Australian context would be the minimum value for fly ash, sodium silicate, gibbsite and silica fume, and the average value for NaOH and metakaolin. The values for greenhouse gas and cost that would be expected for the “typical” geopolymers using the above four mixes are shown in To illustrate the method of calculation: GHG     For the typical Australian situation this could be expressed as: fa = fly ash; NaSi = sodium silicate; g = gibbsite; m = metakaolin; SiFume = silica fume; Also, it must be noted that this equation includes adjustments to convert from dry weight to total solution weight for sodium silicate and sodium hydroxide. Literature mixes for geopolymers and comparative OPC concretes were examined and the carbon and cost factors from this research applied. It was identified that: A comparable amount of cement or geopolymer paste is used to make concrete (both in kg/m The carbon and cost contributions of aggregate were minimal and comparable (due to the first point), and typically made little difference to the comparative impact over a comparison of the binders The amount of water used in the mixtures was typically lower for geopolymers The data obtained for these comparisons are shown in The results of this study indicate that it is not possible to make a simple sustainability comparison on the use of OPC and geopolymers. This is due to the significant impact of reagent transport and variability in the source of energy and technology used to produce the reagents. Transport has been minimised for OPC, as it is an established product; however, geopolymers are yet to go through this cycle of scale-up. Large scale geopolymer use is likely to lead to lower costs due to large orders of reagents. Even so, there seems to be significant potential for geopolymers to be cost effective and environmentally beneficial. This work has taken a broad approach, and the availability of better quality data would produce a more accurate analysis of the impacts – especially in relation to metakaolin production. It is also important that research be undertaken to develop greater understanding of how geopolymer performance in various applications will affect the environmental and cost inventories. If the lifetime and recyclability are included, the results of the current study may vary extensively. Further work should also be done to incorporate further sustainability metrics, and give a wider picture of sustainability performance. This work has brought together a range of reported data from the literature, in order to demonstrate the potential variability in the sustainability potential of geopolymers compared with OPC. The results show that it is important to assess the specific source of OPC and geopolymer feedstocks and transport impacts in order to be able to definitively state the relative sustainability performance for a given application in a given location. This work will be facilitated to some degree by a geopolymer calculator that is currently under development by the co-authors from Curtin University of Technology. There is also potential for optimisation and mapping to give an indication of the regions of applicability for most benefit from geopolymers from given feedstocks. The values for improved greenhouse gas emissions for geopolymer pastes compared to OPC are in the mid-range of estimates for geopolymer concrete as reported by other authors ( The examination of concrete mixes for OPC and geopolymer concretes has indicated that the impact of transport is higher in geopolymer concretes. Comparison of geopolymer paste versus OPC is found to be sufficiently valid and reasonable given the similar amount of geopolymer binder or cement used to create a cubic metre of concrete. Key challenges for geopolymer development will include the need to reduce cost by utilising (for example) less expensive waste feedstocks, and by optimising the amount of transport required to obtain those feedstocks at the point of use. Optimisation of transport is of particular concern in a vast, relatively isolated country such as Australia. Geopolymers’ advantage on a carbon basis may increase with the optimisation of feedstock transport and the increasing reliance on imported cement ( This paper indicates that there is great potential for geopolymers to reduce the climate change impacts of cement production. For the proposed “typical” Australian geopolymer product, there is an estimated 44–64% improvement in greenhouse gas emissions over OPC, while the cost of these geopolymers can be up to twice as high as OPC. However, the paper also indicates that those benefits are only realisable given the most appropriate source of feedstock and the least cost transportation. The broad range of potential feedstock sources leads to a very wide range of potential impacts: compared with emissions from OPC concrete, emissions from geopolymer concrete can be 97% lower up to 14% higher. Each application for geopolymers therefore needs to be assessed for its specific location, given that the impact of location on overall sustainability is one of the determining factors. This project is carried out under the auspice and with the financial support of the