An ultrafine diamond wheel of a mesh size of 12,000 was fabricated by using a hybrid bond material, which consists of silicon carbide, silica and alumina. The employment of the newly developed wheel enabled excellent performance during grinding of silicon wafers. An extremely smooth surface of an average roughness of 0.6nm was achieved. TEM examinations showed that the total thickness of the defected layer was less than 60nm.Ultraprecision grinding has been widely used for silicon (Si) wafer fabrication in the past several decades The grit size of diamond grinding wheels has significant influence on the ground surface finish and subsurface damage. In the previous studies of ultraprecision grinding for silicon or other brittle materials, the grit sizes of diamond abrasives employed were generally greater than 2 To adopt small diamond grits, the disadvantages of resin bond must be overcome. This indicates that a different bond material has to be explored. In this study, we report an investigation of a novel vitrified bond diamond wheel for Si wafer machining. The responses of Si wafers to this diamond wheel were summarised in terms of surface and subsurface characteristics of the ground Si wafers. A vitrified bond diamond wheel with mesh size of 12,000 was developed in house. The bond of the grinding wheel consisted of four diffident materials, namely silicon carbide (SiC), alumina (Al The grinding experiments were performed on an ultraprecision grinder (Okamoto, VG401 MKII), as shown in The surface roughness of machined surface of Si wafers was measured using a non-contact ZYGO high-resolution profiler. The scanning areas for all ZYGO measurements were kept constant at 70×50    Values of surface roughness of the ground wafers are summarised in The subsurfaces of the ground wafers were examined using cross-sectional TEM. The main content of the bond material, SiC, is a ceramic material, which has low density, high hardness, good wear resistance, chemical inertness at elevated temperatures, low thermal expansion and high thermal conductivity and low fracture toughness The development of the hybrid bond material made the use of ultrafine abrasives for grinding of silicon wafers possible. In the previous studies It was also important to find out the optimal grinding conditions, in order to achieve excellent surface integrity. Previous studies In this study, a vitrified bond diamond wheel with mesh size of 12,000 was newly developed for grinding silicon wafers. For the grinding condition being tested, the wheel speed had insignificant influence on the ground surface integrity. The feed rate demonstrated to be more influential than the wheel speed. The surface roughness values of 0.6 The authors would like to thank Mr. Michael Crichton for proof reading the manuscript. They would also like to acknowledge the financial support from