We have developed an enhanced sandwich immunogold assay for highly sensitive detection of cardiac troponin I (cTnI) in human serum. In this assay, the immunoreaction undergoes in sample solution between cTnI antigen and gold nanoparticles conjugated with detection antibodies of cTnI (immunogolds). Then, a capture antibody of cTnI immobilized on a standard 96-well plate captures the immunogold complex, followed by silver staining of the immunogold for the purpose of signal amplification. Compared to the direct assay where the immunoreaction occurs between the target and the capture antibody coated on the well, we found the enhanced assay shows greatly improved sensitivity by two orders of magnitude and a linear relation of the quantitative plot. Because the immunogold concentration affect greatly the sensitivity of the cTnI detection, we also studied the performance of direct and enhanced immunogold assay depending on the concentration of immunogold conjugates. By using the enhanced assay with the optimized procedure, we could achieve the detection of cTnI in human serum as low as 15pg/mL. We also verified the enhanced immunogold assay by measuring the concentration of clinical samples for a healthy person and patients. This development can allow us to apply the assay not only for the analysis of other cardiac markers as well as disease-related biomarkers but also for the optimization of other chip-based silver enhanced colorimetric sensors.Acute myocardial infarction (AMI) is heart atrophy caused by the blockage of one or more coronary arteries that supply the heart muscle with oxygen and nutrients. The MI may be mild and sometimes the patient is not even aware that the heart attack took place Immunoassay based on the highly specific interaction between antigen and antibody is one of the most important tools for the specific analysis of disease biomarkers. Generally, hospital laboratories have been utilized an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) Immunogold labeling technique has been widely used to amplify analytical signal for bio-recognition applications similar to horseradish peroxidase (HRP) in ELISA due to the high electron density of gold nanoparticles (AuNps) as well as the further signal amplification through immunogold silver staining In this study, we described the development of the enhanced immunogold assay for cTnI sensing in human serum based on the immunogold silver staining. We compared the performance of direct and enhanced assays for cTnI sensing in terms of sensitivity and linearity of quantitative curve. Because the immunogold concentration affect greatly the sensitivity of the cTnI detection, we verified the performance of the direct and enhanced assays depending on the concentration of immunogolds. In order to optimize the enhanced immunogold assay for the improved sensitivity and the linearity of quantitative plots, we optimized the concentration of immunogold conjugates for the enhanced assay. Gold nanoparticle solution (AuNp, 10 Conjugation of AuNp with detection anti-cTnI antibody was described in detail previously Immunogold silver staining assay was performed in polystyrene 96-well plates. In order to coat the well plate with capture antibodies, 50 First, mab-cTnI was coated on the well plate as described in Section Immunogold labeling technique has been widely used to amplify analytical signal for bio-recognition applications similar to horseradish peroxidase (HRP) in ELISA due to the high electron density of gold nanoparticles (AuNps) as well as the further signal amplification through immunogold silver staining We prepared a series of cTnI target solutions in 1 The concentration of immunogold conjugates in each assay should be considered because the immunogold concentration affected greatly the sensitivity of the cTnI detection. In order to study the performance of immunogold assay depending on the immunogold concentration, we first performed the direct immunogold assay by using 9 In addition to the direct immunogold assay, we also studied the performance of the enhanced assay depending on the concentration of immunogold conjugates.  To demonstrate that the selected absorbance (420 It is of great importance to validate that the enhanced immunogold assay enables to detect cTnI in clinical samples. We also verified the performance of the enhanced immunogold assay using a clinical human serum sample for a healthy person and patients obtained from Seoul National University Bundang Hospital. We have developed and optimized an enhanced sandwich immunogold assay for highly sensitive detection of cardiac troponin I (cTnI) in human serum. Immunogold assay utilizes AuNp labeling and subsequent silver staining which enables us to further amplify a bio-recognition signal based on AuNp-induced chemical deposition of silver. Compared to general direct immunogold assay, the sensitivity of the enhanced assay for the cTnI detection is improved by two orders of magnitude, and the quantitative plot reveals a linear relation for the enhanced assay, whereas the direct assay shows no linearity of the plot. We also studied the performance of direct and enhanced immunogold assay depending on the concentration of immunogold conjugates, and optimized the concentration of immunogold to reach the best sensitivity. The minimal detectable concentration of cTnI in human serum was found to be as low as 15 This research was supported by Internal Research Program (15RC1210) funded by