The influence of an inorganic salt dispersant, sodium silicate (SS), on the removal of minerals in coal slime flotation was investigated. XRD, contact angle measurements, zeta potential measurements and EDLVO calculations were employed to reveal the interactions between SS and coal slime. The flotation experiments indicated that the combustible matter recovery of clean coal could be increased by 10.9 % with the addition of 1200 g/t SS. The reasons of SS on facilitating the separation of the combustible components from coal slime were governed by two factors, decreasing the hydrophobicity of minerals and enhancing particle dispersion, both of which are beneficial to the coal flotation. Furthermore, it was found that the effect of SS on decreasing the hydrophobicity of minerals was mainly attributed to the surface modification on kaolinite. It was concluded that SS could significantly improve the flotation recovery of coal slime especially under the condition of a high content of kaolinite in coal slime.In recent years, the amount of coal slime has increased sharply for the continuous development of coal mining and mineral processing [ In an attempt to address the problem related to processing ultrafine slime particles in flotation, depressant and/or dispersant have been introduced into the flotation process to modify the colloidal interactions by improving electrostatic repulsion and adjusting the hydrophobicity of particle surfaces selectively. Ramirez et al. [ In the present work, the roles of SS on coal slime flotation were discussed. Flotation experiments were conducted with different amounts of SS addition. Contact angle measurements and zeta potential measurements were performed to illustrate the modification of SS on the particle surface. The EDLVO calculation was applied to demonstrate the effects of SS on the interaction force between particles. A coal slime sample, collected from the Jinda coal field (Tengzhou, Shandong, China), was used as the feed stock of the mineral separation process in this study. In addition, a low ash coal and two pure minerals such as kaolinite and quartz were obtained to study the interaction between SS and each component, respectively. The low ash coal was obtained from the Taixi coal field (Shizuishan, Ningxia, China), and the pure minerals of kaolinite and quartz were purchased from Lincang and Honghe of Yunnan Province in China, respectively. XRD (Smartlab, Rigaku, Japan) was employed to study the composition of coal slime and to analyze the purity of the low ash coal and two minerals. The XRD results of the four samples are illustrated in The particle size of the coal slime sample was analyzed by a laser particle sizer (LS13320, Beckman, United States). As shown in SS of analytical grade (Shanghai Hushi Chemical Co., LTD, China) was used to study the effect of SS on the flotation of coal slime. Kerosene and sec-octyl alcohol were used as the collector and frother, respectively. These two reagents were the common flotation reagents used in the coal preparation plant. Fresh deionized water was used in all experimental tests. The variable experiments of SS were conducted by using a 1.5 L flotation cell (XFG, Wuhan Exploration Machinery Factory, China). The impeller speed was fixed at 1800 r/min and a 1.5 L/min airflow was introduced into the flotation cell. The solid content of slurry for flotation was 100 g/L. The collector dosage (kerosene) and the foaming agent dosage (sec-octyl alcohol) were fixed at 1000 g/t and 500 g/t (i.e., per ton of dried coal), respectively. The dosage of SS was set to 0, 400, 800, 1000, 1200, 1400 g/t, successively. All tests were conducted at the pH value of natural pulp. The detailed operation parameters for each test were specified as: the prewetting time of 1 min for coal slime samples; the mixing time of 3 min, 3 min and 1 min for SS, kerosene and sec-octyl alcohol, respectively; and the scraping foam time of 2 min for the products. Later, the flotation products were filtered, dried and weighed. A muffle furnace was employed to obtain the ash content of the products and raw coal slime. Finally, the combustible mater recovery of the coal slime can be calculated as: The pure samples of coal, kaolinite and quartz were ground to reduce the particle size to −38 μm. Three groups of particles were prepared for the measurements. One sample that treated with water was used for blank measurement, and the other two samples were treated with kerosene (0.1 g/L), and SS & kerosene (0.1 g/L & 0.1 g/L), respectively. Then, the treated particles of 0.4 g were pressed into plates to measure contact angle with the sessile drop method using a contact angle measuring instrument (DSA25, KRÜSS, Germany). The contact angles were recorded immediately after the water droplet was in contact with the plates and the results of contact angles were obtained through the analysis software embedded in the DSA25. Each test was repeated five times and the average value was considered as the final result. Zeta potential analyzer (BI-200SM, Brookhaven, United States) was employed to analyze the zeta potential of coal, kaolinite and quartz, respectively. The samples finer than 5 μm were used in the study. A suspension was prepared by adding 0.04 g samples into 40 mL of 0.01 mol/L KCl solution and it was stirred for 1 min using a magnetic stirrer. As the SS is inorganic small molecule, it has a shorter adsorption time. When a desired dosage of SS was added, the suspension continued to be stirred for 3 min. After conditioning, the suspension was settled for 1 min and the supernatant was collected for measurement. Each test was repeated five times and the average value was calculated. In general, the extended Derjaguin-Landau-Verwey-Overbeek (EDLVO) theory is used to quantitatively predict the interaction energy ( The Van der Waals interaction between two spherical particles can be expressed as [ As the two spherical particles approach in the dispersed medium, an electrical double-layer interaction is generated by the overlap of the charged ions in the diffusion layer, which can be calculated as [ The interaction energy between the coal and kaolinite or quartz particles can be calculated as: The contact angle is related to the polar and non-polar components of the solid and liquid surface energy, which can be expressed as:   Contact angle is an important parameter for describing the wettability of the particles surface [ Thus, SS could adsorb on the kaolinite surface, which may hinder the approach of kerosene to the kaolinite surface and reduce the adsorption of kerosene on the kaolinite surface. Zeta potential can reflect the electro-kinetic characteristics and surface charge of particles in aqueous solution and plays an important role in illustrating the occurrence of attachment or adsorption at particle surface [  The result of zeta potential indicates that the adsorption of SS on the surface of the three samples. Our findings agree with the results reported by Li et al. [ The EDLVO theory was employed to reveal the role of SS on separation of coal and kaolinite or quartz in flotation. In the flotation tests, the combustible matter recovery of clean coal is increased by 10.9 % when the dosage of SS increases from 0 to 1200 g/t. The depressant SS hinders the adsorption of kerosene on kaolinite surface, which cause the decrease of the hydrophobicity of kaolinite surface. In the presence of SS, the more positive values of total interaction energy indicate that the particles are more diffuse [ Based on the knowledge and discovery in this work, a reasonable model to explain the effects of SS on the improvement of combustible matter recovery in coal slime flotation is given as shown in The flotation recovery of coal slime containing kaolinite and quartz was improved by the addition of SS. The roles of SS on promoting the separation between combustible matter and minerals were explored by contact angle measurements, zeta potential measurements and EDLVO calculations. The flotation results demonstrated that the combustible material recovery was increased from 46.0% to 56.9% when the SS addition reached 1200 g/t (accounted for dry coal slime sample). On the one hand, it was attributed to hydrophilic modification on the surface of mineral, especially kaolinite. The SS had a depressant effect on the hydrophobization process of kaolinite surfaces after modified by kerosene. On the other hand, SS could enhance the dispersion of particles in solution. The absolute values of zeta potential on the surface of all particles, including coal, kaolinite and quartz, were increased, indicating the electrostatic repulsion of particles was strengthened. The total interaction energy between combustible coal and minerals was improved with the addition of SS, which suggested that the dispersion effect of particles had been enhanced by SS in the flotation. This study provides a fundamental understanding on the roles of SS in coal slime flotation, and the utilization of dispersants to improve the combustible material recovery of flotation seems to be promising.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research was supported by