Internal fixation is a common modality of treatment for fractures around the hip. In various kinds of osteosynthesis, guide wires are used for localizing the site of entry and to determine the final position of the screws or fixation devices. We report two instances of intrapelvic protrusion of a guide wire during internal fixation of a fractured neck of femur. Though there are several reports of post-operative k-wire migration around the hip A 36-year-old lady with a valgus impacted fractured neck of femur (Garden type I) was taken to the operating theatre for in situ fixation with 7 A 30-year-old male with a Garden type IV (displaced subcapital) fractured neck of femur was taken to the operating theatre for open reduction and cannulated screw fixation after two attempts at closed reduction under image intensifier had failed. In view of the postero-inferior fracture comminution, the fracture was also supplemented by a free fibular graft. However, a final check film under the image intensifier was not taken after the completion of the procedure. The post operative check X-ray showed the guide wire of one of the cannulated screws left behind, with it’s outer end protruding just beyond the head of cannulated screw and the inner end lying deep inside the pelvis ( Pins and wires are the simplest and the most versatile implants used in orthopedic surgery. There are various reports in the literature regarding ill effects due to post-operative migration of pins and k-wires In our first case, guide wire protrusion and breakage was detected during surgery itself and was retreived extraperitoneally by using the ilioinguinal approach. But in the second case, the presence of guide wire inside the cannulated screw and it’s intrapelvic protrusion was detected only on the post-operative check film. Although such complications may occur commonly they are not reported in the literature. The current practice regarding the reuse of guide wires is also not clear. Advice of the manufacturers varies from single use (Smith and Nephew) to rolling them on a flat surface to ensure that they are straight (Stratec AO). Despite this controversy, it has been recommended by one study that single use of guide wires should be ensured by bending them at the end of each case to prevent their reuse First, the cannulated drill bit and tap should be properly cleaned before reusing. The use of drill bits with blocked flutes leads to generation of more heat and hence thermal necrosis of bone and soft tissues Secondly, the operating surgeon should ensure use of straight and stout guide wires which should preferably be meant for single use only. Their repeated use leads to their deformation and loss of torsional strength. Such guide wires when reused bend easily even during their insertion and once bent, subsequent reaming over it tends to be eccentric thereby leading to concentration of reaming forces over a point. This may lead to breakage of the wire at that point. Before wire breakage, this excessive point force so generated may even drive the guide wire further proximally well beyond the acetabulum into the pelvis as seen in both of our cases. In first case, the guide wire had migrated around 4 In both these cases, old and repeatedly used guide wires were used. Thirdly, while using cannulated instrumentation, the guide wire should always be withdrawn completely after final screw insertion before putting in the next screw. Finally, a check film should always be taken after final seating of all the screws, which should include the hip joint in its entirety to prevent negligence as happened in our second case. Counting the guide wires, like sponges in abdominal surgery, will also prevent similar complications. Although none of our patients had serious or fatal complications, protruding pins should be immediately removed as a matter of urgency to prevent serious complications, e.g. vascular or bladder injury. We believe that such complications are rarely encountered in surgical practice but they can be potentially serious and also often difficult to handle. Awareness of such iatrogenic complications will make the surgeon more cautious during these procedures. Proper recommendations regarding reuse of trauma instrumentation, especially guide wires and drill bits, need to be clearly described to prevent similar surgical misadventures. The above-mentioned guidelines may prove to be useful in this regard.