Stability is an essential property of suspensions for material jetting. By adjusting the suspensions’ stability, they are useable for a more extended period without losing its functionality in the printing process. Stability can be analyzed either by the determination of the zeta potential or sedimentation tests. Both methods were carried out for aqueous carbon black suspensions, mixed with different additives. It was found that both methods of analysis can be correlated. Furthermore, the addition of a kind of stabilizer, like BYK-420, is necessary to generate a stable carbon suspension.Material jetting is an additive manufacturing process for ceramic components. It is based on the layer-wise printing of aqueous colloidal suspensions onto a substrate. A carbon black-based suspension is essential for the generation of complex structures. The carbon structures are removed thermally in the subsequent sintering process. In this work, the focus was on the carbon suspension’s stability by avoiding agglomeration and sedimentation of the particles. Material jetting print jobs can extend several hours. Therefore, there must be no sedimentation of the printheads’ suspensions, which would lead to clogging of the nozzles and, thus, to a print stop. One way to define the stability of a suspension is to determine its zeta potential, which reflects particles’ ability to repulse each other electrostatically. An increase in the zeta potential causes an increase in these repulsive energies, reducing or even preventing agglomeration. Such an increase can be adjusted by the addition of dispersants and/or stabilizers [ On the one hand, a suspension that shows no sedimentation for more than 8 ​h is considered to be stable [ To determine the correlation, suspensions, composed of distilled water, various dispersants, and thermal carbon as solid (Arosperse 15, The zeta potential is determined using a particle analyzer (Litesizer 500, Anton Paar, Austria, device-specific deviation ​± ​3%). The suspensions are measured directly after production and after 6, 12, and 18 weeks to determine the influence of time. For measuring, each suspension is mixed with distilled water in a pre-defined ratio. Also, the homogeneity of the measured suspensions is ensured by shaking before each measurement over time. Additionally, sedimentation tests are carried out once, in which recordings of the suspensions are made every hour for 8 ​h. Additionally, each suspension is photographed after 24 ​h and one week. To confirm the theory, suspension D and E are measured again after 38 weeks on the roller bench. Zeta potential, particle size, but also rheological properties (viscosity (RheolabQC, Anton Paar, Austria, shear rate 1000/s) and surface tension (Sita pro Line t15, Sita Messtechnik GmbH, Germany, device-specific deviation ​± ​5%)) are measured. The storage of the suspensions on the roller bench without grinding balls corresponds to the real production conditions. First, the general influence of additives on the zeta potential of the basic suspensions is investigated. It can be determined that all additives’ addition lowers the zeta potential of both basic suspensions ( Looking at Although the network is formed immediately after the additive is added, it takes time to develop fully, which explains the increase in the zeta potential of Suspension C from weeks 6–12. However, the network itself seems to be unstable over time, which is why the zeta potential decreases again after 12 weeks. The addition of glycerol shown in curve D leads to a small, continuous decrease in zeta potential. Only week 18 shows a significant decrease in zeta potential. In the base suspension F, the addition of glycerol (G) shows only slight differences ( According to G.T. Caneba et al. [ In summary, it can be said that there is a correlation between the measurement of the zeta potential and the performance of sedimentation tests. Also, the measurement of zeta potential over time allows one to make a statement about the stability and, thus, the usability of carbon suspensions. Regarding the suspensions used here, it can be stated that a minimum addition of the stabilizer BYK-420 is required to achieve long-term stability. However, even a combination of less BYK-420 in combination with glycerol will cause such behavior. Finally, the addition of a kind of a stabilizer is required in any case to ensure long-term stability in carbon black suspensions. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.