In the paper an approach to simulation of air bubbles behavior in dense slurry flowing in a pipeline is explored. It is based on establishing a relationship between the flow dissipation energy rate and the collisional dynamics of solid particles. This problem is important in hydrotransport technology of bitumen extraction from the oil sands. The dynamics of air bubbles distributed in slurry is investigated based on two models: a model of turbulence and a model describing particles collisional motion. The rate of air bubbles break-up as well as that of coalescence are estimated. The main parameters governing the bubbles break-up and coalescence are discussed.Slurry hydrotransport in a turbulent regime with high solids volumetric concentrations Thus, we consider the turbulent slurry flowing in a pipeline and containing some number of dispersed air bubbles. Let us limit our analysis to slurries formed by fine solid particles ( It is easy to show that distances between particles in real slurry flows are fairly small. Let us assume that slurry consists of monodispersed particles (see The limiting concentration for spherical particles is estimated to be equal to Analysis shows that the inner turbulence scales for dense pipeline slurry flow (0.18< Since eddies of sizes similar to the inner turbulence scale cannot exist in the dense pipeline slurry flow, the energy of turbulent eddies must dissipate in a way different from that in a pure liquid. The particles in slurry are closely packed, which means that even slight velocity and force fluctuations will lead to their collisions. Many investigators (for example Since we consider the homogenous turbulent slurries it is clear that all parameters of the granular phase are uniform in this case. The total energy dissipation rate in slurry Numerical estimations We can express the total energy dissipation rate as the sum of particles–liquid viscous dissipation Let us assume that only the paired particle–particle collisions occur. Then we can consider a single particle moving between the two consecutive collisions. This particle moves under the action of the average drag force: It is difficult to estimate the drag force coefficient in a dense flow because of the strong mutual influence of hydrodynamic fields around particles. It seems to be reasonable to estimate this coefficient as that for the porous medium but related to a single particle. In this case we assume that a single particle moving with the velocity We assume that the free path of a pair of particles colliding with each other is equal to the average clearance between the particles Neglecting the time of particle–particle interaction during the collision, and assuming the Maxwell's distribution of chaotic particle velocities (according to Then the total frequency of particle–particle collisions per unit volume is: The energy dissipation rate per unit mass of the slurry caused by particle's viscous dissipation is calculated as: The energy dissipation rate caused by inelastic collisions of particles with each other is determined as Since we assume the Maxwell's distribution of particle velocities then the granular temperature can be determined as Having defined both viscous ( The total energy dissipation rate is defined by the pressure gradient in a pipeline through the following expression: There are various correlations for calculating the pressure gradient in slurries The coefficient  Note that flows with An analysis of The evolution of bubble size distribution is described by the known set of population dynamic equations, which takes into account the bubble's break-up and coalescence (for example In the present paper we propose the models describing bubble's coalescence and break-up in a dense slurry flow. These models enable us to make some important estimates of trends of simulated processes and they can be employed for population balance analysis. Although the experimental validation of these models in terms of some constants involved would be desirable (see Usually, in simulating the coalescence and break-up in a turbulent flow of pure liquid investigators assume that these processes are determined by the dynamics of turbulent eddies interacting with bubbles. Accordingly, the bubble's break-up occurs due to the bombardment of the bubble surface by turbulent eddies of sizes smaller than the bubble size, while the coalescence is caused by bubble–bubble collisions and their corresponding compression when bubbles are transported by different turbulent eddies. This approach is suitable for the analysis of coalescence and break-up in a slurry flow if bubbles are significantly larger than solid particles because only in this case the turbulence eddies can be considered as continuous ones In the case when bubble sizes are of the same order of magnitude as solid particles at a micro-level the bubbles have to be considered as oscillating due to the multiple collisions with chaotically moving solid particles. In this case, both the break-up and the coalescence must be determined by the parameters of this oscillating motion. The mechanism of turbulent fluctuations in a transition zone from the scales of continual eddies to the ones of oscillating particles is more difficult to describe. In this zone some objects (not real eddies) consisting of several particles are formed, move and fragmented in a liquid simultaneously with intensive particle–particle collisions. Numerical estimations based on a model of particle's chaotic motion presented above show that the difference between the average velocity of solid particles oscillations, and the velocity of an eddy of the same size as a particle, assuming that such an object does exist, is usually within 50% of particle's oscillation velocity. Let us accept, as a rough hypothesis, that energy dissipation in the transition size range is similar to that in a continuous equivalent liquid. Than, we may assume, as a first approximation, that the processes of coalescence and break-up at scales larger than a double particle size can be based on the model of equivalent continuous liquid while for the smaller scales the model of chaotically oscillating particles is applicable. In this paper we limited our study mainly to the small-scale processes governed by multiple collisions of solid particles with bubble's surfaces. The maximum bubble size in a dispersed bubble flow in a horizontal pipeline under conditions of developed turbulence can be predicted by the theory proposed by Levich The ratio of dynamic to capillary pressures (Weber number) is ordinarily used for estimating the maximum bubble size According to Levich However, in the case of slurry flow multiple collisions of solid particles with the bubble surface should be taken into account. The pressure caused by particle collisions is defined as the granular pressure The Weber number exceeding of which leads to the bubble break-up is called critical and must be determined from an experiment. Assuming that the critical number for slurry is kept the same as for pure liquid we can write the equation defining the maximum bubble size as: According to the often used interpretation of the bubble break-up process, it is caused in a pure liquid by the bombardment of the bubble surface by turbulent eddies smaller than the bubble (for example, This mechanism of the bubble break-up in a turbulent liquid flow is well studied and we do not consider it here. Since turbulent eddies with sizes comparable to those of solid particles cannot exist, the break-up of bubbles having sizes close to those of solid particles must be caused by the bombardment of the bubble surface by solid particles. Thus, we propose to use for the small bubbles break-up the same model as for the large bubbles but in this case particles replace eddies as the cause of break-up. We should note that, as opposed to the case of large bubbles break-up, our model for small bubbles is physically justified since particles are real physical objects. Note that there are possibilities for more complicated situations of particles-bubble interactions leading to a bubble's break-up. For example, when a bubble is entrapped between the two (or even three) particles and another particle hits its surface. Though such situations may be more effective in terms of bubble's breakage, the probability of such clusterings is significantly lower than that of pair collisions and, therefore, we do not consider them. Moreover, the simulation of multi (higher than two)-particle interaction processes cannot be performed by analytical methods and require numerical tools (see, for example, Herein we employed the same principles as in Since we assumed the Maxwell's distribution of particle's velocities, we can also assume that for such a dense slurry bubble's velocity distribution is the same as for particles. Then, the equation determining the infinitely small fraction of particles d The average particle's kinetic energy needed to break a bubble is estimated to be equal to Then, the average probability of the bubble break-up in a collision with the solid particle can be estimated to be equal to the fraction In our case the function To characterize an intensity of the break-up process investigators consider the bubble breakage rate An inverse value of the breakage rate defines the bubble lifetime without breakage. The frequency Taking into account The average time that the bubble exists being unbroken is: The process of coalescence is quite complicated. Most investigators assume that after a collision, bubbles stay together for some time, called contact time, and then either coalesce or become detached. In order to study the coalescence mechanism it is necessary to determine the frequency of encounters (collisions) of bubbles with each other, because the frequency of coalescence is found by multiplying this frequency by the probability of coalescence. It is reasonable to assume that in dense slurry a bubble is surrounded by the solid particles since the bubbles concentration is usually much lower than that of solid particles. At a micro-level, a bubble will oscillate due to collisions with the neighboring particles with average amplitude approximately equal to the average clearance between the particles. At the same time, at scales significantly larger than the particle diameter, bubbles are fully entrained by large eddies. If, when considering the large-scale bubbles motion, we ignore their oscillations, we may assume that bubbles move randomly with velocities of turbulent eddies. Namely, large-scale turbulent motion determines the frequency of encounters of bubbles with each other. To simulate the bubble dynamics in a large-scale turbulent motion we use a simple approximate method. Since the system of turbulent eddies is stochastic, the collisional frequency of chaotically moving bubbles defined by the root-mean-square of the bubble's velocity equals to the root-mean-square of the velocity According to experiments by Kuboi If, for simplicity, we consider only the monodispersed bubbles then this equation can be written as: As it was mentioned above, the rate of the coalescence of a bubble of size d The average time during which a bubble does not coalesce is calculated as a value inverse to the coalescence frequency. The coalescence takes place if the contact time is sufficient to drain out the liquid film between the two bubbles in contact until a critical film thickness is reached. The time needed for the film drainage is called the coalescence time. Thus, for the coalescence to take place the contact time must be larger than the coalescence time. Although some novel models that take into account inertial effects accompanying the film drainage were recently developed (for example, Coulaloglou Small bubbles in a slurry flow, which we consider here, especially those coated with natural impurities, behave like solid spheres Tsouris and Tavlarides In order to estimate the coalescence time, we assume that the two particles in contact are pressed against each other by a force caused by the bombardment of bubbles surfaces by solid particles. Considering that the granular pressure The average contact time was estimated on the basis of the following approach. It is assumed that the interacting bubbles will be separated if any of them or a solid particle exerting pressure on one of them is hit by another particle. In this case, the average contact time may be considered to be proportional to the time between two consecutive collisions of a particle with its neighbors, which is equal to the time of a particle free path derived from Taking into account Since the parameters of chaotic motion of the dispersed phases in the dense slurry flow is difficult to determine by direct measurements, the constant An average time that a bubble exists before coalescing can be calculated on the basis of Note that the model of coalescence, as opposed to the model for the bubble breakage, is based on various assumptions that make this model suitable for qualitative analysis only. We carried out some calculations in order to study the behavior of dispersed phase components by the models developed. In all numerical examples the pipeline diameter was In In One can see that the dependencies of chaotic velocities on the average slurry velocity are practically linear. In A parametric study of the bubble break-up was carried out. In In The coalescence process for two bubbles that encountered each other is illustrated below by graphs generated using the equation of coalescence probability ( The coalescence rate depends to a great extent on the frequency of bubbles collisions in a turbulent flow ( To obtain an overall estimate of the coalescence efficiency in a turbulent slurry flow we studied the dependence of the average time Let us, for example, apply these results to the above mentioned technology of oil extraction from the oil sand (see Thus, the examples show how the main process parameters influence the bubble's breakage and coalescence and how the developed models might be used for a technological process analysis. In the paper an approach to simulation of air bubbles behavior in pipeline with dense slurry flow is suggested. The proposed method is based on relating the flow dissipation energy rate to the collisional dynamics of solid particles. The dynamics of air bubbles distributed in slurry is assessed by both the model of turbulence and by the model describing particles collisional motion. The rates of air bubbles break-up as well as that of coalescence have been estimated. The main parameters governing bubbles break-up and coalescence have been determined. The developed models may be used for optimization of bitumen extraction from the oil sands based on hydrotransport technology. 