Two different design aspects for cyclones are considered. The first aspect is to keep the product as free of fines as possible and the second one is to minimize the cyclone loss rates. Besides the mechanisms of the true gas/solids separation, the production of fines due to particle attrition is identified to affect these two aspects. A first approach of a new design procedure is therefore provided, where an attrition model is implemented in a conventional cyclone model.The presence of fines has often been a problem in the field of pneumatic conveying systems. On one hand, the fines can cause dust problems such as explosion hazards and additional burden for the subsequent gas cleaning. On the other hand, they can deteriorate the quality of particular products. Unfortunately, the fines usually cannot be avoided, they quite often originate from preceding process steps and are in any cases inevitably produced by particle attrition during the conveying process. Whether these fines remain in the bulk material or are elutriated with the gas depends on the design of the gas/solids separation. In the present work, this subject is studied with respect to cyclones. Basically, this type of separator is able to sift off the fines from the entering material. However, in case of brittle material, there may be a considerable generation of fines due to attrition inside the cyclones, which must be additionally taken into account. A cyclone should therefore be designed with respect to both the mechanisms of the true gas solids separation and of the fines production due to attrition inside the cyclone. Depending on the process type, there may be quite different requirements on the cyclone design. In the chemical Industry, the product quality is usually significantly reduced by the presence of fines. A frequently discussed problem is, for example, the presence of fines in polyethylene granules. In this case, a cyclone should be designed in such a way that the fines content in the product is as small as possible, i.e. the cyclone should sift off the entering fines as entirely as possible and should furthermore produce as less as possible fines by attrition. In contrast to this, in the minerals processing industry where the product quality is usually not affected by the presence of fines, the avoidance of subsequent dust problems and hazards is of primary interest. Hence, for this process type, the cyclone loss rate should be as small as possible, i.e. the cyclone should be designed such that the loss of both entering and newly produced fines is reduced to a minimum, independently of the resulting fines content of the product. The present work is intended to provide a first idea to approach these different design aspects. The subject is investigated both theoretically and experimentally. The experiments were carried out with a laboratory-scale cyclone that is operated in isolation. As a test material, spray-dried catalysts were used. There are various cyclone theories available in the literature (e.g. Trefz and Muschelknautz In the design procedure of a cyclone, the operating conditions are already given by the process, i.e. the volume flow rate of the conveying gas According to the conventional theories, there is a continuous increase in the total collection efficiency with inlet gas velocity. However, according to Reppenhagen and Werther When the design aspect of “product cleaning” is focused, the mechanisms of both the true gas/solids separation and attrition indicate to design the cyclones as large as possible. In practice, this measure is already quite often applied. In many processes where the product quality is of primary interest, the cyclones are designed as a gravity separator rather than as a separator due to centrifugal forces. Even though the detailed mechanisms have not been known, the intention is usually to prevent product attrition. As an additional positive effect, the entering fines may be sifted off because of the decreased cut size of the true gas solids separation. However, in the present study, no experiment has been carried out to investigate the effect of the cyclone size on the “product cleaning”. There is certainly further experimental and theoretical work necessary to allow some quantitative conclusions on this latter subject. With respect to the second design aspect of “loss rate minimization”, the development of a design rule becomes much more complicated. On one hand, the cut size of the true gas/solids separation should be as small as possible, which could be achieved by high inlet velocities due to the use of a very small cyclone. On the other hand, the attrition-induced production should be as small as possible, which could be achieved by the use of low inlet velocities in a large cyclone. Hence, for each application, there might be an optimum cyclone size with a respective inlet velocity that leads to a minimum loss rate. The optimum will at least depend on the dimensionless cyclone geometry, the operating conditions such as the volume flow rate of the conveying gas the particle size distribution of the entering material, including the fines content, the attritability of the conveyed material, which is characterized by the attrition rate constant The cyclone used in the present investigation is schematically shown in As test materials, three different types of fluidized cracking catalysts were chosen. To simplify matters, they are just named powders “A”, “B” and “C”, respectively. Powder A is a spent catalyst obtained from a refinery in 1985. The other two catalysts were obtained more recently. Powder B is again a spent catalyst. Powder C is a fresh catalyst. The particle size distributions of the powders are shown in Although in practice the materials are passing a cyclone only once, for illustration purposes powder A is repeatedly subjected to the cyclone test. In As can be seen from The identified state of equilibrium is a dynamic one, i.e. only the masses of produced and released fines are identical but not the particles themselves. Although the attrition-produced fines are typically very small in the case of pure abrasion (according to Reppenhagen and Werther  From the above example, it is obvious that a design rule to find the optimum cyclone size for a given process can only be developed by implementing the attrition model A material's attritability can be obtained by a simple procedure that is in detail described by Reppenhagen and Werther As can be seen from The theoretical finding of Particle attrition inside a cyclone may cause significant deviations from the prediction of conventional cyclone design models, which were derived for non-attritable materials. In case where it is of primary interest to keep the conveyed product free of fines, a first theoretical analysis indicates to design the cyclones as large as possible. This minimizes the generation of fines due to attrition and should enable the fines, which might have been generated by the conveying process, to escape from the system. The alternative case is that the cyclone loss rate must be minimized in order to keep as much of the product as possible in the system. In this latter case, an optimum cyclone size will exist for given operating conditions of the pneumatic conveying line and for given attritability of the solids product. The optimum cyclone size is characterized by maximum collection efficiency. With larger cyclones, the collection efficiency is decreased by the deterioration of the gas/solids separation and with smaller cyclones, it is again decreased due to an increased production of fines due to attrition. The optimum size depends on the particle size distribution of the entering material, the conveying gas volume flow and the solids loading, the dimensional cyclone geometry and the attritability of the material. With increasing attritability, the maximum achievable collection efficiency decreases and the respective optimum cyclone size increases. However, it should be noted here that such an optimization should not only consider the cyclone in isolation, but rather take the entire pneumatic system into account. The present work clearly shows that for strongly attritable material in a case where much of the product is to be recovered at the end of the pneumatic conveying line by a gas/solids separation device, the cyclone may not be the optimum choice but rather a filtering separation device should be chosen instead. cross-sectional area of the cyclone inlet (m cyclone attrition rate constant (s mass flux into the cyclone (kg/s) mass of abrasion-produced fines per unit time (kg/s) mass flux in the cyclone loss due to abrasion (kg/s) cyclone inlet velocity (m/s) volumetric flow rate of the conveying gas (m total cyclone collection efficiency cyclone grade efficiency for the fines solids loading at cyclone inlet gas density (kg/m