We report here the transmission electron microscopic examination of alloys of three compositions in the system Al70−X
                     Co15Cu
                        X+Y
                     Ni15−Y
                     . They have been chosen on the basis of: (a) e/a ratio lying between Al65Co15Cu20 (ACC) and Al70Co15Ni15 (ACN) and (b) a possible observation of change in order from ACN to ACC, the end members. The selected area diffraction studies of the melt-spun ribbons of the above compositions have revealed the presence of streaking around some spots and also diffuse rows. These have led to the transformation of a basic P105/mmc structure to that of P10/mmm having a periodicity of ∼8Å. Such a transformation has been explained based on the 6D model earlier proposed by us. The chemical ordering in the layers is shown to accomplish the transformation. However, streaking arises owing to the presence of planar faults with a fault vector having periodic and quasiperiodic components.The periodic stacking of quasiperiodic layers in a direction perpendicular to them results in the formation of a decagonal quasicrystal (DQC) The alloy buttons of three compositions of the above system (see The melt-spun ribbons showing electron transparent regions in some part of them were selected for transmission electron microscopic observation in JEOL 200CX microscope operating at 160 The parameter employed for the basis of synthesis in this investigation is the  Another important feature of these alloys refers to streaking of some of the spots. These are essentially owing to the presence of planar faults in this system. A thorough scrutiny of the streaked spots in the D and P patterns shows that the effect is felt in both of them. This, therefore, means that the fault vector is lying in a direction such that it modifies intensities in both the twofold directions apart from the 10-fold direction. The investigation of these phases under bright and dark field imaging modes does not seem to show any signature of these faults and we do not see speckled contrast. Except when the specimen is tilted slightly away from the 10-fold zone axis whereby subtle changes in contrast appear in the interior of the grains. These observations need further investigation and substantiation through the identification of the fault vectors. We have reported the various structural characteristics of Al–Cu–Co–Ni systems. All the three compositions chosen for the present work were selected based on the criteria of ( The authors are grateful to Professors S. Lele (BHU, India), K. Urban (Juelich, Germany), S. Ranganathan (IISc, India) and Dr. N.K. Mukhopadhayay (BHU, India) for discussions and interest in the present investigation. One of us (RKM) would like to thank German Science Foundation (DFG) for extending financial help to enable him to attend ICQ7, Stuttgart (September 1994).