Hot rolled low Si (silicon) non-grain oriented electrical steel was cold rolled to different reductions. Cold rolled material was subsequently recrystallized, 650°C and 2h, and then temper rolled (to 7% reduction) for the final grain growth annealing and decarburization treatment at 850°C for 2–24h. The development of texture, grain size and magnetic properties were characterized at different stages of processing. Effect of texture on magnetic properties (watt loss and permeability) was observed to be best represented by the ratio of volume fractions of (111)〈uvw〉/(001)〈uvw〉 fibers, as estimated by convoluting X-ray ODFs (orientation distribution functions) with respective model functions. Such a ratio was termed as generalized texture factor (tf) for the non-grain oriented electrical steel. An effort was made to delink effects of grain size and texture, as represented by respective tf, on watt loss and permeability by careful analysis of experimental data. In general, low tf and/or high grain size were responsible for low watt loss and high permeability. However, individual effect of grain size or tf on magnetic properties was less significant at low tf or large grain size, respectively. An attempt was made to fit regression equations, namely—linear, exponential and power, relating magnetic properties with tf and grain size, limiting the fitting parameters to 3. Least standard deviations, between experimental and predicted values, were obtained by power regression equations for both magnetic properties.Although high Si grain oriented steel have attracted more academic interests The important structure-dependent magnetic properties, at least from motor manufacturers viewpoint, are permeability and watt loss—both are expected to depend on grain size and texture of the fully processed CRNO The usual industrial processing of CRNO is based on optimizing chemistry and grain size, i.e. reducing carbon percentage and increasing grain size through optimized decarburization grain growth annealing treatment The usual processing steps, which may alter grain size and texture in the fully processed stage, are: (1) cold rolling The flow sheet in Hot-band material was obtained from industrially produced hot rolled coil—1325°, 900° and 650°C being the respective reheating, finishing and coiling temperatures. Hot rolled low Si CRNO, composition as given in Grain size measurements were obtained by conventional metallography and image analysis. At least 200 grains were measured at random, in each case, by using standard linear intercept method. The average grain sizes after primary recrystallization and grain growth annealing were estimated from such measurements. X-ray ODFs (orientation distribution functions) were obtained by inversion of four incomplete pole figures and the program MTM-FHM The magnetic measurements were conducted using ring samples. The rings were cut from the sheet before the final annealing. Magnetic measurements were also ‘largely’ restricted to mid-thickness ( Development of average grain size, texture and magnetic properties as function of process variables are presented. Then in a separate section, an effort is made to relate effects of texture and grain size on the magnetic property development of the present grade of CRNO. Hot rolled material had an average grain size of  Equally significant changes in texture developments were obtained at other reductions as well. Visual inspection or comparison of ODFs, especially Standard deviation of Texture factor (tf)—ratio of   As a function of processing, 16 different samples, with different grain sizes, textures and magnetic properties, were obtained. However results for 0 Perhaps the easiest way of de-linking effects of grain size and texture on magnetic properties is to look at change in properties at nearly constant grain size or texture. These were attempted and are shown in Watt loss and permeability are the properties in a lamination material, such as the present grade of CRNO, that a motor manufacturer needs to optimize Typical processing route of a CRNO, as used in the present study and which may significantly alter grain size and texture, involves cold rolling ⇒ recrystallization annealing ⇒ grain growth annealing. In low carbon steel, cold rolling may affect texture significantly but predictably Before analyzing the experimental data, the question on confidence and reproducibility should be answered. As in As shown in As shown in For both watt loss and permeability, at lower grain sizes texture factor played and important role but the effect diminished at larger grain sizes, see Effect of change in grain size was insignificant at smaller tf, but noticeable at higher tf. As in With drop in texture factor (bad vs. good fiber • A generalized texture factor, ratio of • As a function of cold rolling reductions and grain growth annealing time, developments in texture, grain size and magnetic properties were investigated. 16 samples with different magnetic properties and corresponding difference in texture and grain size were obtained. As the typical grain growth annealing also involved decarburization, such samples were in two batches (of 4 and 12, respectively) of distinct chemistry, namely different carbon percentage. • In general, watt loss dropped and permeability increased at larger grain size and smaller texture factor (tf). The respective effect of grain size or tf was less significant at smaller tf or larger grain sizes. • An attempt was made to fit regression equations relating magnetic properties with both texture factor and grain size. Three types of equations were attempted—namely linear, exponential and power. As the available data points were only 12, the fitting parameters were restricted to 3. Although standard deviations, between experimental data points and those predicted by regression equations, were not strikingly different, power law fit gave the lowest standard deviation for both watt loss and permeability predictions. Mr. Prem Kumar will like to acknowledge C&G for financial support during the course of this study. The Texture Laboratory of IIT Bombay is created with support (equipment as well as texture analysis programs) from KU Leuven, Belgium. The authors are grateful to KU Leuven and especially to Prof. P. Van Houtte.