Proximal humerus fractures are the third most common osteoporotic fracture, For patients with concomitant humeral head defects and proximal bone loss, isolated fixation and can be challenging as neither LP nor IMN can address humeral head pathology. A recent study comparing LP (n = 24) to reverse total shoulder arthroplasty (RTSA; n = 4) for head split fractures, showed higher revision (24% vs. 0%) and complication rates for LP, We present 2 patients who underwent RTSA with a stem interlocked into a locking 4.5 mm plate. The first patient, an 85-year-old female with history significant for diabetes, pacemaker placement for arrhythmia, syncope, underwent a humeral nail at an outside hospital for a comminuted proximal third humeral shaft fracture sustained during a fall. Two weeks following her index surgery, she felt a pop in her shoulder while performing range of motion exercises during physical therapy prompting evaluation in our clinic. Imaging revealed cutout of the helical blade with destruction of the anterior greater tuberosity ( A standard deltopectoral approach was used. Multiple traction sutures were placed in the rotator cuff tendons. The subscapularis was left attached to the lesser tuberosity, which was osteotomized in the patient with nail cut out. Following standard glenoid exposure and preparation, the base plate was secured with locking screws. Provisional reduction of the humerus was performed. A press fit humeral stem (Fx Solutions, Dallas, TX, USA; Humerlock II cementless stem with two interlocking screw holes) was then placed. An attempt was made to use a sufficiently sized stem to obtain some form of friction fit distally in the intact humeral diaphysis. A 4.5 mm compression plate (Synthes, West Chester, PA, USA; 4.5 mm LCP narrow plate, 9 hole) was placed to bridge the distal extent of the fracture ( Both patients underwent a routine postoperative course with standard arthroplasty rehabilitation protocols without complication. They were immobilized for 3-4 weeks and then started gentle, unrestricted passive motion, advancing to active motion as tolerated. Strengthening was initiated at 4 months At 1-year follow-up, the first patient had fracture consolidation without implant failure ( Humeral shaft fractures with concomitant proximal comminution of the humeral head or glenoid with or without associated degenerative humeral head pathology can be challenging to treat. In this small, 2-patient case series, we present a novel technique utilizing an interlocking reverse shoulder arthroplasty stem combined with a 4.5 mm compression plate to address these challenging cases. At 1-year and 20-month follow-up periods, respectively, both patients had satisfactory results with no signs of implant failure. Other constructs can be used to treat these injury patterns. While cemented stems have demonstrated good results when used for isolated proximal humerus fractures, For periprosthetic fractures that overlap the tip of the stem or extend distally, either revising the humeral prosthesis to a long stem or open reduction internal fixation can be done. Due to the solid construct of standard stems, only unicortical screws or cerclage wires can be used proximally for fixation. While robust fixation can be achieved with cerclage wiring, it has been suggested that this technique can compromise periosteal blood flow and result in osteonecrosis or nonunion. Maintaining correct humeral version for metadiaphyseal fractures can be challenging due to inadequate fixation proximally. This problem is addressed using distal interlocking screws to stabilize humeral version. Further, the added stability from plate fixation may afford better healing potential for the proximal fragment compared to isolated prosthesis placement. Healing of the calcar and proximal segment may avoid the instability associated with proximal humerus bone loss. Additional stabilization could include fixation of the calcar fragment aside from the cerclage wire. Although the design of the plate and stem would not allow for direct screw fixation of the calcar fragment, future designs could include more proximal interlocking options in the stem. Finally, as with standard stems and plates, unless a full-length humerus plate is used, which would require substantially more dissection, a stress riser is created at the distal margin of the plate. Periprosthetic fracture or implant complications associated with the locking stem itself are rare. Patients with degenerative or traumatic humeral head pathology with concomitant metadiaphyseal fractures can be challenging to treat. We present a small, 2-patient case series using RTSA with a stem interlocked to a compression plate. This novel technique offers a viable alternative to current methods to treat these injuries and avoids potential complications associated with cementation and long-stemmed implants. The added stability of this approach may be particularly beneficial in scenarios with proximal humerus bone defects. Dr. Srikumaran reports personal fees and other from Tigon Medical, personal fees from Conventus, Heron, Pacira, Fx Shoulder USA, and Orthofix, grants from Depuy/Synthes, Arthrex, ASES, OMEGA, and Wright, and grants and personal fees from Smith & Nephew, outside the submitted work; In addition, Dr. Srikumaran has a patent Conventus pending, a patent Fx Shoulder USA pending, and a patent Tigon Medical pending. The other authors, their immediate families, and any research foundation with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.