The construction industry consumes large quantities of natural resources and simultaneously generates a considerable amount of construction and demolition waste (CDW). This includes gypsum waste (GW), which must be managed correctly. Besides, the cement manufacturing process, which is part of the construction industry, has a high environmental impact. Therefore, the aim of this study was to recover GW and use it in the manufacture of ordinary Portland cement (OPC), to improve waste management and minimize environmental impacts. To achieve this, we evaluated and compared the environmental impacts of the gypsum production process (primary and secondary [recycling] production) and the environmental impact of the use of recycled gypsum (RG) in the production of OPC. We used the methodology of life cycle assessment, and selected the IMPACT 2002+ as impact assessment method.
                  Local data were used wherever possible to ensure that the life cycle inventory (LCI) was representative of Spain. The data were primarily sourced from interviews with organizations and building materials companies in Spain, and visits to CDW waste recycling plants in Catalonia. Data from primary sources were completed and/or compared with the Ecoinvent v2.0 database and updated with Spanish data where possible.
                  The results of this study confirm that RG had environmental benefits in all the environmental categories evaluated when the GW was transported to a recycling plant at a distance equal to or less than 30 km. The study shows that the process of recycling gypsum consumes less than 65% of the energy needed to obtain natural gypsum (NG), and emits less than 65% of the greenhouse gases produced in the process of obtaining NG. Greater savings of 35% were observed in the categories of carcinogenic effects, ozone depletion and land occupation, even when gypsum waste was transported to a recycling plant at a distance of 50 km. In addition, we found that the environmental impact on the evaluated categories was slightly lower when RG was used instead of NG in the production of OPC. It was assumed that the distance from the site of production of gypsum to the cement plant was the same.Regarding to the waste management, within the European Union, more than 450 million tons per year of CDW waste was generated, this being the largest waste stream in quantitative terms, apart from mining and farm wastes ( In addition to waste generation, the earth's natural resources are becoming scare. Proper action must be taken to ease the situation. This requires tools such as life cycle assessment (LCA), which has become a widely recognised and accepted method to assess the burdens and impacts throughout the life cycle. The LCA-based information may be in the form of environmental product declarations (EPD) or product environmental footprints (PEF), based on reliable and verifiable information ( As the need for product-specific LCA information is increasing in the construction sector, progress has been made to improve consistency and harmonization in LCA studies of building products and buildings in Europe ( Moreover, interest in recovering GW from CDW is also increasing. Recycling of this waste could help to conserve natural deposits of gypsum and high amounts of waste by-product could be reused in the civil construction industry ( Laboratory tests were conducted to study the properties of RG for use in plaster for walls and ceilings or as a component of new cements ( Knauf GmbH is a company that recycles gypsum plasterboard in Spain. The procedure consists of first crushing and an initial screening process, followed by a second screening process that eliminates plaster that is still retained in the fine particles of cardboard (  Moreover, the cement industry has a high environmental impact. The worldwide cement industry accounts for at least 5–7% of the anthropogenic CO Significant researches were conducted on the use of supplementary cementitious materials such as fly ash, silica fume and slag in concrete ( Trials for the use of RG in cement manufacture indicated that the calcium sulphate chemistry of RG did not impede its use in cement manufacture (   Finally, the addition of phosphogypsum to a raw cement mixture lowered the burning temperature and therefore improved the clinker production process. The addition of 10% phosphogypsum led to clinkerization being completed at a lower burning temperature (1200 °C) than usual (1470 °C). This would increase the efficiency of the cement factory by 25% and extend the service life of the furnace fire brick ( Some studies have been carried out on the use of GW as a filler material, base plaster walls and ceilings, and in the manufacture of ceramic. Moreover, studies of RG cement evaluate its physical and chemical properties, but not the environmental impact of its production process. In trials on the use of RG in cement manufacture ( In the production of recycled gypsum, studies have not assessed the environmental impacts of the respiratory inorganics, land occupation, acidification, eutrophication, human toxicity and photochemical oxidation categories recommended by This study evaluates the environmental impacts of primary and secondary (recycling) gypsum production processes, through the LCA methodology. The environmental impacts of the use of RG in the production of OPC are also assessed. Moreover, in this study, we compared the environmental impact of both OPC production processes (primary and secondary production). In this study, we assessed the environmental impacts of primary and secondary (recycling) gypsum production. The environmental impact of the use of RG in the production of OPC was also assessed. We compared primary and secondary cement production, but we did not evaluate the influence of external transport of the cement, as the aim was to determine the general impact of each process, regardless of the production and use sites. It is assumed that the distance from the site of production of gypsum to the cement plant is the same. To assess the environmental impacts, we chose Spain as a field of study. We considered that the mine was located near the plant for obtaining gypsum. Therefore, we only considered internal transport in the production of gypsum. In the recycling of gypsum, we assumed that the GW originated in the centre of Barcelona, because this is the area that generates the greatest amount of CDW in Catalonia. Considering the system of managing CDW in Spain, both types of GW (plasterboard and plaster moulds) are selectively separated from the rest of CDW at the same construction site, and transported jointly to the treatment plant where the waste is crushed. Then, waste paper and gypsum are separated in a fully automated gypsum recycling unit with automatic controls and sensors. The transport of waste from the site where it is generated to the recycling plant is included in the assessment, as also is the internal transport. The typical process of obtaining NG involves the following steps: extraction of raw material using explosives (65% gypsum, 34% anhydrite and 1% other); crushing of the raw material; and drying of the gypsum in a furnace. The assessment system takes into account mining equipment and infrastructure (production capacity of the plant: 400,000 t/year; and recultivation to transform the extraction site). The steps followed in the process of obtaining RG are: collection and transportation of waste, crushing and separation of GW, and gypsum drying in a furnace. The assessment system takes into account the equipment and infrastructure of the recycling plant (production capacity of 400,000 t/year). The recycling infrastructure includes the consumption of fuel oil, which is burned in a boiler.  The production process for cement recycled gypsum (CRG) and cement natural gypsum (CNG) is the same. The only difference lies in the process used to obtain the gypsum and the associated environmental impacts. The stages in the production of OPC are as follows: Obtaining raw materials (limestone, marl and clay are crushed, ground, dried and mixed). Heating the powder in a preheater and pre calciner. Burning the powder in a rotary kiln to produce cement clinker. Grinding the clinker with the other components (gypsum). Gypsum is added to clinker to retard the rapid reaction between C In these stages, we took into account the system inputs and outputs used in the Ecoinvent v 2.0 database (materials and fuels, internal transport, infrastructure and machinery, plant production and direct and indirect emissions) ( The functional unit is defined as 1 kg of product (NG or RG and OPC). The data was primarily collected from interviews carried out by telephone, email or in person with Spanish companies in the sector (participants included over 60 companies representing the construction sector). The Spanish organizations and associations consulted included the Ministry of Industry, Energy and Tourism, the Data on the raw materials (except gypsum), infrastructure and energy consumption of the cement production process were obtained from the Ecoinvent database, and were adapted to the Spanish context. Data on the processes of obtaining RG and NG were taken from Spanish associations and manufacturers of building materials. The maximum amount of gypsum added to clinker for OPC type CEM I 42.5 N is 5%, according to The data on energy consumption in the process of obtaining NG (65% gypsum, 34% anhydrite and 1% other) were extracted from the information provided by the The GW is transported to the recycling plant where it is crushed and separated from the paper. Of the total weight of collected GW, 5% is paper from plasterboard. This percentage was chosen because it is the maximum amount of paper that is generated when all GW comes from plasterboard ( A figure for the consumption of diesel in the recycling plant, which is used in the crushing and separation of gypsum and paper, was obtained from the energy consumption of recycling gypsum in a plant with 65%–80% operating efficiency. Diesel consumption corresponds to 0.036 MJ/kg ( The energy consumption for the dehydration of RG in a natural gas furnace is 0.5436 MJ/kg (  Data on distance travelled were obtained from plants that we visited whose annual production capacity is similar to that of the recycling plant inventoried in Ecoinvent v2.0. The average distance from the recycling plants to the centre of Barcelona was 7 km, according to the Catalan Waste Agency database ( Impact categories were chosen on the basis of scientific consensus. We followed SimaPro 7.3.3 software was used to organize the inventory data and perform the impact assessment. SimaPro is a popular life-cycle analysis tool that quantitatively measures the environmental impact of a product or service. The result of the inventory data obtained with SimaPro 7.3.3 is a long list of emissions and consumption of resources. Several methods are included in the software to interpret the list. The method that best suits the impact categories chosen in this study is IMPACT 2002+, which provides results on two levels: midpoint (14 categories) and endpoint (4 categories). Although endpoint categories are easier to interpret, they have greater uncertainty, given the difficulty of modelling the complex cause–effect relationships. Consequently, in this study we evaluated midpoint categories. In IMPACT 2002+, the human toxicity category evaluated in other methods, corresponded to carcinogenic (C) and non-carcinogenic (NC) effects, photochemical ozone formation with respiratory organic effects (RO), and abiotic depletion due to mineral extraction (ME). Other categories evaluated by IMPACT 2002+ are global warming (GW), ozone depletion (OD), acidification (A), eutrophication (E), land occupation (LO), non-renewable energy (NRE), and respiratory inorganics (RI) ( IMPACT 2002+ was developed by the Technical University of Lausanne (Switzerland). Its impact categories, category indicators and characterization models are internationally accepted, and are based on an international agreement, or approved by a competent international body (   Another process that has a major impact on the categories studied is the use of explosives in blasting. This mainly affects the category of acidification (25%), due to the nitrogen oxide generated ( In addition, the blasting process has an impact on respiratory organics (16%), mineral extraction (14%) and non-carcinogenic effects (12%). The impact results are consistent with those found by The impact of organics on respiratory effects are due to the emission of nitrogen oxides and volatile organic compounds during the use of explosives. Effects on human health are due to particle emission ( Diesel consumption has an impact on all the environmental categories evaluated, particularly eutrophication (19%) and acidification (17%), due to sulphur oxide and nitrogen oxide emissions. The infrastructure of the mine (the built part of the mine, the production sites and the paved roads) mainly has an impact on land occupation (86%), due to the land use ( Electricity consumption (we included electricity generation in Spain and electricity imported from abroad, as well as the transmission network) mainly has an impact on eutrophication (9%), non-carcinogenic effects (7%) and acidification (4%). The emissions from electricity generation (nitrogen oxide [NOx] and sulphur dioxide [SO   Moreover, the process the crushing of gypsum has the greatest impact on respiratory inorganics (85%), due to particle emission to air. The infrastructure of the recycling plant has the greatest impact on land occupation (64%). Diesel consumption by machinery mainly has an impact on eutrophication (50%), acidification (49%), mineral extraction (37%), respiratory organics (33%) and non-carcinogenic effects (27%) ( The greatest impact on the non-renewable energy category is due to burning natural gas in a furnace to dry RG. The results agree with those found by The transport process has the greatest environmental impact on the non-carcinogenic (18%), mineral extraction (14%), land occupation (13%) and eutrophication (11%) categories. When we compared the production of RG (d1 = 7 km) and NG ( RG (d1) production consumes only 54% of the energy used in the production of NG. RG has a lower environmental impact as less fuel and electricity are consumed, which reduces nitrogen oxide, sulphur oxide and hydrocarbon emissions, and therefore contributes to reducing effects on acidification, eutrophication and respiratory organics. Moreover, the recycling of GW (d1) is associated with lower particle emission to air, which contributes to reducing the impact on non-carcinogenic effects (58%). When gypsum is recycled, no natural resources are extracted, which reduces the impact on the mineral extraction category (52%) ( The lower impact on global warming and ozone layer depletion (55%) is also associated with lower consumption of fossil fuels and a corresponding reduction in emissions that contribute to the greenhouse effect ( The production of RG (d1) had the greatest impact on the respiratory inorganic category, because of particle emission to air during the crushing process (  In terms of economic benefits, RG costs 30%–35% less than mining NG ( The average price of diesel in Spain is 1.2823 €/l, according to the Moreover, the influence of the transport of GW was evaluated, from the site of generation to the recycling plant, in order to know how to change the final results. The environmental impacts in the categories of eutrophication and non-carcinogenic effects were greater when GW was transported to a distance of 50 km (d3). All other categories continue to have lower impacts in the process of recycling gypsum. This shows that recycling of this waste has environmental advantages in most categories, even if waste is transported at a distance of 50 km ( RG consumes less than 65% of the energy required to produce NG and emits less than 65% of greenhouse gases, even when GW is transported to a recycling plant at a distance of 50 km. In terms of carcinogenic effects, ozone depletion and land occupation categories, impacts under 65% were also observed in the process of recycling gypsum ( A comparison of RG (d1) and NG ( In the case of RG (d2) and RG (d3), several categories continue to show over 20% greater savings than natural gypsum (NG). In RG (d2), only the categories of non-carcinogenic effects, respiratory inorganics and eutrophication did not reach this level; and in RG (d3), the categories of non-carcinogenic effects, respiratory inorganics, eutrophication and mineral extraction were below this level. RG (d3) had a greater environmental impact than natural gypsum in the categories of eutrophication and non-carcinogenic effects. However, we have also considered that waste will probably not be transported at distances greater than 50 km, as there are several recycling plants in Spain, and particularly in Catalonia, and because transport costs may not allow such long distance transport for waste. Another factor that can influence the final results is the level of contamination of the GW that arrives at the recycling plant, and the technology used to remove the paper.   The greatest impact of producing OPC is on the categories of global warming (98%), respiratory organics (97%), non-carcinogenic effects (96%), and ozone layer depletion (94%). The impact on global warming and ozone layer depletion is due to the carbon dioxide (CO Another process that has a great impact on the categories evaluated is the infrastructure of the cement production plant. This mainly affects land occupation (44%). Likewise, the consumption of electricity has an impact on all categories. In particular, it affects eutrophication (14%) and acidification (9%), due to the nitrogen oxide (NOx), hydrocarbon and sulphur oxide (SO  Despite the small differences mentioned above, if the robustness of these results is confirmed in additional work, the use of 50% RG in cement production would lead to major annual savings in most of the environmental categories evaluated ( In this study, was used life cycle assessment (LCA) methodology to evaluate the environmental impact of primary and secondary gypsum production and its application in the production of OPC. The results demonstrate that the process of burning natural gas in a furnace to dry gypsum has the greatest environmental impact on all environmental categories, except for respiratory inorganics and land occupation, in the production of NG. The infrastructure of the mine mainly has an impact on land occupation (86%). The impact of NG production on the respiratory inorganics category (81%) is due to particle emission to air caused by crushing gypsum. RG had environmental benefits in all the environmental categories evaluated, when the GW was transported to a recycling plant at a distance equal to or less than 30 km. RG consumes less than 65% of the energy required to produce NG and emits less than 65% of greenhouse gases, even when GW is transported to a recycling plant at a distance of 50 km. In terms of carcinogenic effects, ozone layer depletion and land occupation categories, impacts under 65% were also observed. Moreover, the RG is associated with lower particle emission to air and with a lower impact on the mineral extraction category. The greatest impact of the production of RG was on the category of respiratory inorganics, due to particle emission to air during the crushing process. In this study, we found that transport had a more marked effect on the categories of eutrophication and non-carcinogenic effects. The greatest impact on these categories was found when GW was transported to a recycling plant at a distance of 50 km. The transport of GW to recycling plants located at short distances (7 km) can lead to great savings in environmental impacts. Specifically, it brings about saving of around 70% in the category of land occupation, and savings of over 45% in the mineral extraction and no-carcinogenic effects categories. Regarding the application of gypsum as a set retarder in the OPC production, when RG option is compared with NG, the results seem indicate that the environmental impacts could be slightly reduced. However, the differences are so small that we cannot practically distinguish between the two options and cannot state conclusively that RG is more environmentally friendly than NG in cement production due to the current level of uncertainties in data (primary and secondary). These uncertainties have to be assessed in further work, in order to ensure qualitative and quantitative evidence of result's robustness.