In this study modeled full scale application of thermobarical hydrolysis of less degradable feedstock for biomethanation was assessed in terms of energy balance, greenhouse gas emissions, and economy. Data were provided whether the substitution of maize silage as feedstock for biogas production by pretreated cattle wastes is beneficial in full-scale application or not.
                  A model device for thermobarical treatment has been suggested for and theoretically integrated in a biogas plant. The assessment considered the replacement of maize silage as feedstock with liquid and/or solid cattle waste (feces, litter, and feed residues from animal husbandry of high-performance dairy cattle, dry cows, and heifers). The integration of thermobarical pretreatment is beneficial for raw material with high contents of organic dry matter and ligno-cellulose: Solid cattle waste revealed very short payback times, e.g. 9months for energy, 3months for greenhouse gases, and 3years 3months for economic amortization, whereas, in contrast, liquid cattle waste did not perform positive replacement effects in this analysis.Anaerobic digestion is a mature and proven technology providing a versatile renewable energy carrier ( Solid manure from livestock represents a huge still unexploited potential as feedstock for conversion processes. More than 30 million tons of solid animal manure accrued in Germany in 2009 ( Previous studies comparing different methods such as mechanical, thermal, chemical and/or biochemical pretreatment have identified thermobarical pretreatment (also called liquid hot water or thermal pressure treatment) as an appropriate method for breaking down fibrous, high–molecular substances into their constituents, thus making them available for a more rapid and extensive anaerobic digestion resulting in higher methane yields ( Recently, few studies have been published dealing with pretreatment of biomasses and residues derived from agriculture for subsequent biomethanation in full-scale application ( Thermobarical pretreatment is to be considered as a variant with moderate electric and high thermal power consumption, hence appropriate for biogas plants with attached combined heat and power plant (CHP) as often available in agricultural context. Low to moderate installation and maintenance costs and no hazardous risk but a strong effect on biomethanation are further advantages of this pretreatment option. As no pumps or comminution are needed it is highly appropriate for common agricultural biomasses and residues. The implementation of this technology should preferably take place in existing biogas plants ( The objective of this paper is to assess the feasibility of TBH in a modeled full-scale application, considering balances of energy and GHG as well as profitability. A thermobarical hydrolysis device is therefore theoretically integrated in an already existing biogas plant. The exhaust gas from a combined heat and power plant (as part of the biogas plant) is used for provision of thermal energy. Feedstocks (solid and liquid cattle manures and mixtures of these from two origins) were pretreated at conditions of 140–180 Full scale application of thermobarical pretreatment is assessed in terms of energy efficiency and greenhouse gas emissions as well as economic performance. The assessment of GHG emissions follows an attributional life cycle assessment (LCA) approach according to The system before the implementation of TBH is shown in  SCM: Pretreatment of solid cattle manure. LCM: Pretreatment of liquid cattle manure. SLCM: Pretreatment of a mixture of solid and liquid cattle manure. The following process alterations due to changes in feedstock and TBH treatment are regarded: Changes resulting from substitution of maize silage. Changes in the feeding process (on-site process). Parameters of decomposition of the different feedstock for GHG balance. Changes in manure and digestate spreading procedure (off-site process). Energy equivalent shares of maize silage are substituted by a fixed volume of one of the three feedstocks. Thus a unit volume of LCM, SCM or SLCM substitutes different gravimetric shares of maize silage. LCM and SCM are pretreated by TBH and then fed to the biogas plant. LCM and SCM exceeding the daily load of the TBH device are not regarded in this analysis and remain in the usual process chain. The SCM is loaded by a wheel loader and LCM pumped through pipes to the TBH vessel. Thermobarical pretreatment is driven by heat from CHP. Scenarios SCM and LCM considered feedstock from two different biogas plant sites (P1 and P2) and therefore differing feedstock compositions ( Environmental assessment in this study, based on methodology described in ISO 14044 ( feedstock supply, transport of feedstock on an agricultural biogas plant site, storage of waste from dairy cattle farming (solid and liquid cattle manure) and of digestate from biogas process, thermobarical pretreatment of solid and liquid cattle waste and its mixture, their conversion to electricity and heat via biomethanation and combined heat and power plant, manure spreading with or without pretreatment and biomethanation. All parameters are related to (theoretical) electricity output, the main product of the overall process with the functional unit 1 The values related to time period are given as per year. An integration over the year is necessary as the amount in terms of fresh matter (FM) pretreated per year is a fixed value but the methanation capacity is influenced by the respective methane yield and by the organic matter (OM) content of feedstock. Although the parameterization in per Mg implies that a size independent scaling would be possible – disregarding the fact that the amount of feedstock that can be treated in a given biogas plant is limited – values are also given in per Mg FM, thus allowing to compare this study with other studies giving mass related values only. The schematic flow chart of the thermobarical device and its integration into the biogas plant is shown in The main components of this TBH device are a dosing feeder, a high temperature/high pressure vessel and a stirring device. The production of these components is assumed to be comparable to the rolling of stainless steel sheet. The thermal-oil facilities and the associated heat exchanger consisting mainly of stainless steel tubes are assumed to be comparable to cold drawn tubes. The masses of the respective components are summarized in The entire facility is designed for a lifetime of 20 Heat uncoupled from CHP exhaust gas is transported to the TBH device vessel via a thermal-oil circuit by a thermal-oil pump with a nominal electric power of 4.0 The solid feedstock is brought to a receiver tank of 12 The time for heating up feedstock to 100 After pretreatment the heated feedstock is released through a bottom drain valve using the water vapor pressure inside the vessel as driving force. Simultaneously liquid feedstock is pumped through a pipeline that is linked to the outlet pipe. The mixtures of both treated feedstock and liquid feedstock are then delivered to the digester of the biogas plant. The main characteristics of the feedstock are displayed in Maize silage is chosen as reference feedstock. It is the most frequent crop feedstock in anaerobic digestion in Germany today due to its high methane yield per hectare ( A modular design has been projected to ensure wide-range applicability of the TBH. It allows a retrofit to almost all kinds of existing biogas plants. Therefore, the effect of thermobarical pretreatment is calculated without considering the particular biogas process in detail. All calculations assume that the heat necessary to maintain mesophilic temperatures ( A wheel loader with a shovel-volume of 1 LCM – also if used without pretreatment in biogas plant – does not require transport by wheel loader. But it could save an extra amount of maize silage if pretreatment enhances the fresh matter related methane yield. It could therefore save wheel loader trips that would otherwise have been necessary for transporting maize silage equivalent to the additional methane yield. SCM has a lower fresh matter related methane yield than maize silage, but a higher bulk density. Hence maize silage substitution changes the number of trips of the wheel loader necessary to provide the same amount of methane after biomethanation of SCM. In the case of the SLCM, the necessary extra trips and the saved trips corresponding to the respective mass fractions of LCM and SCM in SLCM are calculated. The fresh matter volume-flow of feedstock and maize silage substituted and the numbers of additional or reduced wheel loader trips per day are shown in Heat is the main energy needed for TBH. It is provided by a combined heat and power plant. The CHP used for these calculations is a 330 The maximal set-point temperature The energy balance considers the energy needed for construction materials The respective energy input for employment of agricultural machines for TBH device or biogas plant feeding and manure or digestate spreading was neglected. Calculation revealed values lying in most cases below 0.91% of the entire energy input or output of the system, and never more than 2.45%. The energy for construction and provision of raw material The electricity demand In idealized calculation, thermal energy necessary to heat feedstock is affected by feedstock temperature Related to fresh matter the thermal input Related to fresh matter the process energy in kW In the case of no treatment, the term It is assumed that the methane achievable from the respective feedstock in biogas plant equals the methane yield determined in lab-scale experiments. The processing of LCM as well as the methane attainable from untreated LCM are assigned to the biogas plant, as it is assumed that LCM is used or can be used in continuous stirred tank reactors without any pretreatment. The methane available from SCM is completely allotted to the TBH, as it is not suitable for utilization in conventional continuous stirred tank reactors without pretreatment. The shares of methane from LCM and SCM within SLCM have to be related to the respective feedstock. It is expected, that the difference in methane yield of the respective feedstock – SCM or LCM – due to pretreatment corresponds with that in the mixture of both – SLCM. The ratio of methane from SCM to methane from LCM within SLCM at the different pretreatment temperatures The methanation capacity The methane is converted to electricity and heat by the CHP. The term The thermal output The energy saved by substitution of maize silage ( The energy payback time or payback mass respectively is the time or FM mass needed for providing just as much net energy as is needed for construction of the power generation plant regarded. Assuming that only electric energy is used for production and processing of steel and semi-finished products, as is usual in modern steel plants, the energy payback time in (P[n]Y[n]M) adds up to The energetic payback mass in Mg FM is calculated according to The net GHG balance GHG Related to fresh matter the net emissions The GHG payback time or payback mass (GPBT or GPBM) is the time or fresh matter needed for saving the same amount of GHG that accrued during construction of, in this case, the TBH device (GHG It is assumed that the emissions which result from wheel loader employment for feedstock processing and from the entire process chain of spreading the agricultural manures can be neglected. Calculations revealed values below 0.88% in most cases and never more than 2.27%. Possible emission savings from avoiding LCM storage in open liquid manure storage facilities are assigned completely to the biogas plant and not considered here. It is further assumed that thermobarical pretreatment releases feedstock constituents which, without pretreatment, would not have contributed to methane emissions during storage of untreated LCM because of their lower degradability. Emissions from TBH construction GHG One has to consider the emissions balance of grid electricity GHG Related to fresh matter these emissions are calculated according to The emissions of CH In the case of SLCM only the emissions from SCM are taken into account. The emissions from cultivation, harvest, transport and ensiling of maize silage from whole crop GHG The GPBT or GPBM respectively is the period or the fresh matter of the respective feedstock needed to save the same amount of emissions deriving from constructing the TBH device. The assessment of the economic performance of TBH is based on profitability, amortization period and CO Costs arise from purchasing ( Hence, profit in ct Changes in costs due to alteration in feedstock comprise costs of wheel loader and spreading. Investment of the wheel loader is 73,000 The agricultural wastes would have led to costs for transport and spreading if not used for biomethanation. Costs that arise from transport and spreading of LCM or digestate sum up to Related to fresh matter the costs in € As mentioned above, any processing of LCM is assigned to the biogas plant. As a result of increased methane yields through TBH, a concordant share of digestate from maize silage is replaced. The saved spreading of SCM reduces costs, but the higher amount of digestate arising from SCM compared to digestate from maize silage causes additional costs for spreading. The costs in ct Related to fresh matter the costs in € Costs in ct The overall costs in ct Related to fresh matter the overall costs in € Main income from biogas production is determined by feeding electricity into the grid with a given feed-in tariff. Despite a new Renewable Energy Sources Act that came into force in 2014, the following calculations are in accordance with the Renewable Energy Sources Act of 2012 ( The economic amortization period (ECAP) or amortization mass (ECAM) is the time in years and months (P[n]Y[n]M) or FM mass in Mg pretreated until investment for the entire TBH facility and all running expenditures – except for depreciation and interest rate – is paid back. In order to assess ECAP or ECAM, total investment is divided by profit. Depreciation and interest rate (in sum 17,500 The CO Sensitivity analyses are performed by alternating the following input parameters by ±50%: stirring power exemplary both for changes in demand of electric energy of TBH and as parameter influenced by feedstock viscosity, investment for displaying changes in fixed costs, organic matter content of feedstock as example for changes in feedstock composition and for presenting the impact of changes of organic loading rate on the model output. The output parameters chosen are: GHG as a parameter sensitive to changes in feedstock parameters and energy demand of the device but not influenced by changes of economical parameters, CMC as it is displaying the environmental impact ECAP as it is sensitive to all input parameters that lead to changes in economic viability but disregards the environmental impact. The energy input for TBH construction is 18,730 The energy output of the TBH treatment of the different feedstocks is expressed as methanation capacity and is therefore independent of the overall conversion route of the methane. It can be divided into electric and thermal output, as well as losses if particular CHP is considered as conversion. The methanation capacity depends on feedstock and methane attainable as a consequence of differences in pretreatment. In general it can be stated that SCM from plant 2 pretreated at 160 An increase in uncoupled thermal energy from CHP is possible by cooling down the exhaust gas to 180 The electric energy possibly gained depends on feedstock and changes in digestibility as well as on the organic matter (OM (in % FM)) of feedstock. Feedstock with high OM and hence higher FM-related methane yield is preferred as the fixed vessel volume limits the fresh matter volume to be pretreated per batch. In the case of P1-LCM pretreated at 180 From an energetic point of view, it is possible to obtain more thermal energy from pretreated feedstock than is necessary for pretreatment, e.g. P2-SCM pretreated at 140 and 160 Substituting maize silage as biogas feedstock can save between 3269 and 91,038 The lowest energy payback time is 9 Thermobarical hydrolysis can save a considerable amount of greenhouse gases of up to 0.672 The emissions from construction and operation of a TBH device related to electric energy output are affected by the fresh matter related methane yields of respective feedstock while the absolute emissions are independent of feedstock and treatment temperatures. The emissions from construction are 0.0076 (P2-SCM, 160 The mitigation potential of using SCM is 0.512 LCM does not mitigate GHG emissions, as it is assumed that thermobarical pretreatment releases feedstock constituents that – without pretreatment – would not have contributed to methane emissions during storage of untreated LCM because of their lower degradability. When maize silage is substituted, further GHG emissions of 0.2135 The net emissions of TBH treatment can be as low as 7% of the total mitigated emissions (P2-SCM, 160 The differences between the various scenarios become even more obvious if mitigation effect per year is considered. The values range from −377,504 (P2-SCM, 160 Treatment temperature further controls the mitigation potential. Appropriate treatment can lead to 50% higher avoided GHG emissions per year, e.g. SCM from P2 pretreated at 160 The net GHG emissions described above directly influence the greenhouse gas payback time. The GPBT of a TBH device using SCM is very short, between 3 and 4 The annual profits range from 3763 Depreciation and capital costs for the TBH device are responsible for two thirds of the overall costs and range from 3.11 (P2-SCM, 160 Additional wheel loader employment compared with the reference scenario costs up to 0.40 The electricity production costs can be reduced by a maximum of 3.78 Although methane yields of the feedstock examined differ from the statutory values, the fee attainable is fixed at 2 If related to fresh mass, the revenues are between 0.65 (P2-LCM, 180 The overall electricity production costs, disregarding saved expenditures for maize silage and additional income due to Renewable Energy Sources Act, range from 1.34 The ECAP lies between 3 If the additional electricity production costs according to this study are lower than the grid electricity production costs, the additional CO Sensitivity analyses were performed to assess the viability of the model against hardly determinable parameters, to justify simplifications and to assess the impact of variations of selected input parameters on representative output parameters. GHG emissions per unit energy increase with increasing stirring power ( The increase in GHG emissions with increasing stirring power is due to the assumption that the electricity derives from the national grid with its fossil and nuclear resources. The alteration of stirring power from −50% or +50% leads to changes in GHG emissions of maximum 0.127 OM content of the particular feedstock has a considerably stronger impact on GHG emissions than the changes in stirring power. The alteration of OM content of −50% leads to an increase of maximum 1.484 Although the effect of OM content of a particular feedstock is non-linear and almost doubles the GHG emissions per unit energy with a decrease of 50% in the OM content of LCMs, the impact on GHG emission per year is negligible for LCMs ( CO Scenarios with high electricity production costs and high energy related emissions compared to that of grid electricity in base scenario are strongly influenced by changes in OM content. As shown above, increase in OM content reduces the emissions related to electric energy and reduces the costs for producing that electric energy as well. Especially the CMCs of LCM scenarios are therefore significantly decreased by increased OM content. SLCM also shows a sixfold increase with decrease of the OM content of feedstock by 50%. The SCMs are slightly reduced by decrease of OM content and almost unaffected by increase. Sensitivity analyses for the ECAP display a baseline ( Stirring power only slightly influences the ECAP ( In contrast, changes in OM content strongly influence the ECAP ( ECAP of variants with already high profits are more or less unimpaired by changes in investment as it is given for the SCM scenarios ( The performed sensitivity analyses confirm the assumption that the overall results are influenced only marginally by the accuracy of estimating the stirring power. The energy per time unit attainable from SCMs is high in contrast to the changes in energy related output parameters. In opposition to the SCMs, only slight changes in output parameters occur if related to time for the LCMs as the energy per time unit is low. However, if related to energy there are substantial changes of the overall results. Thermobarical hydrolysis is feasible for many feedstocks such as solid cattle wastes and mixtures of solid and liquid cattle wastes. The additional benefits exceed the additional expenses in terms of energy, greenhouse gas emissions and profitability. Thermobarical hydrolysis treatment of liquid cattle waste does not provide sufficient advantages compared with untreated liquid cattle waste. Therefore substituting maize silage with treated liquid cattle waste is not recommended. In general, it is preferable to use a feedstock with a high fresh matter related organic matter content and ligno-cellulose that is usually unsuitable for anaerobic digestion without pretreatment. Thermobarical hydrolysis of such material will have short to very short energetic and greenhouse gas payback time and economic amortization period. The work underlying this publication was supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 