Prednisolone (PDL) microcrystals were successfully prepared by a controlled microprecipitation method. The characterization of PDL microcrystals by SEM and PSD indicated that the hexagonal and tetragonal PDL microcrystals with an average particle size of 1.60 and 1.46μm could be prepared under a stirring speed of 10,000rpm at 14 and 4°C, respectively. The morphology and the particle size of PDL could be well controlled, from 1.60 to 6.12μm for hexagonal microcrystals and 1.46 to 3.90μm for tetragonal ones, by altering the operating parameters such as temperature, stirring speed and stabilizers. The XRD, TGA–DSC, FT-IR and physical stability studies demonstrated that the as-prepared hexagonal and tetragonal PDL microcrystals with the same pseudopolymorphic form were much more stable in water than the commercial micronized PDL with another crystal form. The dissolution tests showed that the hexagonal and tetragonal PDL microcrystals exhibited significantly enhanced dissolution property when compared to commercial micronized PDL.Prednisolone (PDL) is a synthetic adrenal corticosteroid at least existing two polymorphic forms and two pseudopolymorphic forms ( According to the Noyes–Whitney equation, the dissolution rate could be increased by reducing the particle size at the micro- or nano-scale to increase the interfacial surface area ( The existing technologies to prepare microcrystals can be divided into the so-called “top down” and the “bottom up” technologies. The top down technologies are the mechanical comminution of previously formed larger particles, including jet mills, pear-ball mills and high-pressure homogenizers. However, these technologies do not represent the idea way for the production of microcrystals because drug substance properties and surface properties are altered in a mainly uncontrolled manner. The “bottom up” technologies start from the molecules which are dissolved and precipitate them by adding the solvent to a non-solvent, such as spray-drying, supercritical fluid (SCF) technology, spray-freezing into liquid process, evaporative precipitation into aqueous solution (EPAS) and liquid solvent change process ( Anti-solvent method is an effective way to prepare micro- or nano-sized drug particles. In this method, briefly, the drug is firstly dissolved in the solvent and the formed solution is quickly poured to the anti-solvent. Precipitation occurs immediately by a rapid desolvation of the drug. Currently, aqueous solutions containing some stabilizers are commonly used as the anti-solvent. When comparing different potential stabilizers, hydroxypropylmethylcellulose (HPMC) was especially shown to stabilize the small drug particles. Since HPMC containing methoxyl and hydroxypropyl groups can form hydrogen bonds between the drug molecule and the polymer, the stabilizer presented in the aqueous solution is absorbed on the surface of the formed hydrophobic drug particles to inhibit crystal growth ( The objective of this study was to directly prepare hexagonal and tetragonal PDL dry microcrystals by a controlled microprecipitation method. In addition, the effect of the operation parameters, such as the types of solvent and anti-solvent, the temperature and the stirring speed were also explored. The corresponding physical stability and dissolution property of the as-prepared PDL microcrystals were characterized by scanning electronic microscope (SEM), Fourier transform infrared spectrophotometry (FT-IR), thermogravimetric analysis–differential scanning calorimeter (TGA–DSC), powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) and dissolution testing. The commercial micronized PDL was supplied by Henan Lihua Pharmaceutic Co. Ltd. (China). PDL NMP solution (1.0 Particle size and morphology were examined by SEM (JEOL, JSM-6360LV, Japan). The dried PDL powder was fixed on aluminium stubs using double-sided adhesive tape and coated with Au at 50 FT-IR spectra were recorded with a Bruker IFS66 spectrometer in the range 400–4000 The phase transition of various PDL were analyzed by differential scanning calorimeter (Pyris 1, Perkin-Elmer, USA) at a heating rate of 10 X-ray diffraction analysis was performed using XRD-6000 (Shimadzu Inc., Japan) to detect any change in the physical characteristics and crystallinity. The measuring unit consisted of a rotating anode in transmission technique and with the following specifications: Cu Kα radiation generated at 30 The specific surface area was determined using the gas adsorption method. Calculation is based on the BET equation. Surface Area Analyzer ASAP 2010-M (Micromeritics Instrument Corporation, USA) was used. Before measuring, the sample of PDL was degassed for 4 Dry powder (4 UV–vis spectrophotometer (Shimadzu, UV-2501, Japan) was used for the UV analyses ( Dissolution testing for PDL sample was carried out using a dissolution apparatus (D-800LS, Tianjin, China) following the USP 29 Apparatus II (paddle) method. Paddle speed and bath temperature were set at 50 As a comparison, the SEM image of the commercial micronized PDL was given in SEM images of PDL microcrystals prepared at different stirring speeds were depicted in The molecular structures of the commercial micronized PDL and the two microcrystals were investigated by means of FT-IR. The TGA–DSC curves ( The XRD patterns were performed to study the effect of the microprecipitation on the crystallinity of PDL, as illustrated in Polymorphism is a widespread phenomena observed for most of steroids. The stability of particles in the solid-state forms and/or in suspensions is of considerable importance ( Since the microcrystals were obtained by using the filtrate containing about 0.1 The in vitro release profiles of the commercial micronized PDL, hexagonal and tetragonal PDL microcrystals were compared in In this study, a controlled microprecipitation method using the filtrate as the improved anti-solvent was developed to prepare PDL microcrystals. In this process, the two morphologies, hexagonal and tetragonal ones of the as-prepared PDL microcrystals could be well controlled by the HPMC contained in the filtrate and the temperature. The particle size and PSD of PDL can be controlled, from 1.60 to 6.12 This work was partially supported by the NSF of China (grant no. 20325621).