The effect of different impact events, which occur in fine grinding mills, on the development of the physical properties of dry Norway spruce wood in pulverisation was studied. Dry Norway spruce wood with a median size d
                     50
                     =199μm (±6μm) was pulverised in an opposed jet mill and an oscillatory ball mill down to a d
                     50 of approximately 20μm. In addition, knowledge from an earlier study was used to obtain information about high-speed rotor impact milling. The development of physical properties, such as aspect ratio, width of its distribution and cellulose crystallinity, as a function of particle size was significantly different using oscillatory ball milling compared to using jet milling. When pulverising to median sizes of approximately 20μm, oscillatory ball milling resulted in lower cellulose crystallinity and rounder, more uniform particle shapes than did jet and rotor impact milling. It is proposed that media mills are capable of imposing higher energies and, consequently, cause stronger physical changes for dry Norway spruce wood particles compared to impact-based non-media mills.The utilisation of renewable non-food materials for the production of biofuels and biomaterials has increasingly become a global technological trend. Forests are the most abundant sources of lignocelluloses, which can be used as a raw material for bioenergy and biomaterials. Trees are constructed primarily from wood, which is a natural biodegradable polymer that has often evolved to withstand the violent forces of nature. Wood is known for its high mechanical strength when considering its low weight and is therefore favoured as a construction and reinforcement material. Conversely, the use of wood as a co-fuel with coal in burners is increasing due the environmental regulations towards the reduction of carbon emissions. Wood is also a good source of lignin and cellulose. Lignin can provide different chemicals for various applications and energy, whereas cellulose itself is important for many applications, such as the production of biofuels and paper. Mechanical milling influences the physical properties of wood, such as particle size and shape, which are known to be important properties for different applications This study analyses the effect of different impact events in fine grinding mills on the physical properties of dry Norway spruce ( The raw material used in this study was fresh Norway spruce ( Pregrinding was performed using a model 50 ZPS (Hosokawa Alpine, Germany) air classifier mill including a model 50 ATP (Hosokawa Alpine, Germany) integrated air classifier, using a classifier speed of 3000 Jet milling was performed using a 100 AFG fluidised-bed opposed jet mill (Hosokawa Alpine, Germany), including the same 50 ATP integrated air classifier that was used during pregrinding. The material was fed using a K-PH-CV-KT20 twin-screw feeder (K-Tron, Switzerland). All of the processing parameters were recorded as a function of time during processing. Experiments were performed by pulverising 8 batches of the feed (300 In jet milling experiments the work done for the compression of a grinding air was calculated by assuming air as ideal gas and compression as an isothermal process. A screw compressor GA11FF (Atlas Copco, Italy) was used in the experiments but in the calculations of the compression work A CryoMill (Retsch, Germany) oscillatory ball mill was used in the grinding experiments. In this mill, particles are caught between a grinding ball and the wall of the grinding chamber during pulverisation. The jet-milled products were divided into samples for analysis using a PT-type sample divider (Retsch, Germany). For the measurements of size and aspect ratio distributions, a 1 The volumetric particle size distributions of the ground products were measured using the laser diffraction method (Beckmann Coulter LS 13320, U.S.A.). The median size The aspect ratio was used to evaluate the shape of the wood particles. Aspect ratios of the particles were measured from CCD photos taken from the tube flow of the diluted samples (for a more comprehensive description of the method, see Dry wood powder samples were used to prepare compressed tablets using a hydraulic press. X-ray diffraction profiles were measured from compressed tablets using wide-angle X-ray diffractometry (WAXD), performed using a D5000 diffractometer (Siemens, Germany) using Cu Kα radiation (λ Ultra Plus (Carl Zeiss, Germany) field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) was used to visualise the oscillatory ball milled sample OSC 5. Prior to imaging, a small proportion of the diluted wood powder sample OSC 5 was dried in a vacuum and sputter-coated with platinum prior to imaging.     Oscillatory ball milling and opposed jet milling have been successfully used in the pulverisation of dried Norway spruce wood down to a median size of approximately 20 When considering the detailed morphology of the oscillatory ball milled Norway spruce wood ( When the energy imparted to the particles by mechanical means is just enough to cause fracture, cracks will propagate by using the easiest route, i.e., the route that uses the lowest energy for crack propagation. In the case of the wood, the easiest route for a crack to propagate is along the wood grain, whereas crack propagation across the wood grain is more difficult Physical changes in Norway spruce wood particles during milling can be observed as changes in the particle morphology (size and shape) and as changes in the cellulose crystallinity. Schwanninger et al. Particle–solid body impacts are not physically different than particle–particle impacts because particles can be considered as solid bodies. The main difference between these impact events is that solid bodies, such as a high-speed rotor, may provide impacts with different energy intensities than particle–particle impacts. Karinkanta et al. Because of the different development of shape and cellulose crystallinity as a function of particle size during oscillatory ball milling, in comparison to rotor impact and jet milling, it is proposed that the mills involving impacts in which the particles are caught between solid bodies (i.e., grinding media mills) are capable of imposing higher energies for physical changes in dry Norway spruce wood during a single impact than the mills involving particle–particle and particle–solid body impacts, when pulverising to a median size below 199 Tavares When comparing the energy efficiencies the first consideration should be the desired properties of the resulting wood powder. When high crystallinity and aspect ratio are wanted from dried Norway spruce the possible impact-based fine grinding techniques are the non-media mills. In their case, the pulverisation of dried Norway spruce wood from median particle size between 1 When considering media milling, specific energy consumption can be as low as 0.36 The development of the physical properties of dry Norway spruce wood during pulverisation to a median particle size below 199  Median aspect ratio (–) Crystallinity index (%) The particle size corresponding to 10% value in cumulative particle size distribution (μm) Median particle size (μm) The particle size corresponding to 90% value in cumulative particle size distribution (μm) The dry mass of the product in jet milling (g) Molar mass of air (g Pressure of compressed air (Pa) Pressure of uncompressed air (Pa) Gas constant Specific energy consumption based on the consumption of electrical energy in air classifier milling (J Specific energy consumption based on the energy needed for the compression of the grinding air in jet milling (J Specific energy consumption based on the estimated total available impact energy of the grinding ball in oscillatory ball milling (J Span value ( Temperature of air (K) The total air volume of compressed grinding air needed for jet milling (m The total air volume of uncompressed grinding air needed for jet milling (m The work done by a piston in isothermal and quasistatic compression of ideal gas (J) Width of particle size distribution (–) Width of aspect ratio distribution (–) Density of air (g The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by the