The purpose of this paper is to develop a model of the densities of multi-component aqueous electrolyte solutions containing NaOH and NaAl(OH)4. Coefficients for the Laliberte–Cooper model of multi-component electrolyte solutions were developed from published density data for the NaOH–NaAl(OH)4–H2O system. The density data were split into two groups, data for parameterization and data for validation. The model was able to predict the validation data well, with an R
                     2 greater than 0.99 for five of seven datasets and greater than 0.95 for all datasets. The model was shown to extrapolate to temperature and composition ranges outside those used for model parameterization. Similarly, using coefficients derived here for NaAl(OH)4 and published coefficients for NaOH and NaNO2, the model was shown to accurately predict the density of solutions that contain NaNO2 in addition to NaOH–NaAl(OH)4 (R
                     2
                     =0.993). This indicates that the model coefficients developed here can be incorporated into models of diverse multi-component electrolyte solutions.Sodium aluminate (NaAl(OH) A number of empirical models have been developed to predict the density of NaOH–NaAl(OH) One density model that appears to be accurate without requiring solution speciation is the model of Eq.  The density of NaOH–NaAl(OH) The densities in the parameterization datasets ( The NaAl(OH) As noted in A second regression was performed that excluded the The Laliberte–Cooper model falls into a class of empirical models called mixture models, because the sum of the concentrations add up to one ( Three aspects will be tested here to ensure that the model is valid for the purpose of calculating density. The first aspect will be to test the model results against data that was not used to develop the model coefficients. Secondly, the model will be shown to extrapolate outside the temperature and composition boundaries of the data used to fit the model (  The  The quality of the extrapolation outside the composition range is more difficult to judge than the temperature range because the parameterization data covers such a large composition range. Given that the model error increases with increasing solute concentration, it might be expected that the model error would further increase as the sodium aluminate concentration increases beyond the parameterization composition range. The largest sodium aluminate mass fraction in the parameterization data was 0.2793. There are three data points in the There are a number of empirical models fitted to NaOH–NaAl(OH) Coefficients for NaAl(OH) The work described in this paper was performed for the United States Department of Energy under contract DE-AC27-01RV14136, to support the Hanford Waste Treatment Plant Project. The development of this paper was greatly aided by manuscript reviews and technical discussions with Jeanne Bernards, Dan Reynolds, Ven Arakali, and an anonymous reviewer. Karen Reynolds performed grammatical editing and formatted the document for submission. 