The gamma-radiation-induced degradation of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D) was studied in aerated (A) and in during irradiation air saturated (AS) solutions. Whereas the decomposition rates were not influenced by AS, chloride elimination, detoxification as well as mineralization were significantly enhanced. In the range 50–500μmoldm−3 2,4-D, degradation showed proportionality to concentration, while chloride formation was successively retarded. The ratios of the pseudo first-order rate constants for degradation and chloride formation, k
                     de/k
                     Cl, increase in AS solutions from 1.4 (50μmoldm−3) to 2.7 (500μmoldm−3) and in A solutions from 1.4 to 3.3. In AS for total chloride release 0.7kGy (50μmoldm−3) to 10kGy (500μmoldm−3) were required, the reduction of organic carbon at 10kGy was 95% (50μmoldm−3) and 50% (500μmoldm−3). Increase and decrease of toxicity during irradiation correlated well with formation and degradation of intermediate phenolic products. The doses for detoxification corresponded to those of total dehalogenation. The oxygen uptake was ∼1.1ppm100Gy−1. The presence of the inorganic components of Vienna drinking water affect the degradation parameters insignificantly.The herbizide 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D) is one of the most widely applied agrochemicals. Much effort has been put into investigations for its degradation by advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) which are based on the oxidation of pollutants by The present study concerns with the radiolytic decomposition, dehalogenation and mineralization of 2,4-D as a function of pesticide concentrations (50–500       All measurements were done at least three times, the given results represent mean values. The primary oxidation steps during gamma radiolysis of aerated aqueous solutions are induced by In the presence of aromatic compounds Gamma irradiations of 50–500 2,4-D was decomposed with an initial yield of G(-2,4-D)=3.2×10 The independence of 2,4-D degradation on oxygen concentration is in consistence with earlier observations, where no reaction of oxygen with the OH-adducts of 2,4-D (e.g. reactions (6), (7)) was observable by pulse radiolysis. It was assumed that the addition of oxygen to the OH-adducts occurs with a rate constant Chloride production from 2,4-D is demonstrated for primary products, an ipso-chloro-OH-adduct and an OH-adduct on C3 position (reactions (8) and (9)) The formation of HCl was further proved by pH shift with dose. The pH decrease was equivalent to the observed [Cl The oxygen uptake during irradiation of 50–500 Organic carbon decrease was followed for 4 different 2,4-D concentrations. Oxygen gained importance with increasing substrate concentration. Using AS, for 500 As main aliphatic products acetic acid and formic acid were determined, e.g. the irradiation of 500 Within the initial oxidation steps of aromatic pollutants using AOTs considerable amounts of hydroxylated products are formed. Upon gamma radiolysis of 2,4-D in the presence of air several compounds with phenolic character were identified, whereby 2,4-DCP was the main component ( 2,4-D is a moderately toxic compound (EC The toxicity decrease is enhanced in AS, as is shown for the 500 and 250 After field application of 2,4-D it can be easily transferred into natural waters due to its high solubility. Its microbiological decomposition in fresh water is only practicable for concentrations below 1 Slight distinctions arose for the decomposition process. The initial degradation (up to 250 Summing up, it might be stated that the low concentrations of anions and organic carbon in VW have no significant influence on the various degradation parameters. In natural waters with higher anion concentrations or TOC values, it can be expected that the competition of solutes and anions for the oxidizing radicals will attain more importance and as a consequence the degradation process might be retarded. A pronounced oxygen decrease during the radiation-induced oxidation processes of 2,4-D was found. To achieve efficient elimination of organic chlorine and reduction of TOC, air supply during irradiation has to be provided for 2,4-D concentrations >50