As a sub-process of flotation, the bubble-particle detachment plays a critical role in final flotation recovery. In this short communication, the effect of vibration mode, i.e., sine wave, triangle wave and square wave, on the detachment of low-rank coal particle from oscillating bubble was investigated using a home-made bubble-particle detachment measurement system. The critical detachment amplitude was used to evaluate the stability of bubble-particle aggregate. Three coal size fractions, i.e., 0.25–0.5, 0.5–1, and 1–1.5 mm, were used as the experimental samples, respectively. The results show that the critical amplitude decreased as particle size increased under different vibration modes due to the increased inertia. The critical amplitude at three different size fractions always decreased in the following order: sine wave, triangle wave and square wave, indicating the bubble-particle aggregate was the most stable under sine wave vibration. Square wave vibration has the most dramatic movement path changes, causing a highest instantaneous impulse and detachment force.Flotation is widely used to separate fine particles in applications that include oil-water separation, coal de-ashing, and mineral processing [ A physical model to describe detachment of a bubble from a spherical particle was established by Nutt [ In this work, the effect of vibration mode (sine wave, triangle wave or square wave) on the detachment of low-rank coal particles from oscillating bubbles was investigated using a bubble-particle detachment measurement system that was built in-house. The critical detachment amplitude was used to evaluate the stability of bubble-particle aggregate. Three coal size fractions: 0.25–0.5, 0.5–1, and 1–1.5 mm, were used in the experiments. Low-rank coal samples with 12.24% ash content were obtained from the Shendong Mine, China, and the result of proximate analyses of the coal sample was shown in X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy was used to characterize the surface chemistry of low-rank coal samples (ESCALAB 250Xi, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, ESCALAB 250 Xi, America) using a monochromatic Al Kα radiation (hν = 1486.6 eV) X-ray source and a 900-μm spot-size. High-resolution spectra were recorded using 0.05 eV steps and a pass energy of 20 eV. The binding energies were corrected using the C1s peak at 284.6 eV. Peak fitting was performed using the Casa XPS software. A wide-energy XPS spectrum was produced for the low-rank coal ( Peak fitting by XPS peak software was used to identify the oxygen-bearing functional groups ( A bubble-particle detachment measurement system similar to that of Xu et al. [ The detachment measurement system was composed of a computer, a measuring cell, a signal generator, an amplifier, a vibrator, a capillary tube, a light source and a high speed camera ( The relationship between frequency and bubble-particle aggregate detachment was investigated firstly ( Changes to critical amplitude as a function of vibration mode were investigated for different-sized particles of the low-rank coal ( For different vibration mode, the critical detachment amplitude decreased for the three particle sizes in the order: sine wave; triangle wave; and square wave, indicating the bubble-particle aggregate was the most stable under sine wave vibration. When only vibration mode is varied, the main factors that can affect the bubble-particle detachment are the detachment force and the time over which it acts. A detachment force that is greater than adhesion force and acts over a sufficient time will decrease the length of the three-phase contact line until it disappears and detachment occurs. At 20 Hz, the detachment force had a larger effect on bubble-particle detachment than the time over which the detachment force acted. For a given particle size, the maximum detachment force during the vibration is the product of the mass of a particle mass and its acceleration, which is the second derivative of the position of the particle with respect to time. Square wave vibration has the most dramatic movement path changes, causing a highest instantaneous impulse and detachment force. Triangle wave has the second most dramatic movement path changes, leading to a medium detachment force, as observed in the experimental results. In flotation industry, minimizing the sudden change of pulp flow pulsation could be an effective method to reduce the detachment probability between bubble and particle. Bubble-particle detachment is a critical sub-process in final flotation recovery. A bubble-particle detachment measurement system was designed and built in-house, and used to study the effect of vibration mode (sine wave, triangle wave and square wave) on the detachment of low-rank coal particles from oscillating bubbles. The stability of the bubble-particle aggregate, which was equated with the detachment force between particle and bubble, was evaluated using the critical detachment amplitude. Three size fractions of coal (0.25–0.5, 0.5–1, and 1–1.5 mm) were used in the experiments. The critical amplitude decreased as particle size increased for all the vibration modes, which was attributed to adverse effects of particle size on stability and increased inertia in the larger particles. The critical amplitude decreased in the following order for all three size fractions: sine wave; triangle wave; and square wave, indicating that the bubble-particle aggregate was most stable under sine wave vibration and followed by triangular wave. This is because the square wave vibration induces the greatest acceleration of the three vibration modes when the amplitude and frequency are the same, so the smallest amplitude is required to induce detachment between the particle and the bubble, and the acceleration of the triangle wave is second only to the critical amplitude of the square wave. This work was supported by the