The total energy consumption for ore comminution will further increase within the next decades. One contribution to minimise the increase is to use more efficient comminution equipment. Vertical-roller-mills (VRM) are an energy-efficient alternative to conventional grinding technology. One reason is the dry in-bed grinding principle. Results of extensive test works with two types of magnetite iron ores in a Loesche VRM are presented here. Within these test works, mill parameters like grinding pressure, separator speed and dam ring height were varied, following a factorial design of the experiments. The effects of the grinding parameters on the liberation of valuable minerals are characterised using mineral liberation analysis (MLA). It is shown how the different mill parameters influence important performance values like energy consumption, production rate and mineral liberation. Via multiple regression analysis, an optimal parameter range can be modelled for both ore types. The parameter predictions have been successfully verified in practical test works.mass specific surface ratio of liberation dam ring height regression coefficient production rate separator speed 80% passing size grinding pressure cumulative passing coefficient of determination mass specific energy consumption particle size The energy consumption of ore comminution, especially of the grinding processes, is about to rise in the next years, due to well-known reasons. Deteriorating ore grades force the mining companies to mine and process more raw material to ensure that the refining industry is adequately supplied with ore concentrates. Furthermore, ore textures become more complex and the valuables are more fine-grained, compared to ores of the last decades, requiring additional grinding for sufficient mineral liberation. These trends may lead to a four times higher energy consumption for the comminution of the main metal ores in the year 2030 compared with today ( The strategies against the rising energy consumption can be split in two groups: first to avoid comminution and second to use more efficient comminution technology. The application of vertical-roller-mills (VRM’s) for ore grinding is part of the second strategy. The grinding parts of a Loesche mill ( A VRM offers several possibilities to control the grinding process. Altogether there are six online controls (marked with Several characteristics of VRM’s are advantageous for the challenges in ore industry, especially in comparison to conventional grinding technology. First of all, particles are ground in a particle bed, which is known to be more energy efficient and usually causes a narrower particle size distribution ( Due to a dry grinding process no process water is required. A feature which will become more important in the next decades. VRM’s are well-established grinding equipment for various tasks in the coal and cement industry today. In terms of numbers of new installed units in the cement industry VRM’s have overtaken ball mills for a few years, which makes VRM’s the leading mill technology ( For the grinding tests, a Loesche mill LM4.5 (table diameter 0.45 The mill is part of a complete pilot scale grinding plant, which is equipped with sensors for precise measurement of all necessary mill- and process parameters as well as sampling points for representative material discharge. If the grinding process is steady-state, all process parameters are recorded for several minutes. During this measuring time a hopper collects the product material for accurate determination of the production rate. The mechanical energy spent for comminution is measured directly at the torque support of the gear box via a load cell. The specific energy consumption presented in this paper is computed as the ratio of mechanical power consumption to production rate. Energy consumption of separator and mill fan are not considered in this data. In this paper the results of extensive test programs with two iron ores are discussed. The ores are provided by the Swedish mining company Lousavaara-Kirunavaara Aktiebolag (LKAB). Magnetite (Fe An amount of 40 metric tons of both ores was delivered to the test centre in Germany. The ores were already pre-crushed and had a particle size of +0 to 10 A systematic approach is used for the analysis of the process of ore grinding in VRM’s. On the one hand, all parameters affecting the process are defined as independent variables For this purpose Design of Experiment (DoE) methods are used. With these methods it is possible to gain all necessary information about the dependent variables with a practicable effort of material, time and costs. By combining the DoE with a multi-parameter regression an empirical, polynomial model is set up, describing the dependencies These polynomials are composed of linear terms, interdependency terms and quadratic terms. The coefficients The mill parameters dam ring height, grinding pressure and separator speed are selected as independent variables for the test work with the two iron ores. These three variables span a three-dimensional experiment space ( The product samples are analysed for granulometry and valuables liberation. The particle size distribution is determined via air jet sieving. The specific surface area is measured with the Blaine method according to the German standard DIN EN 196-6. Mineral liberation analysis (MLA) is carried out to characterise the achieved mineral liberation in the grinding product. The MLA combines complex image analysis with discrete X-ray analysis to determine the mineralogy. The working principle is described in detail by The MLA allows the presentation of the liberation data in many different ways. It is common practice to show liberation categories (liberated, binary, ternary) as a function of particle size. However, it is necessary to describe the magnetite liberation of the whole grinding product in one single quantitative parameter, if this parameter is to be used as a dependent variable in the DoE. It was found that an analysis of the data according to Due to a limited budget, MLA analyses are only carried out for the products of the standard roller grinding tests. For this reason and not to exceed the scope of this paper, only the results of the standard roller geometry are discussed in the following. The generated regression models have generally Once the models have been validated, they can be used to calculate the dependent variables for any untested parameter combination. As a next step a grinding test using the same parameters is performed and the measured values are compared with the modelled ones. In each executed verification test the consistency between both values is very good. With just few exceptions, the measured values are within the practical limits of error of the regression models. An example is shown in The applicability of the regression models is proven with the positive verification test results. Hence, the models are a suitable instrument to evaluate and optimise the vertical-roller-mill.  As expected, it becomes apparent that the separator speed is the dominating mill parameter on the The effects of dam ring height and grinding pressure on the ratio of liberation are statistically not significant for the Kiruna ore. The observed deviations exceed the calculated effects of the independent variables. However, a progressive effect of the grinding pressure is significant for the Mertainen ore. The ratio of liberation shows a progressive dependency on the separator speed. In the case of the Mertainen ore there is a diminishing increase at higher speeds. Overall, the Apart from that, the regression models of both ores are really close to each other in all charts belonging to production rate and power consumption ( The Kiruna curve in The regression models of As expected, there is a clear trend between The deviations of the ratio of liberation between the test points in the same particle size range are small, although the mill settings are quite different. This confirms the minor effect of the varied mill parameters, like dam ring height and grinding pressure, which are not effecting the fineness in the first place. It is concluded that liberation cannot be enhanced significantly by changing mill parameters without grinding finer. This perception, however, may not be applicable to other ore types. In case of the Kiruna ore there was the possibility to take samples of the concentration plant KA1 in Kiruna, while the same feed material was ground, as used for the tests with the vertical-roller-mill. The grinding process of KA1 consists of a SAG mill followed by a pebble mill for final grinding. The final grinding product was analysed by MLA as well, resulting also in a data point in In case of ore grinding there are several conflicting requirements. For example, sufficient valuables liberation is, in the majority of cases, inconsistent with enhanced energy savings. Furthermore, the grinding product has to meet the criteria for the downstream processes. The regression models are helpful to find the mill parameters for the best possible compromise between the various dependent variables. The above-shown charts of Using the model explained in this paper, the independent variables are calculated, so that the grinding products match the following The way of finding the optimal parameter combination is shown hereinafter, using the example of Kiruna ore. It is noted, that the data points of the two different optimisation objectives are very close together. This proves the above-mentioned conclusion, that the magnetite liberation can only be enhanced by grinding finer. The ground ore should have a specific surface according to Blaine of 1800 In the charts for the Mertainen ore the data points of the two different optimisation objectives are not as close as for the Kiruna ore, which indicates a bigger optimisation potential. It is possible to achieve a good liberation ratio ( Two Swedish magnetite iron ores were comminuted with a pilot scale vertical-roller-mill. In these experiments the mill parameters dam ring height, grinding pressure and separator speed were varied, according to a factorial design of experiments. Thereby it is possible to generate polynomial regression models for each dependent variable. It can be concluded that the grinding process of a vertical-roller-mill is very well predictable with these models. Pre-calculations show a high conformity with the results of the verification tests. With the use of the models an optimal parameter setting is determined for each ore. Thereby the adaptability of a VRM is demonstrated. Furthermore, MLA-analyses were carried out with the grinding products of the VRM as well as with the final grinding product of a conventional plant processing one of the ores. By comparison, the VRM products had a considerably higher ratio of liberation of the magnetite phase for the same particle size.