Nanoplate γ-Bi2MoO6 is prepared by hydrothermal method. Using this material as photocatalyst, rhodamine B and methylene blue were efficiently degraded under visible light irradiation. The degradation kinetics, total organic carbon changes, and electron spin resonance detection of active oxygen species were investigated to clarify the degradation process. The experimental results indicated that the target dyes could be facilely bleached and mineralized. The formation of active oxygen species of OH and O2
                     
                     − is detected, and they are proposed to be responsible for the degradation of the target dyes. The γ-Bi2MoO6 catalyst is very stable and can be reused.Photocatalysis offers an advanced technology for the elimination of toxic organic compounds from water Recently, the photocatalytic properties of the bismuth mixed oxides with Aurinillius structure have been studied. Photocatalytic activities of Bi In the present work, γ-Bi γ-Bi Crystallinity of the as-prepared sample was characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) on Bruker D8-advance X-ray diffractometer at 40 Photocatalytic degradation of RhB/MB over the γ-Bi As shown in The degradation reactions were carried out after the establishment of the adsorption/desorption equilibrium by magnetic stirring for 30 The mineralization degree of RhB was examined by measuring the decrease in TOC of the reaction solution. TOC variation during the photodegradation of RhB in the system under visible irradiation is depicted in An attractive feature of the photocatalyst materials is that inherent structure of the catalyst is stable toward oxidative decomposition and that the photocatalyst can be facilely separated from the dispersion by simple centrifugation after reaction, which facilitates the reuse of the catalyst. In addition, as mentioned above, the release of degraded intermediates from the catalyst surface can also prevent the catalyst surface from blocking and poisoning by the intermediates. In our experiments, the stability and reusability of the γ-Bi ESR spin-trap technique (with DMPO) was used to probe the nature of the reactive oxygen species generated on the surface of γ-Bi In the case of Bi The results of this work indicate that γ-Bi This work was supported by Chinese National Science Foundation (50538090, 20837001, 50778172, 20433010). Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 