This study is on sorption of lead ions on an agricultural by-product, tree fern. Equilibrium isotherms have been measured and modeled. The equilibrium sorption capacity of lead(II) was determined from the Langmuir isotherm and found to be 40.0 mg/g. Based on the assumption of the pseudo-second order mechanism, a batch sorption model was developed to predict the rate constant of sorption, the equilibrium sorption capacity and the initial sorption rate with the effect of initial lead(II) concentration and temperature. The sorption rate was found to increase with temperature, and an activation energy of approximately 87 kJ/mol was determined from the pseudo-second order rate constants. The findings of this investigation suggest that chemical sorption plays a role in controlling the sorption rate.Understanding the sorption of metal ions from aqueous solution is important in water pollution control. In recent years, there has been considerable interest in the use of agricultural by-products as sorbents. The tree fern, which is commercially available in Taiwan, is used as a sorbent for lead ions. It sorbs water easily and is marketed for horticultural uses as soil for plants. Being dark brown in colour, the tree fern constitutes mainly of lignin and cellulose This study investigates whether the tree fern can be used as a sorbent to remove lead ions from aqueous solutions and whether the corresponding equilibrium isotherm can be determined kinetically. The raw tree fern was dried in an oven at 100 °C for a period of 24 h, and then ground and screened through a set of sieves to get particles of geometrical size 53–61 μm. The materials were stored in an air-tight plastic container before all investigations. The stock solutions of lead(II) (2000 mg/L) were prepared in distilled water using lead nitrate. All working solutions were prepared by diluting the stock solution with distilled water. A lead(II) solution (50 mL) with a concentration of 74.1–344 mg/L was placed in a 125 mL conical flask. A tree fern sample 0.25 g was added to the solution. A series of conical flasks was then agitated at a constant speed of 100 rpm in a shaking water bath at 20 °C. After shaking the flasks for 5 h, the tree fern was separated by filtering the liquid content through a Nylon membrane filter (0.45 μm). Then the filtrate was analysed for the remaining lead(II) concentration with atomic absorption spectrophotometry (AAS). A range of lead(II) concentrations (74.1–350 mg/L) was used and the flasks were agitated for 1 h. All contact investigations were performed by using a baffled, agitated 2-L vessel. A 6.8-g sample of tree fern was added to each 1.7 L volume of lead(II) solution and agitated at 300 rpm for all experiments. The temperature was set at 20 °C with a water bath for all studies. Samples (3 mL) were withdrawn at suitable time intervals by having them filtered through a 0.45-μm membrane filter. Agitation was carried out for 1 h at temperatures ranging from 278 to 318 K. A 6.8-g sample of tree fern was added to each 1.7 L volume of lead(II) solution with an initial concentration 200 mg/L and agitated at 300 rpm. Analysing the results of the isotherm data is important to develop an equation, which can be used for design purposes. To investigate the sorption isotherm, three equilibrium models, the Langmuir, the Freundlich and the Redlich-Peterson isotherm equations, were analysed. The theoretical Langmuir sorption isotherm The Freundlich isotherm The Redlich-Peterson isotherm Several models are used to express the mechanism of solute sorption onto a sorbent. The characteristic constants of sorption were determined by using a pseudo-first order equation The The sorption of lead(II) onto tree fern may involve a chemical sorption. The initial sorption rate can be obtained as  A rate equation for diffusion through a boundary liquid film The equilibrium distribution of lead between the sorbent and the solution is important in determining the maximum sorption capacity of the tree fern for lead(II). To assess the different isotherms and their ability to correlate experimental results, the theoretical plots from each isotherm have been presented with the experimental data for sorption of lead(II) on tree fern at 20 °C Many agricultural sorbents have been tested for their capacity of sorbing lead(II), but their results vary with various sorbents and sources as shown in  The rate of uptake of lead(II) by tree fern in these studies was controlled by a chemical sorption phenomenon. Moreover, a pseudo-second order model is applied in sorption of lead(II) on tree fern. As shown in The increase in the pseudo-second order rate constants with increasing temperature may be described by the equation: There is a linear relationship between the pseudo-second order rate constant and the reciprocal absolute temperature with a correlation coefficient of 0.976. The values of From  The biosorption of lead ions on tree fern was investigated. Tree fern is a suitable sorbent for the removal of lead(II) from aqueous solution. The lead(II) removal was a function of initial lead ion concentration and temperature. The Redlich-Peterson and the Langmuir isotherms have higher correlation coefficients than those of Freundlich isotherm for the sorption of lead(II) onto tree fern. The pseudo-second order kinetic model was successfully applied to the experimental data, confirming that biosorption was chemically controlled. In addition, an activation energy consistent with chemisorption was determined, based on the pseudo-second order rate constants.