Trauma to the elbow resulting in damage to the articular cartilage or residual surface in congruencies can alter the load distribution across bearing surfaces and place the joint at risk for development of degenerative changes and early-onset arthritis. Posttraumatic articular injuries may be isolated to specific areas of the elbow, such as the radiocapitellar joint or can encompass the entire joint, resulting in profound functional limitations and pain. The treatment of posttraumatic elbow arthritis can be quite challenging as the majority of these patients are young and active. Total elbow arthroplasty (TEA), which is an acceptable first-line treatment in the elderly or low-demand patient population, should be viewed only as a salvage option in the young, active patient population due to increased demands placed across the implant throughout the patient's lifetime. Therefore, the goals of treatment in this population are directed at providing a minimally painful and functional elbow articulation, while maintaining future salvage options. An accurate characterization of normal and pathologic elbow structures is important to guide treatment planning, in order to determine which clinical feature is most limiting for each patient so the best treatment option may be offered. The patient's history of the initial elbow injury should include mechanism of injury, types of fractures or instability, subsequent treatment, and any history of infection. Evaluating initial injury films as well as previous operative reports is especially useful to understand degree of displacement, comminution, and articular involvement, as well as to determine prior surgical exposures, nerve transposition, type of hardware, and previous complications. Physical examination of the elbow should include evaluation for deformity, swelling, drainage, crepitance, and previous surgical incisions. An accurate assessment of the arc of motion, including level and location of pain, compared to the contralateral elbow is critical to assess functionality of the limb. The surrounding myotendinous structural integrity and strength, along with collateral ligament stability, should be assessed. Finally, a complete vascular and neurologic evaluation should be conducted including focused assessment of ulnar nerve sensory function and motor function, along with any existing irritability or subluxation. The subsequent treatment plan should focus on the primary patient complaint as it relates to pain, stiffness, or instability. If pain is the primary complaint, it should be determined if pain occurs predominantly at terminal motion (impingement), throughout the entire arc of motion, and/or at rest. Impingement-type pain, secondary to osteophyte formation or capsular contracture, can limit the arc of motion. Pain occurring throughout the entire arc of motion, in general, indicates a joint with a damaged bearing surface and advanced degenerative changes. This can be associated with night pain, effusions, and progressive stiffness. Pain at rest is approached with caution regardless of radiographic changes as this complaint may represent nonarticular pain such as infection, cervical spine radicular pain, soft tissue disease, or complex regional pain syndrome. Conventional radiographs consisting of at least two orthogonal views of the elbow (anteroposterior and lateral) are the standard initial evaluation for posttraumatic osseous deformity and are useful to evaluate the extent of degenerative disease and detect even subtle degenerative changes including osteophyte formation, loose bodies, and joint space narrowing. Computed tomography (CT) can improve accuracy and has a higher interobserver agreement when compared to conventional radiography for the detection of osteophytes and loose bodies. Ruling out infection is paramount prior to planned surgical interventions. In the setting of possible septic arthritis, an elbow aspiration for cell count with differential and cultures is compulsory. In patients with previous open injuries, past history of infection, associated nonunion, or a worrisome clinical presentation, preoperative testing for potential infection is required. Perioperative testing should include peripheral blood cell count, sedimentation rate, and C-reactive protein, as well as intraoperative bone and soft tissue cultures and pathology, and the consideration for staging definitive procedures. Finally, electromyographic (EMG) evaluation should be obtained in patients with peripheral neuropathies to establish a baseline for assessing prognosis of nerve function recovery. The mainstay of early treatment for patients with posttraumatic arthritis is directed at maintaining joint mobility and reducing activities that place stress across the elbow, such as weight bearing and repetitive motions. For patients who fail nonoperative management, treatment is geared at restoring elbow function and reducing pain ( Diminished motion occurring in the early stages of posttraumatic osteoarthritis is consistent with extrinsic elbow contracture and is characterized by periarticular osteophytes without major articular cartilage degeneration. Clinically, these patients complain of pain at terminal motion (impingement) without discomfort along the midarc of motion. There are several successful surgical options for release of extrinsic elbow contracture including arthrolysis, Elbow arthroscopy has become increasingly popular for the release of posttraumatic extrinsic elbow contracture. Cohen et al. compared open versus arthroscopic debridement performed by two different surgeons at two different centers, finding both procedures to be effective with borderline significance for superior motion gained following open debridement and improved pain relief with the arthroscopic technique. Severe joint destruction typically presents with pain throughout the entire arc of motion and radiographic joint space narrowing. These findings are consistent with advanced disease and effectively translate into a “bad bearing” joint. For these patients, arthroscopy can be used to define the extent of degenerative changes in these patients but typically does not provide definitive improvement in pain or motion. Joint replacement may result in the most predictable pain relief and improved joint motion; however, functional restrictions and concern about deterioration with time limit the use of TEA in most young patients with posttraumatic elbow arthritis. Resurfacing options with fewer restrictions, including partial joint arthroplasty and biologic interposition arthroplasty, may be employed as alternative procedures that still reserve TEA as a future salvage procedure. Early evaluation and treatment of isolated cartilage defects in the elbow may be useful for small and isolated lesions. Typically, patients with isolated cartilage defects complain of innocuous joint-based pain, intermittent swelling in the articulation, and at times catching or locking with motion resulting from loose bodies in the joint. Commonly the diagnosis of a cartilage lesion requires an arthroscopic diagnostic evaluation as imaging studies are unreliable for detection of these injuries. At the current time, there is a paucity of literature regarding outcomes for treatment of isolated cartilage lesions outside of capitellum defects resulting from osteochondritis dissecans (OCD). In the young patient with defects from OCD capitellar lesions, the use of osteochondral autografts or allografts has demonstrated adequate outcomes with return to sport. Isolated arthritis of the radiocapitellar or articular surface of the distal humerus commonly results from fracture malunion, fracture nonunion, or cartilage injury Although radial head resection effectively removes the arthritic surface in patients with radiocapitellar degenerative changes, the long-term effect of transferring force transmission entirely through the ulnohumeral articulation is unknown. This consideration may be especially important in the young patient given the possible propagation or development of ulnohumeral arthrosis. In spite of concern for potential development of ulnohumeral arthritis, there is little available data to determine the clinical impact of altered joint forces following radial head resection. Antuña et al. retrospectively reviewed 26 patients following radial head resection for radial head fractures without instability. At time of surgery, all patients were under the age of 40 and follow-up was a minimum of 15 years after surgery. The authors reported that, although osteoarthritic radiographic changes were uniformly present, 92% of patients had satisfactory results with no associated functional impairment. Anconeus interposition arthroplasty of the radiocapitellar joint is another alternative that avoids the use of prosthetic implants. In this procedure, the radial head is excised and the anconeus is reflected from its distal insertion, preserving its neurovascular integrity, and rotated into the radiocapitellar articulation underneath the lateral collateral ligament complex. This cushions the radiocapitellar and radioulnar articulation, increases stability through ligament tensioning, and provides a small degree of axial stability. This procedure appears to be most appropriate for patients with an arthritic capitellum and associated radiohumeral impingement or rotatory radioulnar impingement. Prosthetic replacement of the arthritic bearing surface may also be considered. Isolated radial head replacement removes the diseased articulation, restores lateral column stability in patients with valgus laxity, and rebalances force distribution across the elbow joint. Shore et al. retrospectively reviewed 32 patients who underwent radial head arthroplasty for posttraumatic disorders with a mean follow-up of 8 years, finding that 87% of patients reported fair to excellent outcomes with no revisions performed in their cohort. Resurfacing of both the radial head and capitellum together therefore may be used to remove an arthritic radiocapitellar joint completely. If degenerative changes primarily involve the distal humerus, a distal humerus hemiarthroplasty can resurface the humeral articulation while preserving the native ulnar articulating surface. This has been described for patients with acute distal humeral fracture, nonunion, or failure of fixation Interposition arthroplasty, which utilizes autograft (fascia lata, cutis) or allograft (Achilles tendon, dermis) to resurface the elbow articulating surface, provides a joint resurfacing alternative to TEA in the young or high-demand patient Although the frequency with which interposition arthroplasty is performed is unknown, among patients who do meet indications posttraumatic arthritis appears to be a leading diagnosis. Celli and Morrey reported that posttraumatic arthritis accounted for 71% of the interposition arthroplasties (total of 133) performed at the Mayo Clinic over a 20-year period. Total elbow joint replacement remains the most definitive functional procedure for end-stage osteoarthritis. However, there is hesitation regarding implantation of TEA in the posttraumatic population, which is commonly comprised of young and active patients, due to implant overuse and increased bone-cement stresses associated with relatively high failure rates. In some cases TEA may be the only treatment option because of severe injury such as massive bone loss, articular disruption, or failure of other treatment options. The use of “convertible” designs that allow for conversion between linked and unlinked articulation with the same implant may provide surgeons with the most options for active patients. Implant longevity and potential need for subsequent revision surgery are important considerations of TEA in the population with posttraumatic elbow arthritis, which is commonly young and active. Elbow arthrodesis is rarely indicated because the adjacent joints do not compensate for motion loss. However, it may be an option for young patients with posttraumatic, unilateral arthrosis who require a strong and stable joint. Management of posttraumatic elbow arthritis begins with extensive and long-term conservative, symptomatic care. For patients who fail nonoperative treatment, surgical options are aimed at restoring a functional elbow joint with manageable pain levels (see