The recovery of copper from chalcopyrite concentrates by leaching is difficult due to the slow dissolution kinetics of this mineral in most leaching media. However, recovery of copper from sulfidized chalcopyrite (a mixture of CuS and FeS2) by leaching is faster and could be selective depending on the leaching media.
                  In this paper, the result of an investigation on the H2SO4–O2 pressure leaching of sulfidized chalcopyrite is presented. The variables considered in the study were stirring speed, concentration of sulfuric acid, temperature, and partial pressure of oxygen. The experimental data indicated that stirring speed over 500 rpm and sulfuric acid concentration over 0.1 M had very little effect on the leaching rate. An increase in temperature from 90 to 108 °C increased both copper and iron dissolution; however, further increase to 120 °C affected negatively the copper dissolution. Oxygen partial pressure was found to be the main variable that controls the copper/iron selectivity of the leaching. An increase in oxygen partial pressure increased significantly the rate of copper dissolution but deteriorated the copper/iron selectivity. The analysis for elemental sulfur of the solid leach residues indicated that most of the copper sulfide sulfur in the sulfidized concentrate oxidized to elemental sulfur.Among the copper sulfides used to produce metallic copper, chalcopyrite (CuFeS In recent investigation from this laboratory ( For the temperature range of 325 to 400 °C, the transformation of chalcopyrite proceeds as follows: Above 400 °C, the chalcopyrite transformation proceeds according to: Reaction Few studies have been conducted on the leaching of chalcopyrite heat-treated with elemental sulfur. At ambient pressures, Recently, The leaching with oxygen overpressures is another alternative to accelerate the dissolution of metals from sulfides in sulfate media. On this matter, The sulfidation product obtained at 375 °C in this study is a mixture of covellite and pyrite, thus the following discussion will be concerned only with these two sulfides. The dissolution of covellite in sulfuric acid–oxygen system can proceed with the production of elemental sulfur or sulfate according to the following reactions ( We can notice that reaction Similarly, the dissolution of pyrite has been typically represented by the following reactions ( Reaction The leaching of CuS according to reactions Considering the preceding discussion, the present investigation focused on the study of the pressure leaching of the sulfidized chalcopyrite concentrate in H The experimental study was carried out using chalcopyrite concentrates from Andina Mine of CODELCO, Chile. These concentrates were products from flotation operations of copper sulfide minerals, which were further classified by size. The chalcopyrite concentrates were subjected to the sulfidizing process according to the methodology described by The leaching experiments of the sulfidized chalcopyrite were conducted in a 2 L Parr autoclave made of alloy 20 Cb. This autoclave was equipped with a heating mantle, a PID temperature controller, a variable speed stirrer and an internally mounted cooling coil. The stirring system had two axial impellers with 6 blades with 45° downdraft mounted 4.5 cm apart. All the experiments were carried out batch-wise using 2 g of sulfidized chalcopyrite, 1000 ml of leaching solution (various concentrations of H The main variables studied were the degree of agitation, concentration of sulfuric acid in the leaching solution, partial pressure of oxygen (304 to 1520 kPa), temperature (90 to 120 °C), and time of reaction. The results obtained are summarized in the following. The effect of the extent of agitation of the leaching pulp on the copper dissolution from the sulfidized chalcopyrite was studied under an oxygen partial pressure of 1013 kPa The result is shown in The effect of sulfuric acid on the leaching of sulfidized chalcopyrite was studied in the range 0.005 M to 0.2 M. Sulfidized chalcopyrite samples of both concentrates 1 and 2 were leached at temperatures varying from 90 to 120 °C to determine the effect of temperature on the copper and iron dissolution. The results for the copper dissolution are shown in The iron dissolution from the sulfidized chalcopyrite can be seen in The effect of partial pressure of oxygen on the copper and iron dissolution was studied using concentrates 1 and 2. Although both concentrates differ in copper and iron content, it was determined that the fraction of copper and iron extracted from each concentrate was the same under the same experimental conditions. The results can be seen in The effect of particle size on the copper dissolution is shown in  On the other hand, To verify that the dissolution of copper from sulfidized chalcopyrite occurs through reaction In the overall framework of treating chalcopyrite concentrates by sulfidation and leaching, the leaching of the sulfidized concentrate in autoclave in sulfuric acid – oxygen system is one alternative that effectively extracts copper from the sulfidized concentrate at 100 °C and 1013 kPa. Even though the copper/iron selectivity was not good at these conditions, the pressure leaching of sulfidized chalcopyrite is a viable process to produce pregnant solutions that can be inserted in the conventional industrial lines of SX purification and EW. From the results presented the following can be concluded: Sulfuric acid concentration in the solution over 0.1 M had very little effect on the leaching of sulfidized chalcopyrite in sulfuric acid–oxygen in autoclave. An increase in leaching temperature from 90 to 108 °C, increased the copper and iron dissolution. Increasing the temperature further to 120 °C has deleterious effect on the copper dissolution. An increase in the partial pressure of oxygen from 304 to 1520 kPa increased significantly the copper and iron dissolution. The oxygen partial pressure is the variable that controls the selectivity of Cu/Fe dissolution. The pressure leaching in sulfuric acid–oxygen media is a viable method to extract copper from sulfidized chalcopyrite concentrates producing solutions to be treated by SX and EW. Selective copper dissolution from sulfidized chalcopyrite can be obtained at 100 °C and oxygen overpressures of about 304 kPa in less than 3 h of residence time. However, for longer times, iron extraction increases rapidly and selectivity decreases. The authors acknowledge The National Fund for Scientific and Technological Development (FONDECYT) of Chile for the financial support of this study through Project No. 1050948 and the Research Council of the University of Concepción through Project No. DI 203.095.081-1.0.