The present study was conducted for thickening of activated sludge by continuous electro-flotation (EF) process. The effects of some key factors such as initial pH, current density, operating time, electrode type (stainless steel and graphite) and operation conditions on the sludge thickening by determine of sludge volume reduction (SVR) and sludge solid concentration (SSC) and as well as removal of chemical oxygen demand (COD), total solids (TS), total suspended solids (TSS) and color were investigated. The results showed that the process has a good efficiency. The highest amount of SVR efficiency (89.3%) and SSC (38gL−1) were achieved at current density of 8mAcm−2 in 15min for stainless steel. Moreover, as surface/volume ratio increased, better thickening happened because increases both mass transfer and electro-generation of O2 and H2 at the surface of electrodes in low applied current density. Accordingly, consumed electrical energy was 0.15–1kWhm−3. Although suitable cell design is entirely essential, the use of chemicals and temperature increase are not effective. Consequently, EF is a comparatively appropriate process for thickening; in the water separated from the process, the amounts pertaining to COD, TS, TSS and color were respectively 112, 1601, 140mgL−1 and 5TCU which are useable for subsequent different consumptions.Sludge is an unavoidable waste product originated from the treatment of various types of wastewater. It contains all kinds of harmful substances which should be removed from the wastewater Sludge thickening has been done by making use of common physical and mechanical methods including gravity-based sedimentation, diaphragm filter press, vacuum filter, Dissolve Air Floatation (DAF), centrifuge, and chemical processing (polyelectrolyte conditioners) Electro Floatation (EF) is one of the successful methods in different industrial applications to separate floatable materials and purify different kinds of solutions Various studies have been carried out on the thickening of activated sludge by making use of EF Previously studies The samples were taken from the disposed sludge of the secondary sedimentation tank in the poultry slaughterhouse wastewater treatment plant of Goshtavaran Company, Hamadan, Iran. Because of high production of activated sludge and lack of an adequate place for its disposal, the company needs better methods for management and thickening of the sludge. The fresh, acquired samples were transported to the laboratory at 4 The measurements of pH and conductivity were carried out with a lab pH-meter (Hach Co.) and a PHYWE type conductimeter, respectively. The color intensity of feed and permeate samples were analyzed by PerkinElmer Lambda 20 spectrophotometer. The method of open reflux was used to determine COD. TSS was measured using gravimetric. The residue of suspended solids was dried at 105 A schematic diagram of the continuous thickening of activated sludge plant is shown in For adjusting pH at 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, 5.0, 6.0, 7.0, 8.0, and 9.0 buffer solutions were used. All experiments were donned at 21 In a recent study by Chen et al. it has shown that the pH of the sludge influences the size of the micro-bubbles which are produced by water electrolysis Yong Goy Choy showed that there is no significant difference between the performance of expensive titanium-coated electrodes and stainless steel electrodes in activated sludge thickening and the effect of current density on micro-bubble production is much more than the kind of electrodes Regarding the effect of micro-bubbles’ size on thickening quality, greater removal of solid materials arises when the size of which is equal or greater than that of particles. The results concur with modeling simulations and show that collision efficiency is higher when the zeta potential of one is negative and the other is positive and when their sizes are alike The life time of the electrodes is one of the main factors in the size of the generated micro-bubbles. The reason of such effect is the increase of roughness at the electrode’s surface as the result of the sedimentation of magnesium hydroxide and calcium carbonate as well as the separation of some parts of electrode because of hydrogen ion production during water electrolysis. In a recent study, polarization changes have been applied to overcome this problem In addition to electrode’s material, another parameter which is important in the efficiency of the EF method is the size of the electrodes. The findings show that the amount of produced micro-bubbles is proportional to the electrode’s surface size. Therefore, the electrode’s surface should be raised as much as possible. In this research the electrodes’ surface was intensified as much as possible through increasing the number of electrodes to 5. For a given current density, the production of the micro-bubbles will increase as the surface of the electrodes (surface/volume ratio) is raised. The production of micro-bubbles more both mass transfer and micro-bulb production and consequently better solid removal in low applied current density will occur. In a recent study, the electrode surface of 75 Current density is one of the most important variables in water electrolysis. The more current density, the more micro-bubbles are generated which result in a better removal of the particles. The mechanism of water electrolysis and the production of micro-bubbles of O At the cathode: At the anode: As shown in There was a direct relationship between the current density and the removal of COD, TS, TSS, and color. At the current density of 12 The highest amount of SVR was acquired at optimized current density of 8 Water temperature is one of the most important environmental factors that might influence for activated sludge dewatering and thickening of poultry slaughterhouse wastewaters and hen-meat production in the EF. A very important point to make here is that it has not to date been studied, so it is necessary to examine the effect of water temperature on dewatering and thickening of activated sludge. Of course, the increase of temperature seems desirable because it raises reaction speed and can increase the electrical conductivity of the water; thus, the applied voltage and electrical energy consumed would be reduced. In spite advantage of increase of temperature, the effect of this variable between 20 and 50 The amount of solid materials in the separated cake in gravity methods was 3 The EF method with a continuous flow requires a proper cell design. Moreover, creation of a steady flow is crucial to prevent entrance of the separated cake to the flow. The removal proportion pertaining to the particles increases with the increase of both operating time and current density and it decreases with the increase of the sludge’s solid load. The use of continuous hydraulic flow and against to flocs’ thickening is an advantage because it is resulted in natural mix and an increase in effective contact between gas bubbles and flocs which improves floc floatation. Steady continuous flow is vital for stable efficiency. Thichnieng operation can be controlled through adjusting current density. That is, for sludge containing high solids, when current density goes up, more micro-bulbs are produced and the efficiency amount is maintained. Owing to the structure of extracellular polymeric substances (EPSs) of activated sludge, efficiency is better when other parameters are constant which is on account of complex network creation of flocs in high solids that electrogenerated micro-bulbs are easily trapped into this network and consequently the thickening is improved. Of course, in the present study the load of solids of produced sludge in the wastewater treatment plant ranged constantly between 5630 and 7250 In the separated water from the continuous thickening of the activated sludge, the amounts pertaining to COD, TS, TSS and color were 112, 1601, 140 The EF process has a very high efficiency in activated sludge thickening. The removal figures of the particles increased when both operating time and current density increased. In view of the fact that the only removal mechanism in this method is the flotation of sludge flocs through electro-generation of micro-bubbles, the surface of the electrodes and as well as the distance between them were raised, thus, by applying stainless steel, without adding chemicals, in addition to energy efficiency increase, SVR and SSC indexes were improved. A very important point to make here is that thickening through EF with continuous flow needs an appropriate cell design and creation of a steady flow is also necessary to prevent entering the separated cake into the flow. We are grateful to Hamadan University of Medical Sciences for providing Research materials, equipments and fund. This project received financial support from Vice Chancellorship for Research Affairs of UMSHA (Project No. 9004281666). In addition, the authors wish to thank Goshtavaran Company for providing activated sludge during the experiments.