Di(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) was fixed on the Amberlite XAD-1180 solid support by extractant impregnated resin technique (EIR). The quantity of the adsorbed extractant in the resin was in function of the polarity of the impregnation solvent. Thus, the optimal loading of the monomeric D2EHPA was 6g/g of dry resin using acetone as solvent. The kinetics measurements on the extraction of bismuth (III) ions from nitrate aqueous solution were conducted while varying the initial pH of aqueous solution, initial bismuth concentration, D2EHPA content in the Amberlite XAD-1180 resin, stirring speed and equilibrium time. The extraction yield of bismuth was determined at 98.5% equivalent to 490.7mg of Bi/g of resin, so the D2EHPA–Bi complex was suggested. Also, the complete regeneration of resin was realized in two stages in the presence of concentrate hydrochloric acid. The increase of the immersion aqueous volume, slightly decreases the sorption of Bi(III). The antagonistic effect on the sorption of Bi(III) was observed by adding sodium chloride. 33 factorial designs were employed for screening the factors that would influence the overall optimization of a batch procedure of sorption.Bismuth is used in the cosmetic products; e.g., for the preparation of creams and hair dyes, drugs manufacture; e.g., bismuth nitrate is used for treating intestinal disorders, and in other various applications ( Bismuth is a curious metal and can be toxic in an unsuitable form ( Conventional techniques of metal ions removal from environmental matrices include the following processes: precipitation, solvent extraction, ion exchange, adsorption, electrochemical recovery, membrane separation and other techniques that are currently the most widely used in treatment techniques ( The aim of this present work is to study the influence of experimental parameters on the kinetics of bismuth (III) extraction from nitrate solutions by SIR using the Amberlite XAD-1180 resin impregnated with D2EHPA as organophosphorus extractant, in order to know the best operating conditions of later selective extraction from other metals such as lead, copper and tin. The experimental values were used to determine the polynomial model constants which are adjusted to the studied parameter variations of bismuth (III) extraction. The Amberlite XAD-1180 resin is a polystyrene divinylbenzene copolymer support (the size of resin particles was 20 to 50 mesh; i.e., 250–710 Haier mechanical agitator with standard platform was used in extraction experiments. pH measurements were taken with a Consort C831 pH-meter using a combined electrode. The weighing was made with an electronic analytical balance; type Kern ABS. Kikawerke TC-2 hotplate agitator equipped with a standard thermocouple, was used for the realization of the temperature experiments. UV–visible absorption spectrophotometer; type Lambda 800 Perkin Elmer was used for the bismuth (III) analysis. Before impregnation, the XAD-1180 resin was washed with distilled water in order to remove inorganic impurities and monomeric material, then the resin was dried in the drying oven, at 40 The extraction experiments of bismuth (III) starting from aqueous solution of bismuth (III) nitrate, by the impure di(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) impregnated in XAD-1180 resin were carried out in batch system at 22 The aliquots of 10  The above-saturated concentration corresponds to 6 The previous results of the impregnation process study of Amberlite XAD-1180 resin showed that the quantity of the D2EHPA in the resin plays an important role in the bismuth (III) sorption. In order to investigate the effect of extractant concentration in the resin, this parameter was varied from 15.0 to 46.5 The pH is an important parameter in the study of the sorption kinetic and equilibrium. Its importance is discussed in terms of the metal form in the aqueous solution, as well as the functional group on the extractant. The studied pH range was taken below the precipitation of metals (pH From the results shown in The study of the equilibrium for bismuth (III) sorption from aqueous solutions by solvent impregnated XAD-1180 resin was carried out by taking account the results given in process evaluation of Amberlite XAD-1180 impregnation. In this context, three different SIR containing 15.0, 31.0 and 46.5 The maximum sorption capacity decreases with increasing extractant concentration in XAD-1180 resin, due to the destabilization of EIR during the extraction process. It varies from 490.7 to 466.4 The study of the influence of the initial concentration of bismuth (III) on the sorption kinetic shows that by increasing the initial concentration of bismuth (III) in aqueous solution from 100 to 250 The possibility of desorbing the metal from the loaded EIR is also an important criterion for the processes of a sorption system. The experiments of the adsorbed bismuth elution allow the later study of EIR recycling. From the investigations made in the study of Bi(III) sorption on SIR, we note that the bismuth loaded in the XAD-1180 resin in the form of D2HPA–Bi(III) complexes can be back-extracted in a concentrate acid medium. This is kinetically realized while moving the extraction reaction (Eq. The method of back-extraction of Bi(III) from loaded XAD-1180 resin consist in destabilizing of D2HPA–Bi(III) complexes by the addition of a concentrate stripping solution of hydrochloric acid. It's possible because of the extraction mode with organophosphorus acid ( The study of the influence of the aqueous phase volume on sorption was studied by immersing the resin by various volumes of the bismuth (III) aqueous solution. The concentration was maintained constant and equal to 250 The influence of the ionic strength of the aqueous phase on the bismuth (III) sorption, by the D2EHPA impregnated onto Amberlite XAD-1180, was controlled by the addition of various quantities of the sodium salt to the metal aqueous phase. From the results given in The experiments showed that, as expected, numerous factors can influence the bismuth (III) extraction but only some of them, namely the extractant in XAD-1180 resin, initial concentration of bismuth (III) and the pH value can be regarded as being the key-parameters that govern the process efficiency. An adequate selection of these parameters is an essential requirement for establishing an accurate polynomial model (Eq. In our investigations, a series of 27 attempts was made according to a 3 The results of the bismuth extraction process were expressed in terms of the extraction yield, regarding as being the response function in the investigated process. These results are summarized in The bismuth extraction modelling was achieved on the basis of the 27 measured values, using a Taylor's second-order polynomial ( The individual effects and interactions of the parameters were discussed on the basis of the sign and the absolute value of each coefficient. These coefficient features will define the strength of the corresponding effect involved and the way it acts upon extraction yield (favourable or detrimental), respectively. The first observations from high extracting capacity of the D2EHPA ought to be obtained within the fixed parameter ranges, thereby justifying the suitable choice of the limits; the effect of the D2EHPA/XAD resin ratio is three times stronger than pH, while the initial concentration of bismuth plays an important role within the investigated ranges; interaction between D2EHPA/XAD resin and the pH of bismuth aqueous solution which strongly governed the extraction except between D2EHPA/XAD resin ratio and pH, bismuth concentration and pH, all interactions are unfavourable; pronounced maximum with respect to D2EHPA/XAD resin and to a lesser extent to the pH of solution, will characterize the response surface, giving rise to precise optimal values of these parameters; no synergy must be involved simultaneously between the three parameters. These predictions are in agreement with the shape of the response surface ( For the sake of the model reproducibility, we must check whether this model accurately describes the process investigated by determining which coefficients could be neglected, through Student and Fisher tests ( In the current experiment, the main errors arise from volume and weight measurements. For this purpose, three additional attempts at the central point (0, 0, 0) are required for estimating the average error in the value of each coefficient, on the basis of the random variance. The calculations made are summarized in Thus, with a 95% of confidence (i.e., This model is supposed to accurately fit to the extraction process of bismuth (III) investigated herein. Thus in the vicinity of the expected optimal parameter values, it appears that only D2EHPA/XAD resin ratio and interactions between D2EHPA/XAD resin ratio and pH of aqueous solution are important effects on the Bi(III) extraction. In addition, adequacy tests were applied to check whether the model calculated is valid within the parameter ranges investigated. For this, while comparing the observed value of Fisher's factor (73.61) with the critical one, given by the tables of Fisher's and that equal to 6.60, it's noticed that the The investigations carried out on the sorption of Bi(III) from nitrate medium by impure D2EHPA, impregnated onto the Amberlite XAD-1180 showed that an optimal plateau value of the D2EHPA monomeric extractant loading is 6 In order to achieve the best conditions for Bi(III) extraction from nitrate aqueous solution by D2EHPA impregnated in XAD-1180 resin, a full 3 The authors thank the