Mechanical activation of three natural acidic igneous rocks, including granite, pumice, and perlite, was studied using a planetary mill. Positive effects of milling were demonstrated with respect to the compressive strength of mortars with the partial substitution of cement by mechanically activated acidic powders. A set of mortar specimens was made with 0%, 10%, 20%, and 30% activated powder replacement.
                  X-ray diffraction and mineralogy studies revealed that the initial granite consists of fully crystalline phases, while pumice and perlite contain not only amorphous but also crypto-crystalline phases. It was found that pumice and perlite rapidly lost their crystalline nature through milling, remaining in solely amorphous phases after 15min of milling, whereas granite maintained its crystalline nature even after 45min. Milling generates a larger specific surface area, much more remarkable for pumice than for granite and perlite, but due to reactive agglomeration, there was a limitation on the specific surface area of pumice. All three mechanically activated acidic powders had significant effects on strength development especially at the early ages of solidification. But in the long term their effects depended on material type and grinding condition. The greatest strength improvement was achieved by mechanically activating perlite for 30min, at 10% substitution in cement mix. Cement consumption can be reduced by up to 30% in weight using mechanically activated powders in cement mix while keeping the 28day compressive strength at a satisfactory level. In addition, ultrasonic pulsation of mechanically-activated perlite indicated that the specific surface area was mostly influential and available in the early stages of solidification, while structural changes appeared to be so at later stages of hardening.A wide range of cementitious binders and pozzolanic rock materials are blended with Portland cement because of their advantageous properties and economic benefits. Pozzolans are frequently used as an additive to Portland cement concrete mixtures to increase their long-term strength and durability to reduce the concrete's material costs in some cases by decreasing the cement consumption ( On the other hand, mechanical activation of solid substances is a component of modern scientific mechanochemistry disciplines ( In recent years, only volcanic fly ashes with high amounts of silica, typically pumice, have been widely used as pozzolan in the Iranian cement industry, while other types of acidic rock materials like perlite and granite have received little attention regardless of the existence of numerous resources, the chemical composition of which is almost the same as pumice. The objective of this paper is to investigate the effects of using mechanically activated acidic igneous powders in cement mix for producing modified mortar. In addition, the effects of ultrasonic pulsation on the reactivity of mechanically activated powders are explored. Mechanical activation was carried out by a planetary mill (Pulverisette P6, Fritsch, Germany) in an air atmosphere for 15, 30, and 45 The specific surface area of the samples was determined by the BET method using Quantochrom-3000 (Germany) instrument and the particle size distribution of the samples was measured by Laser diffraction in liquid mode, as shown in Thin sections of the samples were studied using a polarizing microscope Olympus BX (Netherlands), and their chemical analyses were determined by means of an atomic absorption instrument (Nova 300, Germany). The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were collected in a range of 2 Ultrasonic pulsation of the samples was performed using an Ultrasonic Pulse generation instrument (Sonopuls HD2200, Bandelin, Germany) for 5 For the mortar samples to be prepared, the cementitious mixes that were obtained in accordance with the procedure proposed by ASTM C311 were cast into a 5 Representative samples of perlite, granite, and pumice were supplied from the Mianeh Perlite Mine, Skandan Pumice Mine, and Azar Granite Quarry Plant, respectively. Representative samples of perlite and pumice were ground first using a jaw crusher and later using a ball mill in a closed circuit below 100 ASTM mesh size. The particle size distributions of the initial samples are shown in The particle density of these initial samples was measured through a pycnometer according to ASTM D 854, resulting in a density of 2.63, 2.38, and 2.22 XRD and mineralogical studies of the initial samples revealed a fully crystalline structure for granite, a semi-crystalline structure for pumice, and a fairly amorphous structure for the perlite sample. According to the mineralogical studies, mafic minerals make up 3–5% of the samples. In the perlite sample, only a small fraction of fine crystal mainly feldspar (albite) was identified. Minerals of albite (JCPDS 01–0649), oligoclase (JCPDS 02–0532), orthoclase (JCPDS 02–0475) and quartz (JCPDS 01–0649) were identified in the samples by applying XRD techniques, as shown in Three acidic powders were initially subjected to mechanical activation in a planetary mill for various periods and then employed to prepare mortar samples. Usually the compressive strength of a concrete is determined after 7 and 28 To elucidate structural changes during mechanical activation, XRD patterns of the samples were collected.  The comparison of the XRD patterns indicates that the degree of crystallinity in the samples governs their structural refinement and their resistance against milling, i.e. the higher degree of crystallinity, the smaller the structural distortion. A higher degree of crystallinity implies the least extended defects possible, such as stacking faults and dislocations in material structure; in other words, more crystallinity leads to more strength. A decrease in crystallite size during mechanical activation enhances the reactivity of material. The amorphous phase is normally regarded as the most reactive state for a material ( The specific surface area is a major factor affecting the rate of hydration during solidification, due to the fact that the hydration reaction occurs at the interface with water (   After mechanical activation of the samples, the mortar composition was modified by the replacement of 10, 20, and 30% of cement with non-activated and mechanically-activated materials. The compressive strength of samples after both 7 and 28-days of curing, which are the most significant characteristic periods of the process, was measured. The results were compared with OPC (Ordinary Portland Cement) as a mortar reference sample, which only consisted of cement, sand and water.  The compressive strength of the mortar samples after 28  The compressive strength of the mortar samples after 28 To evaluate the influence of the replacement amount, cube mortar samples (5  These findings are fairly consistent with the observations of The abovementioned results indicate that the production of fresh surface area during mechanical activation appears to be the most effective factor at early stages of solidification. In contrast, structural distortion seems to be the most effective factor for prolonged solidification strength. To make things clearer, mechanically-activated perlite underwent ultrasonic pulsation, and then, cubic mortar samples were cast using 20% dispersed powders. The results obtained are depicted in The results indicate that the specific surface area was the most influential factor at the early stages of hardening. In contrast, the structural changes appear to be the most effective factor at the later stages of the solidification process, which can be explained by the fact that once the chemical reactions have advanced to a sufficient level, the hardening takes place, the mortar mixture becomes more and more cohesive, and the role of specific surface area can be ignored. However, the role of bulk distortions, i.e. the amorphous components, remains active and subsequently contributes to the mortar strength development. This is in line with the remarks made by Based on the results obtained above, it can be concluded that: All three acidic rock materials underwent severe plastic deformation and structural refinement during intensive milling. This study demonstrates the capability of transforming acidic rock materials into chemically-reactive building materials by mechanical activation. Cementitious binders can be produced using mechanical activation of igneous acidic rock materials. The investigations revealed that in conventional mortars, the replacement of a certain portion by mechanically-activated acidic powders may be advantageous and ultimately can improve the compressive strength of mortar. The degree of crystallinity in the initial acidic samples appeared to have the most significant effect on the structural changes of materials during milling and the material reactivity, especially in the later stages of solidification. Mechanically activated perlite and pumice were identified as suitable additives into the cement, which are capable of reducing the cement consumption by 30% while preserving the ultimate compressive strength at the OPC reference level. The effects of mechanical activation on compressive strength development were higher for 10 and 20% replacements than 30% replacement in the cement mix. The BET specific surface area appeared to be more effective than the amorphous material with 10 and 20% replacements in the early stages of hardening, while the amount of amorphous material became more effective than the BET specific surface area with 30% replacement at the later stages of solidification. The authors wish to thank the