Amorphous silica is an abundant gangue mineral in ore deposits, but its effect on mineral flotation is unknown. In this study, the effect of amorphous silica on pulp rheology and chalcopyrite flotation was investigated. It was found that the presence of amorphous silica increased the pulp viscosity more significantly than quartz especially at a high percentage of solids. This is due to the formation of network structures of amorphous silica particles driven by hydrogen bonds between silanol (SiOH) groups on adjacent silica units. Flotation tests were conducted using mixtures of chalcopyrite, quartz and amorphous silica. The copper recovery was not affected when the percentage of amorphous silica was less than 30vol%. However, it started to decrease significantly after the percentage of amorphous silica was further increased, which was caused by the significantly increased pulp viscosity. Although a low percentage of amorphous silica had little influence on copper recovery, it caused a significant increase in mass recovery, leading to the decreased copper grade. This was found to be due to the increased entrainment of gangue minerals resulting from the low particle density of amorphous silica and the network structures formed by amorphous silica particles.Silica (SiO In other industries, such as paints and coatings, amorphous silica is well known for its ability to enhance the viscosity of organic media ( A number of studies have indicated a strong relationship between flotation performance and pulp rheological property ( Another important property of amorphous silica is its low particle density compared to quartz due to the lack of crystalline structures ( The presence of amorphous silica in ore deposits may have a significant influence on mineral flotation through the modification of slurry rheology and gangue entrainment. However, up to date, there is no report on the effect of amorphous silica on flotation. In this study, a synthetic ore with the mixture of quartz, amorphous silica and chalcopyrite was used to study its rheological behaviour and corresponding flotation performance. Natural quartz was obtained from Geo Discoveries Australia in a crystalline form with 97% purity. It was pulverized and wet sieved to collect only size fractions between 38 µm and 75 µm. Laboratory grade amorphous silica particles were obtained from Scharlau and were sieved to collect the same size fractions between 38 µm and 75 µm. The density of quartz and amorphous silica particles was manually measured. A known mass of particles and a known mass of water were thoroughly mixed and then the total volume of mixed slurry was measured using a measuring cylinder. The particle density was calculated by dividing the mass of particles by the volume of particles which was obtained by deducting the volume of water from the total slurry volume. Using this method, the measured density of quartz and amorphous silica particles is 2.65 Pure chalcopyrite was obtained from Geo Discoveries, Australia, in a rock form. It was crushed through a jaw crusher and then a roll crusher, and then screened to collect −2.35 mm +0.71 mm particle size fractions. Prior to each flotation test, 15 Rheology measurements were conducted using a Discovery HR-1 rheometer (TA Instruments Ltd., U.S.). All tests were conducted with a vane geometry with a 30.36 mm diameter cup and 28.00 mm diameter vane. For each test, 35 mL prepared suspension was taken with a syringe while the suspension was mixed with a magnetic stirrer and poured into the cup and the vane lowered until the gap between the cup and the vane was 6 mm. The rheometer was operated in a strain-controlled mode where the shear rate was fixed and the required torque (shear stress) was the value being measured. The shear rate range chosen was 0.1–100 In order to examine the effect of amorphous silica on flotation, synthetic ore containing chalcopyrite and different ratios of amorphous silica and quartz were prepared. The solids concentration was fixed at 20 Industrial grade potassium amyl xanthate (PAX) was used as collector. Huntsman’s POLYFROTH W22 which is polyoxyalkylene alkyl ether was used as frother in this study. During flotation, four concentrates were collected after the cumulative time of 1, 3, 6 and 10 In a real ore, amorphous silica usually co-occurs with quartz and the ratio between them varies significantly within different deposits. To achieve a comprehensive understanding of the effect of amorphous silica on pulp rheology, the rheology measurements in this study were conducted in three systems: amorphous silica, quartz, and the mixture of amorphous silica and quartz. The rheological behaviour of amorphous silica and quartz in water at different solids concentrations was measured firstly. To further understand the rheological behaviour of amorphous silica in a real ore system, synthetic mixtures of quartz and amorphous silica at 20 The effects of amorphous silica on copper flotation were investigated by conducting flotation tests using the mixture of chalcopyrite with various amounts of quartz and amorphous silica. The solids concentration in all the flotation tests was kept at 20  In general, the flotation results show that copper flotation was significantly affected by the presence of amorphous silica, and the influences were different at a low percentage of amorphous silica and a high percentage of amorphous silica. The mechanisms behind these different flotation behaviours were discussed in the following sections. As discussed in Section  Another factor which may affect copper flotation is the coating of fine gangue particles on chalcopyrite surfaces, however, this factor was unlikely to occur in this study since both chalcopyrite and silica are negatively charged at pH 9, which makes the coating difficult to occur due to electrostatic repulsion. A similar correlation between mass recovery and apparent viscosity as a function of the percentage of amorphous silica was also observed as shown in Both quartz and amorphous silica used in this study are liberated and hydrophilic, and therefore can only be recovered by mechanical entrainment. To determine the effect of amorphous silica on mechanical entrainment, the degree of entrainment (ENT) was calculated using Eq. (1) ( Fig. shows the ENT value in the flotation as a function of the percentage of amorphous silica. The ENT was 0.24 when quartz was the only gangue mineral. It increased to 0.31 in the presence of 15 Factors influencing the degree of entrainment can be generally classified into flotation operating conditions and particle properties. In this study, flotation operating conditions including impeller speed and gas flow rate were kept the same in all the tests. The only difference among different tests is the ratio between amorphous silica and quartz. Although amorphous silica and quartz share the same chemical composition, their degrees of crystallization are quite different, which leads to different particle properties. The first difference between amorphous silica and quartz is particle density. The particle density of quartz is 2.65 Assuming that the degree of entrainment of quartz remained the same in flotation when the percentage of amorphous silica increased up to 30  Amorphous silica significantly increased the pulp viscosity after its solids concentration reached a critical point. In comparison, quartz showed a significantly lower viscosity at the same solids concentration. The rheological difference between the two minerals was related to their different degrees of crystallization and surface properties. Flotation tests revealed that the copper recovery remained high when the percentage of amorphous silica was lower than 30 When the percentage of amorphous silica was below 30 The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of this work from the