Characterization of the vertical distribution of geochemical element concentration is essential for economic planning in the mining industry. 10 mineralized boreholes and 1 non-mineralized borehole from the Qulong copper deposit, Tibet, western China, were collected to identify the vertical distribution properties of Cu values using fractal models. The vertical distribution of Cu values in mineralized and non-mineralized boreholes shows a positive skewed distribution in the former and multimodal distribution in the latter. The results obtained by the box counting method show that the vertical distributions of Cu values in mineralized and non-mineralized boreholes exhibit self-similarity with box dimensions ranging from 1.28 to 1.37. The box dimensions of mineralized boreholes are greater than that of Cu values in the non-mineralized borehole, indicating that the mineralization makes the distribution of Cu values more irregular. The power-law frequency analysis reveals that Cu values in mineralized boreholes are bifractal. The two portions of the plot define a crossover point at 0.33%, for Cu values less than and greater than 0.33, fractal dimensions range from 0.1 to 0.65, in non-mineralized rocks, and range from 2.71 to 5.79, in the mineralized rocks. Hurst exponents for mineralized boreholes occur at 0.8, which are greater than 0.5, indicating that Qulong copper deposit has a good continuity of mineralization.Characterization of the distribution of geochemical elements in boreholes is of significance to evaluate the quality and quantity of mineral resources in the mining industry. In the past several decades, the nature of the distributions of geochemical elements in rocks has been intensively studied in order to discover a universal geochemical law. A fractal is defined as a set in which the Hausdorff dimension strictly exceeds the topological dimension ( Box counting is one of most popular methods to estimate the fractal dimensions. It can be used for measurement of the irregularity of patterns, and can be implemented with the aid of GIS. A group of grids with box size “δ” were used to cover the concentration curve vector layers, and these grids were used for counting the corresponding number of grey boxes ( It can be rewritten as The power-law frequency model was used to measure the frequency distribution of element concentration. This model has been demonstrated by many studies ( It also can be rewritten as The Hurst Exponent proposed by The rescaled range statistic (R/S) analysis can be used to estimate the Hurst exponent ( Determine the mean, Determine the standard deviation, Normalize the data ( Use the normalized data creating a cumulative series by consecutively summing the data points: Use the new cumulative series to find the range by subtracting the minimum value from the maximum value: Rescale the range, Calculate the mean of the rescaled range for all sub-series of length The length of Finally, the value of H is estimated from the slope of the regression line with log ( The study area, Qulong Copper Deposit, is a large porphyry copper deposit in the Gangdese porphyry copper belt, located approximately 110 km southeast of Lhasa, the capital city of Xizang (Tibet), western China. A simplified geological map is shown in The property of frequency distributions of element concentration are usually evaluated in histograms that display arbitrarily chosen, linearly scaled concentration intervals on the abscissa and the frequency of individual analyses whose results fall in a particular class interval on the ordinate. The histograms ( The box dimensions can be obtained from the line graphs of Cu ( The results obtained by the power-law frequency model for mineralized boreholes are shown in Larger fractal dimensions of mineralization imply more homogeneous mineralization. It can be explained that fractal dimensions are estimated from the frequency of Cu values and can reflect the proportion of Cu values. Larger fractal dimension implies less numbers of Cu values greater than a specific Cu value. It means that the Cu value change slowly along the borehole, indicating more homogeneous mineralization. The coefficient of variation (CV), which is equal to the standard deviation divided by the average, identifies the degree of change. In the case of approximate average of Cu value, a low CV implies elemental concentrations changing slightly along the borehole. In other words, it means more homogeneous mineralization. Therefore, the fractal dimensions of mineralization are inversely related to CV. On the other hand, The results obtained by Hurst exponents using R/S for 10 mineralized boreholes are shown in The continuity of mineralization is a key issue in potential mineral resources assessment for a given deposit. It can be recognized by characterizing the vertical distribution of geochemical concentration values in borehole datasets. In this paper, three fractal dimensions, including box dimension, power-law frequency and Hurst exponent, are used to investigate the irregularity and the continuity of Cu mineralization. The following results are obtained: The vertical distribution of Cu values in mineralized and non-mineralized boreholes show self-similarity with box dimensions ranging from 1.28 to 1.37. The box dimensions for mineralized boreholes are greater than that of Cu values in non-mineralized borehole, indicating that the mineralization process makes the distribution of Cu values more irregular. The vertical distribution of Cu values in mineralized and non-mineralized boreholes has different characteristics: the former satisfies a positive skewed distribution and exhibits bifractal; while the latter satisfies a multimodal distribution. Hurst exponents for mineralized boreholes are about 0.8, indicating that Qulong has a good continuous mineralization. The authors would like to thank two anonymous