The sawing machine vibration is a major factor to evaluate and predict the sawing performance. A few increases in sawing machine vibration cause a significant increase in the maintenance cost, which is important, because it determines the production cost. Hence, the purpose of this study is to investigate the sawing machine vibration based on rock characteristics using stochastic techniques, namely genetic algorithm (GA) and differential evolution (DE). Additionally, 12 types of rocks, including Granite, Marble and Travertine were collected and studied and laboratory tests were conducted based on physical and mechanical properties for evaluating sawing machine vibration from Iranian quarries. The results showed that the applied metaheuristic algorithms such as stochastic approaches can be very suitable to classify the ornamental stone into 2 and 3 separate categories based on vibration level by only some important physical and mechanical properties including uniaxial compressive strength, Schmiazek F-abrasivity, Mohs hardness, and Young's modulus. Although, it has been found that there is no significant difference between the two algorithms, genetic algorithm modeling is more reliable than differential evolution based on the cost function. Finally, such studies can be used by engineers to optimize the ornamental stone sawing process.System vibration is a very significant measure of the sawing performance, because it indicates the amount of sawing energy consumption and maintenance cost. The maintenance cost of the system is directly dependent on system vibration. The system vibration can be significantly dependent on tangential and normal forces per diamond grain. These forces are changed by changing the physical and mechanical properties of rock and operational parameters. So, it is important to study the relationship between sawing vibration with rock and machine parameters. Up to now, many studies have been done on the influence of the rock properties on the sawing performance, which are shown in The percentages of some important physical and mechanical properties of rock are shown in Nowadays, significant advances in the field of soft computing and data analysis have optimally solved complex problems in various fields of science using computational models inspired by nature, including metaheuristic algorithms. Metaheuristic algorithms created a population structure which is inspired by nature and is developed according to their rules This study is conducted in two main sections. In the first section, field and laboratory studies are carried out to produce statistical data. In the next section, soft computing is performed to predict the cutting performance of sawing machine. Flowchart of this study is illustrated in In this study, 12 dimension stones from Iranian famous quarries are investigated. The location of studied quarries are given in Samples of stones, which have been studied, were collected from these quarries and transferred to laboratory. Four major parameters were chosen for assessing the rock sawability. These parameters are listed as follows: Uniaxial Compressive Strength (UCS) Schmiazek F-abrasivity factor (SF-a) Mohs Hardness (MH) Young’s Modulus (YM) For laboratory tests, an attempt was made to collect rock samples that were big enough to obtain all of the test specimens of each rock type from the same piece. Each block sample was inspected for macroscopic defects so that it would provide test specimens free from fractures, partings or alteration zones. Then, test samples were prepared from these block samples and standard tests have been completed to measure the above-mentioned parameters following the suggested procedures by the ISRM standards The mean hardness of each dimension stone is calculated based on the hardness of contained minerals using the following equation: As a final test, the tangent Young’s modulus at a stress level equal to 50% of the ultimate uniaxial compressive strength is used in this study. The results of laboratory studies are listed in There are several evolutionary methods. Genetic algorithm is one of the most popular optimization techniques in evolutionary methods, which John Holland and his colleagues had developed and expanded during two decades since 1960. Studies on genetic algorithm after investigation on artificial neural networks began and developed. In fact, both of these methods are based on the biological systems of the human body and they are inspired by them in the analysis of issues. Thus, GA is considered one of the most perfect solutions for solving many complex and uncertain problems One of the most comprehensive and most useful evolutionary methods is differential evolution algorithm. It has been proposed for solving the continuous value problems by Storn & Price in 1995 and it ranked first in the first International Competition of IEEE evolutionary approaches In contrast to other, evolutionary algorithms, first, the mutation operator generates temporary responses and then it generates the new responses with crossover operator. In crossover, the parent vector ( Metaheuristic algorithms have various applications for optimization. One of their most important and most effective features is optimization of the data clustering. Hence, the objective function is formed for fitness of the initial generation with the aim of maximizing the distance of the centers of clusters from each other and minimizing the distance of the members of a cluster. A clustering method is the loyd's Algorithm, which is considered one of the Heuristic methods In Eq. For the genetic algorithm and differential evolution algorithm, pseudo code is written in Matlab. After the initial analysis and the previous studies, some limitations should be considered which include minimum acceptance precision, ε The cost function in GA algorithm compared to DE has difference with the values: 2.3126 and 2.3127, respectively. However, note that calculations of GA stop at the 161th iteration and have less time than calculations of DE. As a result, Genetic algorithm is preferable to Differential evolution, although the results of DE are reliable and reasonable in this clustering. Furthermore, clustering of samples and distance of clusters’ centers from criteria are given in In clustering with 2 clusters, the optimum partitions are closed together as shown on In the next step, samples are evaluated and classified in 3 clusters. Their results have been shown in  According to the values of Predicting the system vibration is very important factor in rock sawing process, because it affects the production cost. A few increases in sawing machine vibration cause a significant increase in the maintenance cost. In this section, it was aimed to evaluate the applied algorithms and their classifications to predict the system vibration in rock sawing process. To achieve this purpose experimental procedure was carried out on a variety of two groups of dimension stones including 7 carbonate rocks and 5 granite rocks at different feed rate (100, 200, 300 and 400 cm/min) and depth of cut (35, 30, 22 and 15 mm) using a fully-instrumented laboratory sawing rig. The rig was based on a commercially available machine and was capable of simulating realistic sawing conditions. It consists of three major sub-systems, a sawing unit, instrumentation and a personal computer. Sawing tests were performed on a small side-cutting machine, with a maximum spindle motor power of 7.5 kW. Sawing parameters such as feed rate and depth of cut were controlled in the monitoring system. The circular diamond saw blade used in the present tests had a diameter of 410 mm and a steel core of thickness 2.7 mm. 28 pieces of diamond impregnated segments (size 40 × 10×3 mm) were brazed to the periphery of circular steel core with a standard narrow radial slot. The grit sizes of the diamond for carbonate rocks were approximately 30/40 US mesh at 25 and 30 concentrations and for granite rocks were approximately 40/50 US mesh at 30 and 40 concentrations. During the sawing trials, water was used as the flushing and cooling medium. The acceleration signal was acquired along the whole cut. For monitoring the vibration in stone sawing, an adopted sensor system was designed ( This system is made up of the data acquisition program to sample out from sensor and the judgment program to show the monitoring state on screen. An accelerometer (ADXL105-3) for measuring the acceleration of work piece was used ( After the signal is stored, a feature extraction program in Labview analyses the data. RMS feature has been extracted for the acceleration signals. The RMS value of a function x(t) over an interval of T is equal to Eq The RMSaz of studied rocks at different feed rates and depth of cuts and rock classifications by 2 and 3 classes are shown in As given in As mentioned before, the aim of the present study is to propose optimized clustering models for evaluating sawing machine vibration based on metaheuristic algorithms. For this aim, two stochastic techniques, namely genetic algorithm (GA) and differential evolution (DE) algorithm were developed to classify and evaluate sawing machine vibration. During this study, laboratory tests on the database of 12 different varieties of dimension stones from Iranian mines are conducted and four rock characteristics are determined. Then, the laboratory results were classified into two and three separate categories. Finally, the results of optimization clustering process are shown in From these optimized clustering and the related analysis it can be observed that according to the analysis with 2 categories using GA and DE algorithms, laboratory test results are classified into two groups: hard rocks and soft rocks, and the results of clustering were the same in both algorithms. All of Granite samples as hard rocks were in the first group and Marble and Travertine samples as soft rocks were in the second class. In the second analysis by these two algorithms, laboratory test results are classified in three groups, the results of clustering were the same in both algorithms, too. All of Granite samples as hard rocks were in the first group except White Granite (WG) of Nehbandan mine, which was in the second class based on their physical and mechanical properties. Also, all Marble and Travertine as soft rocks samples were in the third class. It is worth mentioning that both algorithms were highly capable to identify hard and soft rocks from each other. However, in clustering with 2 and 3 classes, although, it has been found that there is no striking difference between two techniques, compared with two Meta-heuristic algorithms, according to As mentioned before, in clustering with two clusters, algorithms had identified and determined a difference between hard rocks and soft rocks with highly acceptable degrees of accuracy. Also, according to Finally, factories and mines cannot ignore the role of system vibration for increased efficiency and productivity. In fact, the increased sawing machine vibration can lead to a significant climb in the maintenance cost, which is matter of concern. Hence, this study shows that these approaches can be applied as a powerful tool for modeling more accurate and precise laboratory tests, which result in a decrease in the production cost. Evaluating the system vibration plays a key role in the rock sawing process, it roots in the fact that it affects the production cost. Due to the ambiguity and uncertainty existed in the evaluating of rock sawing process, Meta-heuristic algorithms have been proposed for predicting the system vibration. In fact, the Meta-heuristic algorithms as the stochastic optimization techniques can be easily adapted to a wide variety of engineering complex problems. In this study, the genetic algorithm and differential evolution algorithm were used to survey and classify dimension stones based on four physical and mechanical properties including uniaxial compressive strength, Schmiazek F-abrasivity, Mohs hardness, and Young's modulus. For this purpose, 12 cutting test results of 12 different rocks were used from Granite, Marble and Travertine quarries located in twelve areas in Iran. In fact, this paper attempted to show the capability of GA and DE algorithms for solving the optimal classification of rock and investigating the vibration of circular saw machine. Also, this study shows that these algorithms are very suitable for optimization in low vibration. Therefore, these models are suitable and powerful tools for investigation of the sawing machine vibration based on rock characteristics, which is very notable in the cost estimation and the planning of factories. In future research, evaluation of optimal clustering of sawing machine vibration can also be investigated and improved using self-organizing map (SOM) algorithm and other kinds of Meta-heuristic algorithms such as Particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm, Harmony Search (HS) and grey wolf optimizer (GWO). The Authors would like to say the special thanks to the Urmia University of Technology, University of Birjand, Rasht and Astara Islamic Azad Universities for providing data. We would like to express our deepest thanks to Professor Mahdi Ghaem for his excellent advice. The financial support by University of Birjand is also grateful.