Fault zones cutting limestones and dolostones represent significant seismogenic sources worldwide. The structure of an exhumed strike-slip fault zone hosted in dolostones, the Borcola Pass Fault Zone (BPFZ, Italian Southern Alps), was studied by means of field and microstructural analysis. Ambient conditions of faulting were ca. 1.6–1.7 km and 50 °C. The BPFZ consists of a >80 m wide damage zone cut by three systems of sub-vertical secondary faults striking approximately N–S, E–W and NW–SE. N–S and E–W striking faults reactivated pre-existing Jurassic-Paleogene joints with spacing between 0.2 and 0.5 m, whereas NW–SE striking faults were newly formed during post-Paleogene activity associated with movements along the nearby Schio–Vicenza Line. The core of the BPFZ consists of dolostone fault rock lenses bound by slip zones up to 10 cm thick. Both the principal and secondary slip zones consist of cement-supported dolomitic cataclasites and dolomite-filled veins. Some slip zones contain a sub-centimeter thick “vein-like” cataclastic layer (Layer-A) located immediately beneath the slip surface that truncates another cataclasite below (Layer-B). Detailed microstructural and clast size distribution analysis suggests that Layer-A experienced fluidization (cuspate-lobate boundaries, injection structures, strong grain sorting: D < 1 for clast diameters smaller than 300 μm) possibly related to fast fault slip following seismic ruptures. In light of these observations a conceptual model is proposed for the formation of Layer-A, and the structure of the BPFZ is compared to that of an active seismogenic fault cutting carbonates.Fault zones cutting limestones and dolostones represent significant seismogenic sources in several areas worldwide, including Italy (e.g. Friuli (Italian Fore-Alps) earthquake, 1976, The seismogenic behavior of a fault depends greatly on fault zone internal structure and fault rock constitutive properties (e.g. Earthquakes occur because rock strength (and friction) decreases with increasing slip and slip rate ( Microstructural and mineralogical characterization of carbonate-bearing fault cores and slip zones may lead to the recognition of particular microstructures formed during the seismic cycle. For example, In this paper we describe the macro- to micro-scale internal structure of an exhumed fault zone hosted in dolomitic rocks, the Borcola Pass Fault Zone (BPFZ). The fault zone outcrops in the western Venetian Fore-Alps (northern Italy) as an important branch of the regional-scale Schio–Vicenza Line, and cuts both sedimentary dolostones and dolomitic marbles. Remote sensing data are combined with field and microstructural analyses to document the fault zone structure and the role of pre-existing anisotropies. Although several previous studies have focused on fault zone structure in carbonate sequences (e.g. The eastern Southern Alps of Italy are a SSE-vergent fold and thrust belt delimited to the west by the NNE–SSW-trending Giudicarie Belt and the relatively undeformed foreland block of the Lessini Mountains, and to the east by the NW–SE-trending Idria and Ravne Lines ( The regional geometry of the thrust sheets is controlled to a large extent by NNW–SSE to NNE–SSW-trending Early Permian to Triassic and Jurassic normal faults. These pre-existing normal faults experienced extensional or oblique-extensional reactivation during the Mesozoic and Paleogene until their last dominant strike-slip movement or inversion during the Neoalpine (Miocene) orogenic phase ( The BPFZ outcrops within three quarries close to the highest point of the Borcola Pass (1207 m a.s.l.) ( Significant clustering of earthquakes related to activity along the Schio–Vicenza system occurs in the Lessini Mountains and in the Mount Pasubio area, close to the BPFZ ( Remote sensing analysis using orthorectified photomosaics, Google Earth images and digital surface models was used to characterize the regional-scale pattern of tectonic lineaments associated with the Schio–Vicenza Line, focusing on the Borcola Pass area (analyzed zone: 6–7 km wide, ca. 10 km long) ( The Schio–Vicenza Line displays a segmented geometry. From Posina to the Borcola Pass, the Schio–Vicenza Line is easily recognizable and shows good continuity, whereas from the Borcola Pass northwards only isolated fault segments could be identified ( Surrounding the trace of the Schio–Vicenza Line is a regionally-significant network of lineaments that reach a maximum density within the Upper Posina Valley ( The BPFZ is exposed in the Upper Terragnolo Valley within an abandoned quarry (1146 m a.s.l. and about 1000 m north of the Borcola Pass) which offers three dimensional exposures of the fault zone structure. The quarry contains several sub-parallel, N–S striking faults as well as arrays of secondary faults and veins described below. The most well exposed N–S-trending fault in the quarry is here defined as the Borcola Pass Fault ( Structural characterization and systematic sample collection ( The ca. N–S striking Borcola Pass Fault runs through the middle of the quarry, and on its eastern side has a ca. 4 m wide gully with no exposure. Profiles B and C were carried out on either side of the gully, and together represent an 81 m long transect across the damage zone of the Borcola Pass Fault ( The Borcola Pass Fault cuts two different host rocks in the quarry, crystalline dolostones of the Dolomia Principale (DP) formation in the upper 10 m of the quarry, and, in the lower 10 m of the quarry, dolomitic marbles generated by contact metamorphism of the DP during intrusion of Paleogene basaltic sills and dykes ( The fault surface is surrounded by a centimeter- to meter-thick fault core which itself is surrounded by a tens of meter wide damage zone cut by secondary fault strands. Both of these components are described separately in Sections Significant changes in both fault core thickness and fault geometry were noted passing from the dolomitic marbles to the dolostones. Within the dolomitic marbles the fault core consists of a thin (<1–2 cm) cataclastic layer cut by the principal fault ( Dolomitic marbles adjacent to the Borcola Pass Fault are cut by two sets of sub-vertical hybrid fractures filled by different generations of dolomite cement: 1) an older NE–SW oriented set consisting of veins <100 μm thick are consistently cross-cut by; 2) a NW–SE oriented set consisting of 100 μm–1 mm thick hybrid fractures characterized by steps and rhomb-shaped pull-apart structures ( The width of the damage zone of the Borcola Pass Fault exceeds the total length of profiles B and C (81 m, see The N–S oriented system of secondary fractures (Strike: N20W–N21E; Dip Azimuth: N240E–N291E; Dip Angle: 72–90) (red cyclographic traces in The E–W oriented system of secondary fractures (Strike: N70E–N122E; Dip Azimuth: N340E–N28E, N175E–N190E; Dip Angle: 72–90) (gray cyclographic traces in The NW–SE oriented secondary fractures (Strike: N125E–N162E; Dip Azimuth: N215E–N252E, N61E–N70E; Dip Angle: 60–90) (blue cyclographic traces in Microstructural observations of slip zones were carried out on polished thin sections cut perpendicular to the fault slip surfaces and both parallel and perpendicular to fault lineations using optical microscopy (OM, Department of Geosciences, Padova), field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, INGV, Rome) and optical cathodoluminescence microscopy (OM-CL, Joseph Fourier university, Grenoble). Mineral composition of the slip zones was determined by semi-quantitative X-ray powder diffraction analysis (XRPD, Department of Geosciences, Padova). We refer to both the Access to quarry exposures was limited in places due to the steep topography. Because of this, we collected samples from the slip zone of the main Borcola Pass Fault only within dolomitic marbles in the lower 10 m of the quarry. Instead, slip zones of secondary faults in the damage zone were sampled only within dolostones: in dolomitic marbles the secondary faults were typically sharp and lacked well-developed fault rock materials. Below, we first describe the slip zone of the Borcola Pass Fault where it cuts dolomitic marbles. We then describe the slip zones of secondary faults where they cross-cut dolostones. The slip zone of the Borcola Pass Fault typically consists of a <1–2 cm thick protocataclastic to cataclastic layer cross-cut by the slip surface itself (Borcola Pass Fault surface; The slip zone contains sub-vertical shear fractures in some cases oriented ∼15–20° to the slip surface. The shear fractures have millimeter-scale displacements and a left-lateral shear sense, consistent with an origin as synthetic Riedel shears ( The slip zones of secondary faults are typically 5–8 cm thick and consist of dolomite cement-supported cataclasites with <2% Mg-rich calcite (XRPD analysis) occurring as a late vein infill ( The most striking microstructure of the secondary slip zones is a sub-centimeter to centimeter-thick “vein-like” cataclastic layer immediately beneath the slip surface (defined here as Layer-A: Figs. Layer-A consists of a whitish cement-rich layer with a maximum thickness of 1.5 cm containing isolated clasts of dolostone (micritic or microsparry dolomite clasts or polymict clasts) with diameter < 2.5 mm ( In some cases the exposed slip surface (slip surface 1) is not in direct contact with Layer-A but is separated from Layer-A by a 2–5 mm thick texturally distinct ultracataclasite ( In three dimensions Layer-A displays a complex geometry ( Clasts within Layer-A are suspended within a zoned dolomite cement consisting of polygonal (rhombohedral) crystals with an average size of 30–40 μm ( Several veins (V1 and V2 in Two-dimensional clast size distributions (CSDs) of two samples taken from secondary slip zones (ST13 and ST18) ( The CSDs of sample ST13-Layer-B (blue curve in In contrast the CSD of the vein-like cataclastic layer in sample ST13-Layer-A (red curve in Several studies in recent years have documented that faulting in carbonates is strongly controlled by pre-existing anisotropies within the host rock such as bedding surfaces, veins, pressure solution seams and joints (e.g. Within the >80 m wide BPFZ field observations suggest that N–S- and E–W-trending secondary faults reactivated pre-existing Jurassic-Paleogene joints and normal faults. The N–S- and E–W-trending faults were commonly intruded by Paleogene basaltic dykes. The strike of the Borcola Pass Fault itself is approximately N–S, and thus we suggest that it represents an inherited Jurassic-Paleogene structure reactivated during post-Paleogene movements along the Schio–Vicenza Line. On the other hand, NW–SE-trending secondary faults that broadly parallel the Schio–Vicenza Line cross-cut Paleogene basaltic intrusions and represent faults that were newly formed during movements along the Schio–Vicenza Line. In addition to the presence of pre-existing anisotropies, the structure of the BPFZ is strongly influenced by host rock lithology. The BPFZ cuts two dolomitic protoliths, dolostone and dolomitic marble. Significant changes in both slip zone thickness and deformation intensity were noted passing from the dolostone to the dolomitic marble. Indeed the principal as well as secondary slip zones in dolostone consist of cataclastic and ultracataclastic slip zones up to 10 cm thick, whereas in dolomitic marble the slip zones are protocataclastic to cataclastic and <1–2 cm thick. We suggest that such differences in slip zone thickness result from the likely higher shear strength and increased stiffness of the dolomitic marble. Further characterization of the mechanical properties of the two different host rocks is required to better constrain this interpretation. Field and microstructural observations (see Sections The slip zones studied here are estimated to be exhumed from a depth of ca. 1.6–1.7 km, corresponding to the thickness of the pre-Miocene sedimentary overburden in the area ( The slip zones cutting dolostones typically consist of cement-supported cataclasites together with abundant dolomite veins, suggesting fluid flow along the faults. Clasts are sub-angular and fragmented by bulk extensional fracturing and comminution. Toward the slip surfaces grain size reduction leads to the formation of ultracataclasites that are cut by Riedel shears. The most characteristic microstructure of the secondary slip zones is the vein-like cataclastic Layer-A, sometimes separated from the slip surface by a 2–5 mm thick texturally distinct ultracataclasite containing multiple sub-layers. Image analysis demonstrates that Layer-A largely lacks clasts <300 μm in size, resulting in Clast size segregation is reported in literature for both natural and experimental fault gouges as an indicator of coseismic fluidization (e.g. Several microstructural observations suggest that Layer-A and the ultracataclastic sub-layers adjacent to secondary slip surfaces experienced fluidization: Layer-A displays intrusive relationships with Layer-B ( The upper boundary of Layer-A has a cuspate-lobate geometry, with the cusps directed downwards toward Layer-A. Together with the observation that the ultracataclastic sub-layers display significant thickness variations both parallel and perpendicular to the fault slip direction, this suggests that both Layer-A and the ultracataclastic sub-layers were characterized by viscous behavior, with a lower viscosity for the ultracataclastic sub-layers ( Layer-A contains clasts that are entirely surrounded by dolomite cement. Although this may partly be an effect of two-dimensional sections, it is rare to find touching clasts in Layer-A either in sections parallel or perpendicular to fault slip, and thus they appear to be isolated from one another ( Several veins depart from Layer-A in to Layer-B exploiting previous structures such as Riedel shears. The veins are thicker at the boundary with Layer-A and terminate downwards in to Layer-B, suggesting that they are related to build-ups of fluid pressure within Layer-A. Additionally, OM-CL images indicate that fragmented clasts of dolostone and dolomite crystals were transported from Layer-A in to the veins, and that the veins were subsequently filled by dolomite and later Mg-calcite cements ( Several examples of “fluidized” fault rocks associated with protrusions or injections of one fault rock material into another have been described in different tectonic settings from the field ( We suggest two different hypotheses to account for fluidization of both Layer-A and the ultracataclastic sub-layers within the BPFZ: 1) focussed fluid flow within the slip zones following earthquake rupture (e.g. fault-valve mechanism of Following the first hypothesis slip zones within the BPFZ would have acted as relatively impermeable seals transiently broken by earthquake ruptures ( The second hypothesis invokes thermal pressurization within the slip zones during seismic slip. Thermal pressurization describes an abrupt increase of fluid pressure induced by frictional heating resulting in expansion of pore fluids ( The two hypotheses for triggering fluidization in the studied slip zones imply different origins for the fluid phases (i.e. from local or external sources) and different mechanisms of achieving fluid overpressures. Discerning between the two mechanisms is not possible using only microstructural and mineralogical data from the slip zones, and useful constraints will arise from geochemical analysis of the vein and cement phases (e.g. stable isotope analyses of carbon and oxygen). Nevertheless, some considerations can be made concerning fluidization and crystallization processes within Layer-A, and below we describe our favored conceptual model accounting for the development of Layer-A. The matrix of Layer-A consists of a dolomitic cement with an average crystal size of 30–40 μm. The dolomite crystals display the typical characteristics of a vein-filling cement (i.e. polygonal crystals, compositional crystal zoning). Similar cement has been described in carbonate veins related to coseismic fluid flow in slip zones of the Nojima fault ( In the BPFZ strain was localized in thin cataclastic layers flanking the slip surfaces. In the case of rocks with similar properties to dolostone (i.e. shear wave velocity of about 4 km/s, In the last few years increasingly detailed seismological analyses of foreshock–mainshock–aftershock sequences have begun to elucidate the structure of active seismogenic fault zones cutting carbonate sequences (e.g. Qualitatively, the seismological observations of Further field observations concerning the structure of exhumed fault zones will be important to compare to increasingly high-resolution seismological data. In particular, microstructural observations of thin slip zones are essential to understand physico-chemical processes active during fault slip, because such observations are outside the resolution of seismological data ( The BPFZ is a sinistral strike-slip branch of the Schio–Vicenza Line outcropping in the western Venetian Fore-Alps and cutting two distinct dolomitic protoliths: sedimentary dolostone and dolomitic marble. The fault zone, exhumed from ca. 1.6 to 1.7 km depth and ca. 50 °C, displays a complex structure consisting of a highly heterogeneous fault core and a surrounding damage zone exceeding 80 m in width. The fault core changes thickness where it cuts different host rocks. The damage zone is cross-cut by networks of sub-vertical joints and secondary faults (N–S, E–W and NW–SE oriented) that reactivate pre-existing anisotropies (joints and veins) or represent newly formed structures. Slip zones cutting dolostone typically consist of cataclasites up to 10 cm thick associated with widespread dolomite veins, attesting to the circulation of fluids within the fault zone. Some of the slip zones contain an unusual vein-like cataclastic layer (Layer-A) up to 1.5 cm thick, often separated from the exposed slip surface by a 2–5 mm thick texturally distinct ultracataclasite containing multiple sub-layers. Fluidization of both Layer-A and the ultracataclastic sub-layers is suggested by geometrical features (cuspate-lobate boundaries, pinch-out terminations), strong grain sorting found in Layer-A (CSD indicates absence of clasts with A comparison of the BPFZ with an active seismogenic strike-slip fault zone cutting carbonates (the Bovec-Krn Fault in Slovenia) highlights the common structural complexity of the two faults, characterized by the presence of several branches and sub-parallel strands that in the case of the Bovec-Krn Fault were activated during the same seismic sequence. Field studies of fault zone structure will help to interpret the results of increasingly high-resolution geophysical studies. In particular, detailed microstructural analysis of slip zones is required to understand physico-chemical processes during the earthquake cycle at a resolution currently unavailable from geophysical data. The authors contributions are as follows: MF, SS, GDT, and DZ: conceptual development of the study; MF, DZ and SS: field data; MF and SS: optical and scanning electron microscopy; SM: optical microscopy cathodoluminescence; MF: remote sensing and image analysis. MF, SS and GDT wrote the manuscript and all authors contributed to the general review of manuscript before submission. The authors thank Federico Zorzi (XRPD analysis), Lorenzo Raccagni (polished samples), Leonardo Tauro and Elena Masiero (thin section preparation), Stefano Castelli (high-resolution scans of thin sections), Andrea Cavallo (FE-SEM). The authors thank the reviewers Nicola De Paola and Anne-Marie Boullier for their constructive and helpful comments, which significantly improve the manuscript. This research was funded by the