Using blends of chitosan and polyvinyl alcohol as film-forming materials, the metal ion imprinted membrane was prepared with silver ions as template (Ag(I)-IIM). The DSC curve shows that the membrane does not exhibit the heat resistance very well but the favorable compatibility. FT-IR analysis implies that the coordinating atoms may be N atom of –NH2 in chitosan and O atom of –OH in polyvinyl alcohol. The results on the experiment of competitive adsorption indicate that Ag(I)-IIM has the ability of specificity and recognition to Ag(I). The large adsorption capacity for Ag(I) indicates that Ag(I)-IIM can be used in silver enrichment and separation from waste solutions as an effective material.Selective enrichment and separation of metal ions is an important research field. These metallic ions mainly include toxic heavy metal ions in water ( There are some traditional techniques to recover silver from waste solutions such as electrolysis, replacement, precipitation and ion exchange in industry. Recently, This study is to prepare metal ion imprinted membrane with selective enrichment and separation for silver ions. Complexing mechanism between imprinted ions and membrane was analyzed by infrared spectrogram; pH, adsorption capacity and selective recognition were investigated in this work. The membrane could be applied in field of silver enrichment and separation in waste solutions. Chitosan–acetate solution was prepared by dissolving chitosan (CTS, 90.0% deacetylation degree, loss on drying ≦ IRPrestige-21/FT-IR-8400S Fourier transform infrared spectrometer (FT-IR, Shimadzu.co., Japan) was used to characterize and analyze the complex mechanism between imprinted ions and blend membrane. 910S differential scanning calorimeter (DSC, TA instruments, USA) was used to detect the compatibility and heat resistance of the blends. The absorbance of Ag(I) after adsorption was detected by GFS97 graphite furnace atomic absorption spectrophotometer (GFAAS, Thermo co., USA) in 328.1 Certain amounts of 2% acetate solution of CTS and 5% aqueous solution of PVA were stirred at room temperature until forming homogeneous phase. 0.01 Ag(I)-CTS/PVA was cleaned by deionized water repeatedly and eluted by 0.04 Non-imprinted membrane was prepared under the same condition in the absence of Ag(I), and labeled as NIIM. Ag(I) solutions in the range 1 The blank experiment was carried out by NIIM under the same condition. Ag(I)-IIM was immersed into the mixed solutions (50 Distribution coefficients ( Selectivity coefficient ( Relative selectivity coefficient ( All coefficients above provide an estimation of the effect of imprinting on selectivity, and the blank experiment was carried out by NIIM under the same condition. The factors of blending ratio of CTS and PVA (A), concentrations of imprinted ions (B), cross linker (C) and alkali (D) were investigated by orthogonal experiment of four factors and three levels. The preparing conditions of Ag (I)-IIM with the larger adsorption capacity were optimized by investigating the adsorption capacity of membrane as an evaluation index. The optimum combination program was found to be A  During the past several years, polymer–silver salt complex membranes have been intensively studied, where a silver salt with low lattice energy is dissolved in a polymer matrix via coordination bond ( Compared between c and d, the graphics show that the peak at 1090 To sum up, it can be predicted that N atom of –NH Static equilibrium test was carried out to study the isothermal adsorption of Ag(I)-IIM and the adsorption time was controlled in an hour for considering the adsorption in practice. The experiment was performed by the instrument composed of two compartment membrane cells with a square window between them, where the membrane was placed to separate the aqueous phases of deionized water and AgNO The adsorption between metal ion imprinted membrane and metal ions is a dynamic process of coordination adsorption, which relates to the pH value of waste solution. The impact of pH value on adsorption capacity was shown in The results in Ag(I)-IIM has large adsorption capacity to Ag(I). During the process of imprinting, metal complexing plays the main role and the coordinating atoms may be N atom of –NH