 Complete tear of the ulnar collateral ligament (UCL) of the metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joint of the thumb. Avulsion fracture at the attachment site of the UCL with displacement greater than 5 mm. Acute injuries are treated best with repair; chronic injuries (more than 3–6 weeks) will more likely require reconstruction. If significant MCP arthrosis or arthritis is present, reconstruction is  Acutely injured patients typically have tenderness and swelling on the ulnar side of the MCP joint ( The integrity of the UCL is tested by applying valgus (radially directed) stress to the MCP joint, and comparing the injured thumb to the uninjured contralateral thumb. The degree of laxity is measured, and the endpoint of the deviation is assessed. A complete UCL tear is present if there is more than 35 degrees of laxity, with the MCP in either flexion or extension, or if there is more than 15 degrees additional laxity compared with the uninjured side. Typically, a soft endpoint is present when a complete tear exists ( Less than 10 to 15 degrees of increased laxity, combined with a firm endpoint, probably indicates only a partial tear, and open repair is not typically indicated. Crepitus or pain with joint loading may be a sign of arthritis with loss of healthy joint cartilage.  Standard radiographs should be obtained in posteroanterior, lateral, and oblique views to assess if there is an associated avulsion fracture ( In the lateral view, volar subluxation of the proximal phalanx may indicate an accompanying dorsal capsular tear of the MCP joint. Some subluxation may be physiologic, so comparison to radiographs of the uninjured side is important. Pathologic subluxation may require additional capsular repair or imbrication at the time of UCL repair. In chronic injuries, radiographs should be carefully scrutinized for the presence of osteoarthritis of the thumb MCP joint. Ultrasonography can differentiate between partial and complete injury in most cases, especially in the hands of an experienced ultrasonographer. Furthermore, the position and orientation of the torn ligament can be ascertained in most cases. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may also be a useful adjunct, but these tests are unnecessary if the clinical examination is conclusive.  Distal branches of the superficial radial nerve often lie in the operative field and are at risk for injury. The thumb MCP joint is a diarthrodial ginglymoid joint that is movable in all planes, but primarily moves in a flexion-extension arc. The joint is stabilized by both static (volar plate, collateral ligaments) and dynamic (intrinsic and extrinsic muscles) structures. The UCL is composed of two distinct structures: the proper UCL and the accessory UCL. The proper UCL arises from the lateral condyles of the thumb metacarpal head and travels distally and volarly to insert on the lateral tubercle of the proximal phalanx. The accessory UCL courses superficially from a more volar site on the metacarpal head to the volar plate and sesamoids ( When pathologic valgus stress is applied, the UCL usually tears (or avulses) at its distal attachment. If the radial deviation of the proximal phalanx continues, the avulsed UCL displaces further, and the leading edge of the adductor aponeurosis passes over and beyond the torn ligament. As the injured MCP joint reduces, the torn UCL folds back upon itself, and the adductor aponeurosis becomes interposed between the torn inverted ligament and its attachment site on the proximal phalanx. This anatomic occurrence is termed a “Stener lesion” ( Stener lesions are reported to occur in the majority of complete UCL tears (64%–88%). Because the ligament is displaced from its point of attachment, normal healing cannot occur, even with prolonged immobilization. This is why operative repair is indicated for most, if not all, complete UCL ruptures.  A lazy-S incision is marked on the dorsal-ulnar aspect of the thumb MCP joint. The incision curves from volar distally to dorsal proximally, remaining ulnar to the extensor pollicis longus (EPL) tendon ( Identify and protect branches of the superficial radial nerve within the subcutaneous layer. The proximal border of the adductor aponeurosis is exposed. If there is a Stener lesion, a rounded mass of tissue will appear at the proximal edge of the aponeurosis. The adductor aponeurosis must be incised longitudinally, ulnar to the EPL, to expose the joint capsule. The joint capsule is then opened longitudinally at the dorsal edge of the collateral ligament, and the soft tissue and bone injury can be exposed and evaluated ( Radially deviate the proximal phalanx, and irrigate the joint to gain maximal visualization.  Marking the adductor aponeurosis with a surgical marker before incising it and leaving an edge to sew to radially make it easier to identify and repair this structure at the end of the case. If a tiny avulsion fragment is present, it should be excised to avoid impingement in the joint. Take time to carefully evaluate this anatomy; one must avoid accidentally detaching the proximal portion of the collateral ligament as the adductor aponeurosis is incised and the joint capsule opened.  The UCL may be foreshortened, folded back on itself, or otherwise malpositioned. It should be gently dissected free from surrounding debris and scar, unfolding it to its full length. The site for UCL reattachment on the proximal phalanx is exposed, any distal ligament remnants are excised, and the surface of the bone is abraded with a curet or rongeur. This will provide a cut edge of ligament to heal directly to the bone without intervening tissue. Be very careful dissecting out the UCL, which may appear distorted when it is first encountered. Avoid accidentally damaging the ligament or detaching it from the metacarpal.  This step may be accomplished with a suture anchor, or alternatively, with transosseous sutures. Suture anchor method Anchors preloaded with a 2-0 or 3-0 nonabsorbable suture are preferred. A drill guide is used to place the pilot hole for the anchor at the reattachment site. The anchor is deployed, making sure it is fully countersunk into the bone ( The attached suture is used to secure the UCL down to the bone, using a grasping suture technique (Kessler or Bunnell style stitch; Bone tunnel method A pair of parallel drill holes is created, beginning from the intended site of ligament attachment, heading across the phalanx to the radial side, angled from proximal to distal. This drilling can be accomplished with 0.045-in (1.14-mm) Kirschner wires (K-wires) or a small drill bit. A 3-0 nonabsorbable grasping suture is placed into the ligament stump. The free ends of the suture are passed through the bone tunnels, using Keith needles, specialty K-wires, or other suture passing devices ( The sutures are tied on the radial side of the proximal phalanx ( Sutures can be tied over the skin, using a button. Alternatively, using a small counterincision for exposure, sutures can be directly tied over the periosteum, which avoids any potential skin compromise due to pressure injury from the button. Regardless of the method used for ligament repair, the MCP joint is temporarily pinned by a percutaneous, transarticular K-wire to protect the repair. The repair can be supplemented by suturing the distal end of the ligament to local tissue or to periosteum around the attachment site. One must be sure the distal attachment point of the ligament is correct. It should be attached to the volar aspect of the ulnar side of the base of the proximal phalanx (  Before closing, any large dorsal capsular tears should be repaired to reduce the chance of joint subluxation later. The adductor aponeurosis is repaired with a 4-0 absorbable suture. Deflate the tourniquet and achieve good hemostasis before skin closure. Close skin in layers ( A thumb spica splint is applied with the interphalangeal (IP) joint of the thumb left free.  In chronic cases, the joint must be carefully inspected for arthritis before proceeding with ligament reconstruction. Both the proximal and distal ligament attachment sites need to be exposed and prepared. In the chronic situation, residual ligament tissue will be insufficient for repair, but the remaining ligament stumps can help identify the correct attachment points for the graft and may be sutured to the tendon graft to reinforce the reconstruction. The palmaris longus (PL) graft is harvested through a transverse incision at the volar wrist crease and a second proximal incision over the musculotendinous junction, where the tendon is mobilized and divided. The tendon is withdrawn through the wrist incision with traction on the distal cut end of the tendon. If the PL is absent, a slip of the abductor pollicis longus, flexor carpi radialis, extensor carpi radialis longus, or the proximal aspect of the extensor pollicis brevis (EPB) can be used as a tendon graft.  As with acute repair, chronic ligament reconstruction can be accomplished with either suture anchors or bone tunnels. Suture anchor method Temporary K-wire fixation of the MCP joint is performed in slight flexion, with the joint in neutral or slight ulnar deviation. After preparing the sites, pilot holes are made at the proximal and distal attachment sites ( Suture anchors preloaded with 2-0 or 3-0 suture are deployed at each location ( The PL is folded upon itself, sutured together, and fashioned to the appropriate length to span the two attachment sites ( The graft is secured in place proximally and distally with the sutures attached to the suture anchors to firmly approximate the tendon graft down to bone at both sites ( Bone tunnel method This method requires passing the tendon graft through bone tunnels to reconstruct the ligament between the anatomic attachment points of the native UCL ( Holes may be created with K-wires, small drills, or burrs. The tendon graft can be passed through the bone tunnels with aid of custom tendon- or suture-passer, or loops of stainless steel wire fashioned into narrow “snares” to grab the tendon and pull it through the bone. If these bone tunnels are used, the tendon graft may need to be trimmed to fit into the tunnel. The graft may be secured to residual ligament, periosteum, and joint capsule to augment the repair.  Set the tension of the graft appropriately. If the graft is made too tight, motion of the MCP joint is limited and it may cause pain postoperatively. When creating multiple bone tunnels, be careful to avoid comminution or fracture of the small bone bridges between the tunnels/holes. Holes that are big enough to accommodate passage of a tendon graft also put the bone at some risk of fracture.  The adductor aponeurosis is repaired with a 4-0 absorbable suture. Deflate the tourniquet and achieve good hemostasis before skin closure. Close the skin in layers. A thumb spica splint is applied with the IP joint of the thumb left free.  Immobilization in a full-time splint or cast is continued for the first 6 weeks. The K-wire is removed at 4 weeks. After 6 weeks of immobilization, range of motion exercises are begun, but radially directed stress is avoided. Strengthening exercises are begun at 8 weeks, under the guidance of a hand therapist. Activities that directly stress the reconstruction, including lateral side pinch, are finally provided after 12 weeks. Patients can typically return to full activities, including contact sports, 4 months after surgery. The reconstruction of the UCL is evaluated by radiographic and physical examination at follow-up ( Although mild loss of pinch strength and mild loss of motion are typically reported, most patients are satisfied after UCL reconstruction ( Sensory disturbances after surgery may be due to stretching of the cutaneous nerves during surgery, irritation from pin(s), or thumb spica splints that apply pressure to the digital nerves. Most of these disturbances are temporary and require only reassurance to the patient. 