This paper analyses the influence of the processing conditions on the microstructure and wear behaviour of NiCrBSi coatings. Ni-base alloys, which are widely used to obtain wear resistant coatings, are usually heat treated after thermal spraying to improve their tribological properties. Thus, three different processes are studied: flame spraying combined with flame remelting, flame spraying combined with laser remelting, and laser cladding. Comparison of the resulting microstructures, which are observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), revealed remarkable differences not only in the morphology but in the size distribution and relative proportions of the observable phases from one coating to another. Notwithstanding this, all the analysed coatings exhibited similar phases in their microstructure. The tribological behaviour of the coatings was compared in room-temperature dry sliding wear tests (block-on-ring configuration), under several load conditions (30, 60 and 90N). In addition, main wear mechanisms are investigated by characterising the coating wear tracks using SEM. The wear behaviour was very similar for all the coatings tested, although a transition from an oxidative to adhesive wear regime was observed in the range of test carried out.Thermal spray is one of the most versatile deposition processes for coating materials and its use for industrial applications has been greatly increased There are a considerable number of techniques to melt and propel the coating material. Flame spray is one the most commonly applied of them There are different methods to melt flame-sprayed layers, although the flame remelting process, which is the most commonly used one because of its versatility and economy, is based on the application of an oxyacetylene flame until the melting point of the coating is reached. However, there is no precise control mechanism for its industrial application and satisfactory results cannot be guaranteed. For this reason, this paper evaluates the laser technique as an alternative to the flame remelting of the sprayed layers. As process parameters are easily controlled using the laser technique, certain characteristics of the coating and its wear behaviour can be improved. Laser technology related to protective coatings has gained popularity in both industry and academic research in recent years Among the available protective coating materials, Ni-base alloys, used either on their own or combined with other particles, are widely used in applications where wear resistance combined with oxidation or corrosion resistance at high temperatures is required This paper analyses the influence of the coating technique on both the microstructure and the wear behaviour of coatings of a NiCrBSi alloy deposited by flame-spray (with flame or laser remelting) and laser cladding techniques. A NiCrBSi super-alloy powder was used as coating material. The powder was composed of spherical particles with an average size of 66 The surface of the blocks were prepared by grit blasting using angular 1% carbon steel grit with a hardness of 60 HRC and nominal grain size of 0.7 The flame-spray process was completed with a PB7-G METCO gun at a pressure of 1.7 After spraying, the flame-spray coatings were flame or laser remelted. Flame remelting consists of applying an oxyacetylene flame to the coating until the melting temperature of the powder is reached. This is basically a manual process and the final quality of the layers largely depends on the experience of the operator. Incomplete melting along the full thickness of the coating means a lack of metallurgical bonding between substrate and coating, and is a frequent outcome of the process. An alternative technique used for post-treatment coating consists of using a laser beam to melt the flame-sprayed layer. A Rofin Sinar CO The different process parameters and their influence on the layers obtained were studied under the above conditions. The most satisfactory results were obtained with the following parameters: power density on the surface of the piece of 38 Cladding was performed using the same CO Optimal process conditions were established at a power density of 54 Micro-hardness tests were carried out according to the ASTM E-384 standard. Vickers hardness measurements (100 Optical and scanning electron microscope techniques with energy dispersive spectroscopy (SEM–EDS) were used to analyse the coatings microstructures and to observe the wear mechanisms. Specimens for microstructural analysis were firstly ground and polished to a mirror finish and then etched with solution of 1HCl:10HNO Tribological evaluation of the coatings was performed using a block-on-ring tribometer. Dry sliding wear tests at room temperature according to the ASTM G77 standard were carried out. The coated blocks were tested on a hardened, tempered AISI 1043 steel ring, with an outer diameter of 50 The microstructures of all the coated samples studied in this paper are shown below. The same constituents are observed in all of them; however differences in morphology, distribution, size and percentage of the different constituents have been detected. A granular microstructure is observed in both the matrix and the disperse constituents. This microstructure is similar to that of the powder particles. Several scattered precipitates with a high concentration of Cr have been observed using SEM analysis: chromium carbides (Cr Since a very fine granular structure is observed, a high magnification is required to study the constituents produced using this coating technique ( Three different zones are also observed in the specimens obtained by this coating technique.  The absence of porosity and microcracks show that the process parameters selected in this study have ensured a high quality coating.  Two tests were run for each of the test conditions specified in Section The most significant result of observing wear tracks was the presence of iron oxides on practically all the surfaces of the coatings that were tested ( The surface film formation rate was lower than the destruction it suffered during testing as load conditions increased. This leads to direct metal on metal contact. Wear was observed to be predominantly adhesive in the test carried out at the highest loads. This was stimulated by the high mutual solubility of the Fe and Ni, and was observed both on the surface of the coatings and on the steel rings, where plastically deformed platelets containing Ni, Cr and Si ( The flame melting process exhibited lack of precision because of the poor control of the process parameters, which sometimes lead to incomplete melting of the full coating thickness. If the right parameters are selected, laser remelting and laser cladding processes can provide coatings with an excellent quality and hardness values of around 900 Comparison of the microstructure of all the coating techniques analysed reveals a similar phases-composition, but differences in morphology, distribution, size and percentage of the different constituents of the coatings. There are no significant differences in the wear behaviour of coatings treated with one method or the other, although a change in the predominant wear mechanism was observed as load increase. A regime of oxidational wear characterised by the formation of a surface film of oxide and by a high value of the contact friction force caused by the abrasion of the oxide particles from the film was observed at the lowest load. Load increases lead to the speed of destruction of surface oxides being faster than the speed at which they can form, leading to severe wear regimes in which the predominant wear mechanism is adhesion. The authors acknowledge the financial support of the Spanish Ministry of Science and Technology, projects MAT 2001-3528-C03-01 and MAT 2005-07642-C02-02.