The Electromagnetic Levitational Gas Condensation (ELGC) method was used to synthesize ZnO nanorods. In this paper, the formation mechanism of the synthesized nanorods is discussed. The ELGC method involved vaporization of the levitated Zn specimen, with subsequent condensation and oxidation of nuclei formed under Ar or He–0.2Ar and 
                        
                           
                              O
                           
                           
                              2
                           
                        
                      atmospheres. The particles were characterized by X-ray Diffraction (XRD), Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM). The presented results showed that the [0001]-oriented ZnO nanorods were directly produced by the ELGC process under different process conditions.Semiconductor compounds have received much attention during the last few years, because of their novel optical and transport properties, which have great potential for many optoelectronic applications. Bulk zinc oxide (ZnO) is a well-known n-type semiconductor, with a wide band gap and high excitation binding energy. ZnO has been used in many diverse applications, such as; antibacterial So far, ZnO nanoparticles has been synthesized with different methods, including; pulsed laser ablation There are critical issues in the fabrication of compound nanoparticles, such as purity, size and size distribution, and production rate. The Electromagnetic Levitational Gas Condensation (ELGC) method is a novel method, capable of the direct synthesis of pure nanoparticles with a high production rate. In this method, the sample is levitated in the magnetic field of a specially designed induction coil carrying an alternative current. The specimen is then heated, melted and, finally, evaporated. The metal vapors are then condensed by the cold inert gas stream flowing upward in the reactor, and the particles are collected in a filtering system. Bigot and Champion In the present work, pure ZnO nanorods were directly synthesized with the one-step ELGC method, using the gas mixture of Ar or He–0.2Ar and O Details of the experimental set-up of the ELGC system are explained elsewhere In order to condense the metal vapors ascending from the surface of the levitated droplet, two types of carrier gas of Ar and He–0.2Ar were used. The latter had a higher cooling efficiency. The oxygen gas was also fed in through the reactor at the onset of levitation.   Growth mechanisms of ZnO nanocrystals have been already studied in colloid chemistry To understand the formation mechanism of ZnO nanorods in the ELGC process, the classic BFDH method, suggested by Bravasis, Freidel, Donnary and Harker, and the HP model, proposed by Hartman and Perdok, were used The ZnO particles synthesized in the present work, under different process conditions, all showed the rod-like shape (as shown in  It can also be seen in In the present study, the formation mechanism of ZnO nanorods by the electromagnetic levitational gas condensation method was studied. The results showed that the preferential growth axis of the nanorods along the [0001] direction was consistent with the predictions of the BFDH and HP models. The particles synthesized by the carrier gas of He–0.2Ar were smaller than that of Ar. Reducing gas temperature and reactor pressure both led to the formation of smaller ZnO nanorods.