A single screw extruder was used to pulverize rubber granulates at high shear and compression without using cryogenic fluid for cooling. This process, solid-state shear extrusion (SSSE), is based on the large compressive shear deformation of rubber granulates, which results in the storage of a large amount of strain energy and the formation of cracks. When the stored energy reaches a critical level, the granulate cannot sustain itself. As a result, the stored elastic energy is converted into surface energy through the formation of new surfaces and, in turn, pulverization occurs. The stored elastic energy is dependent on the viscoelastic response of rubber granulates to the processing condition. The independent variables of the process were identified as the degree of compression of the rubber, number of extruder passes, barrel wall temperatures, rotation rate of the extruder screw, and feed rate of the granulates. The effects of these variables on the dependent variables, such as material and screw temperatures, particle size distribution (PSD), torque, and mechanical power consumption at steady state, were systematically studied. Fine rubber particles were obtained when the granulates were compressed sufficiently, and loss of strain energy due to viscoelastic stress relaxation was minimized by significant cooling in the pulverization zone. Agglomeration of rubber particles was found to be competing with the pulverization process.Recycling and reuse of rubber-like (elastomeric) materials has become a major environmental and social issue. Stockpiles of waste rubber including used tires, scrap and by-products of rubber factories are growing, and the disposal charge for waste materials is increasing correspondingly. More than 2.5 billion scrap tires are presently stockpiled in the United States alone The major problem in the recycling of rubber-like materials, e.g., tires, is the crosslinked molecular structure of rubber, which prevents the melting and subsequent processing of these materials. Another important issue in rubber recycling is that the discarded materials are composite in nature and contain carbon black, oil, additives, and a mixture of different kinds of rubbers. One of the major approaches to rubber recycling is devulcanization of used rubber, which causes cleavage of the crosslinks via chemical Size reduction of rubber materials can be performed under cryogenic or ambient conditions. In ambient grinding, a toothed-wheel mill is usually used to produce only large particles of 0.5–1.5 mm diameter at or above ambient temperatures A new concept of noncryogenic pulverization of polymeric materials was first developed by Russian researchers Large rectangular slabs of vulcanized rubber were obtained from a rubber company. The approximate composition of the vulcanized rubber is by weight percent (wt.%): 53.9 wt.% SMR–20 (natural rubber), 26.9 wt.% SRF (carbon black), 10.8 wt.% aromatic oil, 8.4 wt.% curatives and additives. The slabs were cut into small rectangular pieces and then shredded by a Cumberland granulator to produce the rubber granulates to be used in the pulverization experiments. The granulates were dry sieved into two major fractions: granulates in the size range of 4.00–6.30 and 2.00–4.00 mm. Prior to the pulverization experiments, an equal amount of rubber granulates from both size ranges was blended in 250 g batches in a tumble-blender for 15 min. The uniform blend of granulates was then used in all pulverization experiments. Our SSSE process uses a lab-scale extruder manufactured by C.W. Brabender. The SSSE process employs three major components: a Plasti-Corder (Model DR-2051) geared-drive motor capable of submitting a rotation rate of 0–100 rpm and delivering a torque of up to 350 Nm at a power of 5 hp; an Intelligent Interface (Model PL-2000) coupled with a temperature control console (TCC) and a computer for measurement, data acquisition, and control of temperatures and torque; and a single screw extruder for the pulverization of the rubber. The barrel of the extruder and the screws used in this study are designed for a maximum torque of 100 Nm. The torque required to turn the extruder screw was measured by a torque-meter in the Plasti-Corder unit. The temperature signals from the stock and control thermocouples located in the extruder were evaluated by the PL-2000 interface and the necessary adjustments to cooling-collar heating were made according to the set temperatures.  The geometry of the extruder channel is shown in Eight different temperatures were measured in our experiments. Three control thermocouples, which passed through the heating–cooling element, were mounted flush with the barrel wall. They were located at 16.2, 29.6, and 43.0 cm from the inlet and measured the barrel wall temperatures, The pulverization of rubber granulates was carried out at different process conditions. The processing parameters can be divided into two groups: independent variables or controlled parameters and dependent variables. The independent variables include the barrel wall temperatures, The operating conditions of the SSSE process are given in The above-mentioned procedure applies to the tests in which the rubber granulates passed through the extruder once; hence, the process is called 1SSSE. To investigate the influence of the number of extruder passes, the powder produced by the 1SSSE process was pulverized again. The process in which the 1SSSE powder was pulverized again is called 2SSSE, and so on. To perform these reprocessing experiments (2SSSE and 3SSSE processes), we collected about 300–400 g of powder from each 1SSSE process. Dry sieving of 40–50 g of rubber powder from each test was carried out using US standard sieves. The volume-mean diameter, One of the important issues in the scale-up of the SSSE process is the determination of power consumed to rotate the extruder screw, The 50–50 wt.% blend of the rubber granulates in the size range of 2.00–4.00 mm and 4.00–6.30 mm had To determine the effects of the number of extruder passes and the degree of the compression of the rubber, we employed three different screws with CRs of 5:1, 3:1, and 1.5:1 and pulverized the rubber through the 1SSSE, 2SSSE, and 3SSSE processes. Because the rubber granulates were processed through the extruder once in the 1SSSE process, the processing of the 1SSSE particles in the 2SSSE process and, similarly, the processing of the 2SSSE particles in the 3SSSE process were both referred to as reprocessing in this paper. The variation of the dependent variables (characteristic temperatures, torque, and power consumption) vs. the number of extruder passes (Tests S-101, S-102, and S-103) is shown in   As seen in  The dependent variables of the experimental runs conducted with a 3:1 CR screw (Tests S-201, S-202, and S-203) are shown in As seen in For the 1SSSE, 2SSSE, and 3SSSE powders, The extent of pulverization was the highest in the 5:1 CR screw case, and the lowest in the 1.5:1 CR screw case. It seems that the coarse particles underwent a single breakage in the 1.5:1 CR screw case. The PSD shifted gradually to coarser particles when a lower CR screw was used. Our results also showed that pulverization takes place mainly in Zone 3, but some pulverization may be taking place in Zone 2. To investigate the effects of the barrel wall temperatures, we first changed   Except The stress relaxation effect was not very pronounced in the experimental runs where To study the effects of the rotation rate of the screw, By conducting Tests S-101, S-141, and S-142, we investigated the effects of the feed rate of the granulates, Based on our experimental data obtained by using screws with different CR, we may conclude that the degree of compression of the granulates in Zones 2 and 3 could be the most critical parameter of our process. There are two major effects of compression: one is the storage of large strain energy in the rubber granulates, and the other is the prohibition of slip at the rubber–metal interfaces and, in turn, the allowance of shear straining of the granulates as a result of the relative rotation of the screw with respect to the barrel wall. The combined high compressive shear results in more strain energy storage in the granulate. At a critical energy level, the granulate cannot be held together by any cohesive forces, and new surfaces form through the crack propagation and dissipation of the stored energy. Our previous study on the breakage of single rubber discs under high compression and tangential shear in a Bridgman Anvil apparatus supported such effects of the compression on the pulverization phenomenon  In Viscoelastic materials like rubber remember their past deformations with fading memory according to a material time scale, which is strongly influenced by temperature. This is often expressed as time–temperature superposition. A quantity There are many proposed energy laws in grinding literature relating the specific mechanical energy consumed for breakage to the simple particle parameters In The data for The pulverization of rubber granulates under high compressive shear was achieved using a single screw extruder without using a cryogenic fluid for cooling in the SSSE process. A higher degree of compression of the granulates and significant cooling of the pulverization zone were the most significant factors in the successful pulverization of the granulates. Agglomeration of the produced particles, especially the fine particles, was found to be competing with the pulverization process. The extent of agglomeration was observed to increase with a higher fraction of the fine particles, a greater degree of compaction, and a higher temperature of the pulverization zone. The rubber granulates that experience high compressive shear strain can develop tensile stresses and store significant strain energy leading to the formation of new surfaces through the crack opening mechanism (Mode I). The granulates can fragment repeatedly until their size becomes so small that a high compressive strain and consequent high stresses can no longer be applied. Therefore, we conclude that there is a minimum size of the particles produced by the SSSE process, which is determined by the processing conditions and the design of the extruder. The specific mechanical energy consumed in the SSSE process was correlated with the mass geometric mean diameter of the powder. Based on this correlation, we conclude that more mechanical energy should be consumed in the SSSE process without allowing the relaxation of the stresses in order to obtain a rubber powder with a smaller mass geometric mean diameter. This can be achieved by using a screw with a high CR and sufficiently cooling the pulverization zone, which makes the rubber more elastic or solid-like resulting in the storage of a larger amount of strain energy. The authors would like to thank the US National Science Foundation (NSF) Fluid, Particulate, and Hydraulic Systems Division for the financial support of this work under NSF Grant # CTS-9629650.