A new monitoring system based on the monitoring of natural radiation emitted by the material in the separation zone of a jig compartment has been developed and tested in parallel with a radiometric density meter and a conventional float. The authors investigated the correlation between the separation density monitored by the meter and the intensity of the natural radiation. The correlation coefficient was ca. R=0.973 and the standard deviation of the measurement in regression with the density meter indications was sc
                     =0.034g/cm3. This shows that after a float as the measuring unit in a control system is replaced by a natural radiation monitor, one can expect good stabilisation of the separation density. The paper discusses advantages of such systems over float-based systems.The beneficiation process of fine coal in jigs consists of two phases: stratification of coal grains in the bed according to their density and then splitting the stratified material into the product and the discharged refuse. At first, during subsequent water pulsations induced by opening and closing of air valves, the stratification of coal grains takes place due to varied velocity of their upward and downward movement. Grains of low density migrate to upper layers and grains of high density migrate to lower layers of the bed. The material travels horizontally on a screen along the jig compartment with the flow of water. The stratification of grains due to their density is not perfect, because the velocity of their upward and downward movement depends in part on their diameter, shape and the way in which the material loosens within a given pulsation cycle. The distribution of coal density fractions in the bed, characterized by the imperfection factor  The mass of the product is always greater when the separation density is constant over a given period of time - even if in spite of its variations the process renders the same average ash content. Hence, the conclusion is to stabilise the separation density at the desired value as accurately as possible. The simulation analysis presented by The analysis was performed for raw coal washed in a three-product jig at the separation densities of 1.5 and 1.8 The above results indicate that the operation of a refuse discharge system in a jig plays an important role in the final results of coal separation process defined in terms of tonnage and quality of the product. The most popular refuse discharge control systems in jigs use a metal float to monitor the thickness of the heavy fraction in a jig compartment. Two types of refuse discharge systems applied in Polish jigs (Komag) have been described by In field tests, the separation density was measured by a radiometric density meter (described in p. 5) installed at A-A level ( The first application of a radiometric density meter in a jig to replace the float was reported by Three monitoring and control systems shown in The systems were installed in the second compartment of the OM20-type jig. The aim of control was to stabilise the separation density at desired values. The systems were monitored by a radiometric density meter (RDM) to indicate changes in the separation density over a given period of time. The RDM was installed close to the upper edge of the product overflow wall to measure the density of the material separation layer reporting in half to the product and in half to the refuse. A conventional float (FL), indicating the position of the heavy fraction in the bed, was used in the first system (A). In the second system (B) the RDM replaced the float as a main sensor in the closed loop control. In the third system (C) a new monitor, based on the measurement of the natural radiation emitted by the material (NRM) accumulating below the product overflow wall was used. This concept of monitoring in a coal separation process in a jig is not available in the open literature. The signals from the above three meters (FL, RDM, NRM) were sent to the analogue inputs (4–20 Three meters used in systems measure different parameters. The position of the float FL indicates the approximate position of the coal layer whose density is related to the float parameters. The RDM directly measures the density of the separation layer in the bed. The NRM measures the intensity of natural radiation emitted by the material located below the separation layer, correlated with its density/ash content. To evaluate and compare the accuracy of these three control systems, we compared standard deviations in separation density fluctuations. This way of evaluation is accepted in other similar processes, e.g. in the heavy media process. The conventional system with a float (FL), applied widely in the industry, is designed to react to changes in the tonnage of the feed and its washability characteristics. When refuse discharge is controlled in a float system, fluctuations in separation density can be reduced to ±0.12 The measuring method applied in the experimental monitoring and control system is shown in The measuring head consists of a The standard deviation of the density measurement for 10 cycles of pulsations (effective time of measurement: 1.5  V V The ratio V  RDM directly measures the density of the bed layer defined to be the separation layer. Thus RDM, calibrated in the separation density units (g/cm In gravitational coal preparation processes in heavy media or in jigs, raw coal separation into the product and the refuse is performed at a given separation density (cut point), i.e. the density of the raw coal fraction which reports in 50% to the product and in 50% to the refuse (middlings). Gravitational processes are based on a good correlation between ash content in coal density fractions and their density. The empirical relation between ash content and density for coal was presented by The empirical relation between ash content and density depends on the type of coal and should be determined for a particular technological system. Therefore, the parameter of separation density can be replaced by separation ash, if this parameter can be measured in the process. In the case of a jig, separation ash is the ash yield of the coal layer below the product overflow weir (the end wall of the compartment). It can be determined with regards to the intensity of natural radiation emitted by this part of the bed. Application of the natural gamma radiation measurement for determination of ash yield in coals was reported by To measure separation density (separation ash) in the material below the overflow weir, a scintillation detector (100 NRM was calibrated in the laboratory on coal samples in containers simulating field conditions. The ash yield in coal samples was determined by the conventional method. The radiometric density meter (RDM) and the natural radiation meter (NRM) were tested in the experimental control system shown in The NRM and RDM signals for the correlation analysis were taken for longer periods of their steady states (1–2 The standard deviation of the separation density Linear regression in the range of densities between 1.4 and 1.8 The bed density distribution is highly nonlinear and depends on the flow rate of the refuse discharge. The concentrate layers should be always located above the radiation beam but the concentrate (the inflection point between concentrate and middlings) may partly enter the radiation beam when the RDM measuring head is installed too high. In this case the readings from the RDM would be too low in comparison with readings from the RNM. These measurements were performed in the control system shown in A good correlation between the NRM indications and the RDM measurements (fitted line in In the control system shown in  The separation density is kept with a good accuracy at desired values. The standard deviation of the separation density fluctuations around its desired value ranges from 0.023 Further reduction in fluctuations can be expected for the control system with optimised parameters. The mean separation density indicated by NRM differed from the RDM indications by ±0.03 The obtained results confirmed the standard deviation of the separation density control in the range of 0.04–0.05 Conventional control systems for refuse discharge in jigs based on a float as a bed sensor do not stabilise separation density accurately. Fluctuations in the separation density during significant changes in the feed tonnage reach ±0.15 An alternative to RDM is the meter of the natural radiation (NRM) emitted by the material below the overflow wall in the jig compartment. The standard deviation Acknowledgement goes to the Murcki Mine for providing plant data.