Shale fracture conductivity plays a critical role in determining the long term production of shale wells. High fracture conductivity is achieved by pumping more proppants and minimizing conductivity damage by fracturing fluid. Currently, fracture conductivity is either measured in laboratory following ISO 13503-5 or calculated using correlations derived from extensive laboratory tests by regression analysis. There is a need for a handy and practical tool to calculate shale fracture conductivity reflecting realistic fracturing designs.
                  This paper presents a new correlation to calculate shale fracture conductivity that considers proppant properties, fracture design variables and formation mechanical properties. This correlation is based on the population balance equation for size reduction. It utilizes the population balance concept to predict the crushed proppant size distribution under increasing closure stress. Numerical solution of the integro-differential equation is validated by comparing the computed results with the measured data. The crushed grain size distribution determines the permeability of the sand pack. Fracture width is calculated separately by considering proppant embedment and proppant grain rearrangement. Fracture conductivity is then calculated and compared with laboratory measured conductivity. Finally, the effect of water damage to shale fracture conductivity is considered by bringing in a new modification term.
                  Results show that the population balance equation can reasonably predict the crushed proppant size reduction by properly choosing the selection equation and breakage equation. The calculated shale fracture conductivity can match with the measured fracture conductivity using the Barnett Shale. An exponential expression can be used to account for the water damage effect in the Barnett Shale.coefficients of the selection and breakage functions, dimensionless breakage function, dimensionless proppant diameter at the tenth percentile, median proppant diameter, proppant diameter at the ninetieth percentile, initial void ratio, fraction void ratio at certain stress, fraction Young’s modulus, weight percentage of the amount of proppants for size increment of selection function, dimensionless initial fracture width, fracture width at certain stress, fracture width, grain size, dummy variable in the population balance equation porosity, fraction initial proppant pack porosity, fraction proppant pack porosity at certain stress, fraction proppant specific gravity, dimensionless closure stress, phi percentile deviation, index for the proppant grain size increment index for the closure stress increment More and more pilot projects in shale reservoirs have shown that shale well production is positively correlated with the amount of proppants pumped in hydraulic fracturing ( One of the earliest fracture conductivity calculation equations was derived by Water damage is a common mechanism of flow capacity loss in porous media ( Previous correlations to calculate fracture conductivity either require extensive laboratory tests to calibrate the model or depend on a single parameter that is difficult to measure under laboratory conditions. Besides, there is little published data to show that water damage is considered in the previous conductivity correlations. This study intends to develop a cost effective and handy correlation that can be used to calculate shale fracture conductivity considering proppant properties, fracturing design variables, formation conditions and water damage effect. Fracture conductivity is calculated through the following steps: Review the recognized correlations for sand pack permeability calculation. Derive and solve the population balance equation for size reduction that describes proppant crushing in the fracture during elevated stress application. Validate the solution of the population balance equation by comparing the calculated results with the sieve analysis data. Measure the initial proppant pack width under zero closure stress and calculate the width change due to grain rearrangement and embedment. Calculate the fracture conductivity and compare the results with the measured fracture conductivity. Modify the correlation that is based on the dry gas measurements to consider water damage. It has been recognized that sand pack permeability is a strong function of sand grain size, packing, and sorting. This model considers porosity of the porous media, grain particle size and sorting. However, one difficulty of applying this model to calculate propped fracture permeability is to determine the median grain size ( A population balance equation describes the process of population changes of certain species as the net change of population is equal to the rate of concentration change. The net change of population is defined as the difference between species birth and death and they are usually functions of the entire population. So, population balance equations take the form of integro-differential equation. Depending on the form of the birth term and the death term, population balance equations can be solved analytically or numerically. The idea of population balance is widely applied in a variety of engineering areas, such as comminution of minerals, crystallization, polymerization in reactors and monodisperse colloidal suspensions ( In petroleum engineering area, the idea of population balance was applied by In crushing tests, particles usually have a size range and the stress status for the grains is different depending on size, location, number of contacts, and their mechanical properties. Therefore, the chance for each particle to be crushed is not equal. The function to describe the mass fraction of the particles of a specific size to be crushed per unit stress is called the selection function or specific rate of breakage. Take size interval 3 in For example, the 40/70 mesh sand at 0.1 Assume  In our study, we follow the expression of the selection function suggested by Where For particles that are crushed from interval Again, let us use 40/70 mesh sand data as an example. Within the 0.001 The breakage function was experimentally determined by Where The first rigorous mathematical model for size reduction based on population balance was derived by It is assumed that: (1) during the stress application, proppants can only be crushed into smaller sizes and there is no feed of particles into the proppant pack; (2) the selection function and the breakage function as stated in the previous sections are valid in the primary breakage of particles at size y to a differential size For a differential size increment from According to the definition of the selection function, it can be expressed as, Rearrange Eq. We use the consistent nomenclature for breakage function as Assume the stress interval Eq. Rearrange Eq. Differentiate Eq. Eq. Where Solution of the integro-differential population balance equation has been well presented by This study solves the population balance equation numerically using a finite difference method. The algorithm is illustrated by the flow chart in Solution to the integro-differential equation is validated by matching the computed proppant size distribution with the measured data. Two sets of sieve analysis data are provided to match the solutions. The first set of data comes from the conductivity experiment with 0.10 We can see that at the smaller size range, the model shows an underpredicted size distribution compared with the measured values. This is probably caused by the shale particles mixed with the proppants after the experiments. The shale particles collected from the fracture surface have similar sizes as the crushed sand grains and cannot be separated. Other than that, the model predicts a reasonable proppant size distribution. The second dataset is collected from the published literature by The linear size distribution at higher closure stresses on the log–log plot indicates the fractal distribution of grain sizes ( Width reduction happens due to proppant rearrangement, proppant embedment, proppant crushing, gel filter cake, and so on ( Loose proppant grains with a wide size range are loaded on the fracture surface. After the stress is applied, grain rearrangement occurs due to the inter-granular frictional slippage and pore collapse, as illustrated in Define the initial proppant pack void ratio The solid particles are incompressible and embedment is negligible during this phase, so that the change in total volume is only related to the change in pore volume. The consolidation is one dimensional in the width direction and the strain in the flow direction is negligible, or simply assuming the cross sectional area of the proppant pack in the width direction is constant. Assume an initial proppant pack width Initial porosity is, So, Proppant embedment depth is determined by laboratory measurements and the width loss due to embedment is shown in Eq.  In this section, we propose a new method to predict propped fracture conductivity by modifying the Berg correlation for calculating permeability integrated with the population balance equation for size reduction. In this method, the proppant size, packing, sorting, crushing, grain rearrangement and grain embedment are taken into account. A flowchart describing the conductivity calculation procedure is shown in We first solve the population balance equation for the proppant size distribution at various stresses. The parameters for the The initial fracture widths for various concentrations were measured in lab. We particularly measured the proppant pack thickness at multiple surface valleys indicated by the surface profilometry, because fractures tend to close on the thicker sand packs at the surface valleys. The initial fracture widths are summarized in As To account for the extra flow path caused by the open spaces above the sand pack, the Berg model is modified to better predict proppant pack permeability as, Where, The unit of the closure stress The exponential relationship expressed by Eq.  Damaged fracture conductivity, or recovered fracture conductivity, was measured by flowing dry nitrogen through the fracture that was damaged by water. Detailed procedures and the damage mechanisms can be found in the reference ( Initial fracture conductivities and their corresponding recovered fracture conductivities are plotted in The power-law correlation for water damage was developed based on the Barnett shale experiments. Therefore, it is recommended to use the same empirical coefficients for rocks that have comparable properties as the Barnett shale. A theoretical model of propped fracture conductivity was developed to include the effects of water damage on fracture conductivity. The fracture permeability calculation is based on the population balance equation for size reduction to calculate the crushed proppants size distribution as a function of closure stress. Fracture width correlation considers proppant rearrangement and embedment. Based on the studies, following conclusions are made: The Population Balance Equation based approach to calculate propped fracture conductivity considers the proppant properties, fracture design variables, and formation properties. The predicted results give a reasonable match with the lab data. A correlation to calculate fracture conductivity considering water damage is developed. This correlation expresses the power law relationship between the initial fracture conductivity and the recovered fracture conductivity after water damage. In the testing range, a fracture with higher initial conductivity usually has higher recovered fracture conductivity, because it can better overcome the conductivity damage by water which occurs in the vicinity of the fracture walls. With a thick proppant pack, the internal proppant layers are the dominant flow area, and stay intact in the presence of water damage. The authors would like to acknowledge the sponsors of