In this study, relationship between the critical surface tension of wetting of barite and agglomeration recovery and also zeta potential depending on pH and amount of collector (Na-oleate) was investigated. For this purpose, effects of pH and the amount of collector on the agglomeration recovery were investigated and also, zeta potential measurements and Fourier transform infrared spectrophotometer (FTIR) analyses have been carried out to determine the adsorption type of Na-oleate on barite surface.
                  At pH 7, the maximum agglomeration recovery was obtained, the critical surface tension of wetting of celestite is very close to the surface tension of kerosene of which is 25.95mN/m. And also, at the optimum amount of Na-oleate of 3kg/t, the critical surface tension of wetting of celestite is approximately equal to the surface tension of kerosene.
                  In this paper, the decisive rules could not put down in declare of agglomeration success with the critical surface tension of wetting value as in the flotation, because there are different liquids as water and oil (bridging liquid) in the agglomeration system.Wettability characteristics of minerals have substantial influence over the efficiency of beneficiation and processing methods such as agglomeration, aggregation, flotation, dust controlling and solid–liquid separation Wettability or flotation characteristics of solids or minerals can be estimated quantitatively by a number of experimental and empirical techniques The concept of the critical surface tension of wetting, as developed by Zisman The solid or mineral surface is completely wetted by the liquid if the surface tension of liquid is equal to or below from the critical surface tension of wetting value of solid or mineral surface ( In practice, the Zisman approach of determining When a drop of liquid is placed on a flat solid surface, it may spread completely over the surface or, more likely, it may remain as a drop having a definite contact angle with the solid or mineral surface as given in The absorption mechanism of particle by the bridging liquid (oil) is given in The position of the solid particle at the interface between oil and water is governed by the relative values of the interfacial tensions. At equilibrium: The following conditions may apply: If If If Spherical oil agglomeration preferentially occurs when (3) is satisfied. In this situation, the mineral particles concentrating at the oil–water interface, migrate into the oil phase allowing maximum absorption of solids by the oil The principles of the contact angle measurements have been investigated in various studies and most of them have been performed with naturally hydrophobic particles such as coal, stibnite, molybdenite and talc There are limited studies on the contact angle measurements developed for sulphide and non-sulphide minerals to illustrate domains of hydrophobicity and hydrophilicity under a variety of conditions involving pH, collectors and depressants In subsequent periods, there has been investigation in which attempts were made to correlate contact angles with adsorption densities, flotation recoveries and zeta potentials In this study, the relationship between the critical surface tension of wetting of barite and agglomeration recovery was investigated depending on pH and amount of collector (Na-oleate). The adsorption type of collector on calcite was also studied by zeta potential measurements and FTIR analysis. In this study, the barite sample taken from Barit Maden Türk A.Ş. in Sivas-Turkey was used. The sample was ground and sieved to −212 In the experiments, Na-oleate (C The experiments were performed in a 400 Agglomeration recovery was calculated from the The zeta potential of the barite samples were determined depending on pH values (in the absence and presence of Na-oleate), and amount of Na-oleate using Rank Brothers electrophoresis apparatus MKII. The zeta potential measurements were carried out at constant ionic strength of the mineral slurries ( The spectra of the barite samples were obtained in the case of absence and presence of collector with a SHIMADZU 8300 Model infrared spectrophotometer. All spectra were recorded between 4000 and 400 Contact angle ( The surface tension of methanol solutions was determined by the drop weight method at room temperature of 25±1 The surface tension of kerosene used as a bridging liquid is 25.95 As it is known, the agglomeration recovery or the extent of agglomeration depends on surface properties of particles and the nature of the agglomerant. The surface properties of the particles are controlled, in part, by the pH value of aqueous medium. Therefore, the control of pH values of aqueous medium is primarily important. The cos As seen in As seen in  It has been stated in the previous studies that oleic acid and their soaps are in ionized forms as R Under the light of the previous findings, the decreasing of the agglomeration recovery at highly alkaline pH values (pH 11 and above) may be based on both oleate anions which are not adsorbed because of hydroxyl ions adsorption on the mineral surface and the high electrostatic repulsive forces between kerosene droplets and mineral particles. In acid medium (pH 4 and below), the decrease in agglomeration recovery is a result of insufficient hydrophobization of barite particles due to low ionization of Na-oleate. Also, it can be shown in The cos It can be shown in The decrease in the recovery at lower amount of Na-oleate was based on insufficient hydrophobization of mineral surfaces. At higher amount of Na-oleate, the change of recovery was minor, and it could be based on the multi layer oleate formation on the barite surface. In this case, the recovery would tend to oscillate depending on which end of the molecule was projecting away from the surface. In addition, the graph of zeta potential change versus the amount of Na-oleate amount is given in Also, it can be shown in The results of FTIR spectra of barite are given in The IR bands at 650.0, 991.3 and 1093.6 These findings show that the oleate anions are chemisorbed on the barite surface. The obtained results are in a good agreement with the results of Martinez and Uribe The conclusions obtained from this study are as follows: Naturally hydrophilic barite can be agglomerated with Na-oleate as an anionic type collector and kerosene as a bridging liquid. The changes in pH values and amount of Na-oleate affect significantly the oil agglomeration recovery. The oleate adsorption on barite surface increases the value of negative zeta potential and the isoelectric point (iep) value of barite was found to be around at pH 5. The oleate anions are adsorbed on the barite surface chemically. Both at the optimum pH of 10 and at the optimum amount of Na-oleate of 3 In agglomeration system, the decisive rules could not put down in declare of agglomeration success with the critical surface tension of wetting value as in the flotation, because there are different liquids as water and oil (bridging liquid) in the agglomeration system. The authors acknowledge the financial support of this study provided by Cumhuriyet University Research Fund unit.