Pyrite depression in xanthate flotation of multiple sulphide minerals has become a serious problem in every mineral industry. The present study introduces a novel and non-hazardous depressant reagent scheme in selective flotation of chalcopyrite from pyrite with sodium butyl xanthate (SBX) as the collector. The combined inhibitory effect of an organic polymer, tricarboxylate sodium starch (TCSS), and calcium oxide (CaO) depressed the flotation of pyrite more strongly than that of the chalcopyrite in a wide pH range of 7–12. The synergistic effect of CaO and TCSS achieved an improved selective flotation separation of chalcopyrite from pyrite at low alkaline pH of 9, for which the recovery of chalcopyrite was over 80% and that of pyrite was less than 19%. The IR spectral, XPS spectral, UV–vis spectral and zeta potential measurements indicated that the surface of pyrite adsorbed significantly more amount of CaO and TCSS than that of the chalcopyrite. The dissolved calcium species preferentially adsorbed on the pyrite surface decreasing its negative charge and promoting TCSS adsorption. The findings of this research are of great significance in reducing the consumption of larger doses of lime in conventional Cu–Fe flotation circuits of the copper industry.Copper is an important nonferrous base metal that is required for the numerous applications in modern manufacturing industries. Approximately 80% of copper in the world is produced via the pyrometallurgical processing of copper sulphide ores ( Conventionally, the depression of pyrite is usually carried out by the additions of inorganic reagents at extremely high pH ˃ 11 ( Bio-based depressants have been considered as more favourable flotation reagents owing to their environmental friendliness and cost-effective characteristics ( Tricarboxylate sodium starch is a class of polysaccharides whose adsorption behaviour depends largely on the availability of metal hydroxyl species on mineral surfaces ( Mineral samples of pyrite and chalcopyrite used in this investigation were received from Yunfu, Guangdong Province, China. Minerals were carefully handpicked, crushed, and ground in a laboratory porcelain mill and sieved to obtain a maximum amount of 38–74 µm size fraction for flotation experiments. Samples with size less than 38 µm were ground further to <2 µm for the surface analysis measurements including zeta potential measurements, UV–vis spectral analysis, infrared spectral (IR) analysis and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was carried out to confirm the purity of mineral samples and the results are shown in Sodium butyl xanthate (industrial grade collector, 92% purity) was received from a chemical factory of Zhuzhou, China. Terpineol (analytical grade, Guangdong Xilong Chemical Co., Ltd., China) was used as the frother. Sodium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid (analytical grade, Tianjin Kemiou Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd., China) were used as the pH modifiers. Calcium oxide (analytical grade, Aladdin reagent Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China) and laboratory prepared tricarboxylate sodium starch (TCSS) were used as the depressants. The IR spectrum and characteristic infrared peaks of major functional groups in TCSS are presented in Flotation experiments were performed in an XFG flotation machine (40 mL, Jilin Exploration Machinery Plant, Changchun, China) at an impeller speed of 1650 rpm. In each experiment, the mineral suspension was prepared by dispersing 2 g of the ground mineral into a 40-mL plexiglass cell containing 35 mL of DI water. Following the pH adjustment with HCl or NaOH with a stirring time of 2 min, the desired reagent(s) was/were added to the flotation pulp. The addition order and conditioning time for each reagent is illustrated in Experimental procedure used in selective flotation experiments on mixed minerals was the same as that as illustrated in Zeta potential measurements were performed using a Nano Zs90 zeta spectrometer (Malvern Instruments, UK). Potassium nitrate (KNO UV–vis spectral measurements were performed using a 201 UV–Vis spectrophotometer (Shimazu, Japan). UV–vis spectra of the xanthate solution before and after interaction with minerals treated by CaO and TCSS were recorded based on the solution depletion method. For each measurement, the mineral suspension was prepared by dispersing 2 g of the ground minerals into a 40-mL plexiglass cell containing 35 mL of DI water. Following the pH adjustment by HCl or NaOH with a stirring time of 2 min, a pre-determined dosage of SBX was added to the suspension and conditioned for 10 min. Following the centrifugation process of resulting solution at 10,000 rpm for 20 min, the absorbance of supernatant was determined using a quartz colorimetric utensil. All the measurements were performed at a room temperature (25 ± 1 °C). Infrared spectral measurements were performed using a Bruker Alpha FTIR spectrometer (Nicolet 6700, Thermo Scientific, USA). Approximately 1% (mass fraction) of each mineral was blended with a spectroscopic grade KBr and IR spectra were recorded in the range of 4000–400 cm X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were performed using an ESCALAB 250Xi spectrometer (Thermo Fisher-VG Scientific, USA) with Al Kα as a sputtering source (1486.6 eV) operated at 105 W. During analysis, the pressure in analyzer chamber, total spectral energy and step size were set at 10 In order to investigate the individual inhibitory effect of each reagent, flotation experiments were carried out separately with CaO and TCSS.   Results shown in To summarize, the flotation tests on single minerals indicated that a combined inhibitory effect of CaO and TCSS was more effective than that of their individual effect. The synergistic effect of combined depressants achieved an improved depression of pyrite with a lesser concentration of CaO and TCSS at pH 9. Therefore, a combined inhibitory effect of CaO and TCSS could provide an effective flotation separation between chalcopyrite and pyrite. Selective flotation experiment on mixed minerals is a best laboratory measurement mainly used to assess the selectivity of a new flotation reagent. To investigate the selective depressive behaviour of CaO and TCSS, flotation experiments on a mixture of chalcopyrite and pyrite were carried out using the optimized parameters: 30 mg/L TCSS, 200 mg/L CaO, 10  Based on flotation results, it is therefore concluded that a combined depressant scheme has a great potential to be used as an alternative depressant system in Cu–Fe conventional flotation circuits. Zeta potential results of mineral particles as a function of pH in the absence and presence of flotation reagents are illustrated in  As can be seen in  To summarize, zeta potential results indicated that a combined effect of CaO and TCSS significantly modified the surface properties of pyrite; as a result, the surface of pyrite remained passive for the collector adsorption. In contrast, the surface of chalcopyrite adsorbed a significant amount of collector in the presence of CaO and TCSS, indicating a very limited effect of the combined depressants onto the chalcopyrite. Zeta potential results indicated that the prior additions of combined depressants significantly reduced the adsorption of collector onto the pyrite surface. To authorize zeta potential results, UV–vis measurements were carried out further, and the results are shown in Infrared spectral (IR) results of mineral particles in the presence of different flotation reagents are shown in   X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) results of mineral particles in the absence and presence of 30 mg/L TCSS and 200 mg/L CaO at pH of 9.5 ± 0.2 are shown in As seen in The addition of combined depressants indicated an important effect on the binding energies of surface species of minerals. As can be noted from To summarize, XPS results revealed that CaO and TCSS significantly adsorbed and affected the surface properties of pyrite. In contrast, the surface of chalcopyrite remained mildly inert in the presence of combined depressants under the investigated experimental conditions. Flotation results showed that a combined inhibitory effect of CaO and TCSS depressed the flotation of pyrite more strongly than that of chalcopyrite. All of the surface measurements, including zeta potential, UV–vis, IR spectral and XPS spectral analysis, indicated that the addition of CaO and TCSS considerably adsorbed and affected the surface properties of pyrite and thus enhanced the hydrophilicity of pyrite. The dissolved calcium species substantially and preferentially adsorbed on the pyrite surface decreasing its negative charge and promoting TCSS adsorption. Based on the aforementioned measurements, the adsorption mechanism of CaO and TCSS on pyrite surface was proposed. This research offers a novel and non-hazardous depressant reagent scheme in selective flotation of chalcopyrite from pyrite with sodium butyl xanthate (SBX) as the collector. The combined inhibitory effect of an organic polymer, tricarboxylate sodium starch (TCSS), and calcium oxide (CaO) on pyrite and chalcopyrite was systematically investigated through a series of laboratory scale measurements including microflotation tests, zeta potential measurements, UV–vis spectral analysis, IR spectral analysis and XPS spectral analysis. Following main conclusions were drawn from the whole study: Flotation results showed that a combined effect of CaO and TCSS inhibited the flotation of pyrite more strongly than that of the chalcopyrite in a wide pH range of 7–12. Moreover, the combined inhibitory effect of CaO and TCSS was more effective than that of their individual effect. The synergistic effect of CaO and TCSS provided an improved selective separation of chalcopyrite and pyrite at a low alkaline pH of 9, for which the recovery of pyrite in flotation concentrate was less than 19% and that of chalcopyrite was over 80%. All of the surface analysis measurements indicated that CaO and TCSS interacted differently with the two minerals; the surface of pyrite adsorbed significantly more amount of CaO and TCSS than that of the chalcopyrite. Zeta potential results indicated that the dissolved calcium species preferentially adsorbed on the pyrite surface decreasing its negative charge and thus promoting TCSS adsorption. IR spectral and XPS spectral analyses provided the evidences in support of a chemical interaction between Ca-species and TCSS on the pyrite surface. The outcomes of a current research are of great importance in reducing the consumption of larger doses of lime (CaCO The authors declared that there is no conflict of interest. This research was supported by the