Spent hydro-refining catalysts mainly consists of 20–22% MoO3, 5–6% NiO, 4–5% S, 1–2% Co3O4, 1.3–1.5% Fe2O3, 3–4% SiO2, and the balance is Al2O3. In the present study, one such spent catalyst was roasted with sodium chloride to recover molybdenum by converting it into sodium molybdate. The sodium molybdate was further purified by chemical treatment to obtain a pure grade molybdenum trioxide. Various parameters like temperature, time and NaCl addition have been studied, and conditions for the maximum recovery of molybdenum have been established.Petroleum refining industry mostly uses molybdenum-containing catalysts for desulphurization and mild hydrogenation processes. These catalysts have limited life times and, after utilization, are generated as waste termed as spent catalyst. During hydro-refining, the catalysts get poisoned due to contamination with element compounds such as S, Fe, Si, and Zn, etc. These spent catalysts on decomposition cause soil, air as well as water pollution. With increasing environmental concerns and stringent legislations over disposal of hazardous materials, industries are forced to process their own waste products and residues to meet the acceptable environmental standards. The choice of options for utilization must be suited to local conditions, markets and the existing technology ( Various process options are available to recover molybdenum from ores and minerals. Electrooxidation process, although effective for molybdenum recovery from ores, involves high consumption of electrical energy ( Although, chlorination process is found to be quite effective as well as selective. But due to its corrosiveness and toxicity, chlorine gas or any mixture of it inhibits the operation ( Salt-roasting on the other hand is found to be suitable for molybdenum recovery, where a water-soluble molybdate product is obtained in a one-step operation ( In the present study, roasting of the molybdenum-spent catalyst has been carried out using sodium chloride, and optimum conditions for extraction of molybdenum have been established. The hydro-refining molybdenum-spent catalyst used in the study had the chemical composition as reported in Experiments were carried out in 50-g scale. The charge composed of a weighed amount of spent catalyst and sodium chloride. This charge was kept in a mullite crucible and heated gradually in a crab-like furnace to a predetermined temperature. The accuracy of the furnace was ±1 °C. The roasted mass was then cooled inside the furnace. When the temperature of the roasted mass reached 100 °C, the material was removed from the furnace and cooled to room temperature. The calcined mass was then leached in deionized water with pulp density of 20 wt.% at 70–90 °C for 60 min to extract water-soluble sodium molybdate. The amount of molybdenum recovered as Na The roasting of molybdenum-spent catalyst with sodium chloride at 900 °C leads to the formation of soluble sodium molybdate. The reaction involved is as below: In the present study, the main parameters that effect the extraction of molybdenum from spent catalyst were considered, and the best condition for the maximum recovery has been established. During the study on salt-roasting of spent molybdenum catalyst, the roasting temperature was varied in the range of 700–1000 °C, with an interval of 50 °C. The period of roasting was kept constant for 30 min, adding sodium chloride in excess of 5% of the stoichiometric requirement. The percentage molybdenum extraction vs. temperature is shown in The effect of sodium chloride addition for extraction of molybdenum from spent catalyst was studied for a period of 30 min at 900 °C. The NaCl addition was varied from 10 to 30 wt.%, and the results obtained are represented in In order to study the role of period of reaction on molybdenum recovery, the reaction period was varied from 10 to 90 min, with an interval of 10 min, keeping the temperature and NaCl addition constant. The experimental results are shown in It is observed that, at 900 °C with 20 wt.% NaCl content in the feed, there is gradual increase in molybdenum extraction with the increase in roasting time up to 60 min, where 90% of molybdenum is extracted from the spent catalyst ( Thus, the observations revealed that, on the basis of laboratory sale study, it is possible to recover 90% of molybdenum at 900 °C with 20 wt.% sodium chloride when roasted for a period of 60 min. The solution containing sodium molybdate is then treated with hydrochloric acid at pH 2, which decomposes sodium molybdate into various chloride salts as per the reaction This solution is then treated with ammonia until the pH reached 11. At this stage, ammonium polymolybdate formation takes place as per the reaction The above investigation revealed that the hydro-refining spent catalyst generated during desulphurization of petroleum product can serve as a secondary source of molybdenum. Sodium chloride roasting is effective for molybdenum recovery from spent catalyst. The process has an advantage for preparation of sodium molybdate as well as molybdenum trioxide as the end product. Under optimum experimental conditions, i.e., roasting temperature at 900 °C, 20 wt.% addition of NaCl to the feed and a roasting period of 60 min, it is possible to extract up to 90% of molybdenum from hydro-refining spent catalyst. Bench scale study of the process is under progress.