Initially studied in the frame of the first French act on radioactive waste management (December 1991), the pyrotechnology is currently assessed by the Nuclear Energy Direction of the Commissariat à l’Energie Atomique (CEA) within the succeeding act (June 2006) as a potential alternative to hydrometallurgy for the reprocessing of targets or dedicated fuels (coming from accelerator-driven systems or ADS) considered for the minor actinides transmutation.
                  The R&D program is mainly focused on the evaluation of the fluoride melts as interesting media for operating separation between the actinides and the fission products. Two separation techniques are currently evaluated; the first one uses the liquid–liquid extraction technique between molten fluoride and liquid metal at high temperature, the second one is based on an electrolytic separation in a molten fluoride melt. Both are promising in terms of separation efficiency. This paper gives an overview of the current studies and presents the last main experimental results.The French planning act of 28 June 2006 on Sustainable Management of Radioactive Materials & Waste involves one specific area devoted to Partitioning and Transmutation of Long-lived Radioactive Elements. This act notably requires further investigations conducted with those concerning the new generations of nuclear reactors and the accelerator-driven systems (ADS) dedicated to transmutation of waste, in order to provide by 2012 an assessment of the industrial prospects of those systems and to commission a pilot facility before 31 December 2020. Among the various techniques of reprocessing, the pyrotechnology is assessed as a potential alternative to hydrometallurgical technology ( A R&D programme on pyrotechnology has been launched at Marcoule in the late-1990s. It is going on in order to provide the largest quantity of facts before 2012. Ideally a new pyroprocess should not generate more waste and should be at least as safe and cost effective as the hydrometallurgical processes currently implemented at industrial scale. Therefore, along with experimental research, it is necessary to conduct system studies to devise potential processes and to assess their capability to achieve the assigned objectives. These latter are: (i) to recover all the actinides (>99.9%) present in the process input stream for recycling them, (ii) to ensure sufficient decontamination between actinides and fission products, (iii) to generate the minimum of ultimate waste flows, and (iv) to have suitable confinement of process waste. Preliminary experimental studies showed that fluoride medium is very attractive in terms of confinement: direct fluoride immobilization into glass matrix up to 15 An alpha laboratory has been equipped in the Atalante facility (Marcoule, France) and the design of a hot cell for performing tests on irradiated materials is currently under consideration. Two main separation techniques are currently evaluated; the first one is named chemical reductive extraction and consists in using molten fluoride–liquid metal extraction technique at high temperature, the second one is based on an electrolytic separation in a molten fluoride melt. In both cases, the process begins with a series of head-end operations on the fuel assemblies to obtain an oxide powder that is fine enough (50–100 After the dissolution step, the actinides and the non-volatile fission products are present in the fluoride melt as fluorides. Only the platinum group fission products are preferentially at the metallic state and could be preliminarily digested by suitable metallic solvent such as zinc. The rare earths (Ln) are the most awkward fission products to be separated from the actinides (An). The chemical reductive extraction of any trivalent element M(III) (actinide or rare earth) from the fluoride melt to a liquid metallic solvent by an For a given element M at the temperature According to the Eq. To optimize the An/Ln separation (i.e., to increase the separation factor ( Other studies from CEA have also shown its interest as a selective reducing agent for actinide fluorides According to The difference between the distribution coefficients obtained by using AlCu and pure Al is mainly due to the variation of the mole fraction of Al in the metallic solvent; besides a probable and little variation of An alternative route (without aluminium) could be necessary if troubles occur in the subsequent step of the process where the actinides have to be recovered from the liquid aluminium (several options are currently evaluated). One possible route is based on the electrolytic recovery on inert solid cathode, from which the actinides could be easily separated, mechanically for instance. A first rough assessment of such a technique necessarily goes through preliminary electrochemical studies in fluoride electrolytes of interest. These studies are very few on actinides The experimental set-up is presented ( The molten LiF–CaF In order to avoid any disturbance of the other measurements, the temperature of the salt was measured at the end of the experiment. Electrochemical measurements (cyclic voltammetry (cv) and square-wave voltammetry (sqw)) were performed with an Autolab PGstat30. The working electrode was a 1-mm ∅ tungsten wire (Goodfellow, 99.9%) sheathed with Al  Thus, the americium (+II) oxidation state is not stable in fluoride medium contrary to the chloride one NdF Square-wave voltammetries at various frequencies were measured ( The peaks were, respectively, attributed to the Am(III)/Am, Nd(III)/Nd and Li(I)/Li redox couples. Under restrictive conditions, the square-wave voltammetry peak potential can be assimilated to the apparent standard potential The difference potential between Am(III)/Am and Nd(III)/Nd redox couples in LiF–CaF This overview shows that fluoride-based salts are promising in terms of An/Ln separation and of confinement of the ultimate process wastes. Spent fluoride melt can be directly confined in a glass matrix and there are two separation techniques theoretically attractive for operating actinides/rare earths separation. All these experimental results encourage us to pursue the evaluation, notably on irradiated materials (transmutation targets or spent ADS fuel) in shielded cell, and possibly at higher scale, to confirm or invalidate these preliminary lab-scale results.