Bubble size, which controls flotation kinetics, is strongly dependent on frother concentration. Frother concentration variations occur in operations due to the complexity of some circuits and the demands to deliver a reagent at part-per-million levels. A colorimetric technique for analysis of samples from industrial streams has been developed that enables frother deportment around flotation circuits to be determined. This exercise, referred to as frother distribution mapping, establishes whether frother delivery strategies reach the target concentrations and identifies where corrective action may be beneficial. A case study, which illustrates sampling and analytical protocols, reveals significant concentration differences between grinding circuit products, which were not eliminated by merging the streams. Other findings were concentration variations that suggested cycling of frother delivery, the presence of remnant frother in recycled process waters, and the occurrence of frother partitioning between pulp and froth. The experiences, particularly adaptations to local conditions, may help others in planning frother mapping exercises.Flotation is a separation process based on the affinity of selected (hydrophobic) particles to attach to bubbles. Particle-bubble collision frequency, and hence flotation kinetics, strongly depends on bubble size and bubble size distribution. Characterization of bubble populations, through measurement of the so-called gas dispersion parameters (gas velocity, gas holdup, and bubble size), is now routine in industrial practice ( Frothers are added to flotation systems for two main purposes: to preserve bubble formation size in the pulp (collection) zone, and to help stabilize the froth. As a function of concentration bubble size (specifically the Sauter mean diameter) decreases rapidly until a transition value, referred to as the critical coalescence concentration (CCC), above which there is little or no further size reduction ( Based on the above observations, a practical strategy for frother delivery is to target CCC as the concentration ( Plants add frother at intervals around a circuit, and some at only the head end. The anticipation is that frother will disptribute to provide the local concentrations required. There are, however, uncontrolled factors that cause variations in frother concentration such as unstable delivery, uneven distribution into lines of cells, partitioning into the concentrate stream, and residual frother in recycle waters. Stable operation demands stable local frother concentrations (i.e., stable distribution): testing this condition was the driver for frother distribution mapping. The method is based on the colorimetric technique to determine frother concentration introduced by The analytical procedure is described in detail in Frother extraction by contacting the aqueous sample with chloroform; Frother extraction and dehydration by contacting the loaded chloroform with concentrated sulfuric acid; Formation of a colored complex by addition of salicyl aldehyde to the loaded sulfuric acid and immersion in a boiling-water bath for 15 Collection of absorbance spectrum for wavelengths between 300 and 700 Construction of a calibration curve (frother concentration vs. absorbance) at a wavelength where the summation of squared residuals (SSR) is minimum. The Komarowsky reaction using salicyl aldehyde has demonstrated to be reliable, as 48 out 49 frothers have formed colored complexes ( In refining the analysis technique it was found that reagent specifications could be critical particularly in the case of chloroform. Chloroform requires a stabilizer to avoid decomposition and normally either of two compounds is used: ethanol or amylene, with ethanol proving the better choice. Amylene-stabilized chloroform quickly develops a strong color, even in samples with no frother. However, poor reproducibility was apparent on occasions when ethanol-stabilized chloroform was used, a problem traced to limited shelf-life. Safe practice is to use chloroform from the same batch for all samples collected in a given survey. Every time a new chloroform bottle is opened, the analysis of a frother-free sample is recommended. For on-site work at remote locations, where it may be difficult to find a chemical supplier, it is important to secure a stock of fresh chloroform large enough to process the expected number of samples. If this is not possible, one alternative is to re-use the chloroform discarded from previous tests; no significant analysis differences have been observed using fresh and recycled chloroform. The generation of a colored solution requires keeping the loaded sulfuric acid in boiling water for a given time. The time used in our case (15 An option for preparation of standard solutions for construction of the calibration curve is to use process water to account for effects that components other than frother may have on the absorbance. However, the presence of residual frother in process waters is common and construction of calibration curves using both tap and process waters is recommended; if the calibration curves lie on top of each other the process water is frother-free, otherwise an estimate of residual frother concentration can be made. The selection of sampling points and collection of samples are no less crucial than in any plant campaign. Sampling points depend on the flowsheet, as will be illustrated in the case study, but cell type and arrangement also play a role as they often impose access restrictions. Tests to establish reliable frother concentration differences between lines and cells, or to perform a frother mass balance around part of or the full circuit, require collection of samples simultaneously or at least within a short time interval, a difficult proposition in cases if there is only one sampling team. Samples need to be processed quickly after collection, at least within 4–6 From discussions at different plants, it is evident operators share many of the same concerns regarding frother. The most important issue seems to be whether current frother dosages ensure a reliable distribution around the circuit with concentration levels at or above the selected target in every location. Other concerns are the effectiveness of the frother delivery strategy to yield stable cell operation and the magnitude and constancy of frother in recycle waters. There are also some points of academic interest, such as frother partitioning in cells (higher concentration in the concentrate stream relative to that in the pulp), which may be related to air recovery (fraction of air leaving the cell in the unburst bubbles). Results of a mapping exercise, run in a South-America copper concentrator, address these issues and illustrate procedures. The concentrator has four parallel grinding circuits feeding three flotation circuits with 17 parallel lines of self-aspirating or forced-air cells of different sizes. Every line includes cells of the same type and size. A commercial frother, Nalflote 9837P from Nalco, is added after grinding and in some lines in advance. The first task is preparation of two of the reagents required in the analytical procedure: a concentrated solution of sulfuric acid (85%) prepared by dilution of the pure acid, and the Komarowsky indicator (a 5% salicylaldehyde solution in 50%-diluted acetic acid). The analysis is run on 100 Construction of the calibration curve ( For process water it was first determined that this contained 11.3 To determine analysis error the standard deviation (SD) was determined. Four 100 A feature of many circuits, especially large tonnage operations, is the use of one or more grinding lines feeding parallel flotation lines. In the case study here, there are four grinding circuits, two delivering products to different flotation cell lines ( In the case of Grinding Circuits 1 and 2 ( The products of Grinding Circuits 3 and 4 are mixed in a distribution box before delivery to twelve lines of cells ( Testing stability has been done in two ways ( Measuring concentrations at the same location over time has the advantage that only one person is required for sampling. This is the procedure used here. Samples were collected every half hour for 3.5 The presence of frother in recycled process waters appears to be the rule rather than the exception. There were four sources of recycle water in the concentrator in this case study. The results showed the frother content varied significantly ( Frother transfers (partitions) from the pulp into the froth and cell overflow stream (concentrate) through adsorption on the bubbles surface and subsequent release after coalescence and bursting. Partitioning, we have found, always occurs to some degree, regardless of frother type and flotation machine. Results on self-aspirating and forced air mechanical cells have shown significant differences between the pulp (“tails”) and concentrate streams, even for neighbouring cells in a line ( Rather than cell-by-cell, due to time limitations, samples were collected across the line. Samples were collected from the feed and final tails and concentrate streams of the lines fed from Grinding Circuit 2 ( This paper has introduced frother distribution mapping to test temporal and spatial concentration variations in flotation circuits. Sampling and analytical procedures are illustrated by a case study. The study revealed significant variations in concentration around parallel flotation lines fed from parallel grinding lines, which were not eliminated by merging the stream in distribution boxes. Other findings were concentration variations that suggested cycling of frother delivery, the presence of remnant frother in recycled process waters, and the occurrence of frother partitioning between the tails and concentrate streams. The results provide the evidence-based data on which operations can make informed adjustments to the frother delivery strategy. Funding of this work is under the Chair in Mineral Processing co-sponsored by Vale Inco, Teck Cominco, Xstrata Process Support, Agnico-Eagle, Shell Canada, Barrick Gold, SGS Lakefield Research, COREM and Flottec under the Collaborative Research and Development Program of NSERC (Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada) and through the AMIRA P9O project also under the Collaborative Research and Development Program of NSERC.