The leather tannery industry produces a significant amount of solid and hazardous wastes. Chromium-containing wastes like tanned shavings used to be incinerated in order to recover energy. The incineration process generates ashes that must be disposed of. This paper is a report on the results of the evaluation of technological properties and environmental compatibility of products made of alumina and ashes from incinerated chrome tanned shavings. The raw materials, tannery ashes and alumina were mixed together in different proportions. The ceramic bodies were molded using a hydraulic press and fired with a heating rate of 100K/h until 1400°C for 4h in a muffle furnace. The ceramic specimens were characterized regarding physical, mechanical and thermal properties. Leaching tests, according to Brazilian, German and Dutch regulations, were performed on ceramic bodies containing different additions of ash. Results show that the ceramic materials produced are acceptable for refractory applications.Most Brazilian leather industries are located in the south part of the country, in the Federal State Rio Grande do Sul, where more than 50% of Brazilian leather is produced. In the tanning industry raw skin is transformed into leather by means of a series of chemical and mechanical operations Since tanned hides are too thick for most purposes, they are split using a machine similar to a horizontal band saw. After splitting, the thickness of the hides must be uniform all over the hide. This is achieved with a shaving machine used in the process line. The helical shaped cutting blades level the overall thickness to meet exact specifications and open the fibber structure, in order to improve the response to subsequent chemical processing. This operation is called shaving and results in the removal of small pieces of leather with a consistency similar to very coarse sawdust. In the Federal State Rio Grande do Sul, it is estimated that each hide generates an average of 4 In Brazil almost all shavings are land filled. However, regulations about solid wastes are becoming more and more restrictive and the disposal of hazardous wastes on land sites may cease to continue. In the European State, the pressure over land filling of wastes with high organic content and toxic substances is continuously increasing Studies to minimize the amount of tannery waste, their treatment and possible exploitation of waste products are very important. According to Rivela et al. Considering the great volume of generated shavings, the direct use is not always possible. Therefore, to avoid the high cost of dumping, shavings can be processed to recover chromium, or thermally treated to reduce the volume to be disposed of. The issue associated with each one of these processes is the problems that they generate. One problem observed by tanners during the recycling of chromium by dissolution from wastes is the poor quality of the chromium due to the presence of organic lipolytic components, metals and other impurities Solidification is another process that has been considered as an alternative solution to the disposal of wastes containing heavy metals. In this process, waste materials are mixed with various binding media to obtain a new product with improved physical properties Several authors Ceramic and glass technologies are considered to be the most versatile for rendering hazardous waste inert because they destroy organic matter, immobilize regulated heavy metals in a stable matrix and are able to convert complex chemical compositions into useful materials with potential for market exploitation The main purpose of this work was to evaluate the immobilization of chromium present in ashes from the incineration of leather shavings with the use of alumina, aiming to produce a refractory material. The technological properties of the obtained product were also evaluated. Raw materials from this work were alumina type APC 2011 from ALCOA and ash from the incineration of chromium tanned leather shaving (ACS). A leather factory in Rio Grande do Sul supplied tannery shaving. The shaving was incinerated on a pilot plant with fixed bed, at a temperature of 800 The composition of the alumina APC 2011 from ALCOA is shown in  The raw materials, ASC and alumina, were mixed together in the ratios shown in The raw materials were dried mixed and ground in a ball mill for 24 The ceramic specimens were characterized in terms of porosity, linear shrinkage and transverse rupture strength, refractoriness and refractoriness under load. Porosity was measured using the Archimedes method according to ASTM C-373/94 Pyrometric cones are designed to deform at certain moments during firing. According to the Brazilian Standard NBR 10358 To evaluate the use of the new refractory material on industrial furnaces it is important to determine the refractoriness under load. This experiment determines the deformation of the refractory material when submitted to a constant load (2 In order to comply with current regulations in Brazil, a low leachability of hazardous components from the ceramic matrix must be achieved. Leaching tests were performed on ceramic bodies produced at 1400 The batch-leaching test procedure described by NBR 10005/1987 is analogous to the American Extraction Procedure Toxicity Test The solubilization test Because there is no leachability test accepted worldwide, the ceramic products were also tested according to the German method Since there are no specific Brazilian regulations concerning leaching tests for monolithic materials, the method adopted in Holland was applied. The NEN 7345/9 Both apparent porosity and mechanical resistance as a function of ash content on the formulations are shown in As can be seen from Comparing the results obtained with 10% ash and 5% Cr  In The resistance of all cones formulated with alumina and ash to the temperatures evaluated shows that the vitreous phase that causes densification of the ceramic specimens still has a high viscosity, avoiding the deformation. The oxide mixture on formulations, chromium oxide – associated to the hardening of the vitreous phase – and fluxes, brings a favorable equilibrium: high densification with high deformation temperature.  In order to get higher confidence levels of the results obtained in the environmental compatibility tests, a statistical approach was used. For that, the error related to the test repeatability was calculated using  The results show that all elements from samples were lixiviated in concentrations smaller than the concentrations established on NBR 10004 Elements/ions barium, lead, cadmium, copper, iron, manganese, zinc, silver, mercury, fluoride, cyanide and nitrate were also evaluated; however, results laid down below the equipment detection limits, which are far smaller than the maximum concentration determined by NBR 10004 Standard The solution generated on the solubilization test with all samples exceeded the limits for chromium. This would be considered to be a non-inert product. According to the Brazilian regulations, the use of ash in the formulation of ceramic products would not assure a good immobilization of chromium. However, it is possible to see that the chromium from ash is less soluble than the chromium that comes from formulation with pure Cr In order to evaluate the results concerning a different regulation, a leaching test was carried out according to specification DIN 38414-S4 The results show that according to the German regulations cited in TA-Abfall In order to evaluate the role of diffusion of elements in monolithic samples, leaching experiments according to NEN 7345 were made. The obtained results in terms of chromium concentration in the lixiviate are shown in The results show that there was no significant chromium lixiviation in all ash-containing samples. The conditions of the test, with bigger samples with smaller surface area, seem to have a great influence on chromium lixiviation. Again, the chromium solubilization for the sample containing Cr The present study was conducted to develop and to characterize a refractory product with the addition of ashes from incinerated chrome tanned shavings in alumina. The feasibility of the use of these ashes as raw material was demonstrated. The increase of ash content decreases the apparent porosity and increases the mechanical resistance and the linear shrinkage of samples. All samples have shown refractoriness higher than the one presented by cone 15 ( Results obtained in this work showed both technological and environmental trends and possibilities of this kind of ceramic waste processing. The authors would like to thank the Brazilian agencies CNPq, CAPES and FAPERGS for financial support of this work. The authors would also like to acknowledge the financial support of World University Service (WUS), Germany.