The porphyry copper deposit (PCD) at Sungun is located in East Azarbaidjan, in the NW of Iran.The Sungun porphyries occur as stocks and dikes ranging in composition from quartz monzodiorite through quartz monzonite and granodiorite to granite. The stocks are divided into two groups (1) Porphyry Stocks I and (2) Porphyry Stock II. Porphyry Stock II, hosting the copper ore, experienced intense hydro-fracturing leading to the formation of stockwork-type and anastomozing veinlets and micro-veinlets of quartz, sulfides, carbonates, and sulfates. Three distinct types of hydrothermal alteration and sulfide mineralization are recognized at Sungun (1) hypogene, (2) contact metasomatic (skarn), and (3) supergene. Four types of hypogene alteration are developed at Sungun, potassic, propylitic, potassic–phyllic, and phyllic.
                  Four types of inclusion are common at Sungun based upon their phase content (1) mono-phase vapor, (2) vapor-rich 2-phase, (3) liquid-rich 2-phase, and (4) multi-phase solid. Halite is the principal solid phase. The distribution pattern, shape, and phase contents of fluid inclusions in quartz veinlets at Sungun are analogous to those from Bingham and Globe-Miami in western USA. The fluid inclusion data at Sungun showed that the liquid–vapor homogenization temperature [T
                     H(L–V)] values for liquid-rich 2-phase, vapor-rich 2-phase, and halite-bearing inclusions vary from 160 to 580 °C, from 200 to 600 °C, and from 160 to 580 °C, respectively. The ascending unboiled fluid at the onset of the phyllic alteration episode had temperatures ∼580 °C and was moderately saline (∼15wt%). With the gradual decrease in temperature, the salinity of this fluid gradually decreased, so that its salinity at temperatures of ∼370 and <270 °C were ∼7 and <2wt%, respectively. Multiple boiling events occurred in Porphyry Stock II during phyllic alteration. With each boiling event the salinity of the residual fluid increased substantially. The first boiling event occurred at temperatures 540–560 °C, and increased the salinity of the residual fluid up to ∼50wt%. At temperatures >350 °C the residual fluid remained undersaturated (with respect to NaCl) however, at temperatures <350 °C they became saturated. The minimum internal pressures calculated for the inclusions having T
                     
                        s
                     (NaCl)≈T
                     H(L–V) showed that they were developed under the maximum hydrostatic pressure head of ∼1500 m during the boiling events.Fluid inclusion studies in porphyry copper deposits (PCDs) have proven to be an important tool for constraining the physico-chemical conditions of the hydrothermal fluids responsible for vast and pervasive alteration and mineralization processes. These fluid inclusion studies have shown many common features in such deposits throughout the world (  The Sungun PCD is located about 100 km NE of Tabriz, in the NW part of Iran (see inset in Porphyry Stock II experienced multiple intense hydrofracturing, manifested by numerous and varied cross-cutting veinlets and micro-veinlets ( Four types of hypogene alterations are developed in the Sungun porphyries: (1) potassic; (2) potassic–phyllic; (3) phyllic; and (4) propylitic. Types 1, 2, and 3 were developed mainly within Porphyry Stock II, whereas the propylitic type of alteration is restricted to peripheral Porphyry Stocks I and some dike series (e.g. DK Contact metasomatic (skarn) alteration occurs in patches along the contact of Porphyry Stock II with Upper Cretaceous carbonates. Two distinct supergene alteration zones are recognized at Sungun (1) oxidized and leached zone and (2) supergene sulfides zone. Fifteen sub-surface samples containing quartz veinlets from diamond drill holes within the hypogene alteration zones (phyllic, potassic–phyllic, and potassic) in Porphyry Stock II were selected for thermometric analyses ( Quartz crystals within almost all types of quartz veinlets (late-type, quartz-sulfide, quartz-molybdenite, and early-type; Based upon their phase content, four types of inclusion, are present at Sungun: (1) mono-phase vapor, (2) vapor-rich 2-phase, (3) liquid-rich 2-phase, and (4) multi-phase solid. However, occasionally mono-phase solid (minute crystal of halite) inclusions are also observed in some samples (e.g. A Inclusion shapes vary from rounded to sub-rounded, irregular, spheroidal, ellipsoidal, elongate, faceted polygonal, and negative quartz crystals (more detail information on the shape and degree of fill of individual inclusions are in Similar characteristics are seen in fluid inclusion assemblages from other PCDs such as El Salvador, Chile ( The fluid inclusions within cross-cutting micro-fractures were developed during the course of multiple hydrofracturing processes. The superimposition of many generations of inclusions in most samples meant that their paragenetic sequence could not be determined confidently. Therefore, separating the inclusions in the Sungun PCD on the basis of their relative time of entrapment (e.g. primary, secondary, and psuedo-secondary) is practically meaningless. A similar problem was also found in fluid inclusions from Bingham and Globe-Miami PCD (Calagari, unpublished data). It was observed that there are discernible micro-populations of inclusions within which there co-exist inclusions of all types, showing all ranges of salinity and Thermometric analyses were performed principally on fluid inclusions which were relatively large (>7 μm) and preferably polygonal and bi-pyramidal-shaped. Two common thermometric procedures, freezing and heating, were employed to determine the approximate salinity (wt% NaCl equivalent) and homogenization temperature ( Freezing was carried out mainly for non-halite-bearing liquid-rich inclusions, and the temperature of the first melting point (eutectic point for NaCl–H The heating stage was used for all types of inclusion (except for mono-phase vapor inclusions). For non-halite-bearing inclusions the homogenization temperature of liquid and vapor (either L+V→L or L+V→V) was recorded. In the halite-bearing inclusions, two points: (1) As found in most PCD, the fluid inclusions at Sungun are variable in type, distribution pattern, homogenization temperature ( The frequency distribution of halite-bearing inclusions homogenizing by halite disappearance ( The maximum Although it was not possible to verify the temporal relationships among all inclusions, in several samples (e.g. A Halite-bearing and non-halite-bearing liquid-rich inclusions at Sungun exhibit a wide variation in salinity, ranging from 0.2 to 65.5 There are great many halite-bearing fluid inclusions whose data points lie above the halite saturation curve ( More remarkable is the fact that within a narrow range of It is interpreted that the high salinity values measured in inclusions having On the other hand, There is a clear salinity gap within the range of 23–28 Based upon fluid inclusion data, the ascending fluids forming the quartz-sulfide and quartz-moylbdenite veinlets began to boil at temperatures ∼580 °C. The evidence for this is the intimate co-existence of the gas-dominated 2-phase, moderate salinity liquid-rich 2-phase, and high salinity halite-bearing multi-phase inclusions, homogenizing over the same temperatures (in sample A Petrographic studies show that although the quartz-sulfide and quartz-molybdenite veinlets occurred spatially in phyllic, potassic–phyllic, and potassic alteration zones, they were developed temporally in the course of the overprinting phyllic alteration episode. The fluid inclusion data obtained from these veinlets indicate that the separated and evolved magmatic fluids involved at the onset of overprinting phyllic alteration and sulfide mineralization processes at Sungun had temperatures ∼560–580 °C and were moderately saline (∼15 I would like to express my sincere thanks and appreciation to the Ministry of Science, Research, and Technology of Iran and Tabriz University for providing financial support, and to the Department of Earth Sciences of Manchester University for furnishing access to laboratory facilities. I also wish to thank many geologists and engineers of Ahar Copper Mines Company for their generous assistance and cooperation during field work at Sungun. I should be thankful to Prof. Richard Pattrick and Dr Dave Polya for their advice and valuable suggestions at Manchester University. My gratitude is further expressed to Dr Tony Barber and Dr David Alderton (London) for reviewing and making critical comments on this paper.