The Schmidt Hammer test has been widely used in civil engineering to define surface strength of concrete; however, its use in rock mechanics and mining applications have also been the subject of several research works in the past. Roxborough and Whittaker In thick coal seam mining where sublevel caving method is used, it is vital to know the changing strength characteristics of different levels of coal seams, which would determine the excavability/workability of the seam for planning of the mine. The Schmidt Hammer seems to be one of the best methods to be used for this purpose. However, according to the best knowledge of the authors of this study, there is not any information in the published literature on how the Schmidt Hammer value is affected by the existence and spacing of cleats. The main objective of this research is to see whether it is possible to define a Schmidt Hammer strength reduction factor related to cleat occurrence and cleat spacing, and a methodology of using in-situ Schmidt Hammer values to correlate with laboratory coal strength values, and thus to develop a new excavability/workability classification system for coals. For this purpose, an underground coal mine having around 30 The studied coal mine is located in Eynez province of Soma district in the city Manisa and operated by Imbat Coal Mining AS under license from Turkish Coal Enterprises (TKI). Soma Coal Basin is one of the largest economic lignite-bearing alluvial basins in the western Turkey, with around 600 million tonnes of coal reserves dispersed in 11 different areas. The sublevel caving method is used with three consecutive longwalls following each other by 20–25 The coal is highly prone to spontaneous combustion in the mine. The fly ash obtained from a thermal power plant is mixed with water and pumped behind the longwall to prevent spontaneous combustion of coal. Gas emissions are recorded with a Senturion Remote Control Gas Monitoring System established in August 2009. All the electrical systems automatically cut off if the methane emissions reach a level of 0.5% in the mine air. Output coal is transported directly to the coal preparation plant having a washing capacity of 600 Schmidt Hammer is a portable device developed in 1948 to measure the surface hardness of concrete and it has been later used extensively to test in-situ strength of rock formations and coal. The main working principle is realized by transforming potential energy to kinetic energy by means of a spring and hammer within the testing device. Mainly two standards are used for Schmidt Hammer tests. The standard suggested in the “ISRM suggested methods for rock characterization, testing and monitoring (2007–2014), ASTM standard for Schmidt Hammer In-situ N-type Schmidt Hammer tests were carried out perpendicular to fresh coal surfaces in 134 different areas along the mine outline, including coal faces and roadways, and 1357 Schmidt Hammer readings were obtained. The hammer was calibrated before and after the use in the mine. Almost one square metre of fresh surface was prepared in each measurement location. Ten measurements were taken at each area having a distance of at least one plunger diameter from the previous measuring point as indicated in ASTM. Histogram of total 1357 Schmidt Hammer rebound values corresponding to 134 different locations along the mine is given in The most widely used strength property for coal is compressive strength. Due to the difficulties in taking core samples, cubic samples are preferred in coal strength testing. It is reported in the literature that compressive strength value of coal decreases with increasing cube size and after 50 Natural vertical fracture systems in bituminous coalbeds are called “cleat”. Cleat orientation commonly controls the direction of mining with major development paralleling the face cleat. Previous researchers have categorized the origin of cleat as edogenetic relating the origin of cleat to compaction and coalification, and exogenetic relating the origin of cleat to tectonic forces. Endogenetic cleat is formed during the process of physical changes in the properties of coal during the metamorphic process. Coal matter undergoes density changes and a decrease in its volume. These processes are associated with the changes in the internal stress system, compaction and desiccation, and the formation of cleat planes. Exogenetic cleat is formed as a result of the external stresses acting on the coal seam, which include tectonic stresses, fluid pressure changes, folding and development of tensile stresses that coal seam is subjected during various time periods. Endogenetic cleats are normal to the bedding plane of coal and generally occur in pairs. There are at least two sets of near perpendicular fractures that intersect the coal to form an interconnected network throughout a coal-bed. These two fracture systems are known as face and butt cleats. The shorter butt cleat normally terminates at a face cleat, which is the prominent type of cleat. Directional permeability of coal is directly related to cleats. Holes drilled perpendicular to the face cleats yield from 2.5 to 10 times the amount of released gas as compared with holes drilled perpendicular to the butt cleats. Cleat spacing, length, height, connectivity, aperture size, degree of mineral infilling, type of mineral infilling, and angle of orientation all affect the ability of fluids to travel through coal, and hence, the rate and volume of methane which can be extracted. Thus, a clear understanding of cleats is essential for the success of any coal seam gas venture and coal workability. An intensive review of cleats is made by Laubach et al. The angle between the face and butt cleats is around 90°. The spacing between cleats varies according to factors such as the coal maturity, the mineral matter and the carbon content, but normally is less than 25 One of the most important parameter affecting rock mass strength is the number of joints or fractures. Young and Fowell Statistical percentile analysis is carried out to see the effect of cleat spacings on Schmidt Hammer values. In this analysis, strength reduction factor (SHRF) as defined by Young and Fowell is calculated by The effect of cleat spacings (frequencies) on SHRF The relationship between mean Schmidt Hammer values (of ten readings at a certain location) and mean of the three highest Schmidt Hammer values and compressive strength is seen in The Schmidt Hammer values given in  The Schmidt Hammer test is widely used in the laboratory and in the field to make quick estimations of rock strength and is well correlated with some mechanical rock properties. However, if it is used for the characterization of coal seams, there is no doubt that the tests will be affected by the presence of cleats. Although there are several published research works related to the application of Schmidt Hammer on coal seams, the effect of cleat spacing on test values has not been established till now. This work carried out on the methodology of using the Schmidt Hammer reveals the fact that strength reduction factor defined by Young and Fowell A total of 1357 Schmidt Hammer readings were conducted at 134 locations of the coal mine within the scope of this research study. The readings are marked along the cross-section of the 30 The forty-nine coal samples were collected from the locations where the Schmidt Hammer readings were obtained. Compressive strength, static elasticity modulus, and acoustic wave velocities tests ( Based on the studies performed, a classification for excavatabilithy/workability of coal seams has been developed to help designers for the future mine planning activities. This research was carried out with financial support of Imbat from the