The estimation and analysis of uncertainty propagation in separation circuits is an important, but challenging, aspect of a comprehensive circuit design strategy. Owing to the sophisticated and complex modeling requirements, many of the current separation circuit design tools rely on deterministic models, despite the ubiquity of uncertainty in the model input parameters. Additionally, many of the uncertainty assessment protocols, which rely on mathematical solutions, provide few insights on how particular circuit modifications will influence uncertainty propagation. As a supplement to these methods, the current paper describes a method of assessing and evaluating separation circuit uncertainty by integrating the fundamentals of linear circuit analysis, the law of propagation of error, and the separation functional unit evaluation technique. This analysis shows how the addition or modification of units within circuits, based on separation functional unit definitions, can be used to predict how uncertainty propagation will change, even with limited a priori data. The capabilities of this innovative approach are illustrated and critically evaluated through a systematic separation experimental study using the roll-type corona electrostatic concentrator for separating titanium from silica within a heavy mineral sand feed.The estimation and analysis of uncertainty propagation in mineral processing separation circuits is an essential and significant, yet challenging, aspect of an optimal circuit design procedure. Conventional mineral separation circuits often employ complex multi-unit configurations with numerous recirculating streams. The design and optimization of these circuit configurations is a challenging endeavor as the number of feasible and sub-optimal solutions is vast. Over the last 40 years, researchers have coupled heuristic methods with laboratory experiments to identify suitable circuit configurations, and most recently, strategies for numeric optimization of circuit configurations have been attempted using mathematical process models and advanced search algorithms. Extensive reviews of these design and optimization methods have been carried out in several studies, including Despite these modeling challenges, the nature of the mineral processing industry introduces considerable uncertainty into the engineering design process. The minerals industry is subject to several sources of epistemic and stochastic uncertainty in both technical and economic factors, which namely include mineral price, ore grade, material separation characteristics, and operational variability. While some prior studies have investigated the influence of uncertainty on isolated unit operations or components of a mineral separation circuit (e.g. Some exceptions to this trend include recent studies by In an earlier work, the current authors provided a brief review of the most recent studies on the mineral processing circuit design under uncertainty and then described a method using linear circuit analysis (LCA) coupled with the law of the propagation of errors (LPE) to evaluate separation circuits under uncertainty ( As a follow up to the previous study, the current communication focuses on identifying fundamental explanations for the results obtained from the aforementioned LCA-LPE methodology. The technical approach uses the concept of separation functional unit evaluation (FUE) originally provided by Lastly, the current study also seeks to evaluate these findings through a detailed experimental program using laboratory separations of real ore samples. This experimental component has been neglected in many prior circuit optimization studies, but is necessary to rigorously assess the merits, drawbacks, and limitations of the proposed approach. Linear circuit analysis (LCA) refers to an analytical circuit analysis approach that is employed to determine circuit separation performance solely based on separation unit arrangements and stream interconnections as well as separation probabilities ( The middle panel of As discussed in the prior study by The combined LCA-LPE methodology may be employed to rank separation circuit designs based on the level of compounded uncertainty (i.e. lack of robustness) for various separation performance measures. In general, LPE predicts the uncertainty (i.e. standard deviation, Similarly, uncertainty propagation of separation circuits may be predicted as a function of standard deviation of input uncertain variables such as unit recovery and feed grade. To calculate the uncertainty of global recovery for specific particle classes, following formulation may be used: As shown in the right panel of The single unit circuit (top panel) is trivial, as the circuit uncertainty remains constant through all As an extension of their initial work in linear circuit analysis,  Given the unique information provided by the functional unit descriptions, this paper seeks to evaluate the influence that functional unit utilization has on circuit uncertainty propagation, namely the information provided by the LCA-LPE approach. The FUE technique, when combined with the LCA-LPE tool, will provide simple design rules that a circuit designer can utilize for both designing greenfield plants and retrofitting existing plants. The LCA methodology is fundamentally restricted by the assumption of process linearity specifying that a unit’s separation performance is not affected by particle-particle interactions ( To demonstrate the practical application of the LCA-LPE method for evaluating uncertainty propagation in mineral processing separation circuits, the relative uncertainty of the circuit recovery factor was first estimated and analytically illustrated for 31 generic one, two, and three-unit circuits. The graphical representation of these mineral separation circuits along with their analytical circuit transfer functions are shown in In addition to the LCA-LPE valuation, unit operations in each circuit were characterized using the seven combinations of basic functional units described in To evaluate the design heuristics derived from LCA, an experimental program was conducted using multistage electrostatic separation of heavy mineral sands. The heavy mineral sample used throughout the experimental testing was obtained from a standard dealer and contains a mix of ilmenite, rutile, leucoxene, quartz, zircon, and staurolite. The feed assay data ( For the purpose of this study, a laboratory-scale roll-type corona electrostatic separator (  As extensively described in the prior section, separation performance tests were conducted using a laboratory-scale electrostatic separator. To prepare for each test, a sufficient quantity of feed sample (400-g) was representatively taken from the original heavy mineral sand sample source. Afterwards, a small (approximately 5–10-g) sub-sampled was recovered from this feed and then analyzed to determine the feed assay. The electrostatic separator was then allowed to run at the high voltage level of 40 kW and the rotating drum speed of 70-rpm. After drying in the feeder for no less than 60 s, the heavy mineral sand sample was then fed to the rotating drum at a flow rate of approximately 100 g/min. After completion of each separation experiment, the conductive materials, including Ti, and non-conductive particles, including Si, were collected from the concentrate and tailings containers. Similar to the feed sample, the recovered concentrate and tailings materials were subjected to the weight measurement and chemical analysis. Throughout the study, all assays were conducted using a Niton XL2 handheld X-Ray Florescence (XRF) analyzer. The XRF scan used the “Mining Cu/Zn” mode with a 60 s overall scan time. To confirm the accuracy of measurements, all assays were repeated 5 times on individual samples, the statistical mean values were determined, and final means then used for the further mass balance and data reconciliation. To properly investigate the capability of LCA-LPE approach in predicting the circuit uncertainty quantification, several one-, two-, and three-unit circuit configurations (C1, C2, C3, C4, C5, C6, C11, C18, C29, C30, and C31) were selected and their separation performance were examined to produce meaningful comparisons. The separation performance comparisons among these circuit designs can be used to evaluate the impact of scavenging and cleaning functionality, through unit addition or modification, on the degree and direction of circuit uncertainty propagation for low and high recovery particles. Repetitive batch (locked-cycle) tests were carried out to simulate continuous circuits with either concentrate or tailings recycles. The basic procedure had a complete batch test performed in the first cycle, which was then followed by similar batch tests which had “intermediate” material from the previous cycle added to the appropriate location in the current cycle. These batch tests, or cycles, were continued in this iterative manner for an arbitrary number (between 5 and 10) of cycles. At the end of each test, the collected concentrate and tailings were subjected to the weight measurement and chemical analysis. All separation tests for individual circuits were repeated five times to effectively determine the relative robustness of each circuit configuration. Following the collection of all laboratory data, including mass and assays for all final products, a standard data reconciliation technique was used to balance the data. For this study, a technique similar to that described by Following the mass balance, yield and recovery were accordingly calculated using standard processing definitions. Given the replicate test data for the five experiments, the mean and standard deviation for both Ti and Si recovery were calculated for each configuration. To normalize the uncertainty data, all standard deviation values are presented as a percentage of the mean value (i.e. coefficient of variation). The estimated uncertainty data were then used to draw meaningful comparisons between the measured recovery uncertainties and those predicted by LCA-LPE. Finally, to fully investigate the predictive capability of LCA approach with limited data, the selectivity and uncertainty data resulted from the experimental program were compared against the LCA and LCA-LPE predictions.  By design, the selection of the specific 31 circuit templates has included multiple instances for each of the seven unique functional unit combinations. To investigate the impact that these functional units have on circuit uncertainty propagation, the value of the relative circuit uncertainty propagation was determined and compared between circuits that utilize different combinations of functional units. To provide a basis for the comparison, the analysis was approached from two perspectives. First, the 31 circuits were assessed to identify pairs of circuits that contain a “base” circuit and a “modified” circuit where a single-function unit was added to the circuit. For example, C1 is the base single-unit circuit, and C5 is a modified version of C1 that has added a scavenger functional unit ( While the comparisons between circuit pairs can be made over a continuous range of recovery values using the curves in The numerical comparisons shown in As expected, the addition of a cleaner functional unit on either the scavenging or cleaning legs indicates the exact opposite trends. As shown in The same analysis can be used to assess the significance of multi-function units by carefully analyzing the circuits employing rougher-cleaner-scavenger (triple function unit) as well as cleaner-scavenger, rougher-cleaner, and rougher-scavenger functional units (dual function units). Similar to the previous discussion, the relative uncertainty of global recovery for high and low recovery values in various generic design examples were evaluated and compared ( As illustrated in Unlike the rougher-scavenger and rougher-cleaner modifications which always follow definitive trends, the scavenger-cleaner modification follows divergent trends depending on the nature of the modification. As shown in Lastly, the rougher-scavenger-cleaner substitutions largely confirm the prior trends. For example, in comparing C31 to C30, the rougher-cleaner unit has been replaced by a rougher-cleaner-scavenger unit. The net result is added scavenging capacity, and as such, the trends follow that of the rougher-scavenger data (i.e. reduced uncertainty of high recovery particles). The C29-C30 modification produces the opposite result, as the net result of that circuit is added cleaning capacity. Interestingly, in comparing C30 to the base case, C1, both cleaning and scavenging capacity has been added, and as such, the uncertainty in both high and low recovery particles is reduced. Given the various observations presented above, the following generic circuit design rules may be derived. Generally, these rules indicate what types of uncertainty propagation outcomes should be expected after implementing a modification to the original circuit design: Adding pure scavenging capacity (without recycle) to an existing circuit will tend to reduce the uncertainty of high recovery particles, while increasing the uncertainty of low recovery particles. Adding pure cleaning capacity (without recycle) produce an identical, albeit reversed, trend. (See Adding scavenging capacity via recirculation (e.g. transforming the rougher to a rougher-scavenger by recirculating the cleaner tailings) will tend to reduce the uncertainty of high recovery particles. Once again, the trend is reversed for added cleaning capacity. (See In more complex circuits, the net effect of uncertainty propagation in both high and low recovery particles can be predicted by assessing the net change in scavenging and/or cleaning capacity and then applying the two rules described above. Typically, the proper implementation of separation functional units with dual or triple functionality will considerably improve the robustness of the circuit design through suppressing the overall level of circuit uncertainty propagation. To evaluate the reliability of proposed circuit design rules, a systematic experiment program was carried out examining the separation performance of 11 circuit design configurations. In the first phase of this study, the impact of scavenger/cleaner functional unit addition to an existing circuit design was evaluated. As such, the relative uncertainty of high (Ti) and low (Si) recovery particles in different circuits were computed and compared against one another ( To further evaluate the derived rules by LCA-LPE methodology, the uncertainty associated with Ti and Si recovery factors were estimated and analyzed for C1, C3, C4, C5, C6, C11, C29, C30, and C31. These comparisons were utilized to evaluate the influence of addition of scavenging and cleaning capacities, through the addition of tailings or cleaning stream recirculation, on the recovery uncertainty in various circuit designs. As illustrated in As discussed in the previous sections, the separation performance of C1 and C30 circuits can be compared to examine how the addition of both cleaning and scavenging capacities alter the level of circuit recovery uncertainty propagations. As indicated in As discussed in To fulfill the assumption of limited input data, for the LCA calculations, the only inputs to the model were the circuit configuration, the approximate single stage recovery value of 70% for Ti and 20% for silica (see C1 in Comparisons between the LCA-predicted values and the experimentally-derived values are shown in Altogether, this result indicates that the LCA approach can indeed serve as a suitable screening tool in many preliminary circuit design applications, and the insight gained from the method can inform the circuit designer on what steps to take when facing a particular challenge. However, the deviations in the trends also suggest that the method is best used as a compliment to more rigorous methods such as simulation and numeric optimization. One such approach has been described by The evaluation of the mineral processing circuit performance under uncertainty is an essential part of an effective separation circuit design methodology. Due to the distinct characteristics of separation circuits, including rigidity and difficulties associated with plant modifications, a practical circuit design and evaluation technique must be capable of explaining fundamental trends and expectations, so that these rules can be implemented during the early design stages. In the current study, the LCA-LPE methodology was combined with the fundamentals of FUE to investigate the causal factors leading to separation circuit uncertainty propagation. The following conclusions are drawn from this study: The direction and degree of circuit uncertainty propagation can be readily predicted using the proposed LCA-LPE and FUE methodology. The cleaner functional unit intensifies the level of recovery uncertainty for particle classes of higher recovery values while suppressing the uncertainty propagation for the lower recovery particle classes. On the other hand, the scavenger unit operation shows opposite behaviors under uncertain conditions. Addition of cleaning function to units that already perform rougher or scavenging functions tends to decrease the recovery uncertainty of gangue particles (i.e. particles with low recovery values). The inverse trend is seen for the scavenging function. Based on the prior two conclusions: dual and triple functional units tend to reduce overall circuit uncertainty; however, that reduction may be more strongly emphasized for certain particle classes. Lastly, these conclusions were evaluated through a comprehensive separation tests using distinct separation circuit designs. The results of these experiments confirmed the capability of LCA-LPE methodology in predicting the circuit selectivity and uncertainty with limited input data. Furthermore, these data indicated that LCA-LPE approach when combined with the FUE concept can be used to analyze uncertainty propagation in separation circuits and predict the direction of uncertainty for modified circuit configurations. The utilization of FUE as a metric to assess circuit performance and uncertainty propagation merits further consideration in future studies on industrial separation circuits. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: