Food microstructural studies began as a means to examine and understand the microscopic interactions of food components or macromolecules as they build up solid or semi-solid structures ( This chapter is focused specifically on structure-engineering of whipped emulsions such as whipped cream and dessert toppings; frozen whipped emulsions such as ice cream and related foamed and frozen dairy and non-dairy desserts; and aqueous food foams, such as meringues. Ingredient and process parameters that affect structure will be reviewed for each, with an emphasis on optimizing structure for stability and quality. The discussion assumes the reader already has some knowledge of the basic ingredients and manufacturing methods for each product category (see Whipped emulsions can either be dairy or non-dairy based, with the distinction made due to the prevalence and tradition associated with whipped dairy cream and its preparation from a naturally occurring emulsion. The processing methods and structure of each are similar, but the ingredients differ. Creation of whipped emulsions is a two-step process. Emulsions are first made, typically by homogenizing a fat phase (at sufficient temperature to have melted the fat) into an aqueous phase with sufficient surfactant present to create a stable emulsion. Homogenization disrupts the bulk fat and creates both tiny droplets (0.5–2.0 During homogenization, the surfactant must cover the newly created fat surface area, to create a stable emulsion (sufficient for the desired shelf life without creaming, flocculation or coalescence) of tiny fat droplets. However, the surface coverage of protein cannot be excessive or it will impede fat structure formation. This depends on the type of protein and the nature of the film it forms on the emulsion droplet interface. Sodium caseinate, for example, will form a Subsequently, and often just prior to consumption, the emulsion is whipped, thus incorporating a gas phase (typically air) in the form of bubbles. The creation of a stable foam relies on two complementary physicochemical processes. First, sufficient surfactant is required to create a small stable air bubble, thus resulting in a very large surface area at high gas phase volume, which distributes the aqueous phase in numerous lamellae between closely-packed bubbles. The gas phase volume of whipped emulsions and foams is typically measured as overrun, the increase in volume that occurs on whipping relative to the initial volume. Overruns of 120% are typical of dairy creams, and values of 600% can be achieved quite easily with non-dairy creams ( At the same time, stabilization of the aqueous phase enhances the entrapment of air, reduces the rate of serum drainage from the lamellae and converts the viscous liquid emulsion into a visco-elastic whipped foam. In the case of whipped emulsions, this occurs with the conversion of the fat emulsion to a partially-coalesced, three-dimensional fat network ( The final structure of whipped emulsions is composed of: fat droplets, covered by a membrane that has been engineered to give appropriate quiescent stability to the emulsion and yet render it susceptible to partial coalescence; air bubbles that are surrounded by an interface of adsorbed fat globules and protein to render them stable against rapid coalescence and ripening; fat aggregates that surround (both physically and adsorbed to) and stabilize the air cells; and, an aqueous phase that is distributed in thin lamella surrounding the air bubbles ( Processing conditions before the whipping of cream have been found to affect the structural properties of the final product, for example homogenized and recombined creams often have much longer whipping times than natural cream Partial coalescence can also be controlled by altering the solid fat content and/or manipulating the orientation of the fat crystals with respect to the droplet surface ( In addition to foams created by mechanical agitation, it is also possible to create foamed emulsions by pressure release. Such products are sold as pressurized emulsions (i.e., a stable gas, nitrous oxide, is dissolved in cream under elevated pressure) and the expansion of gas during pressure release creates a foam that is stabilized by the immediate adsorption of fat to the interface. Aerosol whipped cream is characterized by a high overrun (400–600%), which provides firmness to the close-packed foam. Nonetheless, the foam does not persist as long as a mechanically whipped foam, due to a very low level of partial coalescence in such foams and also because the high solubility of nitrous oxide in cream enhances disproportionation ( Frozen whipped dairy or non-dairy emulsions are similar to the whipped emulsions previously discussed, in that: (a) a stable emulsion is first created, which requires the appropriate solid:liquid fat ratio and the appropriate fat interface for optimal partial coalescence, (b) whipping is performed to incorporate a gas phase, which needs to be stabilized by surfactant not adsorbed at the fat interface, and (c) partially coalesced fat aggregates are responsible for stabilizing both the air interface and the continuous phase. However, they are differentiated by the high levels of sugar found in frozen whipped emulsions and by the fact that a large portion of the water in the aqueous phase is frozen to form ice crystals of very small size, and hence another discrete phase. Air bubbles and ice crystals usually range in size from 20–50 The development of structure in frozen whipped emulsions and the ingredient and process variables that control it will be described sequentially. The emulsion is formed at the time of homogenization. After preheating or pasteurization, the mix is at a temperature sufficient to have melted all the fat present, and the fat is passed through one or two homogenizing valves. The creation of a large population of small, discrete droplets is a prerequisite for the development of structure during dynamic freezing. Thus, homogenization conditions can have a large impact on ice cream structure ( During the concomitant whipping and freezing step, air is incorporated either through a lengthy whipping process (batch freezers) or is drawn into the mix by vacuum (older continuous freezers) or is injected under pressure (modern Fat destabilization results in the beneficial properties of dryness (shape retention) upon extrusion during the manufacturing stages (which facilitates packaging and novelty molding, for example), a smooth, creamy texture in the frozen dessert, and resistance to melt-down or good stand-up properties (necessary for soft serve operations) ( An example of structure-engineering of ice cream emulsions comes from the work of The use of low-temperature extrusion freezing of ice cream following conventional freezing in a scraped surface freezer is a good processing example of structure-engineering of ice cream ( Liquid food foams such as beer head, cappuccino, meringue, mousse, souffle and sponge cake are, for the most part, protein-stabilized systems that may or may not be exposed to further processing (mostly heating) after aeration. Liquid foams comprise the dispersion of a gas (i.e., air, nitrogen, carbon dioxide) into a liquid continuous phase where the particular life-span of the foam ranges from seconds to several days. At low air phase volumes they behave as viscous fluids whereas at higher air phase volumes they are viscoelastic materials that exhibit a yield stress ( Combinations of these factors could manifest into one (or two) of the three main processes that govern foam stability: film drainage, bubble coalescence, and bubble disproportionation (i.e., Ostwald ripening). Film drainage (of particular importance in liquid foams) refers to liquid flowing from the foam, driven by gravitational forces. The rate of drainage is a function of the rheological properties of the film interfaces and the rheological properties of the bulk phase, and could be controlled by reducing the average bubble size, and increasing the gas content or the bulk viscosity of the liquid phase ( Foams prepared from egg white and milk proteins are often used in foods as structuring materials. This means that the foam microstructure created prior to further processing (e.g., heating) will determine the final mechanical and textural properties of the food material. Meringues are very delicate foams that are easily ruined by overbeating and/or overheating. Preparation protocols (i.e. recipes) often claim that egg whites should be prepared in copper bowls instead of glass bowls, as to obtain more stable foams. The size of a bubble is a primary parameter determining its behaviour and contribution to food structure and texture. Often there is a wide range of bubble sizes, with some sizes contributing more to appearance and others to texture. Smaller bubbles are said to have a lower coalescence rate and to be more stable over extended periods of time ( Whipping time, assuming there is enough surfactant for the formation of surface area, is a very important aspect for foam stability since the latter is severely affected if overbeating occurs. For egg white foams, maximum foam stability does not coincide with maximum volume, but occurs slightly before maximum volume is reached ( Comparison of the foaming properties of egg white proteins and whey protein isolate showed that that egg white protein formed foams with higher yield stress, at lower protein concentrations and less whipping time, than whey protein In foamed and frozen foamed emulsions, microscopy can be used to determine the state of dispersion of the fat (discrete or aggregated, dispersed or adsorbed to Cryo-scanning electron microscopy allows for visualization of surface features of a sample. Samples are frozen in liquid nitrogen and then fractured to produce new surfaces. Samples are then partially sublimated (freeze-dried) to remove a layer of ice from the ice crystals, thus accentuating structural features, coated with a thin layer of platinum or gold and viewed in the frozen state while under a high vacuum. Transmission electron microscopy requires either low temperature fixation followed by cutting thin sections at ambient temperature for viewing with a conventional transmission electron microscope, or cutting of thin sections at subzero temperatures followed by viewing on a cold stage (cryo) transmission electron microscope. This microscopy technique allows for high resolution of two-dimensional thin sections. In the case of foamed and frozen foamed emulsions, it provides high detail of protein adsorption to fat globules and fat globule adsorption to air bubbles ( Confocal laser scanning microscopy on a cold stage has the advantage of permitting examination of the products in the native state. The instrument scans thin parallel layers of a sample and develops a three dimensional image from the data. Fat globule sizes in emulsions can be determined by light microscopy with an oil immersion lens plus eyepiece and stage micrometers for sizing. Dilution with glycerol may be necessary to inhibit Brownian motion. Laser light scattering (sometimes called laser diffraction) techniques may also be used to measure particle size distributions ( At least four different techniques can be used to evaluate partial coalescence of fat. The first is by dilution of both emulsion (cream or mix) and foamed emulsion 1:500 with water and measurement of turbidity (absorbance) in a spectrophotometer with visible light at 540 There has been a desire for many years to reduce the fat, hence caloric, content of whipped emulsions. In the case of whipped cream, this has been very difficult to attain due to the important structural role of fat. Manipulation of the interface of the fat globule to promote partial coalescence is one alterative, together with stabilizing gums to increase serum-phase viscoelasticity. Fat-mimetic ingredients, such as proteinaceous or polysaccharide-based colloidal particles, have also been applied. Processing techniques such as high pressure homogenization, in the case of ice cream mix, have been used to increase the number and surface Readers looking for more general background information on whipped cream and ice cream structure, ingredients and processing are directed to A very useful reference in the foams area is