The feasibility of using the equal channel angular extrusion (ECAE) process for the breakdown of cast structures in commercial purity aluminium has been investigated. Billets of an as-cast coarse grained Al (99.7% pure) were subjected to ECAE at 500°C using a die that imparts an equivalent plastic strain of 0.67 per pass. Multiple extrusion passes were performed using two different processing routes: Route I in which the billet orientation was kept constant from pass to pass, and Route II in which the billet was rotated by 180° about its longitudinal axis from one pass to the next resulting alternately in shear in planes oriented at 120° to each other. Processing by Route I through five passes produced elongated grains showing evidence of dynamic recovery. Processing by Route II through five passes however produced largely equiaxed grains with a dynamically recovered substructure due to the intervention of static recrystallization during the reheating to extrusion temperature between passes. Both processing routes produced a dynamically recovered structure with equiaxed subgrains approximately 6μm in size. Sharp deformation textures were not obtained. The relevance of this technique to industrial processing is discussed.Various plastic deformation processes have been proposed for processing materials using simple shear. One key technique for subjecting materials to large shear strains is the process of equal channel angular extrusion (ECAE) originally proposed by Segal The most important advantage of ECAE is that materials can be deformed to very high strains without any decrease in cross-sectional area. Materials can therefore be processed to give improved mechanical properties, extremely fine grain sizes, and varying textures. In addition, by changing the orientation of the billet from one pass to the next and thereby changing the strain path to which the billet is subjected, different microstructures and mechanical properties can be produced. The ECAE process has been studied by various investigators Previous research has shown that aluminium does not undergo dynamic recrystallization during hot working In this study, a commercially pure aluminium (composition 99.7% Al) was subjected to multiple ECAE passes at 500°C using two different processing routes. The microstructures of the resultant samples were studied using optical and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Texture measurement was also carried out. The results of microstructural observations and studies of texture are analysed and the viability of the process as a step in industrial processing is discussed. The die used for ECAE consisted of two rectangular channels of cross-sectional area   Vickers hardness tests were carried out on longitudinal sections using 5 After each pass, the von Mises equivalent plastic strain imparted to the billet by shear through the die in plain strain is given by Segal The maximum extrusion pressure required for each pass is shown in Hardness testing was performed to obtain an approximation of the mechanical properties resulting from multiple passes of ECAE. The Vickers hardness numbers resulting from the various extrusion passes are shown in The as-cast billet had an elongated grain structure with an extremely coarse grain size (approximately For extrusions conducted through processing Route II, the results are somewhat different. TEM observations reveal a microstructure consisting of equiaxed subgrains with a network of dislocations which is characteristic of aluminium that has undergone dynamic recovery during hot working. The variation in average subgrain size with number of passes for the two processing routes is shown in The (1 For workpieces processed by Route II, in which the workpiece is rotated by 180° between passes, the results are similar for the first two passes. The {1 The maximum pressure required for extrusion decreases continuously from one pass to the next for both the processing routes studied. This decrease is similar to the decrease in drawing stress observed in a similar process of equal channel angular drawing (ECAD) in which a bar was drawn through the two channels at room temperature The measured hardness values are very similar after every pass and very close to the hardness of the initial as-cast billet. Tensile strengths were not measured during the current study. All the samples exhibit dynamic recovery (DRV). Between passes, the billet was reheated to the extrusion temperature of 500°C and held at that temperature prior to extrusion. The total time involved in reheating and holding at extrusion temperature was 45 With an increasing number of passes (especially in workpieces processed by Route I), the initial grain boundaries are extremely serrated. The presence of grain boundary serrations after hot working has been reported extensively in aluminium and has been attributed to local migrations of the grain boundaries to absorb dislocation walls Gholinia et al. A considerable amount of static recrystallization occurs during processing by Route II after three to four passes. This difference is probably due to the variation in strain paths to reach the same value of total strain between Routes I and II. Since the workpiece is rotated by 180° between passes in Route II, the strain path is different from that in Route I. During ECA extrusion through the die with an angle of 120° between the two intersecting channels, intense shear occurs on planes that make an angle of 30° with the transverse plane of the billet. For workpieces processed by Route I, shear occurs on the same plane from pass to pass. However, for workpieces processed by Route II in which the workpiece is rotated by 180° between passes, shear takes place alternately on two intersecting macroscopic shear planes making an angle of 120° with each other. Therefore, in practice, rotating the sample by 180° between passes ensures more uniform strain distribution in addition to changing the strain path. It is possible that this accelerates SRX, especially after three to four passes when there is sufficient accumulated strain. Therefore, for the fourth and fifth pass, the starting material is essentially an SRX microstructure consisting of approximately equiaxed grains undergoing dynamic recovery during extrusion. Hence the grain boundaries are not serrated (and the grains are not elongated) and the subgrain formation as revealed by optical microscopy is not as extensive as the fourth or fifth pass in billets processed by Route I. The textures resulting from the two processing routes are different, although no sharp deformation textures are produced. Billets processed by Route I have textures similar to the original texture although the texture gradually becomes more and more random as the number of passes increases. Since SRX intervenes after about three passes in Route II, the original texture is destroyed much more rapidly. The microstructures as observed by TEM do not show any significant difference and both routes produce equiaxed subgrains of similar size. This is in contrast to substructures produced by the similar ECAD process at room temperature in which Route I produced elongated subgrains and Route II produced equiaxed subgrains An equivalent strain of 0.67 resulting from one ECA extrusion pass can be achieved by a 49% reduction in area during hot rolling. Since no static or dynamic recrystallization occurs, the strains resulting from multiple passes can be considered to be approximately cumulative. This implies that a workpiece subjected to five ECAE passes has undergone an equivalent strain of about 3.35 which is the equivalent strain achieved by a 96.5% reduction in area during hot rolling. Hot rolling to these strains usually results in a distinct deformation texture The die angle between the intersecting channels through which the billet is extruded has also been shown to influence microstructural evolution at room temperature even when the billets are processed to the same equivalent strain Traditional hot rolling to break down the cast structure of aluminium and its alloys involves rolling at temperatures around 500°C with reductions of 10–20% per pass. The deformation is generally inhomogenous and several passes are required to ensure that the centre of the billet is hot worked During the ECA extrusion of commercial purity aluminium, the maximum extrusion pressure required decreases with increasing number of passes. There is no significant difference in hardness, implying that there is no significant change in mechanical properties as a result of ECA extrusion. Multiple passes through Route I, in which the workpiece orientation is kept the same between passes, results in elongated grains with serrated grain boundaries showing evidence of extensive dynamic recovery. No static recrystallization occurs between passes. There is no sharp deformation texture; instead there is a steady progression away from the original texture to a more random texture as the number of passes increases. Processing by Route II, in which the billet is rotated by 180° between passes, produces similar results after the first three passes. However after three passes, static recrystallization occurs during reheating and holding at the extrusion temperature. This results in largely equiaxed grains, showing evidence of dynamic recovery after the fourth and fifth passes. The texture is also more random. In all cases, the dynamically recovered subgrains were equiaxed and approximately 6 This work was largely supported by the Australian Department of Education, Employment, Training and Youth Affairs (DEETYA) through the Australian Research Council Collaborative Grant AM 9280142 and an ARC Small Grant. The work was conducted at Monash University.