Microbial contamination caused by bacterial adhesion and colonization onto the materials surfaces has long been a serious threat to human health. Thus, it is imperative to develop advanced antimicrobial materials for bio-applications. Here, a unique polydopamine/ hydroxyapatite/nisin (PDA/HAP/Nisin) composite with good bioactivities and enhanced antibacterial activities have been developed. The uniform PDA particles are first prepared via the dopamine self-polymerization in an alkaline water-ethanol mixed solvent. Due to the abundance surface catecholamine moieties, PDA particles can serve as the powerful templates for the in-situ mineralization of hydroxyapatite (HAP) in a simulated body fluid (SBF) solution, forming PDA/HAP composites. Transmission electron microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, transform infrared spectroscopy, energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, and X-ray diffraction are used to investigate the morphology, surface composition, and crystalline structure of the PDA/HAP composites. These PDA/HAP composites are utilized as the reservoir for loading the antimicrobial peptide–nisin. Ultraviolet visible spectrophotometry analysis shows that PDA/HAP composites have exhibited a high loading capacity and a superior loading efficiency for nisin. The resulting PDA/HAP/Nisin composites are ideal antimicrobial biomaterials for bio-application because they exhibit not only a significant in vitro cytocompatibility to human embryonic kidney HEK293 T cells, but also the enhanced antibacterial activities against Staphylococcus aureus (Gram-positive bacteria). These advantageous properties of the PDA/HAP/Nisin composites allow them as the promising candidates for a broad range of bio-applications, e.g., drug delivery, implant engineering, and bio-scaffold.Over the past few decades, hydroxyapatite (HAP)–based bioceramics have been widely utilized as the bone tissues repairing biomaterials implanted into the human body, due to their acceptable biocompatibility, bioactivity, osteoconductivity, and intrinsic chemical similarity to natural bone [ Recently, various strategies have been developed to render the implantable biomaterials with antibacterial activities that are able to decrease the risk of bacterial infections. The incorporation of different antibacterial agents, such as antibiotics, fluorine, iodine, quaternary ammonium compounds, and biocide metal/metallic ions, has been reported to prevent the implant-associated infections [ Here, we develop a new polydopamine/hydroxyapatite (PDA/HAP) composite as the platform for loading the antimicrobial peptide-nisin and further evaluated the Dopamine hydrochloride and tris (hydroxymethyl) aminomethane were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Nisin was purchased from Zhejiang Silver-Elephant Bio-engineering Co., Ltd. Other chemical reagents in this work were all of analytical grade and brought from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd (China). Ultrapure water (>17 MΩcm First, monodisperse PDA particles were prepared via the dopamine self-polymerization in an alkaline water-ethanol mixed solvent according to previous works [ Nisin as the model antibacterial peptide was used to study the The The surface morphologies and structures of the PDA particles and the PDA/HAP composites were characterized with a transmission electron microscope (TEM, JEOL JEM-2100, Japan) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi S-4800, Hitachi, Ltd. Japan). The surface element analysis was carried out using the energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX, Quanta 200) attached to the scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Hitachi S-4800, Hitachi, Ltd. Japan). Transform infrared spectroscopy (EQUINX55, Brucher Crop, Germany) was applied to record the Fourier-transform infrared spectra (FTIR) of the PDA particles and the PDA/HAP composites. All samples were cleaned with absolute ethanol, and dried in a vacuum oven for 24 h. Then they were pressed into KBr pellets for the measurement. The spectra were taken from 4000 to 500 cm Human embryonic kidney (HEK293 T) cells were first cultured in Dulbecco's Modiﬁed Eagle Medium containing 10 % fetal bovine serum, 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 μg/mL streptomycin solution, and maintained at 37 °C under a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO The antibacterial tests were carried out against To evaluate the antibacterial activities of the PDA/HAP/Nisin composites against For the antibacterial kinetic test, the Mussel-inspired polydopamine (PDA) particles are prepared via dopamine self-polymerization in the alkaline water-ethanol mixed solvent at room temperature [ The surface morphology of the PDA particles is characterized by TEM and SEM. As shown in The structural evolution of the PDA/HAP composites is further confirmed with SEM and EDX (see Fig. S3). SEM analysis further confirms the uniform morphology of the PDA particles (Fig. S3a and S3b), and demonstrates that the coverage degree of HAP mineralized clusters on PDA particles is also increased with increasing the incubation time (see Fig. S3 d, e, g, h, and j, k). As further observed by Fig. S3 e, h, and k, the HAP mineralized clusters are composed of a stack of small plate-like structured minerals, which are similar to the dominant morphology of nature bones [ The HAP mineralization on PDA particles has also been confirmed by FTIR in XRD has been employed to characterize the crystal structure of the obtained PDA/HAP composites. As shown in Nisin, a small cationic antibacterial peptide, is introduced to offer the PDA/HAP composites with antibacterial activities, and its Next, the nisin-loading capacity and loading efficiency on the PDA/HAP composites are evaluated, as shown in The biomaterials’ cytocompatibility is one important parameter to be evaluated prior to bio-application. The cytocompatibility of the PDA/HAP/Nisin composites is investigated by using the CCK-8 assay against the HEK293 T cells. All of the PDA template particles, PDA/HAP composites and PDA/HAP/Nisin composites are incubated with the HEK293 T cells for In addition, the Nisin and nisin-loaded materials have been exhibited a broad spectrum antimicrobial activity particularly against Gram-positive bacteria, which have been considered as the natural antibacterial materials with minor side-effects in practical applications [ The In addition, the live/dead bacterial cell fluorescence stain assay is used to further confirm the antibacterial efficiency of the PDA/HAP/Nisin composites. Bacterial cells are incubated with the PDA/HAP/Nisin composites for 4 h. The resulting suspension of the viable and dead bacteria are collected for staining. The green-fluorescent dye can generally stain both the intact and the membrane-damaged bacterial cells, whereas the red-fluorescent dye only stains the bacteria with damaged membranes, after which the green fluorescence is reduced. As shown in Besides, the bacterial inhibition growth curves are utilized to investigate the bacteria growth kinetics in the culture media and to quantitatively assay the antibacterial performance of PDA/HAP/Nisin composites. In this process, the PDA/HAP/Nisin composites obtained by loading 7 mg of nisin into 5 mg of PDA/HAP composites in 10 mL PBS buffer solution (pH 7.4) are chosen as the model antibacterial materials for investigation. As shown in In conclusion, we have developed a unique PDA/HAP/Nisin composite with an excellent cytocompatibility and enhanced antibacterial activities. Monodisperse PDA colloidal particles are synthesized and serve as the powerful templates for  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was sponsored by the Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: