In order to improve the flotation recovery of fine kaolinite, mixed dodecylamine chloride/fatty acid was used as collector in kaolinite flotation process.
                  The performance of dodecylamine chloride/fatty acid mixture collector on kaolinite flotation was investigated using flotation test and computational method. Surface tension measurement, contact angle measurement and image analysis were also used to study the flotation behavior of dodecylamine chloride and mixture collectors. The flotation results showed that much higher kaolinite flotation recovery was obtained in the presence of dodecylamine chloride/octanoic acid mixture compared with that in the presence of dodecylamine chloride alone. Surface tension measurements indicated that the mixed dodecylamine chloride/octanoic acid collector was more efficient at decreasing the air–water interfacial tension. Molecular dynamics simulation showed that the octanoic acid molecules were interleaved among dodecylamine chloride ions and co-adsorbed at the kaolinite (001) surface. The relative concentration of water molecules near kaolinite (001) surface further decreased in the presence of dodecylamine chloride/octanoic acid compared with that in the presence of dodecylamine chloride alone, which indicated a much stronger hydrophobicity of the kaolinite (001) surface.Flotation is one of the prime mineral processing methods that has found wide application from separation of complex ores such as sulphides of lead–zinc and copper–zinc to platinum, nickel and gold hosting sulphides, to oxides like hematite, cassiterite, oxidised minerals such as malachite, cerussite and finally to non-metallic ores like fluorites, phosphates as well as coal During the latest ten years, many studies have been conducted to investigate the flotation behaviors of kaolinite However, during their researches, they found that fine kaolinite particles (0–0.045 Kaolinite samples were obtained from Xiaoyi, Shanxi province in China. The samples were hand-picked, crushed and ground in a laboratory porcelain mill. Then the sample was screened and size fraction (0–0.045 The collector, dodecylamine hydrochloride (DAH), with a purity of 99.5%, was purchased from Aladdin Reagent. The concentration of the DAH solution was 0.134 Flotation tests were carried out in a 50 Surface tension measurements were determined by the du Nouy ring method using a LAUDA (TEIC) Tensiometer. The instrument was calibrated against double distilled water. Measurements were made at intervals of a few minutes until successive values agreed within a standard deviation of 0.1 DSA 30 from KRUSS, Inc. (Germany) was used to measure the contact angles on mineral surface in different reagent solution by sessile drop method. In each test, 4 An optical microscope equipped with a digital camera was used to observe the mixture collectors. The collector was prepared by dropping it on a glass plate, followed by putting a thin glass slide on the sample to fix it. During the observation, the collectors were photographed All simulations were performed in Accelrys Material Studio 6.0 (MS) modeling package. CASTEP module included in MS software was used to optimize the crystal structure of kaolinite; DAH and fatty acid molecules were optimized using DMOL3 module. The exchange-correlation function used was the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) developed by Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof (PBE). The energy cut-off for the plane-wave basis was 300 The relative affinity of interaction of the mineral surface with the collector molecule could be quantified in terms of interaction energy, calculated using Eq. The effects of collector concentration on kaolinite flotation were presented in In order to assess the contribution of hydraulic entrainment to the overall kaolinite recovery values, we studied the portion of recovery associated with hydraulic entrainment by measuring the solids and water recovery. The collector concentration was 8.04  Fatty acids are weak electrolyte surfactants and so their ionization depends on pH. A series of hydrolysis reaction would happen according to the pH of the slurry. For fatty acids pKa The results of surface tension (γ) measurements of DAH and C8D in water at pH It was indicated that the DAH/C8 collector mixture showed a synergistic effect in lowering the surface tension. Simultaneously, the ratio of DAH and C8 in the mixed collector affected the value of CMC and the γ Here During wetting progress, the wetting work Here In order to investigate the wetting behaviors of the DAH and mixture collectors on kaolinite, the contact angles were carried out in the study, and the results were presented in The optical microscopy images of octanoic acid and C8D collector were showed in The optimized lattice parameters of kaolinite structure were presented in The equilibrium configuration of DAH and the C8D mixture with ratio 2/1 at the kaolinite (001) surface was showed in  Relative concentration of water molecules along z-direction were shown in The mixed DAH/Fatty acid mixtures were proposed as flotation collector for fine kaolinite (0–0.045 This work is financially supported by the