Sn-based anodes are potential replacements for commercial carbon-based lithium-ion battery anodes. Moreover, alloying with Cu improves the cyclability of Sn. This study directly grows Cu6Sn5 crystals on polycrystalline Cu current collectors via a solid-liquid reaction with molten Sn alloys. The Cu6Sn5 crystals grown when a molten Sn-Cu alloy was used have a preferred orientation along the η-Cu6Sn5 (101). In this study, the crystals are tailored to grow along the η-Cu6Sn5 (2-12) preferred orientation by excluding Cu in the molten Sn alloy used as a starting material. The (2-12) oriented electrodes show significantly improved electrochemical properties, displaying a 50th cycle discharge capacity of 762 mAh g-1, a 55% increase over the (101) electrode under the same cycling conditions. The (101) electrode ceased to function at 1C and above, while the (2-12) electrode retained around 480 mAh g-1 at 2C. In addition, the (101) electrode shows the formation of 3-fold superstructures in the crystal lattice; while the (2-12) electrode shows atomic arrangements of a higher crystal symmetry, further facilitating the transportation of Li-ions. Density functional theory calculations confirm that Li-ions prefer to adsorb onto Sn in η-Cu6Sn5 and diffuse through the structure in a zig-zag pattern along the [111] channels with a low barrier energy of 0.705 eV.With their higher Li storage capacities and enhanced safety profile due to lower risks for Li metal plating, Sn-based anodes are widely studied for their potential to replace commercial carbon-based materials for lithium-ion (Li-ion) battery applications The Cu In this study, we explore the effects of preferred crystal orientations on the electrochemical properties of Cu Sn (99.9% pure) and Sn-0.7wt%Cu alloy sheets were rolled to 50-100 μm in thickness. The sheets were cut to 20 x 10 mm rectangular pieces and placed on 9 μm thick Cu current collectors. A commercially available soldering flux (Weldwell 509) was applied between the Cu/Sn and Cu/Sn-0.7wt%Cu sheets to remove surface oxides. Cu The working anode samples were assembled into 2032 coin cells with Li as a counter electrode and LiPF The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) experiment was conducted under backscatter electron (BSE) imaging mode at an accelerating voltage of 15 kV. Images were analysed with the ImageJ image processing software. A Cu DFT calculations were performed using the VASP 5.4.4 code on the Australian Synchrotron Compute Infrastructure (ASCI). The adsorption energy of Li-ion on the Cu SEM images in  The two-stage lithiation process of Cu As discussed elsewhere A large drop in capacity is observed between the first and the second cycle, primarily due to the increase in cycling current and also some secondary irreversible reactions e.g. the formation of SEIs and incomplete delithiation. This is demonstrated in The Cu The amount of Cu The C DFT calculations show Li-ions in the electrolyte preferentially adsorb onto the Sn atoms with an adsorption energy of -0.155 eV, while adsorption onto Cu atoms are unfavourable with an adsorption energy of 0.205 eV. Following this, Li-ions diffuse in the Cu A charge difference map between the Cu The scalloped grains in Cu Note that Cu can also diffuse through the bulk of the Cu The DFT calculations validate that in the form of Cu The (2-12) preferred orientation exposes the During crystal growth at a liquid-metal interface, when adatoms (liquid) are close to the surface of the substrate (metal), they experience a potential field which varies with the distance of the atom to the surface, and which has a minimum at a preferred distance from the surface The presence of the superstructure in the Cu This work is highly relevant to Cu In conclusion, exposing the The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors acknowledge the facilities, and the scientific and technical assistance, of the Australian Microscopy & Microanalysis Research Facility at the Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis, The University of Queensland, in particular for the access to the Rigaku SmartLab system for the pole figure XRD experiments, and the FIB SCIOS system for TEM sample preparation. This work was supported by a UQ-Nihon Superior cooperative research grant [2016001895] at the University of Queensland (UQ), an Australian Government Research Training Program (RTP) grant from the University of Queensland, and an Australian Research Council Discovery Project grant [DP200101949]. The TEM experiment was supported by the Nanotechnology Platform Project for advanced nanostructure characterisation (JPMXP09-A-18-KU-0277) sponsored by MEXT Japan, the Progress 100 program at Kyushu University (KU) and a “UQ-KU project” at the University of Queensland, which assists research collaborations between UQ and KU. The authors would like to thank AINSE Limited for providing financial assistance (Award - PGRA) to enable the work at the Australian Synchrotron, ANSTO, and the experiment was performed on the Powder Diffraction beamline under proposal No. AS183/PD/14052. Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 