The power required to operate large gyratory mills often exceeds 10MW. Hence, optimisation of the power consumption will have a significant impact on the overall economic performance and environmental impact of the mineral processing plant. In most of the published models of tumbling mills (e.g. [Morrell, S., 1996. Power draw of wet tumbling mills and its relationship to charge dynamics, Part 2: An empirical approach to modelling of mill power draw. Trans. Inst. Mining Metall. (Section C: Mineral Processing Ext. Metall.) 105, C54–C62. Austin, L.G., 1990. A mill power equation for SAG mills. Miner. Metall. Process. 57–62]), the effect of lifter design and its interaction with mill speed and filling are not incorporated. Recent experience suggests that there is an opportunity for improving grinding efficiency by choosing the appropriate combination of these variables. However, it is difficult to experimentally determine the interactions of these variables in a full scale mill. Although some work has recently been published using DEM simulations, it was basically limited to 2D.
                  The discrete element code, Particle Flow Code 3D (PFC3D), has been used in this work to model the effects of lifter height (5–25cm) and mill speed (50–90% of critical) on the power draw and frequency distribution of specific energy (J/kg) of normal impacts in a 5m diameter autogenous (AG) mill.
                  It was found that the distribution of the impact energy is affected by the number of lifters, lifter height, mill speed and mill filling. Interactions of lifter design, mill speed and mill filling are demonstrated through three dimensional distinct element methods (3D DEM) modelling. The intensity of the induced stresses (shear and normal) on lifters, and hence the lifter wear, is also simulated.The power required to operate large mills often exceeds 10 The discrete element method (DEM) has been proved to be a useful tool in milling simulation and optimisation. A number of papers have been published in the literature by using DEM in modelling and simulation of comminution devices, majority of them being limited in 2D. In the present work, Particle Flow Code 3D (PFC3D) has been used to model the effects of lifter height (5–25 Particle Flow Code 3D ( PFC3D modelling is based on the assumption that the individual particles (balls) can be treated as rigid bodies. At contacts, rigid particles are allowed to overlap. The magnitude of the overlap is related to the contact force. There overlaps are small relative to the size of the particles. During contact, the behaviour of a material is simulated using a linear contact model. The contact force vector between two balls or ball and wall is composed of normal and shear components. The normal contact force vector is calculated using the formula: The incremental shear force is calculated using the formula: PFC3D also includes a slip model. The slip model is defined by the friction coefficient at the contact, where the active relevant friction coefficient is taken to be the minimum friction coefficient of the two contacting entities. Each contact is checked for slip conditions, by calculating the maximum allowable shear contact force: The energy state of the entire set of particles can be examined by recording various forms of energy. Frictional work is defined as the total cumulative energy dissipated by frictional sliding at all contacts. Intensity of deformation can be assessed using strain energy, which is defined as the total strain energy stored at all contacts assuming a linear contact-stiffness model. The PFC3D model of the mill is composed of a number of walls which represent mill liner and lifters as well as balls which represents mill charge. The power of the mill is calculated for each instant of time by summing products of moments applied to the liner and lifters and rotational velocity of the mill. Power calculated with DEM refers to the net power associated with mill charge. Power required to rotate the empty mill (no-load power) cannot be modelled using PFC3D. The no-load power is determined by the efficiency of particular mill design, mill size and its rotational velocity. No-load power is about 5–10% of the gross power draw under typical working conditions ( Previous work ( In order to determine the effect of lifters and mill speed on the effective power draw of the mill it is necessary to determine the power draw without any lifting action first. This can be achieved by calculation of the no-lifters power with a coefficient of friction being set to nil. It is possible that in such a case, power draw will be minimal or nil, due to the symmetric shape of the charge around the vertical axis of the mill, The second phase includes introduction of the mill friction. The third phase includes introduction of lifters of constant width and number, but of different height. For each lifter height power draws at different mill speeds were determined. By comparing modelled power draws with those of the no-lifter mill, the effect of each new variable of mill design and operating conditions can be determined. In the simulations normal and shear stiffness of the particles were set 1 The power draw of the mill comprises the power consumed in rotating the empty mill (no-load power), to abrade the charge without lifting the particles, and to lift the charge which may eventually result in impact breakage. Note that this is not the same as the no-load power in a real mill which requires energy to overcome friction in bearing and losses within mill motor. In the case of mill without lifters and in which the coefficient of friction is set to zero, the power draw of the real mill is only a form of no-load power. There is no power being transferred to the charge. The essential role of lifters is highlighted by the fact that without them there would be essentially no net-power draw (assuming nil friction), and consequently no comminution. In such case only this “no-load” power will be drawn and it will be completely wasted. As a result, the throughput of the machine will be nil. In the case of a mill which has some finite effective coefficient of friction (0.3) and charge which is also characterised with same coefficient of friction, net power draw has a value of 49 This indicates that abrasive action in the form of low energy impacts and shearing between particles and balls within the charge is the prevailing mechanism of power consumption within the mill. The increased power is consumed in introduction of impacts due to free falling particles as well as faster movement of the particles on top of charge and within the charge. Lifters are able to more efficiently transfer motion from the mill shell into the motion of the charge. However dominant part of the introduced net energy into the charge (63%) is consumed through low energy shearing between particles, or between particles and mill liners. The fraction of net-power draw that will be consumed by shearing and abrasion is determined by the charge volume. In the case of mill with 500 particles (7  In a current JKMRC SAG mill modelling approach, the relationship of size reduction and high intensity impact energy is experimentally determined with a drop weight test ( Particle motion within the mill is different with different mill filling levels. In the extreme case of single particle, motion is essentially highly reproducible, and characterised by a period when particle is in touch with liner, the period of free fall and period of bouncing at the base of mill, The effect of the number of lifters on net power draw is clearly illustrated in Influence of lifter height on net power draw is presented in  Influence of the lifter height can also be observed through the intensity of forces that are acting on typical particles within the mill. In the case of low lifters (e.g. 5 In all discussions about the power draw of the mills it is important to consider the nature of the charge size distribution. The impact of particle size on the net power draw is clearly highlighted in The lifter wear is directly proportional to the intensity of the induced stresses acting on the lifters. Stresses applied to the lifters were calculated from the moments acting on the lifter plates. From the moments and the known distance between lifters plate and centre of rotation, the average force was calculated. The average value of stress was then calculated from the average force and the area of the lifter. The stresses on the lifter were modelled for the case of vertical plate with the active side facing the charge, and for a plate corresponding to the flat top of the lifter. Considering that stresses are averaged over the entire surface of the lifter, the most significant factor is the mass of the particles. The force that opposes the motion of the vertical side of the lifter will predominantly act perpendicular to the plate. On the top of the lifter, the active force is a shear component of the predominantly vertical force induced by the mass of superimposed particles and the centrifugal force. Hence, stresses acting on the vertical side of the rectangular shaped lifter will be mostly in a perpendicular–normal direction, while stresses acting on the top of lifter will be predominantly shear stresses. Shear stresses will be responsible for the gradual wear of the lifters, resulting in a decrease of their height and reduction of milling efficiency. The modelled stresses show significant variation in stress intensity during each lifter revolution. The interaction of forces with the lifters results in variable induced stress, particularly the stresses that act on top of the lifters. As a result, a large number of balls will be superimposed which will result in higher forces and stresses acting on the lifters. The stresses acting perpendicular to the lifting side are higher in magnitude than the shear stresses acting along the top of the lifter. As the number of lifters increases, both normal and shear stresses decrease, Increasing the numbers of lifters will also alter the impact energy frequency spectrum of the mill. The number of very low energy impacts (0.1 The effect of the lifter height on the intensity of stresses that are acting on the lifters was also investigated. The results show that an increase of lifter height results in an increased intensity of stresses that are acting on the lifter. In summary, the following conclusions may be drawn from the DEM simulations of the interactions of lifter design, mill speed and charge filling on energy utilisation in an AG mill: Increasing a number of lifters leads to increase the proportion of high intensity impacts. A decrease the number of lifter leads to an increase the proportion of low intensity abrasion. An increase the number of lifters leads to an increase the net power draw, but only up to a stable value. An increase mill filling leads to an increase the proportion of energy used for the low energy abrasion breakage, but decreases high energy impact breakage. As the rotational speed increases, the mill draws more power with lower lifter height, but draws less power with higher lifters. At constant lifter height, the mill draws more power when grinding smaller particles. At constant ratio of lifter height to particle size, the influence of particle size on mill power is not significant. Less number of lifters and greater lifter height result in the greater stress intensity applied to the lifters, causing faster lifters/liners wears. After a certain number of lifters are reached, a further increase in the number of lifters will not result in a significant further reduction of stress intensity.