Objectives
                  The aim of this study was to assess fracture union and complications following use of dynamic hip screw (DHS) with internal bone grafting in treatment of unstable delayed presented intracapsular neck femur fractures in patients younger than 65 years of age.
               
                  Material and methods
                  Thirty two patients with displaced intracapsular neck femur fractures(Garden III and IV, Pauwels III, with comminution) with delayed presentation (15–60 days) in the 45–65 year age group (mean 54.4±10.2 years) were included in this study. All patients were treated with dynamic sliding hip screw with closed cancellous bone grafting through a tunnel of a triple reamer. The average time to union was 3.8 months (3–5 months). Satisfactory union was achieved in all patients except two. One case developed avascular necrosis of the femoral head. Other complications were coxa vara in two, shortening of less than 10mm in three cases but there were no cases of infection or implant failure. Excellent results were achieved in 27, good/fair in 4 and poor in 1 patient.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Osteosynthesis with DHS and primary cancellous bone grafting in indicated cases is a simple, providing biological stimulation for early union. Failure in a particular case can be treated with any appropriate second procedure.Best treatment for unstable fracture neck of femur remains controversial. Non-union and AVN are two main complications of intracapsular neck of femur fractures. Anatomic reduction and stable internal fixation are essential for achieving the goals of treatment allowing preservation of the femoral head while minimizing rates of non-union and osteonecrosis The treatment of delayed presented femoral neck fracture is still an unsolved problem. Delayed fixation (>48 hours) is reported to have poorer outcomes in terms of greater incidence of non-union and avascular necrosis of femoral head Various treatment modalities and their modifications have been proposed to preserve the femoral head. Reduction and fixation with canulated screws or DHS, primary valgus osteotomy, fixation with muscle pedicle graft, fixation with fibular graft and joint replacement surgery The aim of our study was to evaluate clinical outcome following internal bone grafting and fixation by dynamic hip screw in unstable delayed presentation intracapsular neck of femur fracture in patients younger than 65 years of age. Patients with displaced femoral neck fractures were eligible to participate. The inclusion criteria were patients aged between 25 and 65 years, traumatic closed intracapsular femoral neck fracture Garden Stage III or IV, Pauwels Type III fracture and fracture with delayed presentation (2 weeks to 8 weeks). Exclusion criteria were: patients with clinically detectable major illness like malignancy, chronic renal disease, ipsilateral fracture neck femur with femoral shaft fracture, polytrauma and fractures requiring open reduction. Prior approval for this study was obtained from the institutional review and ethical committee. All patients had this method of fixation explained to them. Written informed consent was obtained from all patients and the pros and cons of the implant and procedure were also explained. Preoperatively above knee skin traction was applied to all patients to alleviate pain and overcome muscle spasm. After an informed consent an AP radiograph of the pelvis with 20° internal rotation at hips was taken for documentation of fracture and comparison with other hip and to calculate the Pauwels angle. Lateral view of the involved hip was taken to assess angulation, displacement of fragments and to note the presence of posterior comminution. An MRI study was done in five patients where duration of delay for treatment was more than one month. Under appropriate anesthesia, patients were taken on the fracture table for closed reduction (Whitman’s Method). Garden’s alignment index was used for assessment of adequacy of reduction. The desired length (approximately 5 The acceptability of reduction was graded on the basis of residual angulation and the amount of displacement as excellent (<2 Preoperative and postoperative radiographs of the hip and pelvis (anteroposterior and frog-leg lateral views) were evaluated for quality of fracture reduction, adequacy of fixation, fracture-healing, and signs of avascular necrosis. The clinical parameters included: Hip pain, range of hip motion, walking capacity, evidence of bone union, presence of avascular necrosis and position of the screws/graft. Function was measured with use of the Harris Hip Score. The average duration of follow-up before assessment of functional outcome was mean 14 months (12–28 months). Between December 2012 to December 2016, thirty-two consecutive patients (age range 45–65 years) who had displaced femoral neck fractures were enrolled in the study. There were 23 males and 9 females. Fall from height was the commonest mode of injury (n=17), followed by road traffic accident (n=11) and slip while walking (n=4). Left side was involved in 19 patients and right side in 13. Fracture type is shown in Closed reduction of fracture was achieved in all patients. According to the Garden alignment index excellent reduction was achieved in 22 patients (61.9%) good in 14 (25.4%). Preoperative mean Pauwels angle was 60±6.4°. Average time to union was 3.8 months (3–5 months) ( The best treatment of unstable fracture neck femur in young adults is controversial and associated with various complications In the developing world, patients with neglected trauma often present months or even years after injury because of lack of facilities and awareness in rural area Following fracture the neck of femur blood supply to the femoral head may be impaired or entirely lacking, therefore even after best internal fixation, non-union and avascular necrosis may substantially increase The results of fixation in a displaced fracture with either cannulated screw or a sliding hip screw show a higher incidence of postoperative complications. These are mainly due to fixation failure, non-union, and AVN. The majority of reoperations are performed for early fixation failure in osteoporotic bone and non-union Alternative methods are described in the literature to improve results in unstable neglected fracture neck femur by: modifying internal fixation implants to enhance fixation, augmenting the posterior defect by muscle pedicle bone graft, neutralizing unfavorable mechanical forces by doing a valgus osteotomy, osteotomy and fixation with fibular graft, free fibular grafting and micro vascular grafts and CC screw fixation with fibular graft to enhance the union Free fibular grafting has been widely studied as a closed or open method to introduce both structural support and a graft framework due to osteoconductive and osteoinductive properties. The incorporation of fibular graft with the surrounding bone gives biological fixation Salvage procedures such as osteotomy and other treatment options such as vascularized and nonvascularized bone grafts have donor site complications and high failure rates. However graft related complication and donor site morbidity is the main concern of this procedure. Increasing age is usually considered as a risk factor for healing complications. Sandhu Traditional methods of bone grafting requires extensive surgical dissection with its own compilations of open method. Based on these observations in this series all patients were subjected to fixation with DHS-AS and additional cancellous bone grafting to reduce donor site morbidity with noninvasive method of biological supplementation to enhance the union. Reduction in Pauwels angle from a preoperative mean of 60° to a postoperative mean of 42° was observed in 10 cases. This occurred because of the 135% barrel plate applied after the fixation of derotation screw, which changed the angle of inclination and gives favorable outcomes. Despite presence of posterior comminution in our study, primary bone grafting and DHS fixation may be an effective answer to adverse biomechanical factors. Our observation is further reinforced in the literature that comminution of the posterior wall of the femoral neck has a negative influence on the security of fixation due to a persisting posterior gap after reduction. Lindquist. Suggested in his study of 28 patients that the bone graft should be introduced through a drilled channel in the femoral neck without exposing the fracture. At follow-up after 2 years, two patients had been reoperated with prosthetic replacement of the hip. Nineteen fractures were united and one had developed segmental collapse Bone grafting procedure has been supplemented along with internal fixation in cases where the treatment was delayed. Our method of internal bone grafting address this issue of posterior comminution and gap by filling the gap by bone graft in the screw track and with angled disc punch in posterior part of fracture comminution. In this study, the method involved the use of autogenous iliac-crest graft which fills up screw tract and posterior defect which increases the stability of fixation, promoting fracture healing because of its property of osteocondution and osteoinduction. The overall rate of non-union for patients in this series was 6.25%. Regarding avascular necrosis, the overall rate in our series was 3.2%. Meanwhile, the reoperation rate in our series was 6.25%. It is very difficult to compare the results in literature as varied data and methods were used. However in comparison with available literature ( The various reasons for the delay included: non-compliance of the patient for surgery, low socio-economic status of the patients, illiteracy, patients being unfit for the surgery. Hence this procedure is of special significance to those areas of the world where late reporting is not uncommon. We believe that comminuted fracture with posterior bone loss tends to fail after physiological loading due to lack of control over the proximal fragment, therefore augmentation by internal bone grafts increases the bone implant construct stability. Any surgical procedure that facilitates union and postpones replacement surgery is a useful option for patients in developing countries. We have also used cancellous bone chips to fill up any gap at the fracture site before internal fixation is done. This increased the stability of the fracture. There are some shortcomings. Randomized controlled trials comparing all alternatives with sufficiently long follow ups will be able to provide ultimate answers to this challenging question choice of grafting in unstable femoral neck fractures. However, this case series does prove its durability, safety and affectivity in simple settings for preventing non-union despite being a small study. It is difficult to conclude regarding true incidence of avascular necrosis because of short follow-up. In conclusion proximal femoral fractures remain a hot topic of interst amongst clinicians in terms of their best management and dealing with post fixation related complications None. None declared.