While herbage chemical composition varies diurnally, it is not known if this variation affects herbage biomechanical properties. The objective of this study was to evaluate changes in herbage toughness and particle size in relation to diurnal fluctuations of herbage chemical composition. Vegetative (i.e, tillers with three fully expanded leaves) micro-swards of Festuca pratensis Hud. were sampled at four times of the day being: 06:50 (sunrise), 11:10, 15:30 and 19:25h. Cut herbage was analysed for dry matter (DM), crude protein (CP), total non-structural carbohydrates (TNC), neutral and acid detergent fibre (aNDF, ADF), in vitro true digestibility (IVTD), toughness and particle size. The experiment was repeated on two consecutive days. Diurnal variation of temperature, relative humidity and photosynthetic radiation were recorded every 5min with an automated weather station. To characterize the relationship between dependent variables, Pearson correlations were performed. From 06:50 to 19:25h, DM, TNC and the proportion of small particles (<1mm) increased (P<0.05), CP, aNDF, ADF, toughness and proportion of large particles (>4.75mm) decreased (P<0.05) while IVTD remained constant (P>0.05). Toughness was negatively correlated (P<0.05) with DM and TNC concentrations, and positively correlated (P<0.05) with proportions of aNDF and ADF. The proportion of small particles was positively correlated (P<0.05) with DM and TNC concentrations, and negatively correlated (P<0.05) with proportions of aNDF, ADF and toughness. Results suggest an effect of time of day on herbage toughness and particle size as a function of increases in DM concentration, and reductions of aNDF and ADF concentrations, due to an increase in TNC. Diurnal fluctuations in chemical composition of herbage not only result in differential nutrient supply to grazing ruminants during the day, but also in temporal fluctuations in herbage biomechanical features.Several studies have shown increases in dry matter (DM) and total non-structural carbohydrate (TNC) concentrations of herbage during the day because of moisture losses and accumulation of photosynthates ( Toughness has been described as the resistance to ‘cracking’ of plant material ( Ingestive chewing is critical for grazing ruminants because it starts the particle comminution process, as well as facilitates bolus formation, cell content release, degradation and particle passage from the rumen ( The objective of this experiment was to quantify changes in ‘toughness’ and particle size of meadow fescue ( The experiment was conducted at the USDA-ARS Pasture Systems and Watershed Management Research Unit in University Park, PA, USA. In January 2007, monoculture micro-swards ( Sampling was on consecutive sunny, or a few clouds, days ( Three leaf blades from different tillers were randomly harvested from each micro-sward at each time of the day. These blades corresponded to the second fully expanded leaf. Blades were immediately put into nylon bags (20 The effect of time of day on particle size was determined similarly to the particle size reduction index technique of The remaining 6 Data were analysed as a completely randomized design with the experimental unit being the micro-sward. Times of day ( As there was no treatment Dry matter concentrations of the herbage were relatively low ( ‘Toughness’ decreased by 38.6% from 06:50 to 19:25 Ingestive comminution is a critical process for grazing ruminants because it facilitates microbial colonization of feed particles ( The diurnal increment of herbage DM, TNC, and the concomitant dilution of aNDF and ADF concentration diminish meadow fescue toughness and increase of particle size reduction from dawn to dusk. During the afternoon and evening, grass leaves would be more easily comminuted than leaves grazed in the morning, which may help to explain diurnal behavioural patterns of grazing ruminants. The authors thank Melissa Rubano, USDA-ARS, and Dr. Rajesh Bhosale, Center of Food Manufacturing, for laboratory expertise and time contributed to conducting this study. The authors also thank Drs. Pablo Soca, Michael H. Wade and Stacey A. Gunter for their critical review and comment on the manuscript.