Recycling lithium and graphite from spent lithium-ion battery plays a significant role in mitigation of lithium resources shortage, comprehensive utilization of spent anode graphite and environmental protection. In this study, spent graphite was firstly collected by a two-stage calcination. Secondly, under the optimal conditions of 1.5 M HCI, 60 min and solid-liquid ratio (S/L) of 100 g·L−1, the collected graphite suffers simple acid leaching to make almost 100% lithium, copper and aluminum in it into leach liquor. Thirdly, 99.9% aluminum and 99.9% copper were removed from leach liquor by adjusting pH first to 7 and then to 9, and thenthe lithium was recovered by adding sodium carbonate in leach liquor to form lithium carbonate with high purity (>99%). The regenerated graphite is found to have high initial specific capacity at the rate of 37.2 mA·g−1 (591 mAh·g−1), 74.4 mA·g−1 (510 mAh·g−1) and 186 mA·g−1 (335 mAh·g−1), and with the high retention ratio of 97.9% after 100 cycles, it also displays excellent cycle performance at high rate of 372 mA·g−1. By this process, copper and lithium can be recovered and graphite can be regenerated, serving as a sustainable approach for the comprehensive utilization of anode material from spent lithium-ion battery.Lithium ion battery (LIB) has been widely applied in consumer electronics (e.g. cameras, laptops, mobile phones, etc.), energy storage, electric vehicles (EVs), plug-in electric vehicles (PEVs) and other fields (e.g. aerospace industry, robot, etc.) due to its high energy density, good cycle performance and high discharging capacity ( In fact, recovering graphite from spent anode materials enjoys great significance in expanding the supply and alleviating the shortage of graphite resources. On one hand, being widely used in LIBs, metallurgy, atomic energy industry and other fields, graphite has been considered as one of the most important strategic materials ( Some studies report on comprehensive utilization of graphite from spent LIBs. Spent graphite is firstly separated from spent LIBs by physical methods, including dismantling, crushing, screening, and other mechanical processes ( With typical layer structure, the theoretical capacity of graphite is high up to 372 mAh·g Reagents for all experiments are of analytical grade. Hydrochloric acid, sodium hydroxide and sodium carbonate were bought from Xilong Reagent Corporation of China. Deionized water was used to prepare solutions. Spent anode material graphite was obtained from spent LIBs of automotive electronics and computers. Before being dismantled, spent LIBs were discharged in salt water for 8 h. And then anode current collectors were selected manually. The obtained anode current collectors were firstly treated under the protection of high purity argon (80 ml·min Lithium left in leach liquor was recovered by sodium carbonate precipitation method. Before lithium recycling, leach liquor was purified to remove copper and aluminum. 100 ml leach liquor was put into a 250 ml round-bottom flask. Sodium hydroxide with a concentration of 2 M was dropped into the leach liquor under magnetic stirring (100 rpm) at room temperature to adjust pH value. After the reaction under a certain pH, the obtained solid-liquid mixture was separated by filtration. Then, the concentration of lithium in filtrate was adjusted to 1 M by evaporation. 0.5 M sodium carbonate solution was added into the filtrate with the feed rate of 2 ml·min The phases of obtained copper foil, spent graphite before and after thermal treatment, and the recycled products were analyzed with powder X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku-2000) using Cu Kα radiation by a step size of 0.02° at a scan rate of 2°·min Electrochemical performances of regenerated graphite were tested by using coin cells. 90 wt% regenerated graphite, 5 wt% acetylene black and 5 wt% polyvinylidene fluoride were firstly mixed to form a uniform slurry. The slurry was coated on a copper foil and dried at 80 °C for 8 h in a vacuum oven, before being punched into cake-shape plate. The plate functioned as working electrode, lithium metal foil as counter electrode, celgard 2400 polyethylene/polypropylene as separator, and the mixture of 1 M LiPF As seen from In the process of dismantling spent LIBs and then separating copper foils and graphite by thermal treatment, the aluminum in positive current collector and the copper in anode current collector will inevitably enter into spent graphite ( After oxidizing roasting, the metals in spent graphite can be easily leached in hydrochloric solution. The leaching behaviors of lithium, copper and aluminum under various conditions are displayed in After acid leaching, the concentrations of lithium, copper and aluminum in leach liquor are 470 mg·L After purification, the lithium left in leach liquor was recovered by carbonate precipitation method (  Although the particles of recycled graphite get thinner, the surface area decreases. As seen in Coin cells were assembled to measure the lithiation/delithiation properties of regenerative graphite. The charge/discharge curves in  Upon above analysis, the proposed process can recover lithium and regenerate graphite from spent LIBs, but it still depends on the effective management. On one hand, for a consideration of recycling spent graphite, the negative current collector and positive current collector must be separated effectively by a more precise separation method. Artificial separation can achieve this goal, but it is not enough to meet the requirements of industrial production. Therefore, machine separation is necessary. For the convenience of machine disassembly and accurate separation, the spent LIBs must be classified strictly according to materials, specifications, etc. ( Another issue for the recovery process is economy. For graphite can be seen as a waste product from the recycling of cathode materials, the transportation, discharge, disassembly and other costs should not be considered. Take the recovery of 1 t spent graphite for example, it consumes 1.644 t HCl, 0.602 t NaOH and 10, 000 KW·h power. The total cost is around 13, 364.2 CNY (Table S2). Currently, the price of 1 t graphite anode materials is about 15, 000 CNY. Moreover, there are copper metal and lithium carbonate products. Therefore, the recovery of graphite is economical. To conclude, the whole process is simple and short, and can help achieve the comprehensive recovery of lithium and graphite, which enjoys great significance in sustainable development of LIBs. The spent graphite was firstly obtained by the two-stage calcination, and it suffered acid leaching to get the leach residue of graphite and the leach liquor. Approximately 100% lithium, copper and aluminum enter the leach liquor by acid leaching under the conditions of 1.5 M HCl, 60 min and S/L = 100 g·L Lithium in the leach liquor was recovered by carbonate precipitation method, and the purity of the recovered lithium carbonate was over 99%. This work was supported by the Scientific Research Starting Foundation of Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: