Bone cells produce many glycoproteins potentially involved in the maintenance of healthy bone tissues. Two cytokines produced in inflamed joints, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)α and transforming growth factor (TGF)β, have previously been shown to alter cellular glycosylation which may potentially affect the expression and function of glycoproteins. In order to evaluate models to study the glycodynamics of bone cells, we examined primary human osteoblastic cells from osteoarthritis patients, and compared these to human osteosarcoma cells MG63 and SJSA-1. We showed here for the first time that all of the human osteoblastic cells actively synthesize complex N- and O-glycan chains of bone cell glycoproteins, with quantitative differences between cell types. TNFα-induced apoptosis or TGFβ-induced cell differentiation and proliferation had significant effects on both cell surface carbohydrates and glycosyltransferase activities of osteoblasts and osteosarcoma cells. The results indicate that cultured human bone-derived osteoblastic cells are good models to examine the glycodynamics of osteoblasts under conditions of cell growth and cell death. The changes induced by cytokines can result in altered cell surface functions which may be of importance in osteoarthritis, osteoporosis and other bone diseases.The pathogenesis of osteoarthritis (OA) is unknown; however, it involves an imbalance of cartilage and bone degradation, mediated by osteoclasts, and repair, mediated by osteoblasts (OB). In osteoporosis, the decline in bone mass is favored over bone formation in the functional bone remodelling units ( BSP secreted by the rat osteoblastic line UMR-106 is a major anionic glycoconjugate ( The glycans of secreted or membrane-bound glycoproteins have been shown to be critically important for the expression of cell surface receptors, for the regulation of apoptosis and inflammation, and for many other biological functions ( Recently, we reported that primary bovine synoviocytes and chondrocytes have active glycosyltransferases involved in the synthesis of bi-antennary N-glycans and core 1 type of O-glycans of glycoproteins ( Transforming growth factor (TGF)β and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)α are two cytokines present at sites of inflammation in arthritic tissues. TGFβ as well as the related bone morphogenic proteins (BMP) stimulate proliferation and differentiation of OB. TGFβ is the most abundant growth factor in bone, and has selective effects on the expression of glycoproteins ( TNFα, together with other cytokines, has important roles in the pathophysiology of bone disease and in bone resorption ( Both TGFβ and TNFα, as well as their receptors, thus play a crucial role in the regulation of bone cell proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis and bone resorption ( The overall aim of this study was to identify for the first time glycosyltransferases and the pathways of glycoprotein biosynthesis that are functional in bone cells. In order to investigate the glycodynamics of bone cells, several cell types derived from bone have been evaluated as model systems. We demonstrated that human bone-derived OB and osteosarcoma cells SJSA-1 and MG63 have the ability to synthesize complex N-glycans and O-glycans, and are good study models for glycodynamics in bone. We found a distinct relationship between cytokine effects and cellular glycosylation. The understanding of this relationship is important for the development of anti-inflammatory and bone rebuilding strategies for arthritis. Culture media, fetal bovine serum (FBS), Penicillin/Streptomycin and trypsin/EDTA were purchased from GIBCO/Invitrogen. Dexamethasone, collagenase I, Histopaque-1077 layer (density 1.077 Primary human bone cell cultures were isolated from bone or bone marrow of patients with osteoarthritis undergoing knee or hip replacement surgery. Human bone marrow stromal cells (HBMC) were obtained by density gradient centrifugation over a histopaque-1077 layer (density 1.077 Human osteosarcoma cells SJSA-1 (from ATCC) derived from osteoblastic, multipotential sarcoma of human bone were grown in RPM1 1640 medium containing 10% FBS. Human osteosarcoma cells MG63 (from ATCC) were cultured as fibroblastic cells in Minimum essential medium (Eagle) with 2 Primary OB were identified under the microscope as spindle-shaped, mononucleated, fibroblastic OB. ALP activity in these cells was determined in cell lysates using Before treatments with growth factors, primary OB were grown in medium containing 2% FBS, and bone cancer cells in serum-free medium for 48 To remove glycans from cell surfaces, whole cells were treated with peptide N-glycosidase F (Roche, Laval QC) and neuraminidase from Apoptosis was determined using TdT-Frag-EL DNA fragmentation (TUNEL) and the Annexin V-biotin Apoptosis Detection kits, and was visualized by fluorescence microscopy as well as by flow cytometry using an EPICS XL flow cytometer (Beckman Coulter) as described ( To induce Fas-mediated apoptosis in MG63 cells, 1 To assess growth, cell numbers were determined by counting aliquots with a cell counter (Coulter, Zf Model). [ For the determination of cell surface glycans by ELLA, cells were grown as monolayers on 96 well plates to complete confluency. This ensured that the cell numbers in each treatment group were comparable. Cells were fixed and treated with biotinylated lectins and analyzed as previously described ( Cells released from the culture plates were washed with PBS, and hand homogenized in about 5 volumes of 0.25 Primary human OB grown from HBMC or human bone chips treated with collagenase had the appearance of spindle shaped OB. The addition of 0.1 Osteocalcin expression, using anti-osteocalcin antibody, showed a high level above background (data not shown). In addition, antibodies to collagen I showed a high expression of collagen I in OB derived from either HBMC or bone ( Biotin-linked lectins were used to examine the cell surface carbohydrate profiles of bone cells. Lectins WGA, SNA, MAA II, PNA, ConA and HP were tested in two or three separate experiments with eight measurements within each experiment. All of these lectins bound to bone cells, suggesting that the ligand structures were exposed on cell surfaces ( SJSA-1 cells ( To assess the ability of bone cells to undergo cell proliferation, cultured OB and bone cancer cells were treated with TGFβ. TGFβ at 10 The ability of TNFα to induce apoptosis was examined by fluorescence microscopy and by flow cytometry, using biotin-conjugated annexin V and TUNEL staining. SJSA-1 cells treated with 40 After the induction of apoptosis by treatment with 40 Under conditions that are expected to measure near-maximal velocities, homogenates prepared from human OB were assayed for selected activities of glycosyltransferases involved in the synthesis and modification of the lectin binding sites. Only a limited amount of cellular homogenate was available, and enzymes were selected that synthesize complex branched N-glycans and GalNAc-Ser/Thr-linked O-glycans ( OB grown with and without dexamethasone, as well as HBMC, also had core 1 β3-Gal-transferase activity that synthesizes the PNA binding site O-glycan core 1 (3.6–13.6 GlcNAc-transferase I, the enzyme initiating the synthesis of complex bi-antennary N-glycans, was active at similar levels in all three OB cultures (2.1–2.3 In order to compare the enzyme activities detected in cultured OB to cells present in bone tissue, small bone fragments were produced from fresh human bone, and hand homogenized. The resulting homogenate showed very low activities of glycosyltransferases, due to the large amount of insoluble inorganic material in bone, relative to the cellular material. Thus, cell cultures are preferred in the study of bone cell glycobiology. Homogenates from human bone cancer cells were also examined for enzyme activities that synthesize N- and O-glycans. SJSA-1 cells had a highly active polypeptide GalNAc-transferase, using Acetyl-BpaPTPPP-NH MG63 osteosarcoma cells were also active in the synthesis of O-glycans. The activity of polypeptide GalNAc-transferase towards Acetyl-BpaPTPPP-NH TNFα, or TGFβ, added to the culture medium of OB grown with dexamethasone, decreased the activity of polypeptide GalNAc-transferase by 39% and 31%, respectively ( Treatments with TNFα and TGFβ also altered selected enzyme activities in SJSA-1 cells ( The glycodynamics of apoptosis was further studied in osteoblastic MG63 cells. The synthesis of N-glycans was inhibited in MG63 cells by incubation of cells with tunicamycin, followed by assessing Fas-mediated apoptosis. Untreated control cells showed 1.5–2.2% TUNEL stained apoptotic cells. Treatment with anti-Fas antibody induced a 3.5-fold increase in the percentage of TUNEL stained apoptotic cells. Incubation of cells with 500 In synergy with the bone resorbing osteoclasts, OB are programmed to synthesize and maintain bone tissue, and produce many glycoproteins involved in these processes. Our results demonstrate that human bone cells, express enzyme activities involved in the biosynthetic pathways of N- and O-glycan chains of glycoproteins in cell-specific patterns. All of the human OB and osteosarcoma cells were shown to have the potential for the biosynthesis of complex biantennary N-glycans as well as O-glycans with core 1 and core 2 structures. These enzyme activities were found in OB grown with or without dexamethasone, as well as in bone marrow cells which represents a mixture of cells at different stages of maturity. Although these enzymes are expressed in many different cell types, the levels of some of these activities differ significantly in OB from different sources and may thus be tightly regulated during the maturation process of bone cells. A comparison with other cell types from the joint suggests that the enzyme patterns and pathways of glycoprotein biosynthesis of human OB resemble those of human chondrocytes ( All of the human cells tested in this study showed activities of GlcNAc-transferases I and II. While GlcNAc-transferase I activity was relatively constant in the various cell types, GlcNAc-transferase II was much more variable. The cell types studied here can be predicted to have glycoproteins with bi-antennary N-glycan structures and these are also expected to be found in bone. However, there are distinct differences between individual cell types that give them characteristic glycosylation profiles. For example, SJSA-1 cells are particularly low in GlcNAc-transferase II activity, accompanied by a relatively low ConA binding; thus, the relative amounts of N-glycan structures produced in this cell line may be different from those in OB. The enzyme activities support the finding that OB synthesize the HP lectin (GalNAc-) and PNA (Galβ1-3GalNAc-, core 1) binding sites. After conversion of core 1 to core 2, the GlcNAc residue of core 2 is expected to be efficiently extended with a Galβ1-4 residue, due to the high activity of β4-Gal-transferase. This allows further extension and substitution of chains by sialic acid and other functional epitopes. The chain extensions should be of type 2 since β3-Gal-transferase activity that synthesizes the Galβ1-3GlcNAc linkage was not detected in OB. The non-reducing termini of glycan chains may thus be substituted with antigens such as Lewis x and y antigens. These structures, their biosynthesis and their functions in bone remain to be demonstrated. Based on our findings, we expect that osteoblastic osteosarcoma cells SJSA-1 and MG63 cells can synthesize and display glycan structures that are similar to those of OB although there may be quantitative differences. These glycans can have many different roles, including the control of cell surface receptor expression ( Our results demonstrate glycodynamics in bone cells, i.e. a relationship between apoptosis, cell proliferation and glycosylation in osteoblastic cells. The effects of cytokines appeared to be cytokine- and cell type-specific. TNFα and TGFβ treatments resulted in a number of significant alterations of cell surface lectin binding sites, and in alterations of several enzyme activities involved in the synthesis of cell surface glycoproteins. Since a number of cell surface functions, such as the induction of apoptosis, is closely linked to specific glycosylation phenotypes ( Primary OB are stimulated by TNFα to initiate the apoptotic cascade, and this is accompanied by minor changes in N- and O-glycosylation. The decrease in polypeptide GalNAc-transferase activity may be responsible for the significant decrease in PNA lectin binding sites in TNFα-treated OB. Although the glycosylation of SJSA-1 cells appears to be similar to that of OB, the effect seen after TNFα treatment is different. SJSA-1 cells undergoing apoptosis after TNFα treatment exhibit more GalNAc residues but not likely due to an increase in polypeptide GalNAc-transferase. They also show alterations in N-glycan structures which need to be further defined. The N-glycans of MG63 cells appear to have a role in the regulation of Fas-mediated apoptosis, since tunicamycin treatment increased the number of apoptotic cells induced by anti-Fas antibody. This role is probably not involving the ligand binding of Fas molecules that have already reached the cell surface since N-glycanase treatment had a negligible effect on Fas-induced apoptosis. We previously showed that the expression of soluble Fas in HeLa cells requires N-glycosylation and tunicamycin treatment prevents the secretion of fully N-glycosylated Fas ( In contrast to TNFα, TGFβ induced cell differentiation and proliferation, and increased the amount of ConA and HP lectin binding in OB. SJSA-1 cells also respond to TGFβ with cell proliferation; however, the changes in lectin binding sites are in contrast to those of OB and indicate a general decrease in the exposure of lectin binding sites. Although each cell type has its own characteristic glycosylation pattern and none of the cells are identical to primary osteoblasts, the human osteosarcoma cells appear to be good models for studies of N- and O-glycosylation pathways and the functions of glycans. These studies may reveal the roles of glycans in bone biology, and in controlling cell death and tissue regeneration. Novel strategies for the treatment of OA may be aimed at controlling apoptosis by modifications of glycosylation of subchondral bone cells. This may affect bone remodeling, and perhaps also cartilage repair which appears to be closely tied to bone remodeling. In orthopedic practice for OA, these strategies could also serve to improve fracture healing, since about 10% of fractures do not heal properly resulting in non-union. This work was supported by grants from Materials and Manufacturing Ontario and the Mizutani Foundation of Glycoscience. The authors thank Andrew Kuo, Michael Lehotay, Kenneth Lau and Connie Yin for carrying out glycosyltransferase or proliferation assays. Inka Brockhausen has been a Research Scientist of The Arthritis Society.