In the current work, the adsorption of Au, from an industrial alkaline cyanide solution, is reported by the use of a novel synthesized adsorbant, namely graphene aerogel/cellulose fibers/magnetite nanoparticles (GCM) composite. The GCM composite was successfully synthesized by a facile and cost effective mild chemical reduction route. The synthesized composite showed a high gold adsorption capacity (130 mg·g−1) with an appropriate hydrophilicity; in addition, it had the desired mechanical strength (7 kPa at 50% strain) that makes it suitable for the industrial exploitation. The effect of contact time and GCM concentration on the gold adsorption and also the kinetic aspects of the adsorption process were studied and it was found that a pseudo-second-order model can well described the experimental data. In addition, the synthesized composite can be easily collected and separated after the adsorption step by using a magnetic separator. The desorption efficiency of the Au loaded GCM composite was 60% after 20 adsorption-desorption cycles; interestingly, the remained Au in the GCM composite after these 20 cycles could provide the GCM composite decorated by Au nanoparticles (GCM/Au) that shows promising electrochemical characteristics. According to the Cyclic Voltammetry (CV) analysis, conducted in the [Fe(CN)6]3−/4− solution, the modification of glassy carbon electrode by the GCM/Au composite resulted in an increase in the electroactivity (more than two times increase in the redox peak separation); in addition, based on the results of Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS), there was a significant decrease in the charge transfer resistance (Rct) of the glassy carbon electrode modified by GCM/Au composite indicating a considerable improvement in the electrical conductivity and electron transfer.Gold, with a superior electrical conductivity and resistance to corrosion as well as other desirable combinations of physical and chemical properties, is an essential and effective metal in high technology industries. Au has been widely used in computers, communications equipment, spacecraft and jet aircraft engines [ The size of ACs powder and its specific surface area are typically in the order of 10 Nowadays, graphene oxide (GO), the two-dimensional oxygen-rich carbon layers (hexagons) consisting of sp2-hybridized C Apart from all the above-mentioned issues, the desorption of Au from the Au loaded carbonaceous materials, including the activated carbon and the graphene family materials, is another important issue. Typically, the adsorbed Au is not completely removed from the Au loaded carbonaceous materials in desorption step especially after several adsorption-desorption cycles [ In the present study, a mild facile chemical method was employed for the synthesis of Graphene aerogel/Cellulose fibers/Magnetite nanoparticles (GCM) composite for the adsorption of Au from an industrial alkaline cyanide solution. After characterization of the GCM composite, the characteristics of the Au adsorption/desorption steps by the synthesized composite, were quantified and discussed. Finally, after twenty cycles of adsorption-desorption, the electrochemical properties of GCM composite decorated by Au nanoparticles was examined. According to the schematic representation shown in For the preparation of the cellulose fibers, 3 g of waste paper was leached by hydrochloric acid (3 M) at 65 °C to remove the inorganic species. After filtration and washing by hot water, the paper was dispersed in the NaOH/urea solution with a mass ratio of 5/10 under vigorous stirring. The solution was then cooled at −15 °C before mixing with the paper. The obtained slurry was immersed in ethanol, as a regenerating bath, and the cellulose gel was formed. After regeneration, the solvent was exchanged several times with water [ The levels of cellulose and magnetite, employed for the synthesis of GCM composite, were based on the values reported in the literature [ The Au cyanide solution was prepared from Moutheh Gold Mine (Isfahan, Iran). The typical chemical composition of the prepared solution was (mg/l ± 0.01): Au = 1, Ag = 3, Cu = 210, Ca = 11, Ni = 100, Na = 32 and Fe = 200. In addition, the concentration of cyanide was 5 (mM/l) with a pH of 11. All the Au adsorption experiments were conducted in the cylindrical flasks; in a typical adsorption run, 15 mg of GCM composite was kept in contact with 5 ml of Au cyanide solution via a mechanical shaker under ambient conditions. Then, after the desired contact time, the GCM was simply separated from the system by using a magnet. The concentrations (mg/l) of Au in the initial solution (C After magnetic separation of the adsorbent [ After the twentieth desorption step, i.e. after 20 cycles of adsorption and desorption, the as-desorbed GCM composite was introduced to the ascorbic acid solution (0.1 mol/l) for 4 h at 80 °C; as it was expected the remained/entrapped Au in the structure of GCM composite (after 20 cycles of adsorption and desorption), could be reduced to Au nanoparticles. Then, the obtained GCM composite, decorated with Au nanoparticles (namely GCM/Au composite), was washed by distilled water for three times and it was finally freeze-dried at −60 °C. The hydrogel samples were dried via the freeze-drying method using an FD-10V freeze-drier (Tajhizat Sazan Pishtaz Co., Iran). Philips XL 30 device was used to take scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images. On a Philips X-ray powder diffractometer system with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å) operated at 40 kV and 150 mA at a scanning step of 0.04° and the scanning angle from 5° to 80°, X-ray Diffraction (XRD) was recorded. A Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) Thermo AVATAR model was used to measure chemical bonds and functional groups. N The electrochemical experiments were carried out using a Potentiostate SP1 ZIVE in a conventional three-electrode cell with Glassy Carbon Electrode (GCE) as the working electrode, a Pt plate as the counter electrode and Ag|AgCl as the reference electrode. The GCEs (2 mm diameter) from AZAR Electrode, Iran, were polished with 2 μm diamond paste and then rinsed with distilled water and ethanol. Graphene composites (GCM and GCM/Au) were dispersed in H Different structural, chemical and physical analyses were employed for the characterization of the obtained GCM composite. In order to determine the atomic and molecular structure of the GCM composite, XRD technique was employed; in addition, the XRD patterns related to the synthesized GO and GA were acquired for comparison purposes. As it can be observed in The XRD pattern of GCM composite also confirms the presence of the magnetic (Fe In order to shed more light on the functional groups present in the obtained GCM composite, FT-IR spectrum was acquired; besides, the spectra corresponding to GO and GA were presented for comparison purpose ( Also, in the FT-IR spectrum of the GCM composite, there are two broad bands at 1556 and 1181 cm According to the Raman spectra of the GO and GA, presented in In addition, the ratio of D band intensity (I In order to acquire information about the morphological features and elemental composition (microanalysis) of the synthesized GCM composite, SEM-EDX was conducted. According to the SEM images presented in Furthermore, EDX analysis of the synthesized GCM composite presented in The presence (dispersion) of cellulose fibers within the GCM composite can effectively prevent the aggregation of GO sheets; moreover, it can significantly improve the mechanical strength of the composite by cross-linking these sheets. It is also worthy of note that the cellulose fibers can facilitate the formation of a 3D porous structure composite and make the composite hydrophile. According to the results of compression tests obtained from Moreover, the addition of cellulose fibers results in an increase in the elasticity of the composite (66%) due to the role of cellulose fibers as the cross-linker. The improvement in the both of strength and elasticity of GCM composite, i.e. higher toughness [ In order to evaluate and compare the hydrophilicity of the GA and GCM composite, contact angle (h As it can be observed in In order to study the GCM composite magnetic behavior, the magnetic hysteresis curves were obtained under ambient conditions. The M–H curves presented in In addition, the coercive force of the composite is estimated 98.5 Oe with a remanent magnetization of 1.94 emu·g According to the results presented in Three level of GCM concentration (the ratio GCM composite mass to the volume of Au cyanide solution), namely as 1, 3 and 5 g/l, were employed to study the effect of GCM concentration on the Au adsorption from the cyanide solution (1 mg/l) under ambient conditions after 120 min. As it can be observed in Generally, there are two main approaches for the kinetic modeling of the adsorption processes; the mass transport-based models (including external mass transport and internal diffusion) and the surface-chemical (adsorption) reaction ones [ The linear forms of the pseudo-first-order (Eq. According to the above-mentioned linear fitting ( The EDS analysis of the GCM after adsorption of Au(CN) The presence of Au in ICP analysis of solution before and after the adsorption process is indicating that Au was indeed absorbed on composite. The composite was negatively charged at basis pH with some hydrophilic groups. In this study, the adsorption of Au(CN) A survey on previous studies on the adsorption process of Au by the carbonaceous based adsorbents shows that there is typically a limited focus of attention on the desorption (elution) of Au from the loaded adsorbents [  The mechanical strength of the adsorbent is the other prerequisite for its successful exploitation. As previously mentioned, the brittle structure of the ACs, as a disadvantage, leads to the AC loss during the adsorption-desorption process. According to the results of compression test, the synthesized GCM composite shows a high strength (7 kPa) at 50% strain which is due to the both 3D graphene-cellulose structure and the presence of magnetite nanoparticles as the reinforcement species. The subtle point of the present study is related to the GCM adsorbent obtained after 20 cycles of adsorption-desorption process; i.e. the GCM composite remained after the twentieth desorption step that still contains a trace of Au within its structure. In Also, the SEM images reveal that the GCM composite preserves its porous structure even after 20 cycles of adsorption-desorption process. In order to acquire information about the functional groups (bonds) of the GCM/Au nanocomposite, FTIR analysis was carried out. In A comparison between two spectra ( In order to confirm the presence of Au in the GCM/Au nanocomposite, XRD analysis was employed. Based on the GCM/Au nanocomposite's pattern presented in As previously mentioned, after 20 cycles of adsorption-desorption process, the GCM/Au nanocomposite was obtained with some specific characteristics; a hydrophilic nanocomposite with the meso/macroporous structure, high surface area and large pores volume (size) that decorated with Au nanoparticles. Regarding such distinctive properties, it was decided to evaluate the obtained nanocomposite as an electrocatalyst. In order to study the electrochemical activity of the GCM composite and GCM/Au nanocomposite by cyclic voltammetry (CV) technique, the glassy carbon electrode (GCE) was modified by the GCM and GCM/Au materials; in As it can be observed, both the oxidation and reduction current intensities' peaks increase after modification of the GCE electrode by GCM and GCM/Au; i.e. the peak to peak separation (ΔE) value decreases to 98 and 66 mV for GCE modified by GCM and GCM/Au materials, respectively (in comparison with 150 mV in the case of GCE). This improvement is due to the 3D porous structure of the GCM materials that enhances the mobility of electrolyte within the structure [ In order to shed more light on the electron transfer properties of the GCE and the modified GCE (by GCM and GCM/Au materials), Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) was employed. As it can be observed ( These results (the decrease in the value of Rct) are in consistent with the increase in the electrocatalytic activity obtained from the cyclic voltammograms. Graphene aerogel/cellulose fiber/magnetite nanoparticles (GCM) nanocomposite was synthesized with chemical reduction method as a cost-effective and environmental friendly adsorbent for adsoprtion of gold cyanide complex from industrial cyanide leaching solution. The cellulose microfiber has dimeter size of 5 μm which it has a more facile manufacturing process and low cost due to use as waste paper as precursor. Cellulose crosslinks with graphene sheets during the stirring process and causes a significant increase in the mechanical properties and wettability of the adsorbent in adsorption bath which is not destroyed after 20 cycles adsorption/desorption process. The gold adsorption capacity of this adsorbent is greater than the capacities of the similar adsorbents yet reported and it is about 130 mg·g Magnetic separation of the adsorbent from the solution facilitates the process, allowing us to incorporate the same approach in large scales. After undergoing 20 adsorption-desorption cycles, the adsorbent had less adsorption capacity and it is converted to GCM/Au nanoparticles composite via chemical reduction procedure as a result of the remaining gold ions on the removed adsorbent. This nanocomposite shows desired electrochemical properties. The decrease in the value of Rct in EIS test and increase in the current density peaks in CV curves are obtained using GCM/Au composite instead of GCM.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Authors would like to thank Iran minerals production and supply company (IMPASCO) and MOUTEH gold mine especially Eng. Morteza Sadeghi Naeini and Eng. Hamid Ebrahimi Basabi for supporting this research. This work was supported by