Biochemical conversion of lignocellulose to fermentable carbohydrates for ethanol production is now being implemented in large-scale industrial production. Applying hydrothermal pretreatment and enzymatic hydrolysis for the conversion process, a residue containing substantial amounts of lignin will be generated. So far little is known about the composition of this lignin residue which at present is mainly incinerated for heat and power generation and not yet converted so much into more valuable products.
                  In this study, the structural and chemical composition of the solid and liquid fractions of lignin residue from wheat straw were analysed and processing factors discussed. Roughly 70 and 15% of the solid mass fraction consisted of lignin and ash, respectively. Residual carbohydrates mostly originated from hemicellulose in the liquid fraction and from cellulose in the solid fraction. The solid fraction also contained significant amounts of protein, which is a valuable by-product when used as animal feed or when enzymes and yeast cells are separated for process recycling. Silica was the dominant constituent in the mineral fraction and except for few fragments of lignified middle lamellae most particles in the solid fraction appeared as silica coated by lignin, hampering separation of the two components before incineration or refinement of the residue.Processing of lignocellulose to fermentable carbohydrates and subsequent conversion to fuels and chemicals is an area of intense research and development. In a typical bio-chemical process, biomass is pretreated to render the carbohydrates more accessible to the subsequent enzymatic hydrolysis followed by fermentation or extraction of the released monosaccharides. Remaining is a solid fraction mainly consisting of lignin which contrary to the residual from the pulp and paper industry is non-sulfonated, and as large-scale plants become established equally large quantities of this feedstock will become available. However, the nature of this material, termed ‘lignin residue’ in this paper, is unexplored and more information on its basic structure is needed in order to better support its potential applications and valorise it to its full potential be it simple combustion or refinement into high-value chemical products. Pure lignin is an aromatic polyether with lower heating values (LHV) up to 25.4 MJ kg Lignin affects processing of lignocellulosic biomass in different ways. Initially, lignin is a barrier for the access and degradation of carbohydrates into fermentable carbohydrates Also present in the lignin residue are inorganic components. The levels of these vary depending on feedstock but in grasses the levels are generally high. Alkaline oxides and minerals, especially potassium, have been extensively investigated because they cause corrosion in boilers and heat exchangers and furthermore reduce the combustion efficiency by slagging or fouling In this paper we have analysed and described commercially processed lignin residue from wheat straw ( Lignin residue was obtained as whole slurry from the Inbicon plant at Kalundborg, Denmark, where wheat straw, as an agricultural by-product, is processed into ethanol. The process involves comminution of the baled wheat straw into ca. 5 cm pieces, soaking in acetic acid-containing process condensate to adjust the dry matter (DM) content, hydrothermal pretreatment at 180–200 °C for 10–20 min with steam, pressing and separation into solids and liquid fractions, washing of the solid fraction, pH adjustment, enzymatic liquefaction and saccharification and fermentation using baker's yeast ( The remaining slurry was centrifuged in Falcon tubes for 10 min at 3000 rpm (RCF = 1720) to separate the liquid and solid fraction. The solid fraction was air-dried at room temperature and the liquid fraction stored in a refrigerator prior to further analyses. For oxidative delignification, 2 g of centrifuged and subsequently air-dried whole slurry was added 300 mL Milli-Q water, 20 mL 10% (∼1.75 mol L DM content in the whole slurry, solid and liquid fractions was determined using a Sartorius MA 30 moisture analyser at 105 °C In the liquid fraction monomeric carbohydrates were analysed directly by HPLC. To measure solubilised oligosaccharides in the liquid fraction, dilute acid hydrolysis was also performed; empty glass tubes with caps were weighed and triplicates of 15 mL samples from the liquid fraction were collected and added 0.697 mL of 72% mass content H The quantification of From the liquid fraction, triplicates of 0.5 mL from the liquid fraction were air-dried overnight at 45 °C in tin capsules. Afterwards, nitrogen and carbon contents were determined according to the classic Dumas method using an FLASH 2000 EA (NC Soil Analyzer) with gases separated on a GC column The total nitrogen and carbon content of the solid fraction was determined by weighing 6 mg of pulverized DM into tin capsules followed by analysis with an ANCA-SL elemental analyser coupled to a 20-20 Tracermass mass spectrometer (Sercon Ltd., Creve, UK) as previously described For comparison, the nitrogen content of the solid fraction was additionally measured by the Kjeldahl method. Destruction was performed by taking 2 g in duplicate and mixing with 30 mL of 96% mass content (∼18 mol L Multi-elemental analyses of the solid and liquid fractions were conducted using two complementary atomic spectroscopy based approaches. The silicon (Si) content was determined by inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) (Optima 5300 DV, PerkinElmer, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA) while boron, sodium, magnesium, aluminium, phosphorus, sulphur, potassium, calcium, manganese, iron, cobalt, nickel, copper, zinc, arsenic, molybdenum and lead was measured by ICP-mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) (Agilent 7500ce, Agilent Technologies, Manchester, UK). Prior to analysis, samples were digested using a microwave oven (Multiwave 3000, software version 1.24, Anton Paar GmbH, Graz, Austria). For Si analysis, 250 mg of the solid fraction and 2.5 ml of the liquid fraction were digested as described by Haysom & Ostatek-Boczynski For multi-elemental analysis, 250 mg or 2.5 mL of the solid or liquid fraction, respectively, were digested as described previously Attenuated total reflectance-Fourier transform infrared (ATR-FTIR) spectra were obtained in triplicates using a ThermoFischer Scientific Nicolet 6700 FTIR spectrometer Air-dried and delignified residue samples were imaged by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM). SEM images were taken using a FEI Quanta 200 (FEI Company, Eindhoven, The Netherlands), operated at 10–20 kV. All samples were coated with Au/Pd by an SC7640 Suto-/Manual High Resolution Sputter Coater (Quorum Technologies, Newhaven, UK). AFM images were captured using a MultiMode scanning probe microscope with a Nanoscope IIIa controller (Veeco Instruments Inc, Santa Barbara, CA) operating in TappingMode with an etched silicon probe (MPP-12100, Veeco NanoProbe, Santa Barbara, CA). The resonance frequency for TappingMode was 150–300 kHz with a scan rate of 0.5–1.97 Hz. Scan was size was 1 μm This batch of lignin residue was from a process in which cellulose conversion into ethanol had been almost complete and the hemicellulose effectively removed. Yet, the degree of biochemical conversion of any lignocellulosic material will vary according to process parameters such as retention times and temperatures during pretreatment, pressing and separation into a solid and liquid fraction, DM content, liquefaction, saccharification and fermentation together with dosage and type of enzyme preparation and fermenting microorganism The DM content of the whole slurry, solid and liquid fraction after centrifugation is presented in The composition of the dry material in the solid fraction is presented in The heating value of the lignin residue depends on moisture content and carbon oxidation states. The exact heating value of the residue requires further calorimetric investigations not undertaken in this study. Yet, for comparison, a study of lime-treated wheat straw (LTWS) after simultaneous saccharification and fermentation (SSF) with 43% carbon and 27% ash mass contents had lower and higher heating values (LHV and HHV, respectively) of 12.4 and 13.4 MJ kg The nitrogen mass content as determined by isotope ratio mass spectrometry (IRMS) and additionally by Kjeldahl analysis was 1.4 and 1.8%, respectively. Normally, wheat straw harvested after senescence has a rather low nitrogen content stemming from structural proteins in the plasmodesmata and photosynthetic system How much of the crude protein originated from added enzymes and yeast cells could not be investigated but based on a theoretical process setup resulting in ca. 15 mg EP g Recovery and re-use of the crude protein for animal feed or process recycling of cellulolytic enzymes and yeast would be beneficial for the economic competitiveness of ethanol production from biomass The amounts of carbohydrates in the liquid fraction are presented in In the current process configuration, fermentation is based on a yeast strain that is incapable of fermenting pentoses. In accordance with this, solubilised carbohydrates detected in the liquid fraction were mainly xylose and very little cellobiose and glucose. Degradation products such as furfural and 5-hydroxymethylfurfural and depolymerised lignin compounds were not quantified in this study as their abundance is strongly influenced by type of pretreatment and process parameters The elements of both fractions in the lignin residue are presented in The most abundant element in the solid fraction was silicon with one order of magnitude more than sodium, the second most abundant element ( It was not investigated how much soil adhering to the straw or corrosion of process equipment contributed to the mineral content in the lignin residue. According to literature, the initial soaking prior to pretreatment removes soil contaminants and the hydrothermal low-acid pretreatment (see above) only provides a low corrosion potential According to our composition analyses, 14.9% of the total solid mass fraction was ash while it was only 6.3% in total according to the elemental analysis. This difference is caused by that silicon is deposited in plant cell walls mostly as hydrated silica, i.e. SiO In the liquid fraction, sodium was the most abundant element followed by potassium. One to two orders of magnitudes less were calcium, silicon, sulphur, phosphorus, magnesium, iron and manganese while aluminium, cobalt, nickel, copper, zinc, arsenic, molybdenum and lead were three orders of magnitude lower. Silica solubility is generally controlled by temperature, super saturation (i.e. polymerisation of dissolved silica) As expected, ATR-FTIR spectra (see Furthermore, solubilised lignin was seen as aromatic skeletal vibrations around 1590 cm No bands representing silica or silicates were detected in either fractions as neither SiO–H, Si–H stretches between 3700 and 2100 cm Whole slurry was air-dried at room temperature prior to SEM imaging ( According to earlier investigations, lignin generally has globular shapes on nanoscale Composition analyses of lignin residue after biochemical conversion of wheat straw to ethanol showed that the solid mass fraction consisted mainly of lignin and ash, 70 and 15%, respectively. Overall only small amounts of carbohydrates remained; in the liquid fraction stemming mostly from hemicellulose and in the solid fraction mostly from cellulose. The lignin residue contained significant amounts of crude protein from the plant and added enzymes and yeast, which could be recycled or sold as animal feed for example if cost-effectively recovered instead of being incinerated together with the lignin. The amounts of minerals in the solid residue fraction were high with silicon by far as the most abundant element. Chemical and morphological analyses of the lignin residue indicated that the particles were virtually fully degraded plant tissues consisting of remaining or re-deposited lignin covering the minerals underneath which makes separation of the high amounts of silica a challenge before combustion or refinement of the lignin to fuels and chemicals. The work was funded by the The authors also wish to thank laboratory assistants Joanna M. Nielsen, Britta Skov, Mads M. Krag, Preben Frederiksen and PhD student David Cannella for their experimental help and Lisbeth G. Thygesen and Søren Barsberg for their help discussing the results.