Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) have several attractive features for energy applications including tunable pore sizes, highly-ordered structures and versatile chemical reactivity. Here, we show the antiferroelectric perovskite dimethylammonium zinc formate (DMAZF) MOF [(CH3)2NH2] Zn (HCO2)3 as an effective molecular sieve to mitigate polysulfide (PS) migration in lithium-sulfur batteries (LSBs) when combined with conductive carbon nanotubes (CNTs). The DMAZF was selected due to both its nanopore structure and the presence of the Zn-metal site. The nanopores facilitate PS physical separation, whereas the Zn-site acts as a Lewis-acid site to attract the PS and also as a catalytic site to encourage electrochemical redox reactions. The hybrid DMAZF/CNTs/sulfur electrode, with 5 mg cm−2 sulfur loading, delivers an initial high specific capacity of 1260 mAh g−1 at 0.05C and 1007 mAh g−1 at 0.1C with the degradation of only 0.07% after 120 cycles. Even at 7 mg cm−2 sulfur loading, the electrode performance decreases only 0.12% per cycle even after 500 cycles at 0.5C.Lithium-sulfur batteries (LSBs) promise both a high theoretical specific capacity of sulfur (1675 mAh g Recently, the electronically conductive porous materials and the physical confinement of sulfur within their scaffold have been widely employed for high-performance LSBs [ Herein, we report the use of the antiferroelectric perovskite DMAZF MOF with a Zn-metal site and tuned porosity as an effective sulfur host for high-performance LSBs. This carefully selected network has many advantages to enable high-performance LSBs. Firstly, the nanoporous structure can act as a physical trap and a molecular sieve facilitating Li Formic acid (2.0 g, 44 mmol) was added to a solution of zinc nitrate hexahydrate (6.6 g, 22 mmol) in 50 mL dimethylformamide (DMF). The mixture placed in a Teflon sealed vessel and was heated slowly to 120 °C at a rate of 5 °C per hour, the temperature was held at 120 °C for 72 h before was allowed to reach room temperature during 24 h to produce colourless crystals suitable (4.4 g, yield 64%). The solid was then washed several times with DMF, water, methanol and then with acetone followed by drying the product under high vacuum for 24 h. Elemental analysis calculated for Zn The UIO-66 [ To prepare the cathode, the DMAZF, UIO-66, and Br-UIO-66 were composited with the CNTs at a ratio of 3:2. Subsequently, each of these materials was mixed with 70 wt % sulfur to prepare DMAZF/CNTs/Sulfur, UIO-66/CNTs/Sulfur and Br-UIO-66/CNTs/sulfur through the infiltration process at 155 °C. The UIO-66 and Br-UIO-66 without and with Br metal respectively have been selected with a larger pore diameter to compare with the DMAZF. The 80 wt % of each of these composited were mixed, respectively, with 10 wt % of conductive Super P and 10 wt % of PVDF for electrodes preparation followed by slurry coating doctor blade process on the carbon coated aluminum foil. The sulfur cathode was cut into a circular pellet with a diameter of 10 mm. The electrolyte solution was prepared using a 1, 3 dioxolane (DOL) and 1, 2 dimethoxymethane (DME) at the volumetric ratio of 1:1, 1 M lithium bis (trifluoromethane sulfonyl) imide (LiTFSI) and 0.1 M LiNO The LSBs were fabricated inside an Ar-filled glove box with a maximum of 0.1 ppm of H The LAND system was used to acquire the electrochemical performance of LSBs within a voltage window of 1.7-2.8 V (Li/Li The morphology and structure of the inactivated and activated samples were characterized using a field emission transmission electron microscopy (FE-TEM F20) and a scanning electron microscope (SEM) (SU-3500) is equipped with an Oxford X-MAXN energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) detector. XPS survey data was acquired using a Kratos Axis ULTRA X-ray photoelectron spectrometer incorporating a 165 mm hemispherical electron energy analyzer. The incident radiation was monochromatic Al Kα X-rays (1486.6 eV) at 150 W (15 kV, 10 mA). Survey (wide) scans were taken at an analyzer pass energy of 160 eV and multiplex (narrow) high-resolution scans at 20 eV. Survey scans were carried out over 1200-0 eV binding energy range with 1.0 eV steps and a dwell time of 100 ms. Narrow high-resolution scans were run with 0.05 eV steps and at a dwell time of 250 ms. Base pressure in the analysis chamber was 1.0 x10 DMAZF is formed by the reaction of formic acid with zinc nitrate hexahydrate. The single-crystal 3D network DMAZF is shown in The morphology of DMAZF is characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) as shown in To trace the elemental composition of DMAZF and Br-UIO-66, the XPS analysis was performed and shown in  The DMAZF is introduced for the first time in LSBs systems. Hence, authors have selected two different MOFs as UIO-66 and Br-UIO-66 to compare with the DMAZF with the similar experimental conditions. The electrochemical performance of the DMAZF as a molecular sieve was compared to UIO-66 [ Before testing the battery cycling performances, the active sulfur was impregnated into the porous medium of 3:2 ratios hybrids of DMAZF/CNTs, Br-UIO-66/CNTs and UIO-66/CNTs by a typical melt-diffusion process [ The corresponding electrochemical performances of these three different host materials are shown in The rate capability of DMAZF/Sulfur/CNTs cathode is evaluated under different C-rates (0.1C–1C) are shown in The surface morphology of the cycled DMAZF and Br-UIO-66 based cathodes are presented in This Li anode observation is in good agreement with the PS absorption tests shown in In summary, a newly developed nanoporous structure with the electrocatalytic and chemically interactive elements contained DMAZF MOF was first reported for high sulfur content LSB, demonstrating stable electrochemical performance at high sulfur loading. The DMAZF significantly facilitates the Li  Masud Rana is thankful to the Australian Government and the University of Queensland for the research training program scholarship and research facilities used in this study. The authors also acknowledge the facilities and scientific and technical assistance of the Australian Microscopy and Microanalysis Research Facility at the Center for Microscopy and Microanalysis and the Australian National Fabrication Facility at the University of Queensland. RK acknowledges start-up funding support from the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at