Long silver nanowires (average length of 28 μm, average aspect ratio of 130) with uniform diameter along their length were produced by polyol synthesis of AgNO3 in ethylene glycol in the presence of PVP as preferential growth agent. Nanowires were produced with no addition of chloride salts such as NaCl or CuCl2 (or other additives such as Na2S) which are usually used for lowering reduction rate of Ag ions by additional etchant of O2/Cl−. Lower reduction rate was obtained by increasing the injection time of PVP and AgNO3 solutions, which was the significant factor in the formation of nanowires. Therefore, there was enough time for reduced Ag atoms to be deposited preferentially in the direction of PVP chains, resulting in high yield (the fraction of nanowires in the products) of nanowires (more than 95%) with high aspect ratio. The produced nanowires had both round- and sharp-ends with pentagonal cross section. Higher energy level of Ag atoms in borders of MTPs, which increases the dissolution rate of precipitated atoms, in addition to partial melting of MTPs at high synthesis temperatures, leads to the curving of the surfaces of exposed (111) crystalline planes in some MTPs and the formation of round-end silver nanowires.High yield after centrifuge Using additive of (NH High yield after centrifuge Short nanowires Using additive of NaCl Short nanowires Presence of byproducts Using microwave Using additive of NaCl High yield after centrifuge Short nanowires High yield after centrifuge Short nanowires High yield after centrifuge Short nanowires High yield after centrifuge No complete separation High yield after centrifuge Short nanowires Liquid phase synthesis is widely used for production of silver nanowires because of the advantages including homogenous reaction, wide range of usable solvents, simple monitoring of the reactions, low cost and the possibility of scaling up the process Using initial seeds and additives or not, It is widely accepted that multiply twinned particles (MTPs) are essential for the formation of nanowires Regarding the shape of nanowires, it was highly mentioned in the previous researches In the present work, it was shown that there is no need for additives other than PVP for production of silver nanowires. Uniform nanowires with high aspect ratio were synthesized via high yield polyol process. The growth of nanowires was investigated during synthesis using SEM micrographs. The end shapes of nanowires were analyzed using SEM to show their round- or sharp-ends. The effects of synthesis parameters on the yield and aspect ratio of produced nanowires were also investigated. The statistical method of response surface methodology (RSM) was used for analyzing the best synthesis condition to receive the maximum length of nanowires and the highest synthesis yield. Using RSM, polyol synthesis was performed at different conditions by varying the initial concentration of AgNO The effect of synthesis variables including the injection time of separate solutions of PVP and AgNO Silver nanowires were produced according to the polyol method described in previous section. For analyzing the nanowire formation and growth over time, some specimens were drawn immediately after injection of EG solutions of PVP and AgNO As it is observed from SEM micrographs of In the systems with no additive, the content of reduced Ag atoms in the solution is high and the dissolution rate of reduced atoms is less than the systems with additives because only NO XRD pattern of pure silver is shown in  Schematic representation of the growth of Ag nanostructures from different initial seeds is shown in In addition to pentagonal sharp-end nanowires, there were round-end nanowires which were not highlighted in previous reports. These nanowires were also produced from initial seeds of decahedron or MTPs. According to the results of Liu and coworkers The effect of the synthesis variables on nanowire shape and its aspect ratio and synthesis yield was investigated. Specimen synthesized at 160 °C using 0.085 M AgNO Very fast injection (10 s) resulted in the formation of only nanoparticles ( In addition to injection time, AgNO Temperature has also an important effect on the aspect ratio of nanowires and synthesis yield. For investigation of the effect of temperature, polyol synthesis was carried out at 150, 160 and 170 °C while the other parameters were kept constant, A rapid preparation of Ag nanowires with high yield was successfully performed in a polyol synthesis with 0.085 M AgNO