Phase transformation of single crystal silicon (Si) was investigated under various grinding conditions using high-resolution transmission electron microscopy. Nanocrystals with sizes ranging from 6 to 20nm of diamond cubic silicon (Si-I) and high-pressure phase (Si-III) were observed in the grinding-induced amorphous Si layers. The phase transformation pattern was found to be influenced by the thermal status involved in the grinding processes. In this letter, we aimed to investigate the phase transformations involved in an ultraprecision grinding process where an ultrafine diamond wheel was used. High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) was employed to identify various phases induced by the grinding. A cup wheel was employed, which consisted of 56 diamond abrasive blocks. The blocks were 3  The HRTEM images of Samples A, B, C and D, and their corresponding fast Fourier transformation (FFT) patterns are shown in To understand the effect of grinding conditions on the Si phase transformation, it is important to know the maximum undeformed chip thickness of individual diamond grits, as this parameter was widely used to characterize the overall grinding conditions It is well documented that the smaller the undeformed chip thickness used, the higher the specific grinding energy generated in the grinding process. The specific energy increases dramatically if the grit depth of cut is on the scale of <1 Previous studies In the grinding of Sample A, Si-I nanocrystals were found in the amorphous layer, but no high-pressure phases were observed. Though the grinding of this sample used a similar magnitude of chip thickness to that for Sample D, its grinding speed was lower, thus less heat should be generated. As a result, high-pressure silicon phases were not observed, but Si-I nanocrystals did exist in the a-Si layer. Again, this agrees well with the previous study on the nanogrinding of Si It should be noted that neither Si-I nor Si-III nanoparticles were observed in the a-Si layer of Sample B, though its grinding condition was similar to those in Samples A and D. As we only observed a much thinner layer of a-Si in this sample, the lack of nanocrystals might be attributed to the limitation of the TEM observation. As a TEM sample only covers a highly localized area of a ground sample, it is highly possible that the sample taken could be located in the area without the formation of nanocrystals. The much thinner a-Si layer also supported this hypothesis, as the smaller the pressure of deformation, the thinner the a-Si layer formed In summary, the phase transformation mechanisms of Si wafer under various grinding conditions were investigated using high-resolution transmission electron microscopy. The formation of nanocrystals appeared to be highly influenced by the thermal status of the grinding processes. It showed that a higher grinding heat being generated would enhance the transformation of Si-I into high-pressure Si phases. The energy level for the re-crystallization of Si-I in the amorphous Si layer should be less than that for the formation of high-pressure Si phases. 