An electro-resistivity technique for measuring a proxy for froth bubble sizes as a function of height above the pulp–froth interface has been developed. Froth phase bubble size measurements were performed in a laboratory mini-flotation column. Comparison of the proxy herein termed average intra-bubble impact distance (IID) from this new technique to the Sauter-mean diameter from the conventional photographic method established a linear correlation. The average IID from the new technique was higher than the Sauter-mean diameter at all froth segments. Both techniques were able to capture the general increase in bubble sizes as a function of froth height.The flotation process consists of the pulp phase which can be described as the ‘Reactor’ and the froth phase which can be termed the ‘Separator’ ( Further cleaning action may take place in the bulk of the froth phase when particles detach from bubbles mainly because of bubble coalescence ( This work focuses on developing a method to measure a proxy for froth phase bubble sizes in flotation machines where it is not feasible to use the conventional photographic method. An electro-resistivity method is proposed as a basis of measuring this proxy. It is envisaged that the distribution of the proxies obtained with this new method is related to froth bubble sizes distribution. Measurements of the proxy obtained with the new technique are compared to the Sauter-mean bubble diameter obtained by the photographic method. The photographic technique is the most commonly used method to obtain bubble size distributions in laboratory flotation froths ( The use of foam electrical conductivity as a way of estimating bubble sizes has been used by some researchers. Unlike the method by For a conducting probe cutting through the froth phase at a given velocity, the time taken between successive points of significant impact and the speed at which the probe is cutting through the bubbles are used to calculate the IID. If the conductivity probe is dropped into the froth phase several times, the average IID obtained is the proxy that is related to the actual bubble sizes. The bubble-sizer consists of a DC signal generator that is connected to a conductivity probe through a 1 The resistance between the probe and the ground, i.e. froth resistance ( To enable development, testing and validation of the new froth bubble measuring technique, two different types of experiments were performed. The first set of experiments was done to analyse the signal produced when an electrical conducting wire is moved in and out of water at regular intervals. These experiments simulated bubble lamella and bubble air conditions and results would show how the probe signal behaves when coming into contact with water and when it is moving out of water. The second experiments basically tested bubble size estimation on a two phase system in a mini-flotation column and compared the obtained results to the photographic method. Thus concurrent to these experiments, photographs and videos of the froth were also taken. Initial experiments to simulate the response of the bubble-sizer circuit when its probe cuts through froth were done by repeatedly dipping the conductivity probe in an out of water at regular intervals. In these experiments the instances when the probe was in contact with water would simulate a probe in contact with bubble lamella in actual froth while the times it was in air represent moments when probe was in contact with air contained within a bubble. These experiments would provide a general indication of how voltage signal would change as the probe cuts through bubbles within the froth phase. The response rate can also be assessed from obtained data. Experiments were carried out in a 250 The second set of experiments involved generating continuous foam using a mini-flotation column and dropping the conductivity probe into the froth from a fixed height above the surface of the froth as shown in A summary of the results obtained from dipping the probe in and out of the water at regular intervals is shown in The behaviour of the signal as the probe was moved out of water was unexpected. A sharp response similar to the one observed when the probe comes in contact with water was expected. A number of postulations were made to explain this observation viz. (i) Effects of polarisation and the slow discharge of a capacitor that is set between an electrolyte and electrode. (ii) Viscous effects of the water which results in formation of a water bridge which rapidly thins and breaks as the probe is removed from the water Discharge of polarisation capacitance set between an electrolyte and electrode When an electrode is immersed in an electrolyte, a potential is set up between the two phases. The spatial arrangement of the charge round each electrode commonly known as an electrical double layer is formed because of a number of reasons among them includes charge transfer between the liquid–solid interface. The interface can be viewed as consisting of voltage source (E), which emanates from the half cell electrode potential which is in series with polarisation capacitance (C) as a result of the double layer and a polarisation resistance (R) (  The time constant RC ( Viscous effects of the water which result in a thin film/sheath of water following the probe as it moves out of water. It is possible that when the probe is moving out of water a thin film of water will remain attached to the probe and it thins out as the distance between the probe and the surface of the water increases until it eventually breaks. This is referred to as the drag-out problem ( Although the slow response may interfere with vital information that can be used in characterising bubbles, results shown in For the bubble-sizer signal to be able to follow the rapid changes in electrical conductivity that take place as the conductivity probe cuts across the froth phase, the water/slurry should contain a significant amount of ions to increase its electrical conductivity. Consequently the tests involved addition of Copper (II) Sulphate to 8 Estimation of froth bubble sizes using the current froth bubble-sizer is based on the assumption that there is a relationship between the IIDs obtained using the bubble-sizer and the actual froth bubble sizes. The relationship is such that, if the bubble-sizer probe is dropped several times into the froth phase and it is cutting through consecutive bubbles, the average IID per given depth below surface of the froth shall always be less than or equal to the Sauter-mean bubble diameter provided that the probe does not pass through vertical Plateau borders. Vertical Plateau borders are defined as those Plateau borders that are parallel to the direction of motion of the probe. If the probe passes through these Plateau borders, the estimated IIDs will be greater than or equal to actual bubble sizes. The assumption can also be interpreted as stating that for a given froth, with fixed depth, fixed aeration and chemical conditions and at steady state, the average IID will reflect the average size of bubbles at a certain height above the pulp–froth interface regardless of whether the probe passed through vertical Plateau borders. To assess the variation in bubble sizes as a function of froth depth, the 11.7 In addition to providing a global average for a segment, IID distributions (IIDD) can also be obtained from the bubble-sizer data. As an illustration, the froth was divided into two sections each 5 To enable comparison of the two methods, photographs of the froth that were taken concurrently with the measurement of froth bubble sizer using the new technique were analysed. An open source image analysis software ImageJ ( As was expected, the Sauter-mean bubble diameter obtained shows an increase in bubble size as the height from the pulp–froth interface increases ( Analysis of results done in the above section has shown that the froth bubble-sizer is able to measure the changes in bubble sizes that take place in the froth phase. This section compares the IIDs obtained from the bubble-sizer to actual bubble sizes obtained from image analysis. The two methods used to estimate froth bubble sizes were able to show the general increase of froth bubble sizes as a function of height from the pulp–froth interface. The BSD and cumulative IID indicated a coarser distribution in the segments that are closer to the surface of the froth. In general results from the froth bubble size measurement campaign have confirmed that froth bubble sizes can be determined using the new technique. Both methods were successful in capturing the changes in bubble sizes above the pulp–froth interface albeit the new technique showing higher values than the photographic method. In this section an attempt to explain this is made. Two propositions that may have resulted in larger IIDs when compared to the Sauter-mean bubble diameter are advanced viz. (i) slowing down of the probe inside the froth phase, which results in it taking longer to cut across the known froth height (Hf) than predicted by the equations of motion. If the probe slows down the result is an overestimation of probe velocity when equations of motion are used to calculate probe velocity. (ii) It is also possible that the probe may pass through vertical Plateau borders as it cuts across the froth. This length of the Plateau border is considered as part of the IID. Probe velocity overestimation Work by Conductivity probe passing though vertical Plateau borders According to A new method to infer froth bubble sizes using the difference in electrical conductivities of air and slurry/liquid phase has been developed. Comparison of the new technique to the photographic method revealed that the new technique over-estimates the Sauter-mean diameter by up to 31%. An explanation for the overestimation was advanced and tested. Although the new technique was able to capture the general increase in froth bubble sizes as a function of froth depth, it underestimated the bubble size growth rate as a function of height above the pulp–froth interface by about 5.6%. Despite the fact that the new technique does not give actual values of bubble sizes, its ability to provide trends that are related to bubble size and coalescence in the froth can play a vital role in froth phase sub-process understanding and optimisation. The information obtained using the froth bubble-sizer may be vital in assessing elusive froth properties such as froth stability, possibly by comparing the average IID just above the interface to the average IID just below the froth surface. The froth bubble-sizer's operating principle requires that the water that constitutes the bubble films should have a higher electrical conductivity than the air contained within the bubble. The conductivity of water varies with the amount of dissolved ions, thus this technique can be sensitive to the chemical composition of the water in the froth so it is important that this technique be evaluated under different water chemical compositions. The effect of the presence of solids on the bubble lamellae needs to be assessed, thus Part 2 of this work will focus on such assessments. The authors would like to thank Dr Ian Barker for assistance with data acquisition using an oscilloscope and vital discussions and Dr Frank Kienhofer for providing the SCX1 1520 data acquisition device.