The selective separation and concentration of nickel from ammoniacal solutions containing nickel and cobalt by an emulsion liquid membrane (ELM) technique using 8-hydroxyquinoline (8-HQ) as carrier has been examined. The emulsion liquid membrane consists of a diluent (kerosene), a surfactant (ECA 4360J), a carrier (8-HQ), and a stripping solution (0.025 M EDTA solution, buffered at pH 4.0). Cobalt (II) in the 6 M ammonia feed solution was oxidised to cobalt (III) by adding H2O2 and the pH adjusted to 10 with hydrochloric acid (HCl). The important variables were found to be membrane composition, ammonia concentration, diluent type, surfactant concentration, extractant concentration, EDTA concentration in the stripping solution, pH of the feed and the stripping solutions, phase ratio, and treatment ratio. It was possible to selectively extract 96.5 to 99.0% of nickel from a mixture of nickel and cobalt.Increasing interest in hydrometallurgical processes for nickel and cobalt has led to renewed investigations into separation processes for these metals. The selectivity of ammoniacal solutions for nickel and cobalt over iron are advantageous over acid systems where iron dissolution is a problem. Ammoniacal leach solutions are used in many refineries using the Caron process ( There have been numerous publications on cobalt and nickel separation by liquid–liquid systems ( ELMs for metal extraction are made by forming a water-in-oil (W/O) emulsion, stabilized by a surfactant, the (W/O) emulsion contains the metal extractant in the membrane phase and the stripping reagent in the internal aqueous phase. This emulsion is then dispersed by a relatively low agitation into the external phase containing metal ions to be separated. After extraction, the loaded emulsion is separated from the feed solution, demulsification yields a membrane phase that can be recycled. The extraction chemistry involved in liquid membrane transport is essentially the same as that in solvent extraction, but the overall transport is governed by kinetic rather than equilibrium parameters ( If an excess of ammonia is added to the feed solution containing Co The formation constant In order to increase the separation Co(NH The formation constants Nickel can also be effectively stripped by acid ( In the present work, in order to have a better understanding of the dynamics of ELM technique, the major parameters influencing the extent of nickel extraction were studied and the selective separation and concentration of nickel were investigated from the ammoniacal solutions, containing Ni A liquid membrane consists of a surfactant, a carrier, and a diluent. The surfactant used was a nonionic polyamine (ECA 4360J) and the carrier was 8-hydroxyquinoline (8-HQ). A commercial kerosene (15 wt.% aromatic) (TUPRAS Oil Company, Turkiye), toluene, xylene, Escaid 100 and Escaid 200 were used as diluents. ECA 4360J, Escaid 100, and Escaid 200 are the products of ExxonMobil, which were used as received. Etylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) was used as the disodium salt and was purchased from Merck, Germany. Cobalt and nickel stock solutions were prepared from reagent grade cobalt (II) sulphate (CoSO In 250 mL beaker, a 30 mL portion of 8-HQ and ECA 4360J in kerosene are emulsified at mixing speed of 1800 rpm by a variable speed mixer. 18 mL 0.025 M EDTA solution, buffered at pH 4.0 using Na Initial ammonia concentration in the feed solution, contained cobalt and nickel ions between 300 and 500 mg/L (0.0051 to 0.0085 M Co or Ni), has been prepared as desired, and as a result the hexaammine cobalt and hexaammine nickel complexes, have formed, Co(NH In a 600 mL beaker, the ELM prepared (membrane solution and stripping solution) was added to 250 mL of the feed solution. The contents were stirred by a variable speed mixer equipped with a turbine-type impeller at speed of 250 rpm for extraction time of 10 min. To determine the important variables governing the permeation and separation of nickel from cobalt, ammonia concentration, diluent type, surfactant concentration, carrier concentration, EDTA concentration in the stripping solution, phase ratio, treatment ratio, and pH of the feed and the stripping solutions were varied to observe their effect on nickel extraction and separation. No detrimental effect was observed on an oxidation of 8-HQ, by the addition of H The uptake of metal ions was monitored by removing samples of the feed solution periodically for analysis. Atomic absorption spectrophotometry (Shimadzu AA-6701F model, Tokyo, Japan) is used for metal (Co, Ni) determinations. All the extraction experiments were carried out batchwise at the ambient temperature of 20 For all experiments, the Co (II) present was oxidised to Co (III) by a combination of aerial oxygen and hydrogen peroxide (   The surfactant (ECA 4360J) concentration in the ELM was varied in the range of 2 to 6 wt.% in the membrane phase. The effect of increasing the concentration of 8-HQ from 1 to 5 wt.% is shown in The effect of pH in the stripping solution on nickel extraction is shown in Preliminary experiments indicated that EDTA solution was suitable for stripping nickel. The effect of EDTA concentration in the stripping solution is shown in The conditional formation constants  From the results given in The viscosity of the diluent is the main determinant of the thickness and permeability of the membrane for the solute. Different organic diluents produce changes in emulsion stability, percentage of extraction, enrichment factor and swelling ( This may be due to the solvation effect in the membrane solution. It is argued that a diluent which strongly solvates the extractant will probably tend to remove this reagent from the interface which would have an adverse effect on the rate of attainment of equilibrium. However, a diluent which does not solvate the extractant will probably be unable to dissolve sufficient of the reagent for a commercial extraction process ( The stripping phase volume fraction of the emulsion has a profound influence on extraction using ELMs. Change in the stripping phase volume fraction not only leads to a change in the emulsion properties, but also results in an increase in the capacity of the emulsion to extract the solute ( The effect of the phase ratio of stripping solution to membrane phase ( The treatment ratio, defined as the volume ratio of emulsion phase ( The optimum conditions were experimentally determined and are shown in The separation factor, An emulsion liquid membrane using 8-HQ to separate and concentrate nickel from ammoniacal solution has been investigated. It has been shown that under the best experimental conditions, > The authors wish to express their sincere gratitude to the State Planning Organization of Turkey (DPT), which supported this work.