Improving the kinetics of flotation with a given feed often involves adding more reagents or changing the reagent scheme. However, this approach could greatly increase operational cost and cause downstream problems. The present work demonstrates a novel approach to improving the flotation kinetics by applying acoustic sound on flotation. Quartz particles were used as model particles and the flotation tests were carried out in batch mode. The experimental variables were focused on sound frequency (250–500 Hz) and amplitude (90–125 dB). The flotation recovery-versus-time data were fitted to the classical first-order kinetic model and two other kinetics models considering the distribution of rate constants. It was found that use of acoustic sound at 350 Hz and above 110 dB and at 400 Hz and 125 dB could increase the apparent flotation rate constant, suggesting that acoustic sound when applied at proper conditions can improve the flotation kinetics.Froth flotation as a separation process finds broad applications such as removal of particles from water and separation of particles dispersed in water. Regardless of the specific application, a common target of flotation practice is to increase the flotation rate. The flotation rate is affected by many factors such as froth stability, gas dispersion, and flow conditions ( A literature survey on relevant topics found that foam stability can be controlled by using sound. To date, the destabilizing effect of sound has been widely investigated ( In the present work, acoustic sound at various frequencies and amplitudes was applied on the column flotation of quartz. The apparent flotation rate constant obtained at each sound condition was compared with that obtained without applying the sound. The changes in froth stability and gas dispersion with applying the sound were also analyzed. Quartz particles with an 80% passing size of 43.3 µm (Lang Lang Silica 200G, Unimin) were used as received. An ether amine, 3-(2-Ethylhexyloxy) propylamine (EHPA) (>98.0% pure, TCI Chemicals, Japan) was used as frother and collector in the flotation. Acetic acid (>99% pure, Sigma-Aldrich, USA) was mixed with EHPA (at a molar ratio of 1:4.5) to increase the solubility of the collector in aqueous solution ( Batch mode flotation tests with quartz were conducted using a flotation column with 5-cm inner diameter and 150-cm height. A stereo system comprising an amplifier (PA935N, InterM) and a loudspeaker (Fx-10, Visaton) was used to generate sound. The loudspeaker was positioned above the column with the distance between the speaker membrane and the column cell lip being 12 cm. The sound frequency, Prior to a flotation test, feed slurry with 5% solids concentration was prepared and 500 g/t of EHPA was added. The slurry was conditioned for 2 min in a feed sump at an agitation speed of 450 rpm. The pH was 9. The air supply was turned on to give a superficial air velocity of 1.2 cm·s The apparent flotation rate constant was computed by fitting the experimental cumulative recovery, For all sound conditions tested in the present work, the fittings of the experimental data to Models 1, 2 and 3 respectively gave the root mean square error (RMSE) not larger than 3.6%, 8.5% and 3.8%, and   Overall, use of acoustic sound at certain frequencies and above certain amplitude could improve the apparent flotation rate. In contrast, there was no clear correlation between the maximum recovery, Froth stability can be characterized by measuring the water recovery, The response of the three-phase froth to the acoustic sound was analyzed qualitatively. In the flotation test at 350 Hz and 125 dB, the bubbles in the froth were relatively large and non-uniform before turning on the sound (see As a change in froth depth could also change the flotation rate, the effect of acoustic sound on flotation rate was further investigated by controlling the froth depth through the froth depth controller (see Laboratory-scale column flotation of quartz particles was conducted in batch mode with and without acoustic sound. The tests with sound at certain frequencies and above a certain amplitude were found to improve the apparent flotation rate from those without sound. The effect of sound on the froth stability was investigated through measuring the water recovery and analyzing the froth qualitatively. The results suggested that the stabilization of froth induced by using the acoustic sound could drive the improvement in the apparent flotation rate. Overall, the proposed technique could potentially complement the currently-in-place method to improve froth stability and thus the flotation kinetics.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by The Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: