This study illuminates the role of low amounts of magnesia (≤ 3 wt%) on the crystallization behaviour of CaO-Al2O3-SiO2 glass-ceramics. Differential thermal analysis demonstrates that the peak temperature and activation energy for crystallization decrease with the addition of MgO. The crystallization pattern changes from one-dimensional crystallization to two-dimensional growth, as indicated by higher values of the Avrami parameter (n) with increasing MgO contents. Analyses of the Rietveld refinement of XRD data, FTIR, Raman spectra and scanning electron microscopy reveal that MgO causes a simple change in CaO-Al2O3-SiO2 glass-ceramics, which form an Mg-containing solid solution (Ca1-xMgxSiO3; 0 ≤ x ≤ 1) by replacement of some of the CaO with small amounts of MgO. When the MgO content increases to 1.8 wt%, diopside is primarily formed at the interfaces of sintered glass frits, acting as nucleation sites for the inward growth of wollastonite. The density of glass-ceramics increases with magnesia addition. Their hardness is strongly influenced by the phase species present, and can be enhanced by the crystallization of diopside.Glass-ceramics are polycrystalline materials formed through the controlled nucleation and crystallization of glass. They were invented in the mid-1950s by the famous glass chemist and inventor, Dr. S.D. Stookey Magnesium oxide occurs in many natural resources and types of solid waste, such as blast furnace slag The role of magnesia (MgO) on the crystallization behaviour of some glass-ceramics has been investigated. The substitution of MgO in increasing amounts (0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 wt%) for CaO in soda-lime-silica glasses (16Na The information above suggests that the effect of MgO on the extent of crystallization, crystal phase evolution and crystal morphology requires further study. Meanwhile, modification of crystallization paths and kinetics may also occur with increases in MgO content. In addition, little systematic study has investigated the role of magnesium in CaO-Al Firstly, the commercial glass-ceramic product Neoparies The glass frits with grain sizes ranging from 1 to 4 mm were placed in an alumina crucible and then heated to 1060 °C at a rate of 10 °C/min and soaked for 60 min in the muffle furnace. The glass transition temperature (T The activation energy was determined from a plot of ln(T The crystalline phases presented in the synthesized glass-ceramic samples were identified by an Ultima IV X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku, Japan). The powder samples (< 74 µm particle size) were scanned between 2θ = 10–90° with a step size of 2θ = 0.02° and a scanning speed of 2 °/min. Fourier transform infrared absorption spectroscopy (FTIR; Vertex 70 FTIR with Hyperion 2000 microscope, Bruker, Germany) analysis was conducted in the range of 4000–400 cm The fractured surfaces of the samples were polished and chemically etched for 3–5 s in 4 vol% HF solution, followed by microstructural characterisation by a field emission scanning electron microscope (SEM; SU5000, Hitachi, Japan). Furthermore, energy-dispersive spectroscopy (Oxford EDS X-MAX 20) analysis was conducted to identify specific elements. The densities of the glass-ceramic samples were measured via Archimedes’ method. The Vickers microhardnesses of the glass-ceramic samples were determined by an iVision-HV micro-sclerometer. A maximum load of 500 g was applied and the duration of indentation was fixed at 10 s. Each value reported is the mean of five measurements. Non-isothermal crystallization kinetics was determined by DTA curves at different heating rates. It can be seen in  The Avrami parameter (n) at a heating rate of 10 °C/min was calculated by Eq.  In order to study the structural impact of magnesia addition, the cell parameters for wollastonite and diopside were obtained by Rietveld refinement. The results are listed in To further confirm the changes in the wollastonite and diopside structures, FTIR and Raman spectra of glass-ceramics were also observed. As shown in  As the MgO content in parent glass became greater than 1.8 wt%, dark grey columnar grains of diopside (CaMgSi It was interesting to observe that the nucleation sites of the diopside phase were typically located at the interfaces of adjacent sintered glass frits, as shown in   The influence of magnesia on the crystallization behaviour, microstructure and properties of CaO-Al The addition of small amounts of MgO had a simple effect on the CaO-Al The density of the glass-ceramics was increased by adding magnesia. The hardness of glass-ceramics was strongly influenced by the phase species presented, and can be enhanced by the crystallization of diopside. The