The present work deals with the application of biotechnology for the mobilization of metals from different solid wastes: end of life industrial catalysts, heavy metal contaminated marine sediments and fluorescent powders coming from a cathode ray tube glass recycling process. Performed experiments were aimed at assessing the performance of acidophilic chemoautotrophic Fe/S-oxidizing bacteria for such different solid matrices, also focusing on the effect of solid concentration and of different substrata. The achieved results have evidenced that metal solubilization seems to be strongly influenced by the metal speciation and partitioning in the solid matrix. No biological effect was observed for Ni, Zn, As, Cr mobilization from marine sediments (34%, 44%, 15%, 10% yields, respectively) due to metal partitioning. On the other hand, for spent refinery catalysts (Ni, V, Mo extractions of 83%, 90% and 40%, respectively) and fluorescent powders (Zn and Y extraction of 55% and 70%, respectively), the improvement in metal extraction observed in the presence of a microbial activity confirms the key role of Fe/S oxidizing bacteria and ferrous iron. A negative effect of solid concentration was in general observed on bioleaching performances, due to the toxicity of dissolved metals and/or to the solid organic component.Waste generation is a side effect of consumption and production and it tends to increase with economic advance. As a consequence, toxic chemicals are produced and may reach environmental matrices, like air, water, soils or sediments. Pollutants may be present with high concentrations at the points of discharge, or may remain low but highly toxic for the receiving bodies ( Nowadays, waste production, management and disposal are object of interest by scientific community. Considering the progressive raw materials scarcity, the new interest in waste is not only related to their management or health hazardousness but also to their economic value. Spent hydroprocessing catalysts contain middle-high concentration of base valuable metals, such as nickel (Ni), vanadium (V) and molybdenum (Mo). They represent a large amount of refinery solid waste and have been classified as hazardous waste by the Environmental Protection Agency in the USA ( Bioleaching is a commercial application of bio-hydrometallurgy approach to process mineral ores ( In the present work, Fe/S oxidizing bacteria were applied to spent refinery catalysts, CRT powders and dredged marine sediments in order to assess the performance of bioleaching in metal mobilization. The effect of different substrata, elemental sulfur and ferrous iron, of solid content and of redox potential was investigated. No previous works have been found in the literature for bioleaching applied to CRT powders; furthermore spent refinery catalysts and sediments bioleaching was aimed at assessing the eventual scale up of the process, investigating relatively high solid concentration if compared with values usually present in the scientific literature. Spent refinery catalysts were provided by Orim SpA (Macerata, Italy) and consisted of small cylinder shape elements. Sediment samples were collected in the Ancona harbor (13,49915° E, 43,62495° N; Adriatic basin, Mediterranean Sea) by means of a modified Van Veen grab (about 14 Fluorescent powders were provided by the company Relight Srl (Milano, Italy). An environmental sample of Fe/S oxidizing bacteria (i.e., Experiments were performed in autoclaved 250 Two sets of experiments have been performed ( pH and Eh measurements were carried out by Inolab Multi 720 (WTW). The total prokaryotic number was determined by epifluorescence microscopy, after staining with Acridine orange ( Solubilized metals and metalloids were determined by atomic absorption spectrometry; samples were conveniently diluted with distilled water at pH 2 (with HNO Total organic matter in sediments was determined as the difference between dry weight (60 Metal partitioning in the different geochemical fractions of sediment were determined by means of sequential selective extraction, according to European Union protocol ( Total metal content in the solid samples were determined by Inductively Coupled Plasma spectrometer, after acid digestion ( The first set of experiments (SET I in Extraction yields at the end of the treatment with spent catalyst are shown in  Results obtained in this first set of experiments were considered for planning new experiments, finalized to the individuation of the best operating conditions for metal extraction by bioleaching from spent refinery catalysts and from fluorescent powders, residue of cathode ray tubes treatment (CRT powders). Sediments were no more considered in the present optimization step, considering that bioleaching resulted not to be effective with the tested samples. Investigated factors where the solid content and the presence of ferric iron. Experiments were set up with 2% and 10% solid content (w/v), in order to investigate solid concentration more similar to full scale applications. The presence of ferric iron was chosen as factor in order to assess the effect of redox potential on bioleaching performances. Ferric ions can keep sufficiently high the redox potential during leaching and it was demonstrated, for example for chalcopyrite, that metal dissolution rate is strictly dependent on the redox potential, controlled by the Fe   A first order kinetic model ( As concerns CRT fluorescent powders ( Parameters The following semi-empirical equation was fitted to experimental data describing temporal changes of prokaryotic abundance during bioleaching of both catalysts and CRT powders ( The relatively high values of the regression coefficients in The achieved results in the first set of experiments ( The second set of experiments ( As regards spent refinery catalysts, the role of Fe/S oxidizing bacteria was evident and determinant for Ni, V and Mo dissolution, when Fe Bioleaching experiments with CRT powders showed an improvement of metal extraction associated with a good bacterial adaptation, in the absence of ferric iron (treatment 13 in The solid concentration showed a negative effect on bacterial growth in the presence of spent catalysts ( As concerns the role of ferric iron on the biologically mediated dissolution of metals, it is known that bacteria are able to maintain a high Fe Summarizing, metal solubilization from wastes results to be strongly influenced by the metal speciation and partitioning in the solid matrix. While no biological effect was observed for Ni, Zn, As, Cr mobilization from marine sediments, an improvement in metal extraction was observed for spent refinery catalysts and fluorescent powders in the presence of a microbial activity. On the other hand, a negative effect of solid concentration was in general observed on bioleaching performances, probably associated to the toxicity of dissolved metals and/or to the solid organic component. The present work assessed the performance of bioleaching for metal extraction from different typologies of wastes: spent catalysts, contaminated sediments, fluorescent powders residual of the cathode ray tube (CRT) recycling process. The management of such wastes is of extreme importance for environmental protection and a biotechnological approach may represent an environmentally friendly strategy for both solving the disposal problem and also recovering secondary raw materials. The studied approach results to be promising for yttrium and zinc recovery from CRT powders and from nickel, vanadium and molybdenum extraction from exhaust catalysts, also at relatively high concentration of waste, suitable for scale up purposes. On the other hand, no biological effect was observed for nickel, zinc, arsenic and chromium mobilization from marine sediments sampled in the Central Adriatic coast at a solid concentration compatible with process full scale application. Nevertheless, before affirming that bioleaching is not applicable for marine sediments, further work will be addressed at sediments with different mineralogical characteristics, where metals have a different partitioning. Sustainability studies will also be performed aimed at quantifying the environmental impact of the biotechnological approach proposed here and comparing it to its chemical counterpart. Authors are grateful to companies Orim (Macerata, Italy) and Relight (Milano, Italy) for providing catalysts and cathode tube powders, respectively, and to Ms. Alisia Giuliani, Mr. Selcuk Ciftlik and Mr. Ismail Handiri for their helpful collaboration in the experimental work. Research on CRT powders was performed under FP7 program grant agreement 231962 (Hydro WEEE). Research on sediment was performed within a scientific collaboration with Istituto Superiore per la Protezione e la Ricerca Ambientale (ISPRA).