The extraction of Fe(III) from hydrochloric acid with N,N,N′,N′-tetrabutylmalonamide (TBMA), N,N,N′,N′-tetrabutyl-3-oxy-glutaramide (TBDGA) in toluene was studied and compared with the extraction result of N,N,N′,N′-tetrabutylsuccinamide (TBSA) in order to understand the relationship between the chemical structure of the extractants and their Fe(III) extraction behaviors. The extraction efficiency of the extractants toward Fe(III) in toluene increases in the order: TBMA<TBSA<TBDGA. The effect of hydrochloric acid concentration, extractant concentration and temperature on the extraction distribution ratio of Fe(III) was investigated to determine the thermodynamic parameters and the main extracted species. Spectroscopic data (UV–visible and IR) and density functional theory (DFT) were used to clarify the extraction mechanism.Fe(III) is usually present, along with other metals, as an impurity in leaching solutions, such as in the production of rare earth from Baotou Baiyun Obo Rare-earth iron mine in China, and so its separation is of practical importance. Precipitation ( Solvent extraction is a convenient and common method to purify, concentrate and separate various metals from different aqueous media, and plays an important role in hydrometallurgical industries. For the extraction of Fe(III) from raw materials or industrial waste, organophosphorus acid derivatives, viz. di(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (DEHPA) have received considerable attention ( It is well known that the extractant's structure has a great influence on the stability of the extraction species and thus influences the extraction distribution ratio ( In this paper, two kinds of amide extractants, TBMA and TBDGA, were synthesized and the extraction of Fe(III) from hydrochloric acid was studied. The relationship between extraction property and extractant structure was discussed based on the extraction of TBSA ( All the reagents used in this study were analytical grade. TBMA was synthesized by the reaction of dibutylamine with dimethyl malonate as reported by M. C. Costa ( Equal volumes of organic and aqueous phases were placed in a conical-bottom centrifuge tube and shaken for 30 All calculations were performed using the program package Gaussian 09 ( The IR spectra were recorded in the range of 4000–400 The distribution ratios of Fe(III) with TBMA or TBDGA were plotted as a function of hydrochloric acid concentration, respectively ( The effect of the concentration of extractants on the distribution ratio was shown in In our previous study ( The UV–visible spectra of the organic phase before and after extraction of Fe(III) were recorded to study the coordination of Fe(III) ( Based on an anion-pair mechanism, the stoichiometric equation during the extraction of Fe(III) from hydrochloric acid by different extractants could be described as: The subscripts (a) and (o) indicate the aqueous and organic phase, respectively. [H·(nEx)] In order to clarify how the extractant combined with hydrogen ions, the IR spectra of TBMA, TBDGA and TBSA in toluene were investigated before and after Fe(III) extraction in hydrochloric acid medium and shown in There was only one peak (1578 The main carbon chains in TBSA (two methylene groups) are longer than TBMA (one methylene group) which causes the rotation of the carbonyl groups of TBSA easier than that of TBMA. The hydrogen bond with TBSA is more stable which can be established by the values of the wave number shifting of the carbonyl groups in the IR spectra. For TBDGA system, the free extractant's alkoxyl group (C In order to better understand the reactions involved on Fe(III) extraction, the density functional theory was used to simulate the suggested hydrogen bonds formed with the three extractants and hydrogen ions. The optimal structure was optimized by density functional theory (DFT) using a 6-31G basis set (B3LYP/6-31G) ( The following conclusions can be drawn from the above results. One TBSA molecule combined with one hydrogen ion by both of its carbonyl groups. Two TBMA or TBDGA molecules each provide a carbonyl group to combine with the same hydrogen ion. After this process, the formed cations combine with [FeCl As is well known, extraction process proceeds at the interface or near it ( The The effect of temperature on the extraction of Fe(III) with various extractants was given in The values of enthalpy change obtained for the extraction were shown in The extraction of Fe(III) by TBMA and TBDGA has been investigated from hydrochloric acid into toluene and compared with the extraction result of TBSA in our group. Among these extractants, the extraction capacity for Fe(III) is TBMA The authors are grateful for the support from the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at