Continuous self-baking electrodes, i.e. Söderberg electrodes, are commonly employed in the industrial operation of submerged arc furnaces to conduct electrical energy from a transformer(s) to the smelting zone inside the furnace. Söderberg electrodes are formed from Söderberg electrode paste consisting of two components, i.e. a binder that is mostly a coal tar pitch and a solid filler that can be either coke or calcined anthracite. In this paper it is demonstrated how thermomechanical analysis can be used to characterise the thermal dimensional behaviours of Söderberg electrode paste raw materials. Two case study coal tar pitches, three anthracites and a pre-baked graphite electrode sample were characterised. Results indicated that the method applied can be used to determine the baking isotherm temperature more accurately than previously. Enhanced knowledge of the baking isotherm temperature is critical to ensure safe, profitable and continues furnace operation. The results also indicated that the coal tar pitches shrunk approximately 12% if exposed to temperatures above the baking isotherm temperature up to 1300°C, while the anthracites calcined at 1400°C expanded 0.6–1.0% in the same temperature range. The magnitude differences in thermal dimensional behaviour and difference in motion (shrinkage vs. expansion) indicates the vulnerability of a Söderberg electrode baked for the first time at temperatures exceeding the baking isotherm temperature. In contrast to the calcined anthracites, the uncalcined anthracite samples shrunk 6–8% if exposed to temperatures up to 1300°C. This stresses the importance of the efficiency of the calcination process of the anthracite prior to Söderberg electrode paste production to enhance dimensional stability of the Söderberg electrode paste. The results also indicated that the method detailed in this paper can be used by Söderberg electrode paste producers to optimise the selection of raw materials and to do quality control on calcined anthracite.In the operation of submerged arc furnaces (SAFs) electrodes conduct electrical energy from a transformer(s) to the smelting zone inside the furnace. Generally two types of electrodes systems are used in industrial smelting applications, i.e. pre-baked electrodes and continuous self-baking electrodes (Söderberg electrodes). The Söderberg electrode system is quite commonly applied since Söderberg electrodes are less expensive than pre-baked electrodes, Söderberg electrodes with larger diameters than pre-baked electrodes can be made and the Söderberg electrode system does not require furnace shutdowns to extend the electrodes ( In In order to ensure safe, profitable and continues operations many aspects have to be managed in a Söderberg electrode system. These aspects are collectively referred to as electrode management. Notwithstanding the importance of electrode management, relatively little information has been published in the peer reviewed public domain on this topic during the last decade. This sometimes leads to out of date information from literature being utilised in papers. As an example, in a relatively recent paper ( As mentioned, Söderberg electrode paste consists of two components, i.e. a binder that is mostly a coal tar pitch and a solid filler, which can be either coke or calcined anthracite ( Although the focus of this paper was on the raw materials utilised in Söderberg electrode paste production, i.e. coal tar pitch and calcined anthracite, a pre-baked electrode graphite sample was also obtained from the only manufacturer of pre-baked electrodes in South Africa. This facilitated the comparison of measured thermal dimensional behaviours of the Söderberg electrode paste raw materials with a completely baked graphite electrode. None of the raw material suppliers wanted to be identified. Therefore, the coal tar pitch, anthracite and pre-baked electrode graphite samples were denoted as LSP and HSP coal tar pitch, anthracite A1, A2 and A3, and pre-baked electrode graphite, respectively. In order to characterise the coal tar pitch and anthracite samples received, proximate analyses were conducted with SANS 5925:2007, SANS 131:2011 and SANS 50:2011 methods in order to quantify the moisture, ash and volatile contents, respectively, while the fixed carbon content was determined by difference. Ultimate analyses were also performed to determine the carbon and hydrogen contents with ASTM D5373, the nitrogen content with ASTM D3179, the sulphur content with ASTM D4239 and the oxygen content by difference. In addition to the above-mentioned proximate and ultimate analyses, the fundamental properties such as the softening point, coking value, as well as quinoline and toluene insoluble contents of the coal tar pitch samples were determined. The softening points were measured on a Mettler FP 80 HT softening point measurement instrument. In order to determine the coking value the coal tar pitch samples were crushed to less than 212 In the quinoline insoluble analysis, 1 The toluene insoluble content of a coal tar pitch sample was determined by digestion and extraction of 1.5 Since calcined anthracite is used as a solid filler in the production of Söderberg electrode paste, the received uncalcined anthracite samples had to be calcined. Boat crucibles (CoorsTek AD-998 99.8% pure aluminium oxide) were filled with 25 In order to facilitate TMA measurements, cylindrical coal tar pitch and anthracite pellets were produced from the various samples. A procedure similar to procedures described previously ( Coal tar pitches have relatively low melting points, typically in the range of 50–135 Calcined (Section Pre-baked electrode graphite pellets of 9 The thermal dimensional behaviour of the thermally pre-treated coal tar pitch, the calcined and uncalcined anthracite and the electrode graphite pellets were monitored with an Exstar SS6300 TMA. A constant N Each TMA result presented was calculated from the average of three separate TMA analysis of a specific material. All data processing and figures compiled from this data were conducted with a fit-for-purpose Matlab ( The proximate and ultimate analyses of the coal tar pitch and anthracite samples, as well as the fundamental properties (i.e. softening point, coking value, quinoline insoluble content and toluene insoluble content) of the coal tar pitch samples utilised as case study materials in this paper are presented in The dimensional behaviour of the LSP coal tar pitch sample thermally pre-treated at different maximum temperatures is presented in The above-mentioned minimum pre-treatment temperature, which did not result in subsequent melting of the thermally pre-treated coal tar pitch in the TMA is of great industrial significance. The baking isotherm temperature ( Since it was established in the previous section (Section As is evident from the results, both the LSP and HSP coal tar pitches thermally pre-treated at 475 During the first thermal cycle, a small expansion occurred when the pellet was heated from room temperature to approximately 475 In contrast to the first thermal cycle the amplitudes of thermal expansion and contraction during the second and third TMA thermal cycles were relatively small, i.e. approximately 2%. The difference in the magnitude of the dimensional changes between the first and subsequent thermal cycles can be attributed to structural reordering of the carbonaceous material that took place during the first thermal cycle in the TMA. During the first thermal cycle the coal tar pitches were heated up to 1300 Application of the above-mentioned method to quantify the dimensional behaviour of coal tar pitch binders utilised in Söderberg electrode paste production could provide valuable information with regard to electrode management. In particular for the area just below the contact shoes ( Since calcined anthracite is used as a filler in the production of Söderberg electrode paste ( The dimensional behaviours of pellets made from the three case study anthracites calcined at 1400 The influence of calcination temperature on the thermal dimensional behaviours of the pellets made from the case study calcined anthracites are illustrated in All the above-mentioned results related to the thermal dimensional behaviour of calcined anthracites have significant industrial relevance and demonstrate the usefulness of the methods discussed in this paper. During the initial baking of a Söderberg electrode, the conductivity of the electrode is largely dependent on the steel casing and fins ( The dimensional behaviours measured with TMA of pellets prepared from the three case study uncalcined anthracite samples are presented in In contrast to the relatively small thermal dimensional changes observed for the calcined anthracite samples (Section The main objective of this paper was to demonstrate the efficiency of using TMA to characterise the thermal dimensional behaviours of Söderberg electrode paste raw materials. Electrode graphite is not a Söderberg electrode paste raw material, but can rather be considered as the end product of the thermal reordering process during the The thermal dimensional behaviours of pellets produced from the pre-baked electrode graphite are demonstrated in Considering all the results presented in this paper in context of the electrode graphite results, it is evident that although the completely baked Söderberg graphite electrode exhibit relatively small thermal dimensional changes (∼0.5%), the thermal dimensional changes of the Söderberg electrode paste raw materials are much more significant, i.e. up to 1% for the calcined anthracite and approximately 12% for the coal tar pitch binder. Combined these results indicate that a completely baked Söderberg electrode, i.e. graphite, will be very resilient to electrode breaks due to thermal shock (e.g. furnace downtime and subsequent start-up). However, Söderberg electrodes baked up to the phase where the differences in thermal dimensional behaviours of the coal tar pitch binder and the calcined anthracite filler of the paste impart thermal stress in the electrode will be much more susceptible to electrode breaks. This is especially true for the area of the electrode just below the baking isotherm temperature ( The TMA method to determine the baking isotherm temperature of a coal tar pitch described in this paper can be used to determine this important temperature more accurately than before. Better knowledge of the baking isotherm temperature will be beneficial for all aspects of electrode management at smelters using a specific electrode paste for which the coal tar pitch binder was characterised. Other results clearly indicated the conflicting nature in the dimensional behaviour of the case study coal tar pitch binders that shrunk approximately 12% during the first thermal cycle at temperatures above the baking isotherm temperature and the case study anthracites calcined at 1400 Comparison of the Söderberg electrode paste thermal dimensional results with that of pre-baked electrode graphite gave a scientific explanation why a partially baked Söderberg electrode (not yet graphite) is so susceptible to breakage caused by thermal shocks. The authors wish to thank Xstrata Alloys South Africa for financial support.