Multi-wall silica nanospheres have been synthesized from non-ionic surfactant, and TEOS as precursor under acidic and reflux conditions. The wall-to-wall distance inside the “onion-like” texture is close to 10 nm while the nanoscale objects depict polydisperse particle sizes ranging from 80 to 300 nm. Nitrogen physisorption measurement demonstrates a Brunauer-Emmet-Teller (BET) surface area of 691 m2 g−1 associated to a total pore volume of 0.8 cm3 g−1.Mesostructuration of inorganic materials is today a rather well established method All the chemical reagents used in the experiments were obtained from commercial sources as guaranteed-grade reagents and used without purification. 1,3,5-Timethylbenzene (TMB) has been kindly provided by BASF. Tetraethoxi-orthosilane (TEOS) was purchased from Aldrich. In a typical synthesis, 4 g of P123 is first mixed with distilled water (105 ml) then 19.5 ml of Hcl (37%) is added to the aqueous phase. In a second step, this mixture is brought to 35 °C and let under agitation to complete polymer dissolution. In a third step, 0.8 g (930 ml) of TMB and then 8.6 g of tetraethoxi-orthosilane (TEOS) are added to the polymeric aqueous solution. For this specific condition, the ratio TMB/P123 is equal to 0.2. It is important to note that an increase or decrease of the TMB amount does not induce any more this “ognons” texturation discussed in this work, but rather promote two dimensional lyotropic organization (TMB/P123=0.05) at lower ratio whereas for higher ratio (TMB/P123=1) the texturation is closed to previous study on mesocellular siliceous foams TEM experiments were performed with a Jeol 2000 FX microscope (accelerating voltage of 200 kV). The samples were prepared as follows: silica scaffolds in a powder state were deposited on a copper grid coated with a formvar/carbon membrane. SEM observations were performed with a Jeol JSM-840A scanning electron microscope operating at 10 kV. The specimens were gold-coated or carbon-coated prior to examination. Surface areas and pore characteristics at the mesoscale were obtained with a Micromeritics ASAP 2010 employing the Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) method. X-ray diffraction experiments were carried on a 18 kW rotating anode X-ray source (Rigaku-200) with use of Ge (111) crystal as monochromator. The scattered radiation was collected on a two dimensional detector (Imaging Plate system from Mar Research, Hamburg). The sample-detector distance was 500 mm. As discussed in the synthetic part, the mesoscale textures are strongly related to the amount of TMB employed during the procedures ( These differences in topology suggest a synergistic effect between the TMB and the P123 lyotopic mesophases, interaction certainly disturbed by the sol reflux constraint. We do not recover the highly organized mesocellular foam previously observed To remove the organic supramolecular-type templates, the hybrid organic–inorganic materials were treated at 650 °C during a period of 6 h. The heat rate was monitored to 2 °C/min with a first plateau at 200 °C during 2 h. The cooling process was uncontrolled and directed by the oven inertia. The texture of those inorganic objects has been observed by TEM ( In order to better quantify this evaluation we did perform small angle X-ray diffraction profile experiments ( Also, taking into account both TEM and SAXS experiments we do not observe any void spaces within the walls of those nanoscopic objects associated with any kind of porous meso-structuration signature. The main emerging porosity should be induced by silica amorphous character, namely intra-walls microporosity. To quantify this porosity we did perform N For the silica multi-wall nanospheres N In conclusion, we have synthesized for the first time, using a sol–gel process and lyotropic templates associated to 1,3,5-timethylbenzene, multi-wall silica nanospheres associated to intra-walls microporosity and inter-walls mesoporosity. Extension of this work towards other metal oxide materials, more precisely to TiO The authors wish to thanks Dr. M.-F Achard for the SAXS experiment acquisitions data.