 Injuries to the talonavicular and calcaneocuboid joints (Chopart joints) are severe injuries often associated with an abduction force to the talonavicular joint and a lateral compression injury to the lateral column resulting in a “nutcracker” phenomenon. Precise examination and imaging, including computed tomography scan, are essential to defining the injury pattern and presence of articular incongruity. Articular subluxation and step-off, loss of lateral column length, and the presence of smaller avulsion fractures need to be adequately identified to define treatment options. Anatomic restoration of medial and lateral column anatomy is critical in obtaining reduction of these complex injuries. Reduction and restoration of the articular surface of the talonavicular, naviculocuneiform, calcaneocuboid, and cuboid-4,5 metatarsal joints are essential to good outcomes.  Examination of the soft envelope is critical to success in treating midfoot injuries. All dislocations should be treated acutely with particular attention given to impending skin necrosis. It is important to maintain motion along the cuboid/metatarsal joints, as these are essential joints, and maintaining motion is critical for normal foot function. Careful attention should be given to Chopart injuries, as midfoot arthrosis can be disabling, with no great salvage procedure for cuboid-4,5 metatarsal arthrosis.  The role of primary arthrodesis in the treatment of Chopart fracture dislocations has not been well defined. Primary arthrodesis may play a role in treating severely comminuted injuries or severe injuries with significant bone loss.  Obtain three-view radiographs of the injured and contralateral foot including anteroposterior ( Radiographs should precisely identify the anatomy of the medial column and the cuboid-4,5 metatarsal junction. Poor imaging quality can miss impaction injuries and joint incongruity. Computed tomography, including 3D-reconstruction views, provides a topographical map detailing the injury pattern, articular impaction and displacement, joint subluxation, degree of comminution, and presence of avulsion injuries ( Magnetic resonance imaging is usually not indicated in the evaluation of Chopart injuries.  The navicular articulates proximally with the talus at the talonavicular joint and serves as a socket for the talar head, forming an essential joint that contributes up to 80% of subtalar motion ( Distally, the navicular articulates with the cuneiforms at three separate articulations, forming the nonessential naviculocuneiform joints. The navicular articulates laterally with the cuboid bone. The cuboid articulates proximally with the calcaneus at the calcaneocuboid joint and distally with the fourth and fifth metatarsals (see The medial surface of the cuboid articulates with the lateral cuneiform and the navicular. The plantar surface of the cuboid bone contains the peroneal sulcus, a groove through which the peroneal longus passes.  The patient can be positioned supine with a bump placed beneath the knee and hip to control access to the medial and lateral columns of the foot. A lateral position with a foam wedge can be used when the injury is isolated to the lateral column or during access to the cuboid bone if the surgery is being staged. Lesser degrees of internal rotation are desired if a medial column injury is being treated simultaneously.  A medial utility incision can be used for navicular fractures isolated to the medial aspect of the navicular body and navicular tuberosity. The incision is located between the interval of the tibialis anterior and posterior tibial tendons. The medial approach to the navicular can be extended proximally and distally to allow exposure of more complex injuries. A more lateral midfoot incision directed over the lateral one-third of the navicular body can be used for more lateral-based injuries, lateral to the dorsal neurovascular bundle and medial to the lateral branch of the superficial peroneal nerve ( The extensor digitorum longus is retracted to expose the lateral one-third of the navicular ( The saphenous nerve and vessels and all branches of the superficial peroneal nerve should be protected throughout these exposures. A combination approach can be used for more complex navicular fractures. A lateral approach is used to treat fractures of the cuboid bone, with a longitudinal incision placed midline within the cuboid body ( The extensor digitorum brevis is superiosteally elevated off of the dorsolateral foot to allow for exposure of the cuboid body ( The sural nerve should be carefully protected during exposure and is usually plantar to the incision. The peroneal tendons are located lateral and plantar and should be carefully protected throughout the approach to the cuboid bone. This approach can be extended proximally, to allow for direct visualization of the calcaneocuboid joint and sinus tarsi, protecting the peroneal tendons and sural nerve in a plantar flap. The exposure should allow full access to the cuboid body, from lateral to medial, with exposure of the separate articulations of the cuboid-4,5 metatarsal joints and the calcaneocuboid joint proximally (  Staging the approach to complex midfoot fracture dislocations can be critical to achieving a good outcome and in avoiding complications. Application of a spanning external fixator can greatly assist in the treatment of these injuries by improving soft-tissue swelling and alignment and by disimpacting articular fragments. The medial column injury should be treated first, if the soft-tissue envelope allows.  The patient should be forewarned that the lateral approach to the cuboid bone can jeopardize the sural nerve. The risk of lateral foot numbness should be discussed with the patient preoperatively.  A headlamp, Freer Elevator (Sklar Surgical Instruments, West Chester, PA), dental pick, and intraoperatively placed distractor can assist with reduction.  A bicolumnar external fixator can assist with soft-tissue swelling and reduction of the lateral and medial columns ( Fracture pattern and surgeon preference can dictate whether to approach the lateral or medial column injury first, and whether to stage the operative procedure. A medial approach is made between the posterior tibial tendon and tibialis anterior tendon to access the medial navicular body and tuberosity. A second more lateral incision can be utilized lateral to the dorsal neurovascular bundle and medial to the lateral branch of the superficial peroneal nerve for more complex injuries. A lateral incision is made over the cuboid bone between the extensor digitorum brevis and peroneal tendons. This incision can be carried proximally to the calcaneocuboid joint, sinus tarsi, and subtalar joint. A Freer Elevator and Key Elevator (Sklar Surgical Instruments) can be used to carefully expose the fracture site, taking care to protect the surrounding soft tissues and blood supply. The fractures can now be examined for articular step-off and comminution.  Cuboid bone and navicular fractures often lead to severe impaction of the articular surfaces. It can be difficult to anatomically reduce these injuries secondary to bony loss. An attempt should be made to reconstruct the articular surfaces and the overall bony anatomy, to bone graft any defects, and finally to stabilize the construct with stable fixation. It is imperative to preserve length and alignment of the medial and lateral columns, even if treatment eventually leads to arthrosis.  An external fixator can be essential in treating Chopart injuries. Either unilateral placement or a bicolumnar fixator can assist in reduction of the column lengths and assist with articular visualization. Schanz pins (Depuy Synthes, New Brunswick, NJ) are placed in the calcaneus, the first metatarsal, and the fourth/fifth metatarsal bases. External fixator bars can be placed plantar to the surgical incision to allow for visualization of the navicular and cuboid bone ( A distractor can now be used to restore length of the medial and lateral columns and to disimpact the fracture.  Without external fixation, the plate is expected to hold a crushed bone without much structural support. An intraoperatively placed distractor can assist in restoring length of the medial and lateral columns.  The joint surfaces are extracted from the central crushed portion of the navicular and cuboid bone and buttressed against adjacent joint surfaces. Periarticular fragments should be pinned using small Kirschner wires (K-wires), reducing the articular surface under direct visualization ( Medial and lateral distraction can be manually controlled to allow for improved visualization of the articular surface. A Freer Elevator can be used to assess the articular reduction, and a dental pick can assist with reduction of cortical fragments to achieve an anatomic reduction. Once anatomic reduction is achieved with K-wires, the fracture void can be filled with your bone graft of choice. This should be followed by reduction of the blown-out cortices.  The appropriate plate is placed around the K-wires, keeping them in place, to maintain reduction ( The plate is secured with screws under fluoroscopy, as shown in K-wires can be retained around smaller, unstable articular fragments, as shown in  Final intraoperative radiographs can be obtained to assess the final reduction ( A meticulous closure with modified Allgöwer–Donati sutures is performed.  An external fixator can be kept on to assist in maintaining reduction for 6–8 weeks. Cast coverage is encouraged in this setting to prevent an equinus deformity. The external fixator should be removed at 6–8 weeks postoperatively with serial radiographic images obtained to ensure reduction has been maintained ( Non–weight bearing is recommended for 8–12 weeks with early emphasis on ankle and complex hindfoot range of motion with the biomechanical ankle platform system. After weight bearing ensues, early physical therapy can assist in preventing joint contracture and stiffness. After 3 months, the construct should be stable enough to begin progressive weight bearing in a cushioned “running sneaker” with a visco-cushioned orthotic.