Using the Taguchi method, this study analyzed the optimum conditions for comminution of magnetic particles (such as Ni particles) in pure water contained in a flask, which was located on top of an actuator that contained a rotating bar magnet. The controllable factors used in this study consisted of the following: (1) the container, (2) the mass ratio of water-to-Ni particles, (3) the rotation speed of the bar magnet and (4) the time of attrition. The percentage contribution of each controllable factor was also determined. A digital camera and a particle-size analyzer were used to record the flow patterns and particle-size distributions of Ni, respectively. The confirmation experiment was carried out according to the optimum conditions, so that the average percentage of the optimum particle size (⩽100nm) and the smallest particle sizes could reach 80.59% and 22.5nm, respectively.Nanopowders or ultrafine particles have attracted substantial interest since 1980, because they show unusual material characteristics both at the microlevel and at the nanolevel. The magnetic nanoparticle can be very effectively used in liquid bearings, dampers, high-density recording media and other applications, making it very important. Like other nanoparticles, nanosized magnetic particles can be fabricated through either the building-up process Comminution is the process by which an unrefined granular material is ground so as to reduce the mean size of its solid constituents. Attrition refers to losses because of undesired particle breakage Recently, Chou and Chu presented a simple attrition method that used a rotating magnetic field to prepare ultrafine Ni powder. The effects of the following factors on the shrinking of Ni particles were examined: height of the water column, the rate of rotation of the bar magnet, and the amounts of both starting material and dispersion agent The bar magnet, whose positive pole is on top of the negative pole ( Accordingly, extending the works of Chou and Chu The Taguchi method Accordingly, an analysis of the signal-to-noise ( The analysis of mean (ANOM) statistical approach is adopted herein to construct the optimal conditions. Initially, the mean of the In addition to ANOM, the analysis of variance (ANOVA) statistical method is also used to analyze the influence of each controllable factor on the comminution of magnetic particles. The percentage contribution of each factor, A modified commercial magnetic stirrer (MS-90) was adopted as a homemade actuator, which contained a rotating magnetic field, for the fabrication of ultrafine Ni powder ( A high-precision balance (EXCELL BH-150), with a measurement range of 0.005–150 A digital camera (BASLER A602fc-2) with 656 ( Substituting the number of experimental repetitions and results of the measurement (i.e. the percentage of particle size (⩽1000 From The particle-size distributions in Test 4 and the optimum conditions therein are shown in Initially, According to their magnitudes, the rank order of the percentage contributions of each factor is as follows: (1) the time of attrition (61.6%), (2) the container used (16.1%), (3) the rotation speed of the bar magnet (15.4%), and (4) the mass ratio of water-to-Ni (4.2%). Moreover, the percentage contribution of error is 2.7%. The effects of the container on the flow patterns of Ni particles are discussed in the next section. As the time of attrition is the longest one (i.e. 3 The mean of the The mean of the This investigation studied the granular flows of Ni particles, whose grains were shrunk primarily by repeated interactions among the Ni particles in pure water. The patterns of motion of the Ni particles (2 In the left panel of The motion of Ni particles in a conical flask atop of an actuator that contains a rotating bar magnet might be analogous to the typical rapid granular flows, wherein the principal transport mechanisms include kinetic transport by particle fluctuation and collisional transport due to varied particle interactions. In the rapid granular flow regime, the granular temperature, defined as the kinetic energy per unit mass that is associated with the fluctuation velocity, is one of the important mean fields to describe the granular flow. The granular temperature is generally in inverse proportion to the solid fraction In the central panel of The movement of Ni particles in a round-bottomed flask that is placed on top of an actuator containing a rotating bar magnet might be analogous to typical slow granular flows (or quasi-static flows), wherein the principal transport mechanism is through a network of contact forces that are produced by continuous and simultaneous contact among the particles The combined effect of the gravitational and magnetic forces from the bar magnet compels the Ni particles, which are on a concave surface, to congregate at the bottom of the flask, with the result that Ni particles cannot violently collide (or rub) with each other (bottom frame of the central panel in In the right panel of Therefore, the shape of the container substantially affects the motion and the comminution patterns of Ni particles, even when they are driven by identical magnetic field. The comminution of Ni particles is determined by the number of collisions and rubbing, which in turn is driven by the rotating magnetic field. Moreover, the rotation of the Ni particles causes the pure water to rotate in the flask, in turn causing the fine Ni powder to float and become suspended throughout the water. This effect causes an increase in the probability of both the attrition by the collisions among the fine Ni particulates and the agglomeration of particles under the influence of the Van der Waals as well as the magnetic forces associated with the Ni powder. Using both the method of Chou and Yeh The authors would like to thank the National Science Council, ROC, Taiwan for financially supporting this research under Contract Nos. NSC 95-2218-E-002-035 and NSC 95-2221-E-020-037.