Control of degradation rate remains the primary issue in osteosynthesis applications of magnesium (Mg). To improve the corrosion behavior and bioactivity of Mg, bioglass (BG, 45S5) was selected as the filler to reinforce pure Mg. For the first time, the bioglass reinforced Mg (BG/Mg) composites were fabricated by the microwave sintering method to reduce the possible chemical reactions between bioglass and Mg. Measurements of mechanical properties reveal that the as-prepared BG/Mg composites demonstrate significantly higher microhardness, better compressive and flexural properties than pure Mg and that the BG/Mg composite with 10wt% bioglass has the best mechanical properties among all composite samples. Immersion tests in simulated body fluid (SBF) at 37°C reveal that the BG/Mg composites exhibit lower hydrogen evolution than pure Mg. In addition, the pH value in the SBF containing BG/Mg composites is closer to neutrality as compared to pure Mg, indicating stronger corrosion resistance. Preliminary cell studies demonstrate that the cell viability and ALP activity of BG/Mg composites are higher than pure Mg. The results confirm that the BG/Mg composite containing 10wt% possesses the best mechanical and biological properties, which make it a promising material for bone fixation and tissue engineering.Unlike other metallic materials, magnesium (Mg) has many unique properties, which make it very attractive, particularly in the biomedical field. Mg has a Young's modulus close to that of bone (3–20 To date, many attempts have been made to overcome these problems. Alloying is the most widely used method and the increased corrosion resistance with a reduced hydrogen evolution rate have been demonstrated In this work, for the first time, we used the powder metallurgy route to fabricate BG-pure Mg (abbreviated as BG/Mg hereinafter) composites. Unlike conventional powder metallurgy, to reduce the sintering time which may lead to extensive reactions between bioglass and Mg, a microwave sintering process was employed. Microwave sintering has emerged as a new method for sintering a variety of materials, showing significant advantages against conventional procedures, and is believed to be effective in the rapid sintering of the Mg composites Mg powder (purity The theoretical density of BG/Mg composites was calculated using the rule of mixtures. After mechanical polishing, the actual density of BG/Mg composites and pure Mg samples was measured on an AUY120 density tester (Shimadzu, precision 0.1 Vickers hardness measurement (HV) was carried out at room temperature using a standard microhardness tester (MH-6, Philips) under a load of 25 Both compressive and flexural properties were measured in the present work. The compressive properties (strength and modulus) of pure Mg and three BG/Mg composites were measured by a CSS-44100 universal testing machine (Institute of Changchun Testing Machine, Changchun, China) with a crosshead speed of 1 The sample group with the best flexural and compressive properties was selected for evaluation of hydrogen evolution and pH variation in SBF. To determine the hydrogen evolution, polished specimens (Φ11 For the determination of pH value during degradation, specimens in the form of disk (Φ11 X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was carried out using a Rigaku-D/Max-2500 diffractometer operated at 30 The fracture surfaces of various samples were observed by using a Philip XL30 scanning electron microscope (SEM) at an accelerating voltage of 15 The CCK-8 assay was used to determine the cytotoxicity of BG/Mg composites using the indirect contact method as reported by Zheng et al. To evaluate alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, MG-63 cells were cultured for 10 All experiments were performed in three independent tests unless otherwise stated. All data were presented as mean value The relative density of various BG/Mg composites was measured. As listed in The microhardness of pure Mg and various BG/Mg composites was measured. As expected, the microhardness of BG/Mg composites is significantly improved as compared to pure Mg ( The compressive and flexural properties are shown in As shown in The flexural fracture surfaces of various samples after microwave sintering at 500 The crystal structure of BG-10/Mg composite was determined by XRD analysis. As shown in The relative low intensity of the peaks of Mg In theory, a composite will show higher mechanical strength than the pure matrix material due to the reinforcing effect of inorganic fillers. Generally, there is a peak filler content, above which the strength will decline due to the aggregation of inorganic fillers and thus the formation of microcracks. We therefore believe that the lower strength and modulus of BG-15/Mg as compared to BG-10/Mg result from the increased amount and depth microcracks. The increased amount of MgO and Mg Hydrogen evolution is an obstacle for the biomedical applications of Mg. Reducing hydrogen evolution is of paramount importance. In this work, we determined the effect of bioglass addition on the hydrogen evolution of BG/Mg composites. As shown in We also tested the change of pH during immersion in SBF. As shown in The surfaces of various samples after immersion in SBF for 16 The above experimental results clearly demonstrate that the presence of bioglass in pure Mg plays a decisive role in enhancing the corrosion resistance of the resultant BG/Mg composites. The significantly improved corrosion resistance of BG/Mg composites as compared to pure Mg can be attributed to the release of silicate ions from the bioglass and the spreading of silicate ions onto the surface of the composites, which induces the formation of a protective Ca-rich layer on the surface of BG/Mg composites The MTT results ( Apart from MTT assay, we also measured the ALP activity in the presence of the extracts of various BG/Mg composites as well as pure Mg (as a control) since ALP is an important early osteogenic differentiation and biochemical marker of osteoblasts. As displayed in The favorable biocompatibility and bioactivity of BG/Mg composites prepared in this work may indicate that the reactions between Mg and bioglass do not cause obvious adverse effects on biocompatibility and bioactivity. This is most likely due to the very limited reactions as revealed by the very weak peak of MgO and Mg Bioglass reinforced Mg (BG/Mg) composites have been successfully fabricated via the microwave sintering process. Results from the density measurement suggest that microwave sintering at 500 This work is supported by the