Background
                  The treatment of open tibial shaft fractures remains controversial. Important considerations in surgical management include surgical timing, fixation technique and soft tissue coverage. This study was performed to evaluate the results of acute surgical debridement, unreamed nailing and soft tissue reconstruction in the treatment of severe open tibial shaft fractures.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  During a 10-year period between January 1993 and July 2002, 927 tibial shaft fractures were treated with interlocking intramedullary nails. Among them, there were 19 consecutive patients with Gustilo type IIIB to IIIC open tibial shaft fractures with extensive soft tissue injury needing a muscle flap coverage and being suitable for intramedullary nailing. All 19 patients were called for a late follow-up which was conducted with a physical examination and a radiographic and functional outcome assessment. The radiographs were reviewed to determine the fracture healing time and the final alignment.
               
                  Results
                  All 19 open fractures with severe soft tissue injury healed without any infection complications. The fractures united in a mean of 8 months. Nine patients had delayed fracture healing (union time over 24 weeks). One of these patients needed exchange nailing, one patient autogenous bone grafting and dynamisation on the nail and seven patients needed dynamisation of the nail before the final fracture healing. In all patients, the alignment was well maintained. However, seven patients had shortening of the tibia by 1–2cm and two of them also external rotation of 10°. The functional outcome was good in 18/19 patients.
               
                  Interpretation
                  Acute surgical debridement, unreamed interlocking intramedullary nailing and soft tissue reconstruction with a muscle flap appear to be a safe and effective method of treatment for Gustilo type IIIB open tibial shaft fractures.According to the meta-analysis of Bhandari et al., It has been postulated that reaming in association with intramedullary nailing could have a harmful effect on bone circulation and would therefore further impair fracture healing and increase the rate of soft tissue complications in open fractures. However, it is likely that the injury to the soft tissues, especially to the periosteum, Severe open tibial shaft fractures have traditionally been treated with acute external fixation and repeated wound debridement. The soft tissue reconstruction has been performed later, after 5–14 days. However, the modern tendency is to perform an early wound closure, mainly because of the risk of hospital-acquired infection. This more radical approach was attributed to Godina. Due to the development of surgical techniques, instrumentations and antibiotic therapy, even complicated fractures can be treated with acute definitive osteosynthesis and soft tissue reconstruction. The present hypothesis was that early soft tissue reconstruction within 2 days after immediate soft tissue debridement and fracture fixation with an unreamed interlocking intramedullary nail is a safe and effective method of treatment for severe open tibial shaft fractures. This study was carried out to review the healing results and complications of open tibial shaft fractures treated with this concept. Open fractures treated with the same concept, except the timing of soft tissue reconstruction (later than 2 days), were also evaluated. A total of 927 patients who had undergone interlocking intramedullary nailing of a tibial shaft fracture in the trauma unit of Helsinki University Hospital between January 1993 and July 2002 were analysed. Among them, there were 19 patients with an open tibial shaft fracture with extensive soft tissue injury needing a muscle flap coverage and being suitable for intramedullary nailing. Four of the patients were females and 15 were males with a mean age of 36 years (range, 15–64 years) at the time of the injury. Open tibial shaft fractures with severe wound contamination or comminuted fractures with segmental bone loss were stabilised with external fixation and were not considered suitable for this approach. On admission to the hospital, all the patients underwent a clinical examination, and native X-rays with AP and lateral views were taken. A Doppler examination was also performed to detect a possible arterial injury. There were 18 Gustilo IIIB open fractures and one patient with a Gustilo type IIIC fracture (arterial injury requiring repair). The soft tissue injury was treated with immediate surgical debridement and jet lavage. All devitalised tissue was excised. The fractures were stabilised within the first 24 The soft tissue reconstruction was performed either in conjunction with the primary fracture stabilisation or during the following days. A pedicled muscle flap was selected, if the muscle was not injured and the defect was small and within the reach of the muscle flap. If the pedicular muscle was chosen, the reconstruction was usually performed immediately (8 out of 10 patients). In two cases, soft tissue reconstruction with a pedicled muscle flap was performed at a later stage due to imminent soft tissue necrosis. In these cases, the soft tissue reconstruction was performed at 7 and 12 days after the primary operation. Microsurgical reconstruction was usually performed at another operation, in six out of nine patients within 2 days. In two cases, microsurgical reconstruction was performed at the primary operation. In three cases, the soft tissue reconstruction with a microsurgical muscle flap was performed at a later stage due to imminent soft tissue necrosis. In these cases, the soft tissue reconstruction was performed 5, 12 and 20 days after the primary operation. Ten patients underwent only one operation in which both the stabilisation of the fracture and the reconstruction of soft tissue were performed. Eight of these patients received a pedicular muscle flap and two a free muscle flap. Nine patients needed two operations, as the soft tissue reconstruction was performed at a later stage. Seven of them received a microvascular muscle flap and two a pedicular muscle flap. Bedrest for 3–5 days after the soft tissue reconstruction was prescribed. Anti-thrombosis prophylaxis with once-daily subcutaneous injections of 5000 IU low-molecular-weight heparin, dalteparin (Fragmin, Pharmacia Corporation) was given during the hospital stay. The mean hospital stay was 21 days (range, 11–35 days). All patients were followed up until the soft tissues and the fracture had healed. Sixteen of the 19 patients were evaluated at the final follow-up visit, both clinically and radiologically. The minimum follow-up time was 10 months (range, 10–119 months). One of the authors (LT) performed the clinical examination. Three patients were interviewed by telephone and their medical records were studied. All the post-operative X-rays were assessed. The fracture was defined as healed when the patient was able to bear full weight on the operated leg without pain and the X-rays showed consolidation. The radiological end-result was graded as good when there was <1 There were no deep wound infections. The mean time to union was 8 months (range, 3–40 months). All the fractures united ( The radiological results showed that in all patients the angular deformity was under 5°, but seven patients had a shortening of the tibia by 1–2 Considering the severity of the injuries, the overall functional results were good. Eighteen of the 19 patients needed no walking aids ( A good soft tissue envelope is essential for fracture healing and overall extremity function. The goals of treatment of a tibial shaft fracture with severe soft tissue trauma are prevention of infection, promotion of fracture healing, restoration of limb alignment and close to-normal function with minimal morbidity in a reasonable period of time. An initial classification of open injuries is mandatory. Surgical debridement is needed to assess the complete extent and severity of the soft tissue injury. Once life-threatening injuries have been excluded, the patient is taken to the operating room for surgical debridement and stabilisation of the tibial fracture. The intramedullary nailing of tibial shaft fractures has been associated with a good radiological and functional outcome Severe open tibial shaft fractures with insufficient surgical treatment often lead to an infected non-union. The infection usually reaches the fracture site secondarily through open wounds. Thus, early complete soft tissue coverage of the fracture site is mandatory. In the present series, both local muscle flaps and free vascularised muscle flaps were used depending on the fracture localisation and the extent of the soft tissue injury. Immediate or early (within 2 days) soft tissue coverage was a safe way to treat these demanding injuries, and no deep infections were seen in connection wth these injuries. The timing of the surgical treatment of open fractures seems to be essential. The series of Hammer et al. All the fractures in the present series united. Although 9 of the 19 patients required a second surgical procedure (dynamisation of the nail or bone grafting or exchange nailing) to obtain union, the limb alignment was well maintained. The locking screws of the UTN are thinner than those of reamed nails and may predispose to screw breakage. Locking screw breakage was associated with delayed fracture healing. However, in this study, the breakage of the locking screws (autodynamisation of the nail) in seven patients did not lead to detectable axial deformity or lateral displacement. When using an unreamed tibial nail in the treatment of a comminuted tibial shaft fracture, full weight-bearing should not be allowed before 8–12 weeks of the operation and after that the load should be gradually increased, based on the fracture type, the degree of comminution and the radiographic follow-up. The clinical studies of reamed and unreamed nailing of open tibial shaft fractures have shown that the adequate care of the soft tissue injury is more relevant than the choice between reamed and unreamed nailing. Eleven of the 19 patients had anterior knee pain. Anterior knee pain is the most common complication after intramedullary nailing of the tibia. Toivanen et al. Our results suggest that IIIB open tibial shaft fractures can be treated safely and effectively with acute surgical debridement, unreamed nailing and soft tissue reconstruction with either a local or microvascular muscle flap. The technique requires continuous teamwork between the orthopaedic trauma surgeon and the plastic surgeon throughout the entire treatment period. The soft tissue reconstruction can be carried out either primarily in conjunction with the nailing or during the following 2 days. External fixation still remains the safest treatment option for grossly contaminated open fractures and comminuted fractures with segmental bone loss needing bone transport or other reconstructive procedures as well as for haemodynamically unstable polytrauma patients needing damage control orthopaedics or when the fracture presents with delay. We conclude that acute unreamed intramedullary nailing together with soft tissue reconstruction with a local or microvascular muscle flap is a safe and effective technique for the treatment of severe open tibial shaft fractures. There are no conflicts of interest.