Centrifugal slurry pump is widely used for transportation of solids through pipeline in many chemical and mining industries. Erosion wear considered as one of the important parameter which plays significant role in slurry transportation system by affecting both initial cost and life of its components. In the present work, erosion wear due to solid–liquid mixture has been investigated using a slurry erosion pot tester. The erosion tests have been conducted on centrifugal slurry pump material stainless steel (SS304) to establish the influence of rotational speed, particle size, solid concentration and time duration. Sand and fly ash were taken as erodent materials with solid concentrations ranging from 30 to 60% (by weight). The experiments were performed at four different speeds namely 600, 900, 1200 and 1500rpm with time duration of 90, 120, 150 and 180minutes. WC–10Co–4Cr and Ni–20Cr2O3 coating powders were used to increase the erosion wear resistance. Coating powders are deposited on pumping material by supersonic flame of high velocity oxygen fuel (HVOF) coating. Experimental results indicate that erosion wear has high dependence on rotational speed, time duration and nature of erodent solid particles. Significant improvement in erosion wear resistance was also observed by using WC–10Co–4Cr coating over Ni-20Cr2O3.Centrifugal slurry pump are widely used for transportation of homogeneous as well as heterogeneous solid–liquid mixture at medium and shorter distances. The material of pump and its components play a vital role in reliable transportation of solid–liquid mixture. Stainless steels or cast iron are universally accepted pumping materials From the literature, it was found that WC and Cr are the harder materials which improved the erosion wear resistance. HVOF coating technique is universally acceptable in literature for its good mechanical strength, corrosion resistance and low porosity. In present work, an attempt has been made to investigate the erosion wear behaviour of centrifugal pump material namely SS304. Erosion wear experimentation was performed with the variation of different influencing parameters like speed, solid concentration and time duration. WC–10Co–4Cr and Ni–20Cr SS304 was used as base material. The sample specimen was cut into of rectangular shape having dimension Commercial WC–10Co–4Cr and Ni–20Cr Fly ash and sand were selected as erodent materials. Fly ash was collected from GGSS Thermal Power Plant Ropar, Punjab (India) whereas sand was collected from Naptha Jhakri Dam Kinnaur, Himachal Pradesh (India). Fly ash and sand were dried in microwave oven for removal of wetness present in samples. Afterwards, gold coating was performed on erodents with the help of Auto fine coater manufactured by JEOL (Model: JFC-1600). Gold coating helps in facilitating the conduction behaviour to insulated erodent particles. The Erosion wear experiments were performed on erosion pot tester (Model: TR-401) manufactured by Ducom instruments, Bangalore (India). It consists of a cylindrical pot, rotating spindle and screw jack. Digital meter was provided on tester which enables to control the spindle speed and time duration. Propeller is fixed to prevent the settling of erodents at bottom of pot (120×120 The presence of compositional elements in coating powders was obtained from XRD analysis as shown in Surface and cross-sectional SEM micrographs of Ni–20Cr In present study, the velocity of particles is represented by rotational speed of rotor at different levels. The velocity of bulk particles is directly proportional to the rotational speed of pot tester rotor in which sample is fixed. Average erosion wear of uncoated, WC–10Co–4Cr and Ni–20Cr Relative erosion wear of uncoated, WC–10Co–4Cr and Ni–20Cr Effect of time duration on the erosion wear of uncoated, WC–10Co–4Cr and Ni–20Cr The erosion wear mechanism of SS304 with coated surface is studied in present work. SEM of eroded surface was carried out to analyze the surface morphology of all specimens. Emery papers were used for surface polishing with range 220 to 2500 grits (based on 1/0–4/0). The material properties directly contribute in erosion wear which largely depends upon the mechanism of material removal. The investigators The eroded surface SEM micrographs of Ni–20Cr Extensive erosion wear performance of HVOF sprayed WC–10Co–4Cr and Ni–20Cr This work was supported by the