Lightweight-concrete is defined by Lightweight aggregate is defined in The most appropriate method of assessing particle density in structural concrete is to compare the density of the particle to that of typical natural aggregate, e.g. with a ‘reference’ particle density of 2.6 It is important to understand the difference between the two definitions of density. For structural concrete, the requirements for lightweight aggregate are that it: has a strength sufficient for a reasonable crushing resistance ( enables concrete strengths in excess of 20 produces compacted concrete with an oven-dry density in the range 1500–2000 For concrete using fine aggregate from natural sources it is the particle density of the coarse aggregate that has the greatest influence on the oven-dry density of compacted concrete. To achieve lightweight concrete the particle density of the coarse aggregate should be less than about 0.65 Traditionally, manufacturers of lightweight aggregates have been constrained by not only the limitations of the raw material and the method of processing but also the requirements of the market. The properties of lightweight concrete, and hence lightweight aggregate, can be exploited in a number of ways from its use as a primarily structural material to its incorporation into structures for the enhancement of thermal insulation. This variety of purpose is recognized by RILEM/CEB who proposed the classification shown in This chapter relates to the manufacture of aggregates for concretes within Class  The history of lightweight aggregate production from natural sources dates back to pre-Roman times and continues today with porous rocks of volcanic origin. However, the sources are limited to regions of volcanic activity. From around the end of the nineteenth century, with the development of reinforced concrete and the rarity of natural porous aggregate deposits and their non-existence in most developed countries, research for the manufacture of aggregates commenced. In Europe, in the early part of the twentieth century development concentrated on foaming blastfurnace slags since steel production was basic to the industrial infrastructure. However, it was not until the early 1970s that significant developments in pelletizing and expanding blastfurnace slags took place, so that today a slag-based aggregate with a smoother non-vesicular surface, more adaptable for structural concrete, is produced. It was not until about 1913 that research in the USA revealed that certain clays and shales expanded when fired. In about 1917 this led to the production in Kansas City, Missouri in a rotary kiln of a patented expanded aggregate known as ‘Haydite’ which was used in the construction of the USS In the 1950s the UK Building Research Establishment (BRE) developed the technology for the production of a high-quality lightweight aggregate based on pelletized pulverized-fuel ash (PFA) resulting from the burning, generally in power stations, of pulverized For the production of structural concrete with an oven-dry density of less than 1800 Other developments are taking place in lightweight aggregate manufacture, such as the production of hybrids using PFA or other pulverized materials and suitable argillaceous minerals (clay, shales and slate). There are also aggregates termed ‘cold bonded’ which are mixtures of PFA with lime or Portland cement. Although the manufacture of these aggregates is now becoming more successful, their use is more appropriate to the production of masonry than to structural concrete. For any lightweight aggregate, considerable investment in manufacturing plant is required, sustainable quantities of appropriate resource material must be available and there must be a market. In the USA, most cities are based on the principle of high-rise development which in many cases leads to the use of lightweight aggregate concrete. Europe, with its more historic traditions and older infrastructure, has lagged behind. However, more consideration is being given to the conservation of land-based mineral resources and it is more difficult to obtain permission for mineral extraction. The introduction of taxes on natural materials, which will increase, and the ever-increasing cost of transport, etc. will provide a further impetus for investment in aggregate manufacture. The most important asset for any lightweight aggregate manufacturer is a sustainable source of raw material in a form and state ready for immediate use. Manufacturers using Alternatively, an aggregate based on argillaceous materials such as clay, shale or slate can have its density varied by the manufacturing technique. The lighter the aggregate, the lower the demand for resources whereas for the stronger and denser aggregates the resource is depleted at a greater rate. A solution is to make a hybrid aggregate based on PFA mixed with between 25 to 75 per cent by mass of clay (British Patent Specification No. 2218412) which can be heated or fired to make an aggregate with a particle density of, say, 1.35 Most manufacturing processes for lightweight aggregates, with the exception of processes using blastfurnace slag, have been limited to the use of either a sinter strand or a rotary kiln. In instances where the aggregate particle is formed as a friable fresh pellet before firing the sinter strand is preferred. Where the form of the fresh pellet is cohesive and its shape can be retained, the rotary kiln produces the most spherical particle with the most impermeable surface. The various production techniques rely either on agglomeration or expansion (bloating). Agglomeration takes place when some of the materials melt at temperatures in excess of about 1100 When appropriate argillaceous materials are heated by firing to achieve appropriate expansion, the resource mineral should contain sufficient gas-producing constituents and reach pyroplasticity at the point of incipient gas formation. Gas can be developed by a number of different reactions, either singularly or in combination, from the following: volatilization of sulphides from about 400 decomposition of the water of crystallization from clay minerals at approximately 600 combustion of carbon-based compounds from approximately 700 decarbonation of carbonates from approximately 850 reaction of Fe Most argillaceous materials that are suitable become pyroplastic at between 1100 A principle of success with all lightweight aggregate manufacture is homogeneity of the raw material source, as variability inevitably causes fluctuations in manufacture and the finished product. To emphasize this present-day aggregate manufacturers have gone to considerable lengths to ensure homogeneity of the raw material. In this process molten blastfurnace slag at more than 1350 The process of slag pelletization was developed in the early 1970s in order to overcome environmental concerns associated with the production of foamed blastfurnace slag on To manufacture this aggregate, molten blastfurnace slag at a temperature of about 1400 More water is sprayed onto the surface of the slag at the end of the vibrating plate. This enables gas bubbles to form in the body of the slag, creating further expansion while also chilling its surface. After being discharged from the vibrating plate the expanded globules of semi-molten slag are fed onto a horizontal rotating drum fitted with fins which project the material through a water mist. The trajectory of material is such that the slag forms irregular and more spherical pellets which are sufficiently chilled to avoid agglomeration when they come to rest. After pelletization the material is removed, allowed to drain and, finally, screened to the required size. The process produces a finished product that comprises semi-rounded pellets with a smooth surface encasing a glassy matrix and a discrete cellular structure, which is essentially non-absorbent ( This aggregate is produced from PFA which is a powder by-product of pulverized bituminous coal used to fire the furnaces of power stations. Suitable PFA of not more than about 8–10 per cent loss on ignition which results from unburnt carbon in the form of coke (char), is first homogenized in bulk in its powder form. Once homogenized, it is then conditioned through a continuous mixer with about 12–15 per cent of water and, as necessary, an amount of fine coal is added to make up the fuel content to about 10 per cent of the dry mass of the pellet to enable it to be fired. This conditioned mixture of PFA is then fed at a controlled rate onto inclined and revolving pelletizing dishes. The size and degree of compaction of the formed ‘green’ pellets depend on the inclination and speed of rotation of the dish, the rate of addition of the conditioned PFA as well as a further amount of water spray. The formed pellets discharge from the pelletizer at a diameter of about 12–14 The finished product on the sinter strand is a block of hard brick-like spherical nodules, lightly bonded by fusion at their points of contact. As the sinter strand reaches the end of its travel and commences its return to the feeding station a segment of the bed of the finished product is discharged into a breaker. This action separates the aggregate pellets prior to grading. While the surface and internal structure of the finished pellet ( Expanded clay aggregates are manufactured in rotary kilns each consisting of a long, large-diameter steel cylinder inclined at an angle of about 5° to the horizontal. The kiln is lined internally in the firing zone with refractory bricks which, as the kiln rotates, become heated to the required temperature and ‘roast’ the clay pellets to achieve the required degree of expansion. The length and configuration of the kiln depends in part on the composition of the clay and length of time it takes to ‘condition’ the clay pellets in the pre-heater to reach a temperature of about 650 The clay is dug and, to eliminate natural variability, is usually partly homogenized by layering into a covered stockpile with a spreader before it is removed from the stockpile Shale, a low-moisture content soft rock, is quarried, transferred to blending stockpiles before it is reduced by primary crushers and dry-milled to a powder of less than 250 Slate, a hard argillaceous rock, is first reduced to about 12–15 Research on structural concrete has established that concrete made with appropriate lightweight aggregates does not have many of the deficiencies in performance compared to concrete made with natural aggregates. As the need increases for alternatives to aggregates from natural sources, there are opportunities for capitalizing on the resources that exist, for which there is currently no accepted use in their present form. For instance, it is estimated that there are some 200 million tonnes of ‘stockpiled’ PFA in landfill in the UK alone. In other EC countries landfilling of PFA is now penalized for environmental protection by taxation of the power companies. Although PFA has been used in the UK for the manufacture of aggregate, the finished product has a single nominal density which has limited its wider application in structural concrete. This, together with the limitations Expanded clays have their own limitations, mainly because of restrictions placed on the availability of suitable material. In 1992 a plant for the production of expanded clay aggregate in the UK was closed due to the refusal of planning permission for the winning of otherwise accessible resources. Other alternatives exist for combining the technologies used in the manufacture of aggregates from both clay and PFA to produce products identical in performance to those of slate or shale. The amount of clay used can be as low as 10 per cent but can be as high as 80 per cent by mass when particle densities lower than 0.65 The sinter strand, can use any argillaceous material, for instance clay or the considerable stockpiles of ‘soft’ slate that was produced as waste when quarried (e.g. in North Wales, while the spoil and tailings produced from mining coal are, in theory, potential raw materials for lightweight aggregate production). However, the volatiles in mine tailings, etc. present a concern for air pollution control while clay, shales and slate containing low amounts of volatile products are most suitable. However, for lightweight aggregates to be successful in the future, pulverization and reconstitution of the shale or slate into pellets must be an integral part of the manufacturing process. Producing aggregates on a sinter strand results in a less spherical particle but with the advantage of a closed surface. For increasing the suitability of mine ‘tailings’ as an aggregate feedstock, the removal of volatiles such as naphtha, sulfur and bituminous by-products would be essential before pulverization and homogenization of the resultant ‘clean’ feedstock prior to pelletization. The most significant development is the use of resources from so-called ‘waste’ materials for the manufacture of lightweight aggregates ( The technology is available for successful lightweight aggregate manufacture. However, to produce a genetic and consistent aggregate the feed stocks used must be statistically Another concern with all lightweight aggregate manufacture is to match demand with supply. Significant investment will not be made until it becomes common practice to use lightweight concrete for structural purposes both below, as well as above, ground level. For example, One Shell Plaza in Houston (