Mixing behavior in a magnetic mixer is investigated using an experimental approach. The concept of the residence time distribution (RTD) was applied to characterize a mixing process under the action of a rotating magnetic field (RMF). The main idea of the proposed approach is the utilization of experimental RTD measurements to determine the information entropy. This paper discusses a method to compute an information degree of mixing as a measure of mixing performance for a continuous flow system. The quality of mixing in the tested equipment is analyzed by means of a proposed mixing capacity. Different operating conditions with respect to liquid flow rates and a magnetic field strength are used to study corresponding effects on a recommended parameter. It is observed that mixing capacity increases with increasing magnetic field strength. This mixing parameter is analytically described as a function of operating flow rates and the applied magnetic field.The stimulus–response experiment by the pulse input of a non-reactive tracer into a mixing system is often associated with the knowledge about the hydrodynamics, transfer processes and chemical reactions. The residence time distribution (RTD) is one of the most informative characteristics to obtain hydrodynamic information. The RTD technique may be also treated as a quantitative method to derive simple hydrodynamic models in the case of complex engineering systems. The diagnostics and the characterization of a mixing process may be directly gained from the interpretation of the RTD curves ( The RTD also allows us to compare an obtained curve for a tested mixing device with ideal mixing models (plug flow reactor—PRF and a continuous stirred tank reactor—CSTR; Mixing performance in continuous flow stirred tank reactors may be studied by using age distributions. The measure for the relative level of mixing of a molecular age in these systems was proposed by An interesting alternative to classical methods is the description of chemical engineering processes by means of the informational theory. The concept of the information entropy was introduced by Shannon to measure the amount of information in a signal ( The fundamental work for the application of the information theory in the area of chemical engineering is presented by Several types of reactors or mixers are used in chemical engineering industries ( A schematic diagram of the experimental set-up is graphically presented in Investigations were realized on the temperature of a working liquid (tap water) which varied between 20 and 25 The mixing process was provided by means of a modified three-phase stator of an induction squirrel cage electric motor, whose parameters are compatible with Polish Standard PN-72/E-06000. The magnetic induction of the RMF was controlled by means of the alternating current frequency equal to the frequency of the RMF. In these measurements, the stator was supplied with 50 The mixing process under the action of the RMF was evaluated by RTD measurements using the stimulus–response technique. This technique is the simplest and most direct way of finding the RTD curves. In the case of this experimental work, the RTD was obtained by injecting a tracer instantaneously (a pulse input) at the inlet of a flow system, and then measuring the tracer concentration, The RTD experiments were realized with a saturated solution of brine (25 The measured RTD function, The fraction of the whole material that resided for a time The RTD can be expressed in the dimensionless form as a function of the dimensionless time The selected normalized RTDs are shown in Most of mixing phenomenon can be explained in terms of probabilities. Thus, Shannon's entropy, as used in the information theory, appears to be a useful parameter for describing mixing efficiency in a system. It is necessary to mention that the information entropy can be also used to analyze the RTD measurements. The information entropy may be used as a mixing parameter based on the uncertainty regarding the amount of time taken by a tracer element to reach an outlet. Generally, the informational entropy of a random variable is defined in terms of its probability distribution. A discrete random variable, The information associated with the receipt of signal Taking into account the function From the practical point of view, information mixing capacity can be defined as the degree of approach from the piston flow to the perfect mixing flow using maximum and minimum values of the information entropy as follows: The condition under which The condition of the minimum entropy corresponds to the ideal plug flow reactor (PFR). For the PFR it is shown that the informational entropy is equal to 0 ( Taking into consideration the above definition the mixing capacity may be defined as follows: In consequence, the informational entropy is a non-negative continuous function which gradually increases from 0 to its maximum value at The relationship between the applied magnetic field and an electrical conducting liquid may be expressed by means of the well-known advection–diffusion type of equation in the following form: The RMF may be characterized by using non-dimensional parameters. The magnetic field will change if some material of sufficiently high electrical conductivity is placed inside the inductor of the RMF being able to expel the magnetic field. This well-known skin effect may be described by using the skin depth the dimensionless Chandrasekhar number the dimensionless field frequency based on the Reynolds number The interaction between the RMF and the used liquid may be also described by means of the non-dimensional Hartmann number: It should be noticed that the Chandrasekhar number is the square of the Hartmann number In the presence of a steady or a rotating magnetic field, the relative influence of the magnetic Lorentz force versus viscous force is determined by using the Hartman number. The Hartman number is proportional to the strength of the produced magnetic field and its square is a measure of the relative importance of the electromagnetic to the viscous force. Therefore, the obtained values of the mixing capacity (see Eq. Experimental measurements were performed for different liquid flow rates ranging between 0.0084 and 0.0167  Several important conclusions may be drawn from the material presented in this paper: When a quick comparison between various systems is needed, the mixing capacity based on the informational entropy can be very useful. This parameter reduces complex analysis of the RTD measurements to a single quantity measuring the progress of a mixing process. The proposed mathematical description provides useful insight into the mixing process and a new approach to dynamic behavior description of this process could be proposed instead of a classical approach applying well-known theories (e.g. the coefficient CoV which gives the ratio of the standard deviation to the mean and provides a measure of the relative variation of a distribution). In the present report, the influence of the RMF on the mixing process was studied systematically. The RTD curves for the magnetic mixer were determined experimentally by the impulse method. Based on these investigations, the informational mixing capacity was developed in order to describe the mixing process under the action of the RMF. Using the RTD as a measure to indirectly evaluate mixing behavior in the magnetic mixer, the calculations of the informational entropy were performed to obtain the mixing capacity. Based on these experimental data, it is observed that mixing of a liquid phase increases with the increase in the magnetic field strength and the flow rate. This study emphasized the importance of the informational entropy as a critical complementary parameter for the experimental RTD studies in the evaluation of mixing in a flow system. It should be noticed that the RTD investigations were worked out for the magnetic mixer. From the data available in a technical literature it is clear that the attention has not been focused on the experimental studies of the RTD analysis under the action of the RMF. In previous publications there have been no available data describing this process by means of the mixing capacity based on the informational entropy.  magnetic field, kg tracer concentration, kg coefficient of variation diameter, residence time distribution function, s frequency of rotating magnetic field, s information entropy, bit characteristic dimension, information mixing capacity probability skewedness shielding parameter time, s time-lag, s space time (mean residence time), s operating volume, m volumetric flow rate, dm velocity, m discrete random variable  Dirac delta function magnetic permeability, kg viscosity, m magnetic diffusivity, m density, kg standard deviation of residence time distribution, variance of residence time distribution, s electrical conductivity, A dimensionless time skin depth, angular velocity of rotating magnetic field, rad  averaged maximal minimal  interaction parameter Reynolds number magnetic Reynolds number field frequency based Reynolds number Chandrasekhar number This work was supported by the