In the present paper, the effect of vibration frequency and time on the size of α-Al primary solid phase and density on an A356 aluminum alloy was studied. The vibration frequencies and times used were 10, 20, 30, 40 and 50Hz and 5, 10 and 15min, respectively. It was observed that the increase in vibration time up to 15min and vibration frequency up to 50Hz led to decrease in the size of α-Al phase. The results show that maximum grain refinement was occurred at 50Hz and 15min vibration conditions. At these conditions, the size of α-Al phase decreased down to 173μm and 53% grain refinement was achieved. However, it was observed that the increase in frequency up to 50Hz and time up to 15min led to increase in the density of A356 aluminum alloy. The best density was obtained at 50Hz and 15min resulting in density of 2.68g/cm3.Al–Si alloys are the most common materials among the casting aluminum alloys. These alloys exhibit many benefits such as wear and corrosion resistance, hot tearing resistance, good weldability, high strength to weight ratio and excellent castability Today, so many methods have been introduced for microstructural control. Among these methods, application of external forces such as vibration is an advantageous method that has been considered by investigators Some investigators applied vibrational energy isothermally during periodic times. They used ultrasonic waves as vibrational energy and reported that application of ultrasonic waves isothermally at longer times or periodically in semisolid state are more effective because cavitation and other mechanisms of grain refinement and mass feeding act more effective Chemical composition of A356 aluminum alloy used in the current research is shown in 1.5 A combination of vibration during solidification and isothermal vibration of semisolid alloy (two stages) was studied. When vibration was stopped, the heating system surrounding the mold was removed and mold was cooled in the air. In order to evaluate the effect of vibration, an as-cast sample was poured at 700 After finishing the casting, samples were prepared for microscopic examinations according to ASTM-E407-2002 standard using Keller solution. Samples were examined optically by a ZEISS optical microscope equipped with a CASIO EXILM EX-P505 digital camera. For measuring the size of primary solid phase, grain refinement degree and Reynolds number of melt flowing around dendrite arms, two parameters of circular diameter and DAS were calculated by means of CLEMEX-PROFESSIONAL EDITION image analyzer software. Circular diameter (CD), grain refinement degree (GR) and Reynolds number ( Dipping method was used to measure the density and porosity examination of samples. For this purpose, weight of samples dipped in pure water was measured with a digital weighting system. Then, density of alloy was calculated using the following equation:    Vibrational energy influences the final microstructure in two manners; i.e. creating periodic tension–pressure and forced convection in molten alloy However, vibrational energy leads to forced convections in the liquid. Flows induced by vibration exert external force toward dendrite arms to rearrange it in flow direction Campbell Measured density of unvibrated sample was 2.40  It is well known that the porosity present in the structure of casting components is due to dissolved hydrogen in liquid and insufficient mass feeding of liquid into spaces between dendrite arms Application of prolonged mechanical vibration led to decrease the size of primary solid phase. Furthermore, increasing vibration frequency and time led to further decrease in the size of primary solid phase, as shown in Melt flow intensity around dendrite arms is indicated by Reynolds number. According to Eq. Some authors The effect of prolonged mechanical vibration on grain refinement and density of A356 aluminum alloy has been investigated. It was found that: Application of mechanical vibration led to increase in grain refinement and density of A356 aluminum alloy. Increasing vibration time up to 15 Increasing vibration frequency up to 50 Maximum achieved grain refinement was 53% in 50 Increasing vibration time and frequency led to increase in the density of A356 aluminum alloy. It was observed that mass feeding of liquid phase and melt degassing because of applying mechanical vibration have strong effect on the density of alloy. Maximum achieved density was at 50 The authors would like to thank prof. J. Hedjazi and Mr. M.S. Safarzadeh for his useful comments on experimental results, Mrs. Sara Ghannadi at Multimedia University of Malaysia and Sahar Ghannadi at Alberta University of Canada for their useful helps and encouraging us in the performance of our experiments. The financial support from Iran ministry of Industries and Minerals is also acknowledged with gratitude.