The aim of this study is to establish the potential novel approach for the selective synthesis of copper-nickel (CuNi) alloys using two waste streams, printed circuit board (PCB) and nickel-metal hydride (NiMH) batteries. A thermal route is established to synthesise CuNi alloys by using waste PCB, simultaneously as a Cu source and reducing agent from C-bearing polymer and waste NiMH batteries as Ni source. Thermal transformation and reduction studies were carried out at 1500 °C under an inert atmosphere. Initial characterization of raw materials was conducted in detail using various analytical techniques. Synthesised CuNi alloys were confirmed with ICP, EDS and XRD analyses. Material ratios of 75–25 wt% and 50-50 wt% of NiMH battery and PCB waste was considered and these range of compositions of e-waste, as raw materials, minimised the slag generation and optimised Ni recovery. Concentration of Nickel in the synthesised alloys was 20–30 wt%. Reduction extent of nickel oxide using PCB as reductant was confirmed by off-gas analysis. This approach has the potential to be implemented in selective synthesis of CuNi alloys instead of using conventional ores/reductant, to achieve target composition of alloys as per application requirements including marine/automotive/electronic industries. This novel approach promises significant benefits to divert e-wastes from landfill and provide sustainable solution for future metal alloy security.The most common and popular copper–nickel or cupronickel (CuNi) contains 10 or 30% Ni, though many standard alloys exist with varying composition and small addition of other elements for special purposes ( It is estimated that worldwide 20–50 million tonnes of e-waste generated annually due to rapid growth in consumption and obsolescence of electronic devices ( Rechargeable or non-rechargeable batteries are excellent choice of energy storage applications including household, power tools and electronics and global demand is abruptly increasing. Approximately 350 million handheld batteries are annually consumed in Australia and nearly 2 million units are reprocessed. Majority of the end-of-life batteries are either legally or illegally exported, stockpiled or landfilled. Among all handheld battery types, NiMH batteries accounts for 6% (approximately 20 million) ( In this study, a novel sustainable approach which will lead to the recovery of CuNi alloys through reduction of nickel oxide of NiMH battery by waste PCB. Waste PCB simultaneously as a reductant and a source of Cu was considered. Reaction mechanism to recover CuNi alloy was conducted at 1500 °C. The possibility of generation of dioxin or hazardous elements/emissions is therefore minimised ( Many studies focusing on hydrometallurgical, pyro-metallurgical, and mechanical routes to recover valuable metals from waste PCB ( Recycling techniques of NiMH batteries include mechanical separation-based route, chemical/hydrometallurgical and pyrometallurgical routes. The mechanical route includes grinding/cursing, sieving, separation such as: gravity separation, electrostatic separation, magnetic separation techniques ( In our group, research has focused on waste transformation into value-added product including nanomaterials ( The PCB samples were supplied by a recycling company (4R recycling Pvt. Ltd.). The sample PCB used for this study is mixed PCB from different sources mainly from computers which were collected, mechanically crushed and metal rich fraction were separated by electrostatic separation technology, therefore rich in Cu. In general, PCBs are composed of ∼40% metals, 30% polymers and 30% ceramics ( Waste NiMH batteries were collected from UNSW Environmental Sustainability e-waste collection booth and manually dismantled. The major components of NiMH battery are two electrodes (positive, negative), separator, electrolyte, casing etc. In general, Nickel hydroxide/oxy-hydroxide is used as positive electrode ( The positive electrode (∼40 wt% of NiMH battery cell) is used for this study to avoid complexity of mischmetal compounds. The electrode material was dried in the oven (60 °C, 2 h) and milled into powder before using as active material for this study. Analysis of waste NiMH positive electrode is given in Thermal study of waste PCB alone and mixed with NiMH battery at different proportion to synthesise CuNi alloy was carried out in a horizontal tube furnace (1 m long with 50 mm diameter, Alumina tube) at 1500 °C. The carrier gas, argon flow rate of 1 L/min from the gas inlet was controlled by gas flowmeter. The temperature was chosen above the melting point of Ni (∼1453 °C) and Cu (∼1085 °C) considering Cu-Ni phase diagram ( The chemical composition of obtained powder from spent battery, PCB and product were analysed by inductively coupled plasma optical spectrometer (ICP-OES) model Perkin Elmer Optima 7300DV after aqua regia digestion. The crystal structure was identified by PANalytical X'Pert Pro Multipurpose X-ray diffraction (XRD) using CuKa radiation (λ = 1.54 Å). Phase identification was conducted by Xpert high score plus software. Elemental compositions were determined by Energy-dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDS) of Bruker X flash 5010. Raw materials were dispersed on carbon tape and synthesised CuNi alloys were coated with carbon for sample preparation for EDS analysis. Infrared gas analyser (IR) unit (Advance Optima model ABB® AO2020) was attached to the outlet of the furnace to measure off gases, CO, CO The average particle size of the shredded PCBs was ≥1.00 mm ( NiMH battery powder was black in color and particle size was ≥250 μm as shown in Waste PCB at 1500 °C showed mainly three products including a gas fraction, Cu based metallic droplets and black fraction which contains mainly carbonaceous/slag/metal residue. The metallic and slag residues were easily separated through a 250 μm sieve and shown in The black carbonaceous/slag residues after heat treatment of PCB at 1500 °C, were also analysed by SEM and EDS mapping and Raman analysis ( It is evident from the phase diagram ( Reduction mechanism of NiO present in NiMH battery powder by C-bearing polymer from PCB was studied using off-gas evolution during the reduction reaction. The thermal decomposition reaction of nickel hydroxide, Ni(OH) Formation of CuNi alloy was qualitatively confirmed with XRD, EDS (mapping and line scan) analysis. ICP analysis provided quantitative data of the composition of synthesised CuNi alloy. XRD pattern of the CuNi alloys ( SEM image and EDS mapping of the synthesised alloy are shown in Elemental composition measured by ICP is shown in Sn bearing CuNi alloys are popular in electronics industry as Sn increases the tensile strength; tarnish resistance and wear resistance of the alloy ( This study shows the possibility to use waste PCB as a reducing agent and Cu source and waste NiMH battey as source of Ni to synthesise CuNi alloys which could be subsequently processed to deliver products for various applications. The approach will reduce the huge ratio of major elements like Cu, Ni which are coming from waste, for the final product processing, therefore providing a sustainable and economical option to consider. Future study will be carried out to investigate the thermal properties and corrosion resistance (in salt water) of as-synthesised CuNi alloy for marine application. Synthesis of CuNi alloys is established using waste NiMH as Ni source and waste PCB as a source of Cu and reducing agent by providing solid carbon and reducing gases. Reduction mechanism using waste PCB as reductant to form CuNi alloy is described and synthesised alloys were confirmed by XRD, EDS, ICP analysis. Concentration of Ni in the synthesised alloys was 20–30 wt% and Ni were homogenously distributed and showed complete recovery from waste NiMH using PCB as reductant. CuNi alloys are widely used in marine industry, automotive and electronic industry depending on the composition as per application requirement. Although the hydrometallurgical route to recover value added metal/materials from PCB and NiMH battery are cited mostly, this route requires accurate mechanical treatment to reduce particle size, large consumption of chemicals and multiple complex processes to obtain final product. In contrast, pyrometallurgical processes is well known as also demonstrated by the cited industrial treatments. This study achieved the synthesis of CuNi alloy from problematic waste NiMH battery and PCB at 1500 °C. Due to the simplicity of the technique and adaptability with the feed materials derive from waste, this innovative approach will create a new urban mine of Ni and Cu from e-waste, simultaneously transforming PCB into a reductant to synthesise CuNi alloy. The financial support for this research was provided under the Australian Research Council ( The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at