Centimeter-sized single crystals of pure and Er-doped KPb2Cl5 were successfully grown by the Bridgman–Stockbarger method using silica ampoules sealed under HCl gas. The phase transition that occurs at 255°C (528.15K) was characterized by differential scanning calorimetry and found not to entail mechanical breakdown of the crystals. The KPb2Cl5 volumic mass and specific heat functions were measured from ∼700 to 760K and ∼120 to 760K, respectively. An updated Ellingham diagram for chlorides aimed at choosing the crucible material, synthesis and crystal growth atmosphere, and starting products is proposed.In the last few years, the interest for middle infrared laser host compounds has led to extensive studies of several chloride systems. The most impressive results were obtained with bulk KPb Molten salt and aqueous solution chemistry of potassium lead chlorides were first investigated at the beginning of the 20th century and the discovery of KPb Further studies of the laser operation behavior of this promising family of compounds require sizable single crystals of outstanding quality and this has led us to careful and systematic growth experiments in conjunction with thermodynamic characterization of the solid and the melt. The accurate knowledge of the specific heat Forty grams of KPb Calorimetric measurements were performed from 120 to 760 The density measurements ( In order to interpret the voids distributed over the lower part of the bulk surface, we needed an Ellingham diagram which, owing to the fact that several chlorides found many applications in mineral processing and extractive metallurgy (grace to their low melting point and high vapor pressure), had been calculated by Kellogg  In the Ellingham diagrams shown in Among the transition metal chlorides it seems that the less stable ones belong to the so-called inert metals (Mo, Ta, W, Pt) broadly employed as crucibles. For instance, Mo was claimed to be an appropriate metal for crucible during the synthesis of rare earth trichlorides from their metals and HCl, with the proviso that the ratio We have established how it is possible, despite that KPb This work was partly funded by the “Mission Ressources et Compétences Technologiques” (MRCT) of the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), via the “Cristaux Massifs et Dispositifs pour l’Optique” (CMDO) network, and the Conseil Régional de Basse-Normandie. Alban Ferrier is the owner of a Ph. D. thesis DGA fellowship from the french Ministry of Defense.