Background
                  The traditional method of treating displaced mid clavicular fractures with conservative methods gives poor results. When there is displacement more than 2 cm and shortening, internal fixation of the clavicle, when performed properly, gives better results.
               
                  Methods
                  We reviewed the results of 20 cases of middle third clavicle fractures (Edinburg type 2B) with displacement more than 2 cm which were treated with open reduction and internal fixation with precontoured locking plate and screws.
               
                  Results
                  In all the fractures radiological union was evident by 10–16 weeks. None of the patients had complications like malunion, nonunion, deep infections, and implant failure and neurovascular damage. There was no problem with hardware and implant removal was not done. The average constant score was 95.45. All the patients were satisfied with the cosmetic appearance of surgical scar.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Precontoured locking plate fixation gives excellent results, facilitates early return to function, results in better cosmesis and avoids complications of conservative methods like nonunion, malunion and also implant removal is not necessary.Fractures of the clavicle are common injuries especially in young, active men. Midshaft fractures account for 80% of all clavicle fractures. These fractures have been traditionally treated with conservative methods resulting in unsatisfactory patient outcome. While undisplaced fractures are predominately treated by conservative methods, fractures with displacement more than 2 cm when treated by nonoperative methods have higher rate of nonunion, poor clinical outcome and decrease in shoulder strength and endurance. With the development of more predictable implants, internal fixation of the clavicle, when performed properly gives better results. Plate fixation provides immediate rigid stabilization, pain relief, facilitates early mobilization and return to pre injury activities. The aim of our study is to analyze the results of internal fixation of displaced fractures of middle third of clavicle with precontoured locking plate and screws. During the period from January 2008 to December 2011, 114 patients were treated for clavicle fractures in our hospital. Out of these, 20 cases of middle third clavicle fractures (Edinburg type 2B) with displacement more than 2 cm were treated with open reduction and internal fixation with precontoured locking plate and screws. Most of patients were in the age group between 21 and 40 years (63%). The youngest was 18 years and oldest was 59 years with an average age of 32.1 years. There were 16 males and 4 females. 14 of the fractures were sustained following Road Traffic Accident (70%) and 6 cases (30%) following fall from height. Right clavicle was fractured in 11 cases and left in 9 cases. 5 cases had comminution at fracture site. 4 cases were maluniting at the time of surgery. All the cases had displacement more than 2 cm 2 patients had associated brachial plexopathy. On an average the timing of surgery was 3 days post injury. Two cases with primary brain injury were operated on 37th and 50 Patients with isolated clavicle fracture were in hospital for 5 days. Those patients requiring treatment for associated major injuries stayed for long time ranging from 14 days to 44days. All the cases were operated with precontoured locking plate fixed on superior surface with 3.5 mm locking screws. Interfragmentary screw was used in 3 cases. Under general anesthesia, the patient was placed in supine position with a folded towel placed under the affected shoulder and the arm draped free for intra-operative mobilization. An incision along the superior border of clavicle was taken. The fracture site was exposed and at the junction of the medial and middle thirds of the clavicle, the inferior surface is exposed so that a protective instrument can be inserted during drilling. After reducing the fracture, the plate was fixed over the superior surface with at least 3 bicortical locking screws on either side of the fracture ( Wound inspection done on 2nd post-op day. IV antibiotics were given and discharged on 5th day. Sutures were removed in 7–10 days. The limb was kept in a sling post-operatively for 2 weeks. Patients were advised to use the arm for light weight activities of daily living till 6 weeks. At six weeks check x-ray was taken and full range of shoulder movements started. Subsequent follow-up was done in 8thweek, 12 week, 6 months and 1 year. Those with unsatisfactory callus formation at 3 months were again called after 1 month for repeat x-ray. Union was considered if clinically the fracture site was non-tender, radiologically when there was visible callus. Functional outcome was assessed based on Constant Shoulder Score. By 6 weeks all the patients were advised to start shoulder abduction. Radiological union was evident by 10–16 weeks. All the patients were satisfied with the cosmetic appearance of surgical scar ( The clavicle is s-shaped long bone, convex ventrally on its medial half and concave laterally. It is tubular in cross section medially and flat laterally. The junction between these two is the weak spot. Both the lateral and medial side are stabilized by strong ligamentous and muscular structures. The Midshaft is left relatively unprotected. Hence most fractures occur in midshaft. Historically these fractures have been treated conservatively. “Watchful expectancy and skillful neglect “has been the basic principle in managing these fractures, resulting in malunion, shortening and in some cases non-union. Early reports by Neer (1960) and Rowe (1968) formed the basis of idea of closed treatment methods. Rowe stated that “Fortunately for man, the nature has endowed the clavicle with excellent reparative powers”. Conservative management remains treatment of choice for undisplaced midshaft clavicle fractures (Edinburgh type 2A). In the metanalysis of 1145 conservatively treated fractures, 986 of which were undisplaced showed a nonunion rate of 5.9% only. Recent literature is challenging the traditional belief that midshaft clavicle fractures uniformly heal without functional deficit. This is supported by several studies by members of Canadian Orthopaedic Trauma Society, who reported higher rate of nonunion and functional deficits after non surgical treatment of midshaft clavicle fractures when compared to internal fixation. A retrospective study of 52 non-operatively treated patients showed that displaced fractures with shortening of 2 cm or more are predictive of higher non-union or symptomatic malunion rates. Patient based outcome scores in some studies have been published stating that malunion with shortening after midshaft fractures may lead to symptoms such as pain, loss of strength, rapid fatigability, paresthesia of the arm and hand and problems with sleeping on back as well as cosmetic complaints.  Glenoid orientation/scapular winging: Because of the shortened lever arm of the shoulder girdle, there is a change in orientation of the glenoid with winging of the scapula, which leads to functional problems of the shoulder in overhead movements. The winging of the scapula result in pain while lying on the back. Muscular: Shortening of the clavicle has a negative effect on muscle-tendon tension and muscle balance, which may result in loss of strength and endurability.  Drawbacks of conservative management can be effectively overcome by surgically treating these fractures achieving near normal anatomic, cosmetic and functional profile. Plate fixation provides immediate rigid fixation, cortical compression and rotational control, helping to facilitate early mobilization. Disadvantages being superior clavicle plating may result in a greater risk to underlying neurovascular structures and hardware prominence and irritation necessitating implant removal and cosmetic concerns. We have used precontoured locking plate with minimum 3 locking screws on each side, fixed over superior surface of clavicle. We have seen better outcome, shorter time to union no case malunion or nonunion. Patients had excellent functional outcome with Constant score of 95.45. All the fractures united within 16 weeks. Bone grafting was not necessary. As none of the patients complained about hardware prominence, we have not done plate removal. The traditional method of treating displaced mid clavicular fractures with conservative methods gives poor results. When there is displacement more than 2 cm and shortening, precontoured locking plate fixation gives excellent results, facilitates early return to function and avoids complications of conservative methods like nonunion, malunion and brachial plexopathy. It is the most predictable method to maintain anatomical reduction of displaced fractures and results in better cosmesis and also implant removal is not necessary. The author has none to declare.