Coal pillars are usually loaded under combined compression-shear stresses at underground coal mines. Their long-term stability is critical to the utilization of underground structures, such as underground reservoirs at coal mines. In this study, a modified rock property testing system was used to explore the mechanical properties of coal specimens under quasi-static combined compression-shear loading conditions. The acoustic emission technique was applied to investigating the microcrack fracturing of coal specimens at various inclination angles. The experimental results show that specimen inclination has remarkable effects on the microcrack initiation, microcrack damage and ultimate failure of the coal specimen. The failure mode of the coal specimen tends to transit from axial splitting to shear failure with increasing specimen inclination, and its peak strength is closely associated with the microcrack damage threshold. In practice, it is recommended to consider coal strength under combined compression-shear loading when using empirical pillar strength formulae so that the effect of pillar inclination can be included.Pillars are commonly employed in underground coal mining, such as rib pillars between panels and load-bearing pillars in the room-and-pillar method. Recently, construction of underground reservoirs has become increasingly popular at coal mines in the west of China, where coal pillars serve as barriers to preserve water in the goaf. In this case, it is critical to ensure the long-term stability of coal pillars for the regular operation of underground reservoirs. Understanding the fracture process of coal is prerequisite for disclosing the failure mechanism of coal pillars ( Previous laboratory experiments on coal emphasized its behavior under the effects of CO The above findings demonstrate the importance of pillar inclination on pillar stability and evoke laboratory tests under combined compression-shear loading conditions on different rock types, such as granite ( Previous studies on material properties under combined compression-shear loading revealed that both the elastic modulus (  In this paper, a modified rock property testing system is adopted to study the quasi-static failure of standard coal specimens under combined compression-shear loading. The acoustic emission (AE) technique is employed to observe the pre-failure microcrack fracturing of coal specimens at various inclination angles. The effects of specimen inclination on both the pre-failure process and the ultimate failure of coal specimens are studied to reveal the coal properties under quasi-static compression and shear loading conditions. Two main methods have been commonly used to simulate combined compression-shear loading in previous laboratory experiments ( The self-developed combined compression-shear test (C-CAST) system was used in two previous studies to investigate the quasi-static failure of igneous rocks under combined and shear loading ( In this study, two modifications are made to upgrade the original C-CAST system. The external loading force is applied by a servo-controlled MTS to the modified C-CAST system through the lower loading platen. The axial stress and strain of the specimen in the combined compression-shear loading test are calculated by Eqs. A total of 20 laboratory experiments are performed in the State Key Laboratory of Coal Resources and Safe Mining at China University of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou, China. The coal specimens are sampled from the coal blocks collected at Zhangminggou Coal Mine in Shaanxi Province, China. Cylindrical specimens with dimensions of 50 mm (in diameter) × 100 mm (in length) are used. A grinder is used to carefully flatten the ends of each specimen. Four AE sensors are glued to the middle of the coal specimen in each test ( The laboratory tests were divided into four different test scenarios, with the specimen inclination angles of 0°, 5°, 10° and 15°, respectively. Each test scenario was repeated five times under the same testing condition ( First, the reproducibility of the test results was examined. The specimen peak strength in each test is listed in The absolute deviation, relative deviation, standard deviation and relative standard deviation of the test results in each test scenario are also provided in  Another method is to examine the slope change of the ‘cumulative AE property vs. axial stress’ curve. Cumulative AE energy ( Some authors considered the axial stress at which the AE hit curve begins to increase linearly as the CI threshold and the axial stress at which the AE hit curve begins to increase nonlinearly or exponentially as the CD threshold ( Many others accept In this section, the CI and CD thresholds of the coal specimens at various inclination angles (i.e. The average AE properties from the four AE sensors were analyzed (    Another important mechanical property of the coal specimen is the Rocks (e.g. coal) after CI still possess an increasing load-bearing capacity (  CD is associated with unstable microcrack propagation and the formation of macroscopic failure planes in the specimen.  The non-monotonous change of The Previous studies on other types of rocks, different from the coal which is a type of soft rocks, suggest that the CD threshold corresponds to the long-term strength of the rock (e.g. Many factors influence the fracture process and the failure pattern of the rock, such as the stress direction and the distribution of external loading ( The coal specimen peak strength at different inclination angles is provided in Empirical pillar strength formulae have been developed for both coal pillars ( Underground coal pillars are generally subjected to combined compression-shear loading. In this study, a modified rock testing system is used to reveal the mechanical properties and the microcrack fracturing processes of coal specimens under quasi-static combined compression-shear loading. The following conclusions are made: Both the CI threshold and its ratio to the peak strength of the coal specimen decrease with increasing inclination angles. The CI threshold declines almost linearly. The CI threshold to peak strength ratio changes non-monotonously in a decline tendency. The CD threshold of the coal specimen increases slightly as the inclination angle changes from 0° to 5° and then decreases almost linearly with increasing specimen inclination. The external shear loading component induced by the combined compression-shear loading condition mobilizes the friction and cohesion of the coal specimen and leads to a slight increase in the CD threshold at small inclination angles. The main effect of the additional shear loading component is to accelerate unstable propagation of microcracks when the inclination angle increases to a certain value, resulting in gradual reduction of the CD threshold. The CD threshold to the peak strength ratio should be an intrinsic property of the coal specimen if the inclination angle is within 10°. This ratio tends to decrease once the inclination angle reaches 15°. The external shear loading component dominates the failure mode of the coal specimen in that case. The coal specimen at this inclination angle fails along a visible shear failure plane with few spalls. The coal specimen tends to fail along a macroscopic shear failure plane rather than splits axially with increasing inclination. Its peak strength at different inclination angles is closely related to its CD threshold. Specimen peak strength obtained from the combined compression-shear loading test is recommended to be incorporated in empirical pillar strength formulae to account for the effect of pillar inclination. The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. The work of this paper is supported by the