Recent studies have shown that the sample path smoothness in soil spatial variability can have a significant effect on the failure probability of geotechnical problems. The purpose of the current study is to propose a procedure that can identify the sample path smoothness based on site investigation data. It is shown that two factors determine whether or not the sample path smoothness can be identified: the type of auto-correlation function (ACF) model and the parameter estimation method. In order to identify the sample path smoothness, a non-classical two-parameter ACF model, such as the powered exponential (PE) model and Whittle-Matérn (WM) model, must be adopted together with the maximum likelihood (ML) method. The method of moments (MM) is incapable of identifying the sample path smoothness regardless of the ACF model type, classical or otherwise, although it is effective in identifying the scale of fluctuation (SOF). Between the two non-classical ACF models, the WM model is more flexible because it covers a wider range of sample path smoothness than the PE model. Neither the PE model nor the WM model is able to model the “hole effect” (non-monotonic auto-correlation). The development of a sufficiently flexible non-classical model that can simultaneously identify SOF, sample path smoothness, and hole effect remains an open research question.The property of a spatially variable soil mass is often modeled as the sum of a trend function (t) and a spatially variable residual (ε) It is seldom emphasized in the geotechnical literature that the random field sample paths obtained from different ACF models can have very different smoothness. The fact that the sample path smoothness can affect limit states naturally leads to a practical question on how the sample path smoothness can be identified from site investigation data. However, the effect of a parameter and the identifiability of a parameter from real soil data are two distinct issues. The former is a theoretical parametric study. The latter is a statistical characterization question. The purpose of the current paper is to address the following question: in order to identify the sample path smoothness based on site investigation data, what kind of ACF model and parameter estimation method should be adopted? First, it is shown by numerical examples that classical ACF models (e.g., SExp, SMK, and QExp) cannot identify the sample path smoothness. This is obvious, because classical models have prescribed sample path smoothness. There is only one free parameter in a classical model, and this parameter can be adjusted to fit the SOF only. To match the sample path smoothness in real data, model selection Several ACF models have been adopted in the literature, such as: Non-classical ACF models contain two or more parameters. It is advantageously to have a system of one-parameter classical ACF models such as SExp, SMK, and QExp when it comes to model fitting to real soil data, even though there is only one sample path feature of interest (SOF) in the fitting process. In a similar vein, it is advantageous to have more two-parameter models on hand when the statistical characterization objective is extended to fitting two sample path features (SOF and smoothness) in real soil data. This paper adopts the powered exponential (PE) and Whittle-Matérn (WM) models for fitting purposes. To our knowledge, the suitability of fitting the PE model to real soil data has not been studied thus far. Ching and Phoon The ν parameters in the PE and WM models control the smoothness. The importance of controlling sample path smoothness has been recognized among geostatistical researchers (e.g., Both Eqs. It is worthwhile to emphasize the PE model is not a subset of the WM model. Numerical examples are used to illustrate the effectiveness of classical and non-classical ACF models in identifying sample path smoothness. The vertical spatial variability ε(z) is modeled as a zero-mean random field. A one-dimensional stationary normal random field with mean = 0, standard deviation = σ, and SOF = δ can be simulated by the following equation: Other methods (e.g., Karhunen-Loeve expansion) can be adopted to simulate For the method of moments, the sample ACF is first calculated as follows Let us consider the case that the SExp model is adopted as the actual model (i.e.,  The conclusions are qualitatively the same as those presented above for actual model = SExp. The conclusions presented above are only for a limited number of random seeds. The parameter estimation results based on more random seeds indicate the same conclusions: MM is in general a poor parameter estimation method for the sample path smoothness but an effective method for SOF. The log-likelihood function for (σ,ν,δ) can be written as Let us consider the case that the SExp model is adopted as the actual model (i.e., When the The PE model has a gap within the range of possible smoothness: its sample path is not mean-square differentiable if ν The conclusions for ML presented above are only for a limited number of random seeds. The results based on more random seeds suggest the same conclusions. The observations obtained from the numerical examples are summarized as follows: In general, MM is incapable of identifying the sample path smoothness, but it can consistently identify SOF. This is true regardless of the type of the assumed model. In short, MM is robust for identification of SOF, which is a first-order sample path feature. However, it is insensitive to higher-order features such as smoothness. In general, a classical one-parameter model (e.g., SExp) is incapable of identifying the sample path smoothness. However, with ML, it can mimic the sample path smoothness by adopting an inaccurate δ (smoothness-SOF false tradeoff). The main limitation for a classical model is that the sample path smoothness is The PE model with ML can consistently identify the sample path smoothness only if the sample path is admissible within PE parameterization. Specifically, only non-differentiable or infinitely differentiable sample paths are admissible. However, the PE model with ML can mimic the sample path smoothness by adopting an inaccurate δ due to the smoothness-SOF false tradeoff. The WM model with ML can consistently identify the sample path smoothness with a broad application range: the sample path can be non-differentiable, finitely differentiable, or infinitely differentiable. However, this does not imply that all sample paths are admissible within the WM parameterization. One such example with the so-called “hole effect” will be illustrated later using a real case history. Beyond the above limitation of WM, there is also no study that demonstrates all geotechnical limit states are impacted by the SOF and smoothness features alone in spatial variability. The smoothness-SOF false tradeoff can be demonstrated by the contour plot for the likelihood function of the WM model, i.e., f( The sample path smoothness can become less identifiable if the sampling interval dz is large. The purpose of the case histories is to verify whether the conclusions obtained from the numerical examples still hold for real case histories. The first case history site is located at a test site in Hollywood, South Carolina developed for the evaluation of liquefaction mitigation using driven displacement piles as described by Stuedlein et al. From the numerical examples, it has been concluded that MM is incapable of identifying the sample path smoothness, but it can consistently identify SOF. To verify whether these conclusions still hold, five scenarios are considered: (a) SExp-MM, (b) SMK-MM, (c) QExp-MM, (d) PE-MM, and (e) WM-MM. From the numerical examples, it has been concluded that a classical model with ML is incapable of identifying the sample path smoothness, but it can mimic the sample path smoothness by adopting an inaccurate δ (smoothness-SOF false tradeoff). The PE and WM models with ML can consistently identify the sample path smoothness, but the PE model has a smoothness gap. The second case history site is located at South Parklands, Adelaide (South Australia). The test site was characterized by a large number of CPTs performed in a relatively homogeneous, stiff, overconsolidated clay known as Keswick Clay   It is noteworthy that the identified δ values for SExp-ML, PE-ML, and WM-ML range from 0.05 to 2 m. However, this range is inconsistent with the reference range The hole effect refers to the phenomenon of a non-monotonic ACF One possible way of modeling the hole effect is to superpose two ACF models with different SOFs. The larger SOF is used to model the pseudo-periodicity, whereas the smaller SOF is used to model the local spatial variability. This superposition idea was proposed by Vanmarcke Based on the observations obtained from the numerical examples and real case histories, we recommend the following procedure for the purpose of identifying the sample path smoothness: Adopt WM-ML to identify (ν Also adopt WM-MM to identify (ν If the δ estimate obtained by WM-MM is close to that obtained by WM-ML, the (ν If the δ estimate obtained by WM-MM is fairly different from that obtained by WM-ML, this is an indication that the actual auto-correlation may fall outside the scope of the WM model. The hole effect arising from non-monotonic ACF is a fairly obvious example. The (ν In the geotechnical literature, SOF has been treated as the main (and probably the only) parameter that characterizes the auto-correlation of a spatially variable soil property. The characterization for the sample path smoothness is largely ignored. However, Ching and Phoon It is found that two factors determine the identifiability of the sample path smoothness: the adopted ACF model and the adopted parameter estimation method (MM or ML). The relationship between these two factors has not been systematically studied thus far. It is found that the method of moments (MM) is incapable of identifying the sample path smoothness, although it can consistently identify SOF. MM is arguably the most practical de-facto method for statistical parameter estimation for soil spatial variability and it has proven to work reasonably well in many applications. The importance of demonstrating the rather unexpected limitation of MM should be appreciated in this context. It is also found that a one-parameter classical ACF model (e.g., SExp, SMK, QExp, etc.) is incapable of identifying the sample path smoothness. However, a classical model with ML can To identify sample path smoothness, a non-classical two-parameter ACF model (e.g., PE or WM) with ML is necessary. Between PE and WM, the WM model is more flexible for the task of fitting the smoothness feature. In addition, numerical results produced by the WM-ML show quantitatively that the sampling interval in the cone penetration test (CPT) is sufficient to identify sample path smoothness. Hence, sample path smoothness is not merely an interesting, but unobservable theoretical feature of CPT data; rather, it is an additional and necessary feature for some geotechnical problems (see It is found that the WM model does not encompass all possible auto-correlations. There are cases where the actual auto-correlation cannot be modeled by WM, such as the hole effect. To detect this issue, one can conduct a separate WM-MM to identify the SOF. If the two SOF estimates based on WM-MM and WM-ML are fairly different, the issue exists, and the (ν It is useful to note that the sample path smoothness and SOF are both generic features that appear in actual soil data. However, ν The authors would like to thank the members of the TC304 Committee on Engineering Practice of Risk Assessment & Management of the International Society of Soil Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering for developing the database 304 dB (http://140.112.12.21/issmge/Database_2010.htm) used in this study and making it available for scientific inquiry. The first author would like to thank the Ministry of Science and Technology of Taiwan for the research grant 106-2221-E-002-084-MY3.