Light harvest and I–V characteristics of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) made from transparent TiO2 photoanodes of different thicknesses with and without light scattering layer (LSL) have been studied. The results obtained for transparent TiO2 films, composed of smaller aggregates, with and without LSL were compared with that of opaque films, which were composed of larger aggregates. The light absorption efficiency of the photoanodes has been expressed in terms of current per mole of the dye. Although short circuit photocurrent density (J
                     sc) increased with thickness/dye loading for cells made with transparent single (∼4 μm), double (∼7 μm) and triple layer (10 μm) films, current per mole of dye for these films decreased. This was ascribed to presence of a fraction of dye molecules, which does not undergo photoexcitation and thus, does not contribute to current. And, this fraction of dye molecules increases with thickness/dye loading. Current per mole of dye was determined to be highest for transparent single layer film with LSL and hence, it can be considered as the most efficient light harvest. Open circuit voltage and dark current in the cells remained similar while J
                     sc changed with enhancement in light harvest. LSL on the opaque TiO2 film did not improve light harvest and J
                     sc in the cell while transparent single layer (4 μm) and double layer (∼7 μm) films with LSL exhibited enhancement in J
                     sc by about 20% and 24% respectively. Moreover, opaque TiO2 film (∼10 μm) having slightly more amount of dye than the TiO2 transparent single layer film (∼4 μm) showed lower current per mole of dye than transparent single layer film with and without LSL. This was because of larger aggregates present in the opaque TiO2 film, which scattered the light within the first few layers of the film such that little light reached the TiO2 layers away from the substrate and thus, a large fraction of dye molecules in these distant layers remained in ground state.Since 1991, following the demonstration of dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) for the first time by Michael Gratzel There are several studies, reported in the last decade, which have shown enhancement in light harvest in DSSCs by use of light scattering layer. In 1997, a theoretical study by Akira Usami It is also possible to scatter the incident light within the TiO All the studies related to light scattering in DSSCs, reported so far, depict that light harvest by a photoanode depends on concentration of dye and magnitude of scattering of light in the TiO The as-received Degussa P25 TiO The particle (agglomerate) size and its distribution in all the above slurries were measured by dynamic light scattering (DLS) method, using Beckman Coulter's Delsa Nano C particle size and zetapotential analyzer. The slurry prepared from as-received Degussa P25 TiO Thickness of the films was measured by a Dektak stylus profilomter. Transmittance (or absorbance) through the films with and without N3 dye and light scattering layer was measured by a UV–Vis spectrophotometer (JASCO, Model-V650). Amount of dye loaded in the films was determined from UV–Vis spectra of the dye desorbed from the films into 1 N NaOH solution. DSSCs were fabricated using the above photoanodes with and without light scattering layer. An FTO substrate with Pt deposited on it by sputtering was used as the cathode. The electrolyte used in the cell was composed of 0.1 M LiI (Merck), 0.05 M I XRD patterns of as-received and calcined (1000 °C for 3 h) TiO The 6 vol% TiO  The I–V curves of DSSCs made from opaque TiO Transparent double layer (DL) and triple layer (TL) TiO It is worth noting here that the amount of dye (4.8 × 10 Transparent TiO The authors would like to acknowledge