This investigation addressed the study of the effects of the slurry's rheological behavior and the state of aggregation and dispersion on wet ultrafine grinding of an iron ore concentrate. Regrinding tests were conducted under different conditions of dispersion (pH 7.3, 8.5 and 10.0) and with the addition of 300g/t of lime. The increase of pH from 7.3 to 10.0 increased the slurry dispersion degree, providing lower values of yield stress and apparent viscosity, and a reduction in specific energy consumption of 17.4%. So, sodium hydroxide, added at previous processing steps, has acted as a grinding aid. The addition of 300g/t of lime caused an increase of 27% in specific energy consumption, with significant increase in yield stress and consistency index of the fluid, especially for the condition of 18kWh/t.Comminution stages represent a challenge in the mineral industry due to the low mechanical efficiency and the huge energy consumption, corresponding to the highest operating costs in the concentrators. The fraction passing 44 At Samarco, the grinding stages represent approximately 80% of the total energy consumption in the concentrators, regrinding reaching 60% of the overall consumption. Relevant investigations aiming at increasing the productivity and reducing the specific energy consumption have been performed, but none of them addressed the effect of rheology on grinding performance. The influence of rheology on grinding is not yet well understood and, in view of this, it is rarely incorporated as a variable in projects, analyses and optimization. A major reason is the difficulty of studying the rheology of suspensions that settle, which occur in most mineral beneficiation processes. Viscosity, and not the solids percentage, is the variable that rules the interaction between the pulp and the grinding media inside the mill Some references available in the technical literature The iron ore concentrate sample was composed by increments collected during 10 days from the concentrate thickener feed (Samarco's concentrator I). A resulting pulp weighing 1000 The simplified flowsheet of the study is illustrated in The regrinding tests were performed according to a procedure developed at Samarco The power absorbed per ton of grinding media is calculated by the Rowland JR's equation The original method The regrinding tests were performed at three different times (22, 44 and 66 The rheological curves were obtained with the use of a coaxial cylinder viscometer (Brookfield, model R/S+, sensor CC3-45). The shear rate was decreased from 500  The objective of the first sequence of tests was to evaluate the possible effect of significant changes in the dispersion degree on the regrinding performance.  The conclusion of this stage is that sodium hydroxide, added in earlier stages (desliming and mechanical flotation), prior to the concentrate regrinding is already acting as grinding aid.  The effect of the pH on the production of ultrafine and colloidal particles was evaluated with the help of curves presenting the percent retained in 10 The first graph shows that increase in the pH (and consequent increase in the dispersion degree) affected the production of ultrafine and colloidal particles. This graph is coherent with  The curves shown in The test done in the presence of 300 Beyond increasing the yield stress values, the increase in applied energy observed in the test in the presence of 300   With the objective of evaluating the effects of adding 300 The determination of the dispersion degree using sedimentation tube combined with the analysis of flux curves and the coefficients of the Herschel–Bulkley and Bingham models is adequate to describe the rheological behavior of ore pulps under different aggregation and dispersion conditions. The increase of the pulp pH from 7.3 (natural pH) to 10.0 caused an increase in the dispersion degree of the particles in the pulp from 3% to 28%. As a consequence, decreases in the values of the yield stress and apparent viscosity were observed and the specific energy consumption was reduced by 17.4%. So, sodium hydroxide used in process stages preceding regrinding is already acting as grinding aid. The increase in grinding time, converted into applied energy, caused exponential increases in the fluid consistency indices and in the yield stress. Both, pH decrease and addition of 300 No differences were observed in the specific energy consumption Blaine surface area generation between the tests performed with distilled water or process water, indicating that the concentration of calcium ions in the process water of Samarco's concentrator I is not significant to the point of affecting the regrinding performance. Nevertheless the addition of 300 The authors declare no conflicts of interest.