This paper describes the design and implementation of a new laboratory apparatus to model the recently proposed rotary-percussive penetration (RPP) technology to be applied in tunnel boring machines (TBMs). It also deals with the tests carried out to explore the pure effect of appending a percussive load to the other applied loads during excavation in the prepared specimens. Results of this study confirmed that the combined mode of cutting-impact is very effective in the cutting of the moulded specimens. A good agreement was also achieved between the results of the experiments and the previously developed analytical model. Therefore, this research generally shows that the percussive load can ultimately improve the rate of penetration (ROP) of disc cutters of a modelled tunnel boring machine.Tunnel boring machines (TBMs) are presently utilized in wide scale in underground construction and tunnelling both in civil construction and mining industry. Disc cutters are the most commonly used tools on the face of TBMs in medium to hard rock conditions. During the excavation, TBM cutters roll across the tunnel face and continuously expand the crushed zone immediately beneath them. Within the last few years, together with the rapid advances in the machine manufacturing technology in many aspects, some powerful and smart machines have been introduced in the market which have generally raised productivity and set new excavation footage records. Despite all these advancements, the rate of penetration of the machines (and as a result, the productivity) is a parameter which continuously encounters higher demands on growth. Over the years, several researches have been conducted to meet this requirement for higher advance rates through making improvements in the machine performance. Among them, some researchers have noticed the combination of different forces acting behind the TBM disc cutters like the utilization of dynamic loads as a supplementary energy to achieve higher rates of penetration and also lower power supplies by the machine as novel technologies. In spite of the application of this kind of dynamic energy (oscillation) in the past researches, percussive (impact) loads seemed to be more efficient because of the greater amplitude in unit of time of wave propagation. This has been shown by The major contributions of this research are as follows. It leads to presentation of a new laboratory apparatus which is able to physically model the work of a TBM cutter-head (in laboratory scale) under different loading conditions including rotary and rotary-percussive loadings. The series of tests are conducted on moulded specimens to study the effect of appending the dynamic load to other acting loads in TBM as a new idea. It ends with a comparison of the recent experimental results with a previously developed analytical model to verify its applicability. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section Disc cutter is the key part in tunnel boring machine. When wedge edge of disc cutter is pressed into rock surface by large thrust exerted by propulsion, a small crushing block forms under disc cutter, and then the crushing block is compacted into core. The pressure is transferred around through the core, and then radial crack occurs. The radial crack extends outward with the increment of pressure. With the roll of disc cutter driven by cutter-head groove with cracks in two sides occurs on rock. When adjacent two grooves occur, their cracks connect each other, and then rock fragments form if the interval of two adjacent grooves is less than a certain value ( Many researchers have supposed the penetration mechanism of the discs as Recently, Also, Eqs. These equations could properly calculate and estimate the depth of penetration of a single disc cutter in a rock medium resulted from its rotation, compression and also subsequent percussion behind it. In this model, the depth of penetration resulted from the impacts is largely related to the squared form of number of impacts behind the indenter The authors have also used the presented analytical model in some examples from the real tunnelling projects to estimate the possible supplementary penetration in the case a striker would has been installed behind the disc cutters of TBM. However, the mentioned model has been developed based on some assumptions and simplifications which are the basis of all the analytical models. Therefore, the new concept of rock cutting requires to be further investigated through the experimental activities. The next section comprehensively describes the process of the laboratory works for this purpose. As mentioned in the last section, it has been essential to investigate the effect of appending an extra percussive load to the other conventional loads in the cutting process of TBMs. Therefore, a laboratory research has been conducted to perform a more complete feasibility study of the newly proposed rock cutting technology. For this purpose, an apparatus has been designed and implemented in the Rock Mechanics Laboratory of Shahrood University of Technology, Iran. This section shows how this process has been executed and the laboratory tests by using the new device have been conducted. To meet the planned goals of the design and implementation of a laboratory RPP machine, the design parameters are required to be considered prior to the start of the process. One of the most important parameters in the design stage was the ability of the apparatus to perform the proper tests on the specified size of the specimens. This condition has influenced the geometry of some parts of the device such as its foundation and cutter-head. The minimum required thrust and torque for excavation of an assumed regular laboratory rock sample have been accurately calculated using the existing models such as CSM (Colorado School of Mines) model ( After the complete design of the various parts, they were implemented to construct the desired apparatus. A schematic diagram of the device is presented in In the constructed apparatus, the specimen is located on a heavy The total weight of the apparatus approximately equals to 2 The steel beams with channel profiles (160 The upper frame is one of the most important parts of the constructed device since holds the rotary and percussive loads generators, and transfers the loads as well. The frame has also duty to provide the required thrust while a test is performed through its own weight as well as additional weights supplemented by the operator. The The ultimate aim of the construction of the apparatus has been to investigate the cutting of hard rocks. So the disc cutters had to be considered and designed in order that the design had to meet the needs of working conditions and logical geometry of a laboratory apparatus. In addition, the parameter of cuts spacing was considered in selection of the size of the cutter-head and the disc cutters. The cutters spacing had to be adjustable to the required amounts which have been resulted and indicated in the previous experimental and numerical studies such as The discs are installed on four crossed rods carved from the same steel alloy and the spaces among them are filled with the steel bushes (spacers). This holder cross is in fact the axis for rotation of the discs which forms the cutting face of the cutter-head. The The amount of required rotary force was calculated using the theoretical and empirical models such as CSM model ( A pneumatic striker (MARTSHOCK Model PS063 produced by OLI Co.) was installed on the top of the upper frame to apply impacts to the cutter-head and the disc cutters ( The control unit adjusts the working conditions of the apparatus during a test. This unit consists of an electric power dispatcher, a frequency convertor (Model VFD-B produced by Delta Co.) for reduction of rotations of the cutter-head and its rotation direction and also a dual digital timer to adjust the time intervals and number of impacts by the striker. The laboratory tests are conducted by using the constructed apparatus to investigate the effect of the supplemented percussive load on the cutting process. For this purpose, some preliminary testing conditions have to be set and then the effect of the percussive load would be determined. In this research, the amount of penetration has been considered as the main criterion to measure the efficiency of the new technology. This section describes the preparation of specimens and the experimental tests. The tests conditions and the results are also discussed. Because of the aim of this work to investigate the penetration in medium to hard rocks, the specimens have to possess acceptable brittleness and penetrability characteristics. On the other hand, there is a need to have some duplicate specimens with identical homogeneity, size and strength properties. Therefore, the moulded gypsum specimens were selected to be prepared for the experimental tests. Rectangular specimens (90 Some preparations and adjustments are required to be done prior to the execution of the penetration tests. One of the most important adjustments is related to determination of the arrangement (layout) of the disc cutters on the cutter-head. In this research, equal trajectory spacings of 1.5 Before the start of each test, the specimen was fixed by two clamps on the foundation surface exactly under the centre of the cutter-head. In the tests, the effect of appending percussive load on the penetration was investigated separately for each specimen. This means that in each test, firstly a determined amount of penetration was done using the rotary load, then the percussive load was added to the penetrating process and the rest of penetration was performed using the rotary-percussive load. The number of rotations of cutter-head and the number of impacts per time unit were adjusted by frequency convertor and digital timer in the control unit, respectively. Same number of rotations and different number of impacts were considered for four tests. Therefore, the single difference among the four tests was the number of impacts per time unit. In fact, this difference is able to properly disclose the effect of the appending percussive load. The insertion pneumatic pressure was 3 In all the tests, the whole process of cutting was performed for 10 The results of the executed tests are represented in As can be seen in the presented tables and diagrams, generally, the amount of penetration would dramatically increase after appending the percussive load to the other applied loads in the cutting process. If we define a concept named ‘Percentage of Increase in ROP’ caused by appending the percussive load (like fourth column in Comparisons show that although the analytical model predicts the penetrations a little fewer than what the experiments show, a good agreement does exist between them. In the recent case, the amount of penetration resulted from the experiments by the apparatus are higher than what the model predicts and the trendline has also more concavity compared to the model’s line. One can relate the difference between two achievements to many causes such as mathematical simplifications of analytical model, though the authors believe that the difference in cutting ability of a single disc cutter and a set of cutters (installed on a cutter-head) could get involved in the results of the comparisons. Totally, this comparison showed that the previously developed analytical model can be cautiously used to predict the penetration of a V-type disc cutter by rotary and rotary-percussive loads. In general, growth in the amount of penetration in rock and as a result, the increase in advance rate is one of the major aims in all tunnelling projects especially those which are excavated by TBMs. Many researches have been conducted in the past to reach this goal. In addition, regarding the high energy consumption of TBMs, finding the ways to increase the efficiency of the machine via the increase in penetration rate with a constant consumed energy is very marked and essential. To achieve this target, the required thrust of the machine has to be reduced insofar as the advance rate is not influenced by this change. This is obvious that meeting both these goals at the same time is not easily ascertainable, because they are exactly in the opposite sides; to improve the advance rate and other excavation parameters is directly required to an increase in the machine thrust and other effective energies. Therefore, there was a need for presentation of more recent technologies than what is currently employed. In this research, the recently presented concept of the dual penetration (previously published by the authors) was experimentally examined in the laboratory. For this purpose, a new rotary-percussive apparatus was designed and implemented and then some tests were performed on the artificially cast specimen. The tests carried out to explore the pure effect of appending a percussive load to the other applied loads during excavation in the specimen. Two phases of cutting were considered in each test; the first phase was the excavation by regular rotary load and the second one was the application of the rotary-percussive load. The number of impacts per time unit was changed in four tests, and all the penetrations were measured. Then the first and most important result was obtained: the rate of penetration was noticeably increased after appending the percussive load to the other applied loads in the cutting process. In addition, regarding all the tests results, it is disclosed that percentage of increase in ROP caused by switching from Phase I to Phase II grows with increase in the number of applied impacts per time unit. Though, the effect of increasing the number of impacts decreased using the large numbers. Nevertheless, in general, the penetration rate was raised averagely from 42% to 89% in Phase II and this can be considered as a primary proof for the newly proposed cutting concept for TBMs. Therefore, as the final result, the rate of penetration of the cutter-head in the tested specimens under combined mode of cutting-impact is significantly increased compared to single cutting. In addition, higher impact energy under combined mode can increase the depth of cuts in cutting process. Predictions were also made by using the previously developed analytical model to estimate the increase in penetration by increase in the number of percussions behind the disc cutter. An acceptable agreement was found between the results of the experiments and the analytical model which proves the applicability of the new model. In this study, there was not any device available to measure the accurate energy consumption in different loading conditions of the cutting apparatus. However, since the utilized striker works with compressed air, thus that cannot play a significant role among the main energy consumers in a TBM such as the energy required to produce the thrust and torque to penetrate into the rock. Certainly, at the present time, this concept is limited to the laboratorial scale and it has to be examined in various situations so that it can converted to a more reliable rock cutting technology. On the other hand, the manufacturing technology is one of the most critical phases in implementation of any new idea in industrial scale. Finally, it is worthy to note that this paper exclusively followed a laboratorial feasibility study to show how and to what extent the percussive load can ultimately improve the rate of penetration of disc cutters of a modelled tunnel boring machine. The work reported here is financially supported by Iran National Science Foundation (INSF) (Project No.: 87020162). The authors wish to acknowledge the financial contribution and appreciation of the foundation for supporting this research.