In this study, simultaneous biosorption of Cr(VI) and Fe(III) on free Rhizopus arrhizus in a packed column operated in a continuous mode was investigated and compared to the single metal ion situation. The breakthrough curves were measured as a function of feed flow rate and different combinations of metal ion concentrations in the feed solutions. Column competitive biosorption data were evaluated in terms of the maximum (equilibrium) capacity of the column, the amount of metal loading on the R. arrhizus surface, the adsorption yield, and the total adsorption yield. Since the maximum column capacity and the adsorption yield decreased with increasing concentrations of the other metal ion, the combined action of Cr(VI) and Fe(III) on R. 
                     arrhizus was generally found to be antagonistic. In the single-ion situation, the adsorption isotherms were developed for optimum conditions and it was seen that the adsorption equilibrium data fit the non-competitive Freundlich model. For the multicomponent adsorption equilibrium, the competitive adsorption isotherms were also developed. The empirical Freundlich model for binary metal mixtures represented satisfactorily most of the column adsorption equilibrium data of Cr(VI) and Fe(III) on R. arrhizus.One of the difficulties in describing the biosorption of metal ions from waste streams is that waste waters contain not one, but many metal ions. Even though optimum adsorption conditions of heavy metal ions on various species of microorganisms are known, many other parameters affect the capacity of microorganisms to bind more than one metal simultaneously A number of different metal-binding mechanisms has been postulated to be active in biosorption such as ion exchange and complexation Biosorption in columns involves competitive ion exchange, in which several toxic heavy metals compete for a limited number of binding sites. When the column capacity is approached, a species with a lower affinity is pushed off by other species with higher affinity and displacement of the species occurs. Owing to the competitive ion exchange taking place in the column, one or more of the metals present even at trace levels may overshoot the permissible limit in the column effluent well before the breakthrough point of the targeted metal, thereby considerably reducing the service time of the column Equilibria and capacity relationships for monocomponent systems are well established and quantitatively expressed by various types of adsorption isotherms In this study, a Freundlich-type multicomponent adsorption isotherm has been successfully used to describe Cr(VI) and Fe(III) adsorption equilibria, and to predict breakthrough for packed column adsorbers. An experimental strategy to obtain multicomponent adsoption data, which can be used in competitive adsorption isotherms in packed column adsorbers, is presented. The main objectives of this paper are to generate additional adsorption data, and possibly, to form a data bank of major heavy metal pollutants and of major representative backgrounds, in order to widen the use of reliable equilibria relationships in multicomponent systems. The culture used in this study was the surface-attached filamentous fungus The stock solution of Cr(VI) (1.0 g l Identical packed columns, 2.5 cm in diameter and 10 cm in height, were used in the adsorption studies. Packed bed experiments were carried out at 25°C. Solutions were fed to the bottom of the column (upflow) by a Masterflex L/S drive (Cole-Parmer Model H-07521-00) and an easy-load pump head (H-07518-00). The effluent samples were taken at 5-min intervals at the beginning of column operation and at 25–30 min intervals after reaching equilibrium. Experiments were terminated when the fungus bed was saturated by both metal ions. The Cr(VI) and Fe(III) content in the column outflow was determined spectrophotometrically. The coloured complexes of Cr(VI) ions with diphenyl carbazide and Fe(III) ions with sodium salicylate were read at 540 and 530 nm, respectively. No interference of Cr(VI) and Fe(III) ions on the analysis method of the other metal ion was observed The breakthrough curves for the single- and multicomponent biosorption of Cr(VI) and Fe(III) were measured as a function of flow rate and inlet metal ion concentration. The results are given in terms of the maximum (equilibrium) capacity of the column, To investigate the effect of flow rate on the single-component biosorption of Cr(VI) and Fe(III) ions by The simultaneous biosorption of Cr(VI) and Fe(III) ions on The breakthrough curves of Cr(VI) ions obtained at increasing initial Cr(VI) ion concentrations in the range 50–250 mg l The breakthrough curves of Fe(III) ions obtained at increasing initial Fe(III) ion concentrations in the range 50–250 mg l The breakthrough curves were evaluated. The combined effects of Cr(VI) and Fe(III) ions on The data in The monocomponent adsorption constants and the competition coefficients for the empirical Freundlich model are given in The adsorption isotherms for the competitive biosorption of Fe(III) ions to In our previous study, the simultaneous biosorption of Cr(VI) and Fe(III) on   The authors wish to thank TÜBİTAK, the Scientific and Technical Research Council of Turkey, for the partial financial support of this study (Project No. 409).