Imaging of the wrist is challenging to both radiologists and orthopedic surgeons. This is primarily because of the complex anatomy/functionality of the wrist and also the fact that many frequent injuries are sustained to the hands. On going developments in multidetector computed tomography (MDCT) technology with its “state of the art” postprocessing capabilities have revolutionized this field. Apart from routine imaging of wrist trauma, it is now possible to assess intrinsic ligaments with MDCT arthrography, thereby avoiding invasive diagnostic arthroscopies. Postoperative wrist imaging can be a diagnostic challenge, and MDCT can be helpful in assessment of these cases because volume acquisition and excellent postprocessing abilities help to evaluate these wrists in any desired plane and thinner slices. This article pictorially reviews the current clinical role of MDCT imaging of wrist in our practice. It also describes arthrography technique and scanning parameters used at our center.Wrist is a complex joint both anatomically and physiologically. It is one of the joints that get injured often and can have significant functional impact on day-to-day activities. Therefore, it is important to proactively manage injuries and pathologies of the hand and wrist. Imaging plays an important role in guiding the management of different soft tissue and bone pathologies. Different modalities are used to image the wrist joint. Plain radiographs are routinely performed for acute and chronic wrist injuries. These are particularly useful in bone trauma and recognition of established degenerative changes. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is helpful in characterizing soft tissues and bone marrow edema. Ultrasonography examination of the wrist and hand is also useful for assessment of ligament injuries and soft tissues. Over the last decade, there has been significant increase in the use of multidetector computed tomography (MDCT) for imaging the wrist. This is because of its “state of the art” postprocessing capabilities that are able to generate excellent submillimeter spatial resolution images. MDCT also enables acquisition of true isometric voxels of information (ie, cubes of data that have the same dimensions in all planes), which allow assessment of images in multiple planes. It is also possible to assess the intrinsic ligaments and the articular cartilages of the wrist by performing MDCT arthrography. One another reason for its growing popularity is the ease of availability and lack of contraindications in comparison with MRI. In this article, we outline our scanning technique and highlight the role of MDCT in evaluation of common traumatic disorders and intrinsic derangements. We also describe our arthrography technique and parameters that can be adopted universally. A third-generation MDCT scanner is essential in acquiring a good data set that can be manipulated during postprocessing. In our center, we use Somatom Sensation 16 (Siemens AG, Germany) scanner. Patients are positioned prone on the table with their hand lying overhead in supine position. High-resolution images are obtained at 0.75-mm collimation at 140 kV and 100 mAs. Images are reviewed in multimodality workstation and reconstructed at 1 mm thickness with 50% overlap and a high-resolution kernel (bone window). Standard transverse, coronal, and sagittal reformats are obtained. The wrist joint is initially assessed in the coronal plane. Axial scans are particularly useful in the assessment of dorsal and volar aspects of the scapholunate and lunotriquetral ligaments. Sagittal plane is used to assess the alignment of the carpal bones and the extent of triangular fibrocartilage complex (TFCC) tears. Oblique reformats are also used in the assessment of scaphoid and intercarpal ligaments. Fall on the outstretched hand (FOOSH) is the most common mechanism of injury involving the wrist. Distal radial fractures are common in elderly, whereas scaphoid injury is common in young adults. Plain film radiographs are usually the initial imaging modality of choice but up to 35% of wrist fractures could be occult on initial plain radiographs Scaphoid is the most common carpal bone to fracture. Scaphoid fracture's commonly through the middle third (waist) of the bone and the fracture line can be horizontal, oblique, or transverse. Transverse fractures perpendicular to the long axis of the scaphoid are considered stable, whereas oblique fractures with comminution are regarded as unstable. Extension of the fracture line to the cortex differentiates acute from chronic fractures ( There is significant variance in the imaging protocol used by different centers for the management of scaphoid fractures. Assessment of scaphoid fracture healing can be difficult. Plain radiographs are usually not diagnostic and further imaging is often required. MDCT is useful in assessing fracture healing in patients with clinically suspected partial or nonunion of the scaphoid. Posttraumatic avascular necrosis of the scaphoid is a common problem. This is common in patients with proximal pole or waist fractures, which impair the blood supply of the scaphoid. MDCT demonstrates osteopenia of the distal pole associated with sclerosis and collapse of the proximal fracture segment ( MDCT is also useful in the assessment of fractures treated with fixation screws ( Triquetrum is the second most commonly injured carpus. Type 1 is a dorsal avulsion fracture at the site of insertion of ulnotriquetral ligament. Type 2 fractures involve the body, are comminuted and associated with perilunate dislocation. These are considered benign and heal well with immobilization. Type 3 fractures are rare and involve the volar cortex Plain radiographs are limited in their ability to detect these fractures because of the overlap of the proximal and distal carpal bones. MDCT with its excellent spatial resolution, cortical details, and multiplanar reconstruction capabilities is more useful in detecting these fractures. Lunate has a moon shape on true lateral radiograph of the wrist. It is the central carpal bone in the proximal row and is anatomically divided into volar pole, body, and dorsal pole. Lunate fractures occur secondary to fall on a dorsiflexed hand causing direct axial compression of the head of capitate into the lunate. These are commonly seen in active men involved in sporting activities that require a grasping movement, such as catching a ball or holding a bat. Fractures may either involve the body ( Trapezium, trapezoid, capitate, and pisiform injuries are infrequent. These can occur in isolation ( Distal radial fractures are relatively common and can be easily recognized on plain radiographs. MDCT imaging is reserved for preoperative planning of complex fractures and postoperative follow-up. MDCT with its 3-dimensional reformats allows clear demarcation of fracture location and its intra-articular extent ( MDCT arthrography is a relatively new technique and can be performed in a multitude of ways. At our institution, contrast is injected under fluoroscopic guidance, and the patient is transferred to the scanner for MDCT imaging. Dorsal approach is preferred and triple-injection technique is used, if there is no communication between the 3 compartments (radiocarpal, midcarpal, and distal radioulnar joint [DRUJ]). A mixture of 2.5 mL of Niopam 300 with 2.5 mL of 1% lignocaine is used as a contrast medium. A 25-gauge needle is first inserted into the radioscaphoid joint under fluoroscopic guidance followed by midcarpal injection between scaphoid and trapezoid bones. DRUJ is injected last ( Assessing internal derangement of the wrist requires an understanding of the key ligaments and cartilaginous structures of the wrist. MDCT arthrography allows direct visualization of the intrinsic ligaments, articular cartilages, and TFCC ( TFCC is composed of triangular fibrocartilage, dorsal and volar radioulnar ligaments, ulnar collateral ligament, meniscus homologue, and extensor carpi ulnaris tendon sheath. Acute or chronic injuries of TFCC are a recognized cause of wrist pain. TFCC tears have been classified as traumatic (Palmer class 1) or degenerative (Palmer class 2). These are important intrinsic ligaments and help in maintaining the integrity of the proximal carpal row by establishing stable linkage between the carpal bones. These ligaments have thick dorsal and volar components attached to joint margins with intervening thin membranous part. Perforations are common in the membranous part. Dorsal and volar bands are more important structurally. On coronal thin sections, scapholunate ligament (SLL) appears as a triangular structure with free apex within the scapholunate joint ( Lunotriquetral ligament is smaller of the 2 ligaments. Disruption of this ligament is second most common cause of carpal instability resulting in volar tilt of the lunate (volar intercalated segmental instability). MDCT arthrogram will demonstrate ligamentous discontinuity and thinning or irregularity. Associated TFCC abnormalities may also be seen. Extrinsic ligaments are not well visualized on MDCT and MRI may be required. DRUJ subluxation and dislocation is a frequent cause of ulnar-sided wrist pain. In summary, MDCT of the wrist is a widely available and easily performable test with relatively no contraindications. MDCT imaging should be performed in patients with clinically suspected carpal injury even if the plain radiographs do not show any fracture. MDCT is accurate in detection of carpal bone injuries and internal derangements of the wrist joint. It is also useful in preoperative planning and postoperative follow-up of wrist injuries.