The design of a mineral concentration plant plays an important role, since the operation of the plant depends on the structure of the process (Mendez et al., 2009). The concentration plant is formed by several concentration stages interconnected within a particular arrangement. Currently, the selection of the flotation circuit is based on the experience of the designer, and is complemented by laboratory tests and simulations. In the literature there are many studies that design concentration plants using mathematical programming. However, these strategies use a non-convex MINLP model that is difficult to solve. For that reason, usually simple models and systems with fewer species are used.
                  This paper presents a methodology for the design of a mineral concentration circuit based in two steps: 1) Identify the set of optimal structures using discrete values of stage recoveries and solving several mixed integer linear programming (MILP) problems; 2) Determine the optimal design for each of the structures obtained in the previous step, using a Mixed Integer Nonlinear Programming model (MINLP) and a rigorous model for the recovery at each concentration stage. This work is based on the assumption that there are little optimal structures within a given space of species recoveries at each stage. A case study is used to validate the proposal using a system with several species. The quality of the model of the flotation stage for the purpose of flotation circuit design using optimization has been controversial. While some authors indicate that using a robust flotation model is the first step towards finding the optimal circuit design ( Recently In this work, a procedure for flotation process design is proposed based on the previous demonstration. First, a set of optimal flotation circuits is obtained using discrete values of stage recoveries solving several times a MILP problem. In this stage bank model is not used. Then, for each optimal flotation circuit, the number of cells in each bank is calculated together with operational condition using a MINLP problem using a cell model. A case study is used to explain the methodology. The case study in this paper considers a flotation plant that has eight species (  The mathematical model utilized is similar to the one used by The methodology proposed for the design mineral concentration circuit is based in two steps: 1) Identify the set of optimal structures using discrete values of stage recoveries, solving several MILP problems; 2) Determine the optimal design for each of the structures obtained in the previous step using a MINLP and a rigorous model for the recovery at each concentration stage. The number of cells were represented by discrete distribution functions between 4 and 15 cells per bank. The residence time in each cell was represented by uniform distribution functions between 3 and 6 In the second step, the number of cells and the cell residence time in each bank were included as variables, but the structure was fixed in the optimal solutions found in step 1. This is, the optimization problem was applied to the five flotation circuits obtained in step 1. The results show that three flotation circuits gave similar optimal values as shown in In the first step, only five circuit structures were identified for the 30,000 optimtizations performed. These structures are shown in  A methodology to design flotation circuits was proposed. Unlike previous work, this methodology allows for more complex models based on cell models and not models of banks. In addition, the methodology allows a greater number of species in the system under study. A case study with eight components and six stages of flotation (with a maximum of 15 cells) was utilized to illustrate the procedure. Financial support from CONICYT (R10C1004) is gratefully acknowledged. L.A.C & E.D.G. thank CONICYT and the Regional Government of Antofagasta for their funding through the PAI program, Project Anillo ACT 1201.