The objective of this study was to evaluate the potential of three C4 perennial grasses (Miscanthus x giganteus, Panicum virgatum and Spartina pectinata) for biomass production on arable land unsuitable for food crop cultivation due to Pb, Cd and Zn contamination. We assessed soil properties, biomass yield, metal concentrations, and the photosynthetic performance of each species. Physico-chemical and elemental analyses were performed on soil samples before plantation establishment (2014) and after three years of cultivation (2016), when leaf area index, plant height, yield and heavy metal content of biomass were also determined. Physiological measurements (gas exchange, pigment content, chlorophyll a fluorescence) were recorded monthly between June and September on mature plants in 2016. Cultivation of investigated plants resulted in increased pH, nitrogen, and organic matter (OM) content in soil, although OM increase (13%) was significant only for S. pectinata plots. During the most productive months, maximal quantum yield values of primary photochemistry (Fv/Fm) and gas exchange parameter values reflected literature data of those plants grown on uncontaminated sites. Biomass yields of M. x giganteus (15.0 ± 0.4 t d.m. ha−1) and S. pectinata (12.6 ± 1.2 t d.m. ha−1) were also equivalent to data published from uncontaminated land. P. virgatum performed poorly (4.1 ± 0.4 t d.m. ha−1), probably due to unfavourable climatic conditions, although metal uptake in this species was the highest (3.6 times that of M. x giganteus for Pb). Yield and physiological measurements indicated that M. x giganteus and S. pectinata were unaffected by the levels of contamination and therefore offer alternatives for areas where food production is prohibited. The broad cultivatable latitudinal range of these species suggests these results are widely relevant for development of the bioeconomy. We recommend multi-location trials under diverse contaminant and environmental regimes to determine the full potential of these species.The potential of perennial, rhizomatous C4 species for energy production ( Among several perennial C4 species with phytoremediation potential on heavy metal (HM) contaminated arable land, As for many regions globally, Silesia in Poland has a legacy of land contaminated from former mining and smelting activities (Kucharski et al., 1994). Food production is prohibited on such areas ( However, the impact of HMs on plant productivity in these species is not well known, especially under field conditions. Of the three above-mentioned species, The objective of this study was to quantify the potential of three perennial C4 energy grasses ( What is the impact of energy grass cultivation on HM contaminated soil properties? Which photosynthetic traits condition biomass production under the European temperate climate? What levels of Pb, Cd and Zn are taken up by the different species and what influence do the contaminants have on plant productivity? A field trial was established in May 2014, at Bytom (50°20′ 43.0″N 18°57’ 19.6” E), Southern Poland, on arable land contaminated with Pb, Cd and Zn from metal smelting ( Five soil samples (0–20 cm depth) per plot were collected before the trial was established (Spring 2014) and after the third growing season (September 2016). Soil samples were air dried and sieved through 2 mm (pH, electrical conductivity, organic matter) and 0.25 mm (elemental composition) for analysis. Soil pH was measured in H Total concentrations of Cd, Pb, and Zn were obtained from soil digested with Bioavailable Cd, Pb and Zn was analyzed after extraction with 0.01M CaCl Gas exchange and chlorophyll From June to September of the third growing season (2016), between 8am and 1pm, monthly measurements of instantaneous photosynthesis, stomatal conductance, and transpiration rate were performed on the youngest fully expanded leaves of two shoots on three marked plants per plot with an infra-red gas analyzer (LCpro SD, ADC Bioscientific, UK) at the light saturated condition. Each leaf was kept in the chamber once, until reading stabilization (3–5 min). The LCpro SD was equipped with a narrow chamber (580 mm Dark-adapted chlorophyll Chlorophyll content (μg cm Five biomass sub samples were taken from the total biomass of each plot and weighed, washed with deionized water to remove soil particles, and oven-dried for 72 h at 70 °C. These were then weighed for water loss and dry biomass yields were calculated. Concentrations of Pb, Cd and Zn were determined using flame atomic absorption spectroscopy (SpektrAA 300, Varian INC., USA) after hot plate digestion of dried milled biomass samples at 80 °C in nitric and perchloric acid (4:1 v/v) ( All analyses were performed using Statistica 13.1 (Dell, US). Statistical differences were estimated by ANOVA tests at the 5% level (P ≤ 0.05) of significance. Where ANOVA indicated a significant difference, a post-hoc Fisher's least significant difference (LSD) test was carried out. All presented means are expressed with ±SE. Soil pH did not differ significantly between the plots, either at the beginning or end of the experiment. However, by the experimental end it increased by at least 0.5 pH on every plot, irrespective of cultivated species ( EC on plots assigned to HM threshold limits in Poland for the top 0–30 cm of soil on arable land for Pb, Cd, and Zn are 100 mg kg Photosynthesis rates were significantly higher for Stomatal conductance ( Transpiration rates were significantly higher for LWUE, calculated as the quotient of the rate of photosynthesis to stomatal conductance (A Chlorophyll content followed a similar pattern for each species through the growing season, with a significant fall in levels in August ( Contrary to chlorophyll content, flavonol and anthocyanin indices ( All investigated plants showed the lowest values in September (and August for Leaf pipeline models of phenomenological energy fluxes are valuable tools to determine environmental stresses in plants (  Harvesting of grasses such as The reduction in HM levels found in the soil in Bytom over the course of this experiment was not due to uptake by the plant species, as the amount of metal extracted was a maximum of 538 g, 15 g, 1.5 kg of Pb, Cd and Zn, respectively, from 1 ha per year. These values are far below the reduction in HMs we identified in the soil after three years of cultivation. Instead, we suggest that the decrease observed in soil total HMs after three growing seasons might be explained by the introduction of intensively growing plant species, whose dense root and rhizome systems, along with deposited litter, results in an overall dilution effect on the HMs through OM mineralization processes ( Differences between physico-chemical characteristics and HM concentrations in the initial soil samples from different plots are a common phenomenon in any field investigations. Indeed, the spatial distribution of HM deposition may vary even in short distances between two sampling points. Despite differences between plots, phyto-available fractions (CaCl Literature comparing gas exchange parameters for  Flavonols and anthocyanins were measured in the adaxial epidermidis. These indices could be weak in terms of inter-species comparison but provide information regarding seasonal changes ( Reduction of fluorescence yield at J-I The increase in fluorescence yield at O, J and I band for Sp and Pv during July measurements could be related to an increase in the rate of photosynthesis and photosynthetic efficiency, as F The decrease of all phenomenological energy fluxes, except DI/CS for Literature reporting HM uptake for Pb, Cd and Zn levels on the site exceeded threshold limits for food production by at least fourfold. However, biomass yield and photosynthesis parameters were comparable with those of plants growing on uncontaminated locations in previous investigations, therefore we found no indication of a significant impact of these metals on the tested species. Metal concentrations found in the biomass ranged from ca. 20–70, 0.25–0.80. and 90–200 mg kg Authors contributions are as follows: The project was implemented under The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at