Increasing the service life of cold forging dies with respect to fatigue is a key issue in the highly competitive tool manufacturing market. In industry, achieving a lower level of stress in a die insert is known to be preferable when deciding the amount of shrink fit for a stress ring. However, it was found that stress amplitude is a more significant factor in increasing the cold forging tool life with respect to high cycle fatigue. With higher shrink fitting ratios, undesirable pre-stresses were induced in the tool insert, resulting in an increased stress amplitude between the forging/extrusion and unloading/ejection stages in a bolt forming process that lowered the high cycle fatigue life of the die insert. In the present investigation, the effect of the shrink fitting ratio on the level of die stresses, including the pre-stressing due to shrink fitting, was numerically investigated for a two-stage hexagonal bolt forming and gear extrusion operation. The study shows that optimum values of the shrink fitting ratios tended to increase the high cycle fatigue life based on the level of the stress amplitude in the die insert.Tooling costs represent one of the major parameters governing the manufacture of a cold forged product and, to a greater extent, depend on the tool life that is achieved. Consequently, in order to reduce the cost of a cold forged product, maximizing tool life is essential and involves the material selection, process and product design, manufacture, heat treatment, surface treatment etc. An important technique for tool-life optimization in many high-stress forming applications is to use shrink fitting during the die manufacturing stage. Shrink-fit tools normally consist of a die insert and a reinforcing stress ring or casing. With respect to the reinforcing stress rings, a conventional design consists of a single ring or multiple ring set that is intended to provide a sufficient compressive pre-stress in the assembled die insert in order to offset the circumferential tensile stress that results during forming. Generally there are few rules to aid industrial die designers in selecting an optimum interference or shrink fitting amount of the stress ring. Because of complexity of the tooling system, it is especially true in cold forging that when trying to determine the interference, the design of the process-specific tooling is based on experience and the application of simple numerical rules.  Due to the high strength of tool materials and requirement of near to net shape manufacturing in cold forging, tools are usually subjected to elastic strain. If the stresses on cold forging tools are below the yield stress of the tool materials, then the tools are usually subjected to high cycle fatigue. Thus, According to the work by In their work, Recently, Based on such results, an attempt was made in the current study to obtain an optimum value of the shrink fitting ratio by determining the stress distribution in the tool insert with a single stress ring in a two-stage bolt forming process and gear extrusion. In this study, the shrink fitting ratio was introduced by dividing the interference by the inner radius of the stress ring as shown in In order to carry out the decoupled elastic analysis of the die insert and stress ring in a staggered manner, a three dimensional forming analysis was made for the bolt forming and gear extrusion processes by using an in-house finite element program CAMP The bolt forming process consisted of two stages referred to as stages 1 and 2, respectively, consisting of a pre-heading step and final heading as shown in  For computational efficiency, a 30° symmetric part section for the bolt with hexagonal head was simulated while a 25.714° part section for the gear was used. The simulation results for the last stage of deformation are given in In order to calculate the stress amplitude and mean stress in the die insert and stress ring to estimate the high cycle fatigue life, variation of their effective stresses was determined for the initial state before and during forming/extrusion. For simulating the initial state before forming/extrusion, only the displacement boundary condition incurred by shrink fitting was applied by introducing the Lagrange multiplier method as shown in To carry out the elastic die stress analysis, the three dimensional elastic program CAMP  By introducing a shrink fitting ratio of 0.52% for the pre-heading and heading steps, respectively, the effective stress levels in The location of the peak effective stress for the pre-heading step was identified as node 879 in the simulation and was located on the top of the circumferential edge O Similar to the bolt forming sequence, the peak effective stress was in plastic range for the gear extrusion case without applying the shrink fitting as shown in Thus, the repetitive forging cycle of loading and unloading the billet will generate the cyclic loading condition of the maximum effective stress in the die insert as introduced in the following section. By introducing the compressive pre-stressing due to the shrink fitting as shown in However, by increasing the shrink fitting ratio to 0.2% and 0.4% as shown in By raising the amount of shrink fitting ratio to 0.52%, the effective stress amplitude further dropped down to 231 When the amount of pre-stressing was further raised to over 0.8%, the effective stresses due to compressive pre-stressing at the beginning of the forming process were considerably higher as shown in  Similarly, the elastic die stress analysis for the lower dies used in the heading step of the bolt forming process was carried out. Since the peak effective stress exceeded the yield stress without introducing the shrink fitting as pointed out earlier, shrink fitting should be applied. The peak effective stress level was reduced to the elastic range with a shrink fitting ratio of 0.6% as shown in In In In order to investigate the other forming process and different die design, the lower dies used in the gear extrusion with seven teeth were simulated. In In order to investigate the change in peak effective stress state, the variation of the outer radius of the stress ring was also examined. The original outer radius of the lower die for the gear extrusion was 162  The current approach may help tool designers to better quantitatively determine the effect of shrink fitting ratios on the level of the effective stress amplitude in the die insert and stress ring. The present investigation clearly demonstrated the reverse effect of pre-stressing and forming pressure to minimize the effective stress amplitude. The optimum values of the shrink fitting ratios of 0.52, 0.75, and 0.33% for the stages 1 and 2 of the bolt forming and gear extrusion, respectively, were obtained under the present investigation condition. These ratios were dependent on the processes and different from the values where the peak effective stress levels were at minimum. Therefore, FE analyses of the three-dimensional forming processes and decoupled elastic analyses of dies with different shrink fitting ratios can be used as a convenient and easily applicable procedure to achieve the minimum effective stress amplitude that will result in a better high cycle fatigue tool life. This work was supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF) through the National Research Laboratory Program funded by the Ministry of Science and Technology (no. R0A-2006-000-10240-0).