Thermal energy storage is a technology under investigation since the early 1970s. Since then, numerous new applications have been found and much work has been done to bring this technology to the market. Nevertheless, the materials used either for latent or for sensible storage were mostly investigated 30 years ago, and the research has lead to improvement in their performance under different conditions of applications. In those years a significant number of new materials were developed in many fields other than storage and energy, but a great effort to characterize and classify these materials was done. Taking into account the fact that thousands of materials are known and a large number of new materials are developed every year, the authors use the methodology for materials selection developed by Prof. Ashby to give an overview of other materials suitable to be used in thermal energy storage. Sensible heat storage at temperatures between 150 and 200°C is defined as a case study and two different scenarios were considered: long term sensible heat storage and short term sensible heat storage.Energy storage technologies are strategic and necessary components for the efficient utilization of renewable energy sources and energy conservation. Thermal energy storage (TES) in general has been a main topic of research for the last 30 years, but most researchers still feel that one of the weak points of this technology is the material to be used as a storage medium. When one looks at the literature, the same materials described 30 years ago as potential materials for thermal energy storage As thousands of materials are known and are developed every year, the authors believe that these materials should be studied, to find out whether they are suitable to be used in thermal energy storage. In this paper, the methodology for materials selection developed by Prof. Ashby at the Cambridge University Sensible heat storage materials are defined as a group of materials that undergo no phase change in the temperature range of the storage process. The ability to store sensible heat for a given material strongly depends on the value of its energy density, that is the heat capacity per unit volume or Storage systems based on phase change materials (PCM) with solid–liquid transition are considered to be an efficient alternative to sensible thermal storage systems. From an energy efficiency point of view, PCM storage systems have the advantage that they operate with small temperature differences between charging and discharging. Furthermore, these storages have high energy densities compared with sensible heat storages. The number of available materials is more than 150,000, with new ones appearing every year. Materials scientists classify them into four families: metals and alloys, ceramics and glasses, polymers and elastomers, and hybrids that include composites and natural materials Browsing or searching in handbooks and databases is useful if the material or process is known, but these tools give no comparison or possible relationships between properties of materials that enable selection. A simple way to compare materials is a bar chart, where a certain property is plotted for all the families of materials. The values of most properties of engineering materials span a total range of many decades and for that reason a logarithmic, rather than a linear scale, is used. The material properties charts allow mining the data for patterns. As shown in In order to select the material with the highest performance for a given application, a design-led approach strategy is developed. The first step is that of translating the design requirements into a specification for materials selection. It is followed by a screening step, where those candidates that do not meet the specifications previously established are rejected. From a criterion of excellence, the remaining materials are ranked, and finally, more detailed information about the best material is needed to ensure that the selection is successful. Then the procedure is as follows: function of the component for which the material is sought; list of the constraints it must meet—satisfy limits on thermal or electrical properties and so forth; list of objectives, the criteria by which the excellence of choice is to be judged, for example minimizing cost, minimizing mass, etc; list of free variables—those that the designer is free to change; usually dimensions or shape, and, of course, the choice of material. The performance of an engineering component depends on the values of properties of materials with which it is made of. It usually depends not only on one property but also on a combination of two or more expressed as a criterion of excellence, called material index, which maximizes the performance for a given design and is the result of the translation step. An example of objective is to As case studies, materials for sensible thermal energy storage in the range of temperatures of 150–200 To translate design requirements the function, which is store thermal energy, is first identified. The material should meet the following constraints: high energy density (or heat capacity per unit volume), the lower limit for maximum service temperature should be 150 A convenient combination of thermal properties, and representation in a bubble chart can be done. In A more exhaustive selection can be performed following the selection strategy. First of all, the objectives are translated into one or more performance equations. So, taking into account that the thermal energy stored per unit volume can be expressed as Looking at Eq. For a multi-objective optimization we may consider a design limiting mechanical property such as fracture toughness (K1c) as another material index. We should identify those materials that maximize both objectives, or minimize their inverse, by plotting the inverse of material indexes one in front of the other. We now go one step beyond, and consider the case of short term storage (such as solar cooling and short-term thermal storage devices). To translate design requirements the function is identified. In this case, to maximize the energy stored for a given temperature rise, time, and material thickness. The material should meet the following constraints: high energy density (or heat capacity per unit volume) and good thermal diffusivity as the parameter that introduces the concept of time, and the lower limit for maximum service temperature is 150 Translating the objectives into one or more performance equations it is found that thermal diffusivity Considering this example as a transient heat flow problem, with material thickness This is an approximated as the constant of proportionality depends on the geometry of the body into which heat is diffusing. Substituting in Eq. Avoiding geometrical considerations at this stage, the It can be seen that the objective depends on different variables, some geometrical (area), others functional (time Applying logarithm in the materials’ index equation and rearranging led to  As in the previous case, we may consider a mechanical property such as fracture toughness. Plotting the inverse of both material indexes 1/M (Eq. The cost for unit of thermal energy stored, in this case study, is the lowest for ceramic materials such as concrete of supersulphate cement or sodium chloride. Improving fracture toughness also increases the cost and thus we find the reactive powder concrete as an option. Glass filled phenolic resin or even asbestos performs with similar fracture toughness but higher cost. Steel alloys have the higher K1c values but also the higher cost. A methodology to find potential materials to be used in thermal energy storage is presented with a case study that evaluates materials for sensible thermal energy storage in the temperatures range 150–200 The proposed methodology allows combining multiple objectives and restrictions of use, to evaluate the most used engineering materials for applications in thermal energy storage. Not only physical properties may be considered but others like cost, availability, or environmental aspects such as embodied energy or CO This work was partially funded by the