The author was surprised to be contacted by the Journal ( Before examining the significance of the paper entitled “Longwall mining “cutting cantilever beam theory” and 110 mining method in China – The third mining science innovation” by Prof. Manchao He and his colleagues, which is the main focus of this editorial, I will first comment on the overall standing of JRMGE. The author is a regular reviewer for several well respected international journals. He judges the quality of journals by the standing of the members of the journal Editorial Board and the quality of papers. Obviously, the quality of the papers published in a journal is also a reflection of the standing of the reviewers. The writer is impressed by the calibre of the people making up the Editorial Board of JRMGE. This is definitely reflected in the quality of papers published in the journal, including the one on which this commentary is a focus. The writer is very familiar with the work of the lead author of the paper, Prof. Manchao He. Prof. Manchao He is one of the few academics that conduct relevant research. Relevant research is research that has impact on industry, community and yet contributes new knowledge to science. Prof. Manchao He has contributed significantly to the advances and solution of many critical areas in rock engineering in the areas of hard and soft rock mechanics. In the area of hard rock mechanics, Prof. Manchao He and his team at the State Key Laboratory of Geomechanics and Deep Underground Engineering in Beijing, China have developed some of the most practical laboratory testing procedures to demonstrate the rockburst phenomenon. These laboratory procedures have both helped in advancing our knowledge in this area as well as leading to support mechanisms to mitigate the consequences of these events. The writer is also pleased to acknowledge the work of Prof. Manchao He for the development of a tendon support system with extreme energy absorption capacity over any known rockburst mitigation support systems known before then, including the various derivatives of cone bolts and D-Bolt. A summary and comparison of these technologies can be found in The paper by Traditional longwall mining requires that one stoping face has two advance roadways and one reserved coal pillar before the next mining cycle (Fig. 1 in  Recent statistics show that gate road accidents form 80 to 90 percent of longwall mining accidents in China and this is attributed to reduction in the remnant pillar sizes in the 121 longwall mining method using the transfer rock beam theory. One reason for this statistic is that as mining depth increased, the MBT justifying the reduction in remnant pillar sizes became questionable as evidenced in In 2008, Prof. Manchao He and his team proposed the cutting cantilever beam theory (CCBT, see Fig. 8 in The CRLD bolts or anchors are compared with existing bolts in their category in Fig. 14 in The other point of interest in This writer was engaged in a destressing study of a highly stressed ore-body in the Sudbury Basin in 2007 for sub-level open stoping (SLOS). Hanging wall destressing was embarked upon to prevent hole squeezing, stuck in the hole hammers (ITH) and minimizing dilution in the mining of a longitudinal panel in vertical retreat mining. The destressing holes were 170 mm in diameter and spaced at 1 m apart along the hanging wall. The plan was to blast these holes at the end of a 4–12 h shift on a Friday evening in order to let the ground settle on the weekend. Prior to the blasting of the destressing holes, a crack propagated from one destressing hole to the next, creating a crack along the hanging wall resulting in the drilling of the remaining holes without problems. Thus, the induced fracture from the destressing holes had destressed the stope panel. Details of this interesting case history can be found in Finally, the important outcome of the two innovations described above is the introduction of the 110 longwall mining method (Fig. 10) by Improved safety from the CRLD anchors is further enhanced by their being instrumented to enable real time remote monitoring of forces in the roof during mining and caving and enables subsidence and gate road stability to be effectively managed. The work of