Ca-amendments are commonly applied to improve acid soils, whilst no-tillage (NT) has been widely recommended in soils where conventional tillage (CT) has led to losses of organic matter. However, the potential interactions between the two treatments are only partially known. Our study was conducted on a degraded soil located in SW Spain, in order to assess if the combination of Ca-amendment plus crop-tillage provides long term soil amelioration on microbial activity. To this end the effects of four different combinations of Ca-amendment and crop-tillage on selected key soil microbial properties were analyzed. The experimental design was a split-plot with four replicates. The main factor was the application or not of a Ca-amendment, sugar foam (SF) and control (C), and the second factor was crop-tillage, no tilled improved pasture (no tilled-IP) and conventional tillage forage crop (tilled-FC). Soil samples were collected from 2 soil depths after 7 years since the first SF application and after 1year from a repeated SF application. The use of the Ca-amendment meant a higher pH although this effect was not found in the combination Ca-amendment plus no-tilled. Total organic carbon (TOC) was highly influenced by tillage, being higher for no tilled plots. The interaction found between tillage and amendment suggested that the beneficial effect of the Ca-amendment on organic carbon is lost after tillage practices. A positive effect on microbial biomass carbon (MBC) was found after a second SF application for the no tilled plots in the upper layer however the effect was opposite in the deepest layer where no differences in TOC were found. After a year from a repeated SF application, a clear positive effect of no-tilled was observed on β-glucosidase, β-glucosaminidase and urease activities at the superficial layer. This fact was not found in these enzymatic activities when the amendment application effect was studied but an interaction between tillage and amendment showed that the Ca-amendment plus no-tilled combination was the most favorable option to increase the activities of these enzymes. Values of dehydrogenase were higher in amended plots than in control for both soil depths regardless of the sampling date, showing a pH effect on its activity. From our findings, no tillage plus a Ca-amendment appears to be the most suitable choice for ensuring suitable production, through the accumulation of soil organic matter (SOM) and the improvement of biological properties.Soil degradation caused by intensive agriculture leads to reduction of soil fertility due to changes in physical and chemical soil properties, as well as in microbial activity. In acidic soils, where the main constraints for crop production are Al toxicity and Ca Microbial biomass and enzymatic activities are reduced by soil acidification mainly through the negative selection of acid-sensitive microorganisms ( Remediation of acidification requires the use of amendments capable of raising the soil pH value. Reclamation of acidic infertile soils through different conservation and amendment practices improves soil biological fertility by increasing microbial biomass and enzymatic activity, which are beneficial to plant growth and crop production. Minimum or zero tillage also increase soil microbial biomass and enzymatic activities of degraded soils ( The study was conducted on an experimental plot established in 2002 in the Cañamero’s Raña (39°22′–39°17′, 5°21′ N -5°16′, E) where soils are located 580 Soils of the Cañamero’s Raña area are classified as clay-skeletal, kaolinitic, acid, thermic Plinthic Palexerult. Soil pH values are in the range 5.1–5.3 in the top 5 The long term effects of sugar foam (SF) on the properties of the Cañamero’s Raña soil was tested with a field experiment established in 2002. The SF amendment was applied at rate of 3.9 Soils were sampled from all plots in October 2009, after 7 years since the first SF application and in October 2011, one year after the second SF treatment. Soil were sampled after harvest from the 0–5 Soil pH value was determined in deionized water (1:2.5 soil/water ratio). Exchangeable Ca, Mg, Na and K concentrations were determined by soil extractions with ammonium acetate at pH 7 followed by elemental analysis by atomic absorption spectrophotometry. The total C and N content was determined with a LECO Instruments TruSpec CN analyser. The β-glucosidase activity (Gls) was measured according to Statistical analysis of the data was conducted with Statgraphics Centurion XVI. Analyses of variance were performed using a linear model for a split-plot design with blocks for Ca-amendment as the main factor and crop-tillage as secondary factor. Log transformations were applied when necessary to meet ANOVA assumptions. Data were analysed independently for each soil depth. A correlation matrix of different properties was based on Pearson correlation coefficients (p Seven years since the first Ca-amendment application, pH soil values were significantly higher in amended plots than in control plots for both 0–5 In the 0–5 Total nitrogen (TN) concentrations followed the trend of TOC, with higher values in the no tilled-IP plots than in tilled-FC plots regardless of sampling times and soil layer ( Soil MBC was significantly higher in the no tilled-IP plots than in the tilled-FC plots in the 0–5 Enzyme activities were higher in the 0–5 The dehydrogenase was significantly correlated ( The higher TOC content in the 0–5 Amelioration of soil acidity and SOM accumulation, particularly in the absence of plowing disturbance, have led to increased microbial biomass likely due to the quality increase in soil microbial habitat ( Dehydrogenase activity in soil is considered as an indicator of the overall microbial respiration processes, and it’s generally positively correlated with the soil pH value and SOM content ( Our work demonstrated that SF is an effective liming agent that leads to amelioration of the Cañamero’s raña soils in terms of pH neutralization, organic matter, microbial biomass and enzymatic activity. Soil amelioration is predicted to be permanent due to both the high SF lime content and limited nitrifications in the studied soils, but there are also additional benefits from conservative soil management. Overall, the incorporation of SF is a sustainable technique to induce physical, chemical and biological fertility in Spanish acidic raña soils. Support for this work was provided by the