This paper first proposes an original procedure to implement three-dimensional (3D) surfaces of rough existing unbonded contact specimens, i.e. fully open with no chemical bond, into non-linear finite element models to numerically simulate shear tests conducted under Constant Normal Load (CNL) conditions. The developed procedure is applied to 18 contact specimens drilled from concrete, concrete-rock, and rock joints of existing dams. A total of 83 finite element models of the contact interfaces are generated and the results of the numerical simulations are analyzed and validated against corresponding experimental findings. Sensitivity analyses are conducted and highlight, among other things, that the geometric resolution must be selected with caution and that mismatch due to initially unmated conditions or differences between the geometries of the lower and upper contact faces must be considered. A practical non-linear shear strength criterion is also proposed and compared to numerical results. The results presented confirm the major role of roughness and matching properties in the shear response of dam joints. Finally, values of apparent cohesion and friction angle are suggested and applied to dam stability assessment while accounting for joint roughness and matching properties to emphasize the efficiency and relevance of such practice.The structural safety evaluation of aging concrete gravity dams has been a major concern for dam owners, especially the assessment of dam sliding stability along interfaces where cracks may develop Previous experimental research has investigated the sliding stability of rough unbonded rock discontinuities (e.g. Most of the experimental and numerical studies focusing on the shear behaviour of rock discontinuities were related to mining engineering applications and rock slope stability analyses, which generally involve a single material and, in some cases high stress levels, as opposed to dam joints This paper proposes an original procedure to implement 3D surfaces of rough unbonded contact specimens drilled from existing gravity dams into non-linear finite element models developed to simulate shear tests conducted under Constant Normal Load (CNL) conditions. In this paper, the FEM is selected as it is increasingly popular to assess the structural safety of concrete dams. The procedure is applied to 18 contact specimens drilled from concrete-concrete, concrete-rock, and rock-rock joints of existing dams whose diameters vary from 83 mm to 145 mm. The matching and roughness properties of the 18 contact specimens are presented in Renaud et al. The 18 small-scale unbonded shear-tested contact specimens used for the validation of the numerical procedure proposed in this paper comprise: 6 rock-rock (RR), 6 concrete-rock (CR), and 6 concrete-concrete (CC) joints as described in The roughness of the 18 contact specimens is evaluated based on the Joint Roughness Coefficient The 18 shear-tested contact specimens described previously were modelled using nonlinear finite elements according to the following procedure. The numerical model of the contact specimen is subjected to a direct shear test under CNL conditions as tested in the laboratory. The lower block of the modelled interface is fixed, while the upper block is subjected to an increasing lateral displacement The local non-linear behaviour at the interface includes normal and sliding contact conditions, and is implemented through basic frictional contact finite elements The normal stress The flowchart in In this work, The 3D processed contact faces with the final geometric resolution The points of the 3D processed contact faces at a resolution of Volumes are extruded from the geometry of the 3D lower and upper contact faces to generate the two blocks of the joint sample core. The mesh density is defined through a regular division of the created volumes to ensure a rigorous mesh compatibility. The default horizontal mesh resolution 3D 8-node solid finite elements are generated including the material properties. All elements are linear elastic except a layer of several elements along the contact interface that are modelled using a Von Mises constitutive law. Numerical analyses were conducted to verify that this layer is thick enough to ensure that the stresses within the elastic materials do not exceed the yield strength. It is also interesting to note that the required thickness depends on the asperity height of each contact. The boundary and loading conditions are defined: the lower block remains fixed, while the upper block is subjected to an increasing lateral displacement Non-linear contact conditions are implemented at the interface through basic frictional contact elements. The developed routine ensures that only contact elements that may interact during the motion are paired. An example of implemented 3D surfaces into a finite element model of the lower face of contact specimen RR3-2 is shown in No calibration of the models is applied to improve agreement between the numerical predictions and the experimental results. The finite element models of the contact specimens are assigned identical input mechanical parameters such as material compressive strength, elasticity or basic friction angle. The following material properties are considered for the mass concrete and rock, respectively: Poisson’s ratios In this section, the proposed procedure is applied to the 18 contact specimens described previously. The models are implemented into the finite element software ADINA It can be seen that the finite element analyses can provide reasonable predictions of  The numerical simulations presented in this section were not aimed at obtaining identical results to the experimental findings. The main objective reached herein was rather to investigate to which extent numerical simulations, based on common engineering assumptions and finite element modeling state-of-practice, can satisfactorily predict shear strength and dilation in contact specimens that are typical of dam joints, as shown in This section presents a parametric study to assess the effects of various modeling assumptions presented in First, the 3D effects of the contact interface geometries are assessed. For this purpose, 2D profiles are extracted from the 3D original models as shown in A sensitivity analysis related to the selection of the geometric grid resolution The routine developed above allows the selection of a finite element mesh resolution equal to The proposed procedure requires mating of the lower and upper faces of contact interfaces, based on visual inspection, before the generation of the corresponding finite element models. To study the effects of matedness on the shear response of contact specimens CC2-1, CR2-1 and RR3-2, the lower and upper blocks of each contact are first separated and then the upper block is displaced by an offset of Even when the contact specimens are perfectly mated, the presence of mismatch possibly due to material loss at the interface during drilling operations can still be observed. Indeed, for the 18 contact specimens, the Joint Matching Coefficient In this section, the effects of roughness on the shear response of contact interfaces is discussed. First, the height along the The following equation, adapted in Renaud et al. In this section, the non-linear failure criterion proposed for existing unbonded dam joints in Eq.  The effects of apparent cohesion and friction angle on the sliding stability of a gravity dam are assessed next using three typical dam monoliths denoted by This paper proposed an original procedure to implement 3D surfaces of existing rough unbonded contact specimens into non-linear finite element models developed to numerically simulate shear tests conducted under Constant Normal Load (CNL) conditions. The originality of the procedure stems mainly from the efficiency of routines developed to: (i) process the 3D profiles of laser-scanned contacts through noise filtering and their mating based on visual inspection; and (ii) automatically generate the ruled-mesh of the numerical models in which the detailed geometry of the lower and upper faces at contact are imported. The technique was applied to 18 contact specimens drilled from concrete, concrete-rock, and rock joints of existing dams. A total of 83 3D non-linear finite element models were generated and analysed, and the obtained numerical results were validated against experimental findings, which is another original aspect of this work, as such validations are still uncommon in the literature. Sensitivity analyses were conducted to discuss the effects of various modeling assumptions (basic friction angle, 2D versus 3D, geometrical and finite mesh resolutions, initial unmated position, initial contact gaps neglected) on the shear response of the investigated contact interfaces. The results confirmed that the effects of 3D geometry along contact interfaces should not be neglected. It was clearly illustrated that accounting for such effects requires the selection of an adequate geometric grid resolution, which was found to be more critical than that of the mesh density. This work also showed that mismatch due to initially unmated conditions and geometrical differences between lower and upper contact faces of a given joint must be considered in the analysis. A practical non-linear shear strength criterion was proposed and compared to the experimental and numerical results, and a fair agreement was generally observed. Furthermore, the shear strength criterion with Overall, the results presented in this paper confirmed the major role of roughness and matching properties in the shear response of dam joints at small scales. Although this work provides valuable assistance in the understanding of the shear behaviour of dam joints, more comprehensive experimental data of shear-tested specimens is still needed to validate the numerical predictions through extensive sensitivity and statistical analyses. Also, the presence of possible scale and material heterogeneity effects prevents from directly extrapolating the findings to a larger scale for practical dam stability assessments. Ongoing research is focused on extending the numerical procedures and practical shear strength criteria with corresponding values of apparent cohesion and friction angle to multiscale modeling, based on larger scale shear tests, as well as 3D profiles obtained from topographic surveys.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), and Hydro-Québec. The authors would also like to thank Patrice Rivard, Danick Charbonneau and Clermont Gravel at the Rock Mechanics Laboratory of the Université de Sherbrooke for their collaboration.