A new efficient extractant of polyalkyl phosphazenes, PN-1200 (supplied by All-Russian Research Institute of Chemical Technology), was used for the separation of uranium from wet process phosphoric acid (PA) in a batch process at laboratory scale. Solvent extraction of uranium from 29% P2O5 phosphoric acid using PN-1200 was compared with uranium extraction from phosphoric acid using synergistic mixtures of D2EHPA+TOPO and D2EHPA+TRPO. All extractants were diluted in normal aliphatic kerosene.
                  It is concluded that PN-1200 has some good properties, such as high uranium distribution coefficient, good stability, acceptable kinetics, good phase separation, and simultaneous extraction of U4+ and U6+.Phosphoric acid (PA) is an important alternative source of uranium. Approximately 13,000 metric tonnes of U PN-1200 Some samples with various molecular weights and acid numbers, PN-1000 ( A research program was conducted by the Fuel and Ore Processing Center, Atomic Energy Organization of Iran (AEOI) to recover uranium from wet process PA, in collaboration with the All-Russian Research Institute of Chemical Technology, Moscow. This paper describes an improved extraction process for the separation of uranium from PA by employing the PN-1200 extractant, which is diluted in normal aliphatic kerosene. Results for this extractant have been compared with D Ordinary funnels, electrical water baths with thermocouples for constant temperature experiments, and a shaker were used for batchwise tests. A mixer–settler was used for the continuous process. D The distribution coefficients (  It seems that the second method is preferable to adsorption on activated carbon, especially for large amounts of the PA, since it requires no extra equipment for the handling and contacting of solid-phase material with liquid phase and can be run continuously. The washing solution contained 25% (vol) fatty alcohol blend in kerosene and was operated in cycles. After each cycle, it was regenerated with water and sodium carbonate solution. In the initial experiments, the equilibrium time of uranium distribution between two phases was determined; 2 min of mixing time is enough for equilibrium state (see The clean PA was mixed with different solutions of PN-1200 in kerosene at Values of Temperature has a strong effect on the extraction of uranium from PA. Variations of  The number of recycles and stability of extractant are important parameters in solvent extraction systems. Experiments were conducted to investigate the stripping of uranium from a solution of 10% (vol) PN-1200 in kerosene. Ammonium carbonate and sodium carbonate were used in these tests for uranium stripping. In the first stage, the organic phase was stripped with solutions of different strengths of ammonium carbonate, but at the second stage of each test, a stripping solution of 15% (wt/vol) (NH The equilibrium concentrations of uranium between 29% P After batch tests, continuous experimental tests were investigated in a small mixer–settler. A series of tests was carried out using Iranian 29% P It is clear that: Pretreatment and washing of PA with a solution containing 25% (vol) fatty alcohols (C Extraction of uranium from PA by PN-1200 in kerosene is a fast reaction; approximately 2 min is sufficient for the equilibrium, but in the experimental tests, 3 min of mixing time was used. The addition of 0.1 M solvating extractants such as TBP and alcohol reduced the uranium extraction power when using PN-1200   It can be seen from According to From continuous mixer–settler extraction results, it is concluded that properties of D  The results suggest that 10% (vol) PN-1200 in kerosene is better for the separation of uranium from PA, compared to synergistic mixtures of D The separation of uranium and iron takes place at the stripping stage. Fatty alcohol mixture solutions in normal aliphatic kerosene have been studied and recommended for removing organic impurities from wet process PA. Mixer–settler tests show that the recovery of uranium from Iranian PA is feasible, but additional pilot plant tests are necessary for the selection of an optimum solvent extraction system. The authors wish to thank the Fuel and Ore Processing Center of AEOI, especially the Chemical Analysis Laboratory of Fuel and Ore Processing Center.