Food properties influence the parameters of the masticatory process, such as jaw movement, muscle activity and chewing rate. Firm foods will require more muscle activity than softer foods. However, the influence of food hardness on chewing rate is ambiguous as both slower and higher chewing rates have been reported for harder foods. Rheological characteristics of the food, such as plasticity and elasticity, may help to explain differences in chewing rate. The aim of our study was to determine the influence of food properties on chewing rate and muscular work in five phases of a chewing sequence. Eighty-four participants chewed on five foods, which strongly differed in consistency. Chewing gum was used as a reference food. The phase in the chewing sequence had a large significant effect on cycle duration for the five foods. A significant decrease in cycle duration at the beginning of chewing was followed by an increase in later phases, leading to U-shaped curves. Food type had a small effect on the average cycle duration. However, large significant differences in cycle duration were observed between the foods at the beginning of a chewing sequence. In that phase, the firm foods were chewed much slower than the soft foods. Muscular work was significantly influenced by both chewing phase and food type.Jaw movement and the neuromuscular control of the jaw muscles are important aspects of the comminution of food. The basic rhythmic activity of the jaw-opening and jaw-closing muscles is known to be generated by a central pattern generator located in the brainstem ( Large differences exist between individuals in the parameters of mastication, such as the masticatory performance, the number of cycles needed to prepare the food for swallowing, the amplitude and velocity of jaw movements, the amount of jaw muscle activity and the chewing rate (number of chewing cycles per minute) ( Food properties such as structure, composition, appearance, volume, size and shape influence the masticatory process ( At the beginning of a chewing sequence, when the food is still intact, the mechanical and geometrical properties of the food have a large influence on both the amount of jaw muscle activity and on the movement trajectories ( Our aim was to determine the influence of food consistency on chewing rate and muscular work in various phases of the chewing sequence. For this, we studied a large group of participants and averaged their results to reduce the between-subject variation. The participants chewed five natural foods that differed greatly in consistency. We hypothesized that the foods that are harder to chew (carrot, peanut and melba toast) would be chewed slower (with longer cycle durations) than easy-to-chew foods (cake, cheese). Furthermore, we expected that the differences in chewing rate and muscular work would be most prominent at the beginning of a chewing sequence and that these differences would gradually decrease upon further chewing. Chewing gum was used as a reference food: it is neither broken down nor swallowed and it has a plastic behaviour. Eighty-four subjects participated in this study, 23 men and 61 women, aged 43 All subjects chewed on five natural foods that differed greatly in consistency: melba toast (Melba toast, Buitoni, Nestlé, Switzerland); breakfast cake (Right, Peijnenburg, the Netherlands); carrot; peanut (unsalted medium size) and Gouda cheese. Breakfast cake, carrot, and cheese were offered as blocks, melba toast as a round disc of about 2 The volumes and characteristics of the foods (density, water and fat percentages and yield point) are listed in We monitored the jaw gape during the chewing experiments with an optical motion analysis system (Optotrak We recorded the activity of the subject’s jaw-elevator muscles, the m. masseteres and the m. temporales anteriores. Bipolar surface electrodes (Blue Sensor, Medicotest, Denmark, 18 We divided the chewing sequence in 5 phases, so that we could average the results of all participants in these phases irrespective of the numbers of chewing cycles until swallowing. The beginning phase consists of the first 3 cycles and the end phase consists of the last 3 cycles before the food was swallowed. The second, third and fourth phases are based on the nearest 3 cycles around 0.25*N In addition, we determined the average cycle duration in the entire chewing sequence, its total duration and the total muscular work in the chewing sequence. Finally, we determined group averages for each of the above-mentioned parameters from the results of all 84 individuals. Repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA, IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, version 22.0. Armonk, NY: IBM Corp.) was applied for each food type to test possible differences in chewing rate and muscular work among various phases of a chewing sequence. Furthermore, we applied repeated-measures ANOVA to test the influence of food type on chewing rate and muscular work for each of the phases of the chewing sequence.  Food type had a significant influence on both the number of chewing cycles until swallowing and the total chewing duration. The number of chewing cycles was much smaller for the softer foods (cake and cheese) than for the firm foods (melba toast, peanut and carrot; The work done by the jaw muscles while chewing the various foods is listed in Food type had a significant influence on the total muscular work. Total muscular work was lowest for cake and cheese and highest for melba toast, peanut and carrot ( Food type had a significant effect on both the number of chewing cycles until swallowing and the total duration of a chewing sequence ( The influence of food type on the average chewing rate was, although significant, rather small ( We found that the chewing rate varied greatly during the various phases of chewing ( After the initial chewing phase, the food has been fragmented and lubricated with saliva and the process continues of forming a food bolus that can be swallowed. The subject can manipulate the food more easily and has become familiar with its mechanical properties. Consequently, the subject chews less tentatively and faster. In phases two and three, at 25% and 50% of the chewing sequence, chewing was fastest and the variation in chewing rates between the foods was smallest. In these phases the emphasis still lies on fragmentation of the food to facilitate interaction with the saliva and bolus formation. Apparently, for this task and these food volumes the central pattern generator that drives the basic chewing rhythm, on average strives for a cycle duration between 0.6 and 0.7 In the last two phases of chewing the emphasis shifts from fragmenting the food to manipulating it towards the back of the mouth in preparation for swallowing ( Our results show that the average cycle duration (and the average chewing rate) is generally based on highly varying values observed during the various phases of chewing. Moreover, differences in chewing rate between foods in the first phase of chewing tend to partly compensate opposite differences during the later phases. This leads to relatively small differences in average chewing rate between foods. This may explain the ambiguous findings for average chewing rate in previous studies ( With chewing gum the subjects were asked to chew continuously for one more minute without swallowing. Recording started only after the subject signalled that the gum had formed a soft bolus. The chewing rate in the recordings of chewing gum was constant, in accordance with the instructions. However, in the first phase of the chewing gum recordings the cycle duration was significantly shorter than in the subsequent phases. This may indicate that the subjects, when they signalled, were in last phase of overcoming the stiffness of the gum and still chewed relatively fast, comparable to the second phase of chewing the other foods. Except at the very beginning of chewing, gum was chewed at a much slower average chewing rate than the other foods, although it is a relatively soft food. It should be realized that chewing gum is not chewed to prepare it for swallowing. Furthermore, it has completely different rheological properties (plastic) than the other foods (elastic). Our results confirm previous findings, that frequency adaptation was best explained by rheological properties like elasticity, plasticity, stickiness and brittleness, with plastic products being chewed at slower frequencies ( Food type had a large significant effect on the total muscular work needed to prepare the food for swallowing ( The phase of the chewing sequence had a large significant influence on the muscular work per chewing cycle for all foods ( In the later phases of chewing the differences in muscular work per cycle were not as marked as in the beginning. However, the relative differences in muscular work between firm and soft foods remained. Just before swallowing the muscular work per cycle for cake and cheese was about 65% of the work needed to chew carrot, melba toast and peanut. The extra muscular work observed with the firmer foods shows that the subjects continued to encounter more resistance from the firmer foods than from the softer foods right until swallowing. This coincides with the finding that the subjects also continued to chew the firmer foods faster than the softer foods. The combination of both findings reinforces the idea that the subjects continue to fragment particles of the firmer foods until swallowing. The amount of muscular work in the recordings of chewing gum was constant, in accordance with the instructions, except for the first recording in which the muscular work was larger. This coincides with the fact that the subjects also chewed gum faster in the first recording. Both findings indicate that the subjects, when they signalled to start the recording, were in the last phase of overcoming the initial stiffness of the gum. The chewing of the gum required a lower level of muscular work than was needed to chew the other foods during the chewing sequence, except the end phase. This may be explained by the relatively soft consistency and the smaller volume of the gum. We reject our hypothesis that harder foods would be associated with slower chewing rates. Only in the first phase were hard foods chewed at a slower rate than soft foods, about 25–30%, except when the hard food was presented as several small units (peanuts) instead of one large piece. After one quarter of the sequence, chewing had accelerated significantly, particularly with the harder foods. In the subsequent phases chewing slowed down again, but now the harder foods were consistently chewed at 10–15% faster rates than the soft foods. The average chewing rate during the entire sequence varied relatively little between foods: hard foods were chewed up to 10% faster than soft foods. Differences in chewing rate in the first phase of chewing partly cancelled differences during the later phases. This makes the average chewing rate less suited for characterization of chewing, which may explain the ambiguous results in earlier studies. Our findings confirmed that differences in chewing rate and muscle work are largest at the beginning of chewing. Large differences in muscle work show that the initially slow chewing of hard foods can be related to control of large muscle forces or careful oral manipulation of awkwardly shaped food. In the later phases of chewing muscle work steadily decreases, although with the harder foods muscle work is consistently about 30–50% higher than with the soft foods. This indicates that melba toast, peanuts and particularly carrot need more fragmenting than cheese and breakfast cake before a bolus is formed that can be swallowed. This coincides with the fact that the harder foods were chewed longer than the soft foods (between 1.5 and 3.5 times) with much more total muscle work involved (between 2 and 6 times). This work was supported by the