Hydrogen spillover refers to catalytic dissociation of hydrogen molecules followed by surface diffusion to the catalytic support. This mechanism has been proposed as a means to initiate hydrogen storage at ambient temperature. When catalytic dissociation of hydrogen is used to initiate room temperature hydrogen storage, this initiates weak chemisorption. High variations in experimental uptake, combined with theoretical calculations that are inconsistent with this mechanism, have made this concept controversial. Here, we review hydrogen uptake in porous carbon and metal-organic frameworks (MOFs), with emphasis on spectroscopic evidence of atomic hydrogen bound to the surface and resolution of discrepancies between experimental and theoretical studies. We conclude with a perspective of hydrogen spillover for future material design, hydrogen storage, and fundamental understanding of a process that is crucial for adsorption and catalysis.  This review comes from a themed issue on Edited by For a complete overview see the Available online 15th November 2018  2211-3398/© 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. Hydrogen has the highest gravimetric energy density (142 MJ/kg) of any fuel, is naturally abundant, and the only byproduct of its oxidation is water. However, its low volumetric density leads to major hurdles in its storage and transport, particularly at near ambient temperature conditions (−40 to 85 °C) that are of interest for vehicular applications. Compression, liquefaction, physical adsorption, and formation of metal or chemical hydrides cannot simultaneously meet gravimetric and volumetric storage targets (4.5 Hydrogen spillover (a.k.a. weak chemisorption) has been proposed as a way to store hydrogen at ambient temperature. Hydrogen spillover involves addition of well-dispersed catalyst nanoparticles to dissociate hydrogen into atoms which are then free to migrate to the high-surface area support. Enhanced hydrogen uptake due to spillover has been reported for both carbon [ Hydrogen spillover has been reviewed recently elsewhere [ Carbon-based supports were the first sorbent studied for spillover [ Surface oxygen functional groups also act as receptors for spillover hydrogen. For example, an AC heavily oxidized with KOH was mixed with Pt/AC to serve as secondary spillover surface to emphasize the role of oxygen groups that are not adjacent, or bound to, the catalyst [ Beyond catalyst dispersion, catalyst activity that arises due to a specific exposed crystallographic face (like Pt(110)) has been implicated [ The high surface area, crystallinity, and tunable surface chemistry and porosity made MOFs a promising candidate for hydrogen spillover studies [ To maintain MOF structure, others have attempted to directly incorporate spillover catalysts into MOFs, using, for example, wet precipitation [ Advanced characterization techniques have been used to provide secondary evidence of spillover in several reports, including temperature-programmed desorption studies using mass spectrometry that validated the early MOF reports [ Inelastic neutron scattering (INS) has been used to probe hydrogen spillover Raman spectroscopy was used as an Other The work of Yakobson Early DFT calculations of spillover found the energy of the transition state for hydrogen diffusing in a chemisorbed state was higher in energy than gas-phase hydrogen [ This apparent theoretical-experimental discrepancy, was partially resolved with the consideration of the effect of dopants and functional groups on hydrogen mobility and energetics [ Theoretical modeling of spillover to MOFs is even more complex. Experimental results have been explained through the consideration of the role of defects in propagating hydrogen spillover. It is speculated that hole-mediation (metal vacancy) leads to exothermic hydrogenation with reduced activation energy [ Tsao's group [ Early spillover reports approached DOE gravimetric storage targets (ultimate goal 6.5 wt% (kg H A heavy emphasis on meeting technical targets before a fundamental understanding had emerged also contributed to the controversy. This ‘fundamental understanding’ on how to reversibly hydrogenate a surface via spillover remains somewhat elusive at this time. Sufficient spectroscopic evidence has demonstrated both reversible and irreversible catalytic hydrogenation of both carbon and MOF supports. The cumulative body of literature shows defects, functional groups, catalyst thickness, and charge transfer are necessary to propagate hydrogen spillover. It is also clear that spillover surfaces are much more complicated than other hydrogen storage materials, with catalyst dispersion, catalyst active face, thickness, anchoring, metal-support interactions, surface chemistry, dopants, impurities all playing a role in the extent of hydrogen spillover. These effects are not easily modeled, nor elucidated in experiments. An iterative process between experimental and theoretical studies has addressed much of the discrepancy, and advanced both theoretical and experimental understanding of a mechanism that is fundamental to catalysis and adsorption. It is difficult, but perhaps not impossible, to envision a spillover surface that exceeds the ultimate DOE target reversibly. Graphane (CxHx) provides one highly idealized benchmark, with a hydrogen content of 7.6 wt%. Although dehydrogenation of ideal graphane would be irreversible at room temperature, the energetics of graphane dehydrogenation ultimately depends on the hydrogenation pattern, and studies with ‘real’ carbon materials have shown the importance of carbon morphology, dopants, defects, and so on. The catalyst loading and perhaps perfect catalyst dispersion would be essential to have a reasonable chance of increasing uptake of a carbon surface above 6 wt%. Incorporation of non sp2 hybridized carbon chain structures, or patterning of dopants with lower molecular weight than carbon would increase the relative weight of hydrogen, beyond a one to one carbon to hydrogen ratio. How one might design such a surface on the molecular level is an intriguing scientific question, when one looks beyond engineering constraints. Yet, even engineering constraints have trade-offs: room temperature reversibility continues to offer considerable practical advantages. The authors whose names are listed immediately below certify that they have NO affiliations with or involvement in anyorganization or entity with anyfinancial interest (such as honoraria; educational grants; participation in speakers’ bureaus; membership, employment, consultancies, stock ownership, or other equity interest; and expert testimony or patent-licensingarrangements), or non-financial interest (such as personal or professional relationships, affiliations, knowledge or beliefs) inthe subject matter or materials discussed in this manuscript. Author names: Cheng-Yu Wang, Cheng-Wei Chang, Yi-Ju Wu, Angela D. Lueking. Papers of particular interest, published within the period of review, have been highlighted as: • of special interest •• of outstanding interest This work is supported by the