The protransglutaminase factor XIII (FXIII) has recently attracted attention within the field of tissue regeneration, as it has been found that FXIII significantly influences wound healing by exerting a multitude of functions. It supports hemostasis by enhancing platelet adhesion to damaged endothelium, and by its cross-linking activity it stabilizes the formed fibrin clot. Furthermore, FXIII limits bacterial dissemination from the wound and incorporates macromolecules of importance for cellular infiltration, supporting cell migration and survival. FXIII-mediated complex formation of the vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 and αVβ3 integrin is important for angiogenesis, supporting the formation of granulation tissue. Chronic inflammatory conditions involving bleeding and activation of the coagulation cascade have been shown to lead to reduced FXIII levels in plasma. Of particular importance for this review is the fact that patients suffering from inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) have reduced FXIII antigen levels and activity. Furthermore, these patients show impaired mucosal healing, which supports the inflammatory state of the disease. This review summarizes the role of FXIII in the healing of wounds, and briefly summarizes the previous use of FXIII in clinical settings. Moreover, it addresses the potential role for FXIII as a therapeutic agent in the healing of persistent wounds during chronic conditions, with an emphasis on IBD.Tissue remodeling and wound healing are complex processes involving a range of interrelated events. Efficient regulation of the wound-healing process is required to avoid impaired tissue rigidity, loss of epithelial integrity, and excessive fibrosis. The effectiveness of this process is important for both the healing of acute wounds and wound healing under chronic inflammatory conditions. There is growing evidence linking components of the coagulation cascade to the process of wound healing and resolution of chronic inflammatory conditions. Coagulation factor XIII (FXIII) influences wound healing, both by non-enzymatic signaling and by cross-linking of cellular receptor systems and constituents of the extracellular matrix (ECM). In this manner, FXIII induces cellular signaling, which affects cell motility, proliferation, and survival, all of which are crucial for tissue regeneration This review summarizes the roles and distinct functions of FXIII through the phases of wound healing. It touches upon previous clinical trials using FXIII, and elaborates on the potential significance of FXIII as a therapeutic agent. Finally, special emphasis is placed on IBD and mucosal healing with reference to the multiple tissue-regenerating functions influenced by FXIII. A search of English-language publications was performed in the PubMed and Embase databases until January 2013. The search term [factor XIII OR FXIII OR fibrin stabilizing factor] was combined with: coagulation, [deficiency OR clinical trial], ECM, [endothelium OR epithelium], [integrin OR growth factor OR angiogenesis OR signaling], [immune response OR inflammation], [migration OR proliferation OR survival], platelet, [ulcerative colitis OR Crohn's disease OR IBD], and wound healing. The relevant articles were selected on the basis of their scientific and clinical relevance, and reference lists were screened for additional relevant literature to be included in this review. Only English-language articles were considered, including reviews, letters, editorials, articles, and abstracts from scientific meetings relating to FXIII, wound healing, and IBD, as well as announcements from the Food and Drug Administration and European Medicines Agency. FXIII was initially identified as a coagulation factor of the hemostatic system. Following activation, FXIII cross-links polymerizing fibrin monomers to form urea-insoluble fibrils, thereby enhancing the clot strength. FXIII belongs to the family of protransglutaminases, and is the final enzyme to be activated in the blood coagulation cascade, with fibrin being its main substrate. It cross-links adjacent polypeptide chains with the appropriate specificity by formation of N FXIII in plasma (pFXIII) is a heterotetramer (FXIII-A The fundamental role of pFXIII in hemostasis is well established, whereas the role of cFXIII is not clarified. In platelets, which express high amounts of FXIII-A The cellular source of pFXIII is not fully elucidated. Contradictory studies have pointed to either platelets FXIII-B is expressed solely by hepatocytes, which secrete FXIII-B in a dimeric form (FXIII-B The circulating FXIII-A zymogen is proteolytically activated by thrombin to release a 37 amino acid activation peptide. The presence of Ca Circulating FXIII is bound to fibrinogen, which reduces the threshold level of Ca Following induction of coagulation and cross-linking of fibrin by FXIIIa, the level of non-cross-linked fibrin declines, limiting further FXIII activation possibly to avoid excessive cross-linking. Furthermore, it has been shown that elastase released by invading and imbedded granulocytes of the hemostatic plug is the primary protease degrading FXIIIa To date, ~ 800 patients have been diagnosed with FXIII deficiency. On the basis of extrapolations from previous studies, the frequency of FXIII deficiency is estimated to be one in 2 million individuals, corresponding to a few thousand patients worldwide Deficiency of pFXIII down to 2–3% of the reference interval (14–28 mg L The cause of FXIII deficiency can be either congenital or acquired. Congenital FXIII deficiency is an autosomal recessive disease affecting the gene encoding FXIII-A ( Acquired FXIII deficiency causes impaired function or loss of pFXIII. Generation of antibodies against FXIII, impairing either the activation, the activity, or the binding to fibrin, or decreasing its plasma half-life, is most frequently observed During wound healing, a provisional matrix is produced. This forms the basis for the invasion of cells involved in tissue regeneration. This provisional matrix is invaded by leukocytes, which phagocytose debris and bacteria from the wound. The inflammatory phase is followed by the proliferative stage, where invading stromal cells such as fibroblasts and endothelial cells (ECs) replace the provisional matrix with granulation tissue, which matures in the remodeling phase In recent years, increasing evidence has suggested a role for pFXIII in wound healing pFXIII plays a role in wound healing in several ways, as depicted in At the site of vascular injury, prothrombotic factors of the subendothelium, including tissue factor, collagen, and collagen-bound von Willebrand factor (VWF), become exposed to the circulating blood, leading to activation of the coagulation cascade and pFXIII, and subsequent facilitation of hemostasis The transglutaminase activity of pFXIII is not restricted to fibrin, and other proteins are also incorporated into the forming clot. Inhibitors of the fibrinolytic system, e.g. α In addition to stabilization of the fibrin clot and the integration of proteins and platelets, FXIII is involved in platelet spreading and the subsequent CR, which is an important event in primary hemostasis. pFXIII and platelet cFXIII are known to be necessary for CR, at least in mice, whereas cFXIII plays a role in human platelet spreading The recurrent bleeding episodes observed in FXIII-deficient individuals resulting from insufficient platelet function combined with reduced cross-linking and strength of the early provisional matrix may therefore be explained by lack of FXIII. The catalytic activity of pFXIII reduces the paracellular flux over the endothelium. This has been demonstrated in In the above models, pFXIII administration reduced the injury-induced leakage of blood constituents and edema formation following endothelial damage. Furthermore, reduced exudation and leakage of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and other proteins from the circulation reduce degradation of the provisional matrix The Recently, Loof Patients with chronic inflammatory conditions, including IBD After the formation of a provisional matrix, with the incorporated molecules cross-linked by pFXIII, the matrix becomes infiltrated by inflammatory cells, sprouting blood vessels and fibroblasts. The cells communicate directly with the ECM via integrins and other matrix receptors The polymorphonuclear cells (PMNs) are the first to invade the provisional matrix and surrounding inflamed tissue. They are recruited by growth factors and cytokines, including transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), platelet-derived growth factor, interleukin-8, and chemokine ligand 1 Indications of the mechanism by which cFXIII regulates cellular functions are emerging. Studies have shown that the motility of monocyte-derived dendritic cells is positively influenced by differentiation-dependent elevation of cFXIII Approximately 4 days after an injury, during granulation tissue formation, the provisional matrix is invaded by fibroblasts and sprouting ECs. These cells are stimulated by platelet-secreted factors within the matrix, including basic fibroblast growth factor (FGF), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), insulin-like growth factor-1, and various other growth factors, together with PMN-secreted chemoattractants Fibronectin is cross-linked by pFXIII, and it plays an important role in cellular infiltration during wound healing. Thus, cross-linking of fibrin and incorporation of fibronectin seem to be necessary for optimal fibroblast proliferation and crossing into the provisional matrix Angiogenesis is the sprouting of new vessels from existing capillaries, and it is a fundamental part of granulation tissue formation and wound healing. Besides angiogenic factors such as FGF, angiopoietin, and TGF-β, VEGF is one of the most crucial regulators of angiogenesis. Activation of VEGF receptor 2 (VEGFR-2) on the endothelium induces the proliferation, migration and survival of ECs by activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases, Akt, and Rac/Rho GTPases, respectively ( Guidance of the migrating cells into the wound bed is regulated by interactions with the ECM, and integrins are essential to this process. Integrins are cell surface receptors that allow the adherence and directional migration of cells, and integrins transmit intracellular signals in response to extracellular changes. One of the most important integrins in angiogenesis is α Besides the indirect angiogenic stimulation by pFXIII during wound healing through the retention of integrin-interacting macromolecules, pFXIII additionally mediates direct angiogenic signaling. Dardik Cario A range of exploratory studies have examined the potential use of FXIII in various clinical conditions, on the basis of its wound-healing capacity. In a rat burn wound model, pFXIII levels were reduced as a consequence of consumption, and wound healing times were subsequently increased. Subsequent administration of pFXIII significantly decreased the wound-healing times As previously mentioned, pFXIII has been shown to limit postoperative bleeding and vessel exudation Recently, FXIII has attracted interest in the field of mineralized tissues, as FXIII has been shown to be involved in the mineralization process during bone formation. In bone, FXIII-A is expressed in a differentiation-dependent manner by both chondrocytes and osteoblasts, together with another transglutaminase (TGase), TG-2. The effects of TGases are still unknown, but their expression is correlated with the hypertrophic zones of the growth plate in bone. cFXIII is important for collagen I secretion, a prerequisite for osteoblast differentiation, and ECM-bound pFXIII is involved in stabilization of the matrix by cross-linking. Hence, FXIII is expected to play an important role during cellular differentiation and ECM mineralization of bone. Redundancy between their TGase activities seems to exist, as knock-out of either TG-2 or FXIII-A in mice is compatible with bone formation, whereas non-discriminating TGase inhibitors inhibit osteoblast differentiation and mineralization IBD is a diagnosis for a variety of chronic intestinal diseases, of which ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn's disease (CD) are the two most common entities The clinical efficacy of pFXIII is uncertain, as four studies showed an effect This inconsistency in the reported results could possibly be attributable to differences in the dosing of FXIII and applied endpoints, and/or inconsistent and uncontrolled patient selection criteria. Furthermore, the studies have mainly been based on small, open exploratory study groups, often without control groups or with an inadequate number of patients. Accordingly, the potential therapeutic effect of FXIII on mucosal healing in IBD is still unknown. On the basis of current knowledge, FXIII seems to have enhancing effects on several aspects of the wound-healing process. Deficiency of FXIII or reduced pFXIII levels have also been correlated with prolonged wound healing, indicating a clinical potential for FXIII. The conditions that display reduced pFXIII levels are diverse, and show a relationship with recurrent bleeding and inflammation, including surgical procedures. Retention of bacteria and promotion of the immune response are important processes in most diseases involving tissue damage. Furthermore, limitation of vessel exudation in combination with stimulation of interstitial cell proliferation and migration is important for a proper wound response together with increased angiogenesis. Patients with active IBD, among a range of other conditions, could potentially benefit from all of these FXIII-mediated effects, as epithelial restitution is generally thought to be of importance for bringing this disorder into remission In IBD patients, the increased level of mucosa-resident bacteria, the epithelial ulceration and the intense inflammation-dependent angiogenesis in the intestinal tissue point to generally impaired mucosal healing. Angiogenesis can be viewed as a two-edged sword, on the one hand being beneficial for wound healing, but on the other hand leading to leaky capillaries and a weakened endothelial barrier, promoting exudation, inflammation, and tissue damage, when uncontrolled Taken together, these findings show that FXIII, by virtue of its diverse mechanisms of action, is involved in a series of tissue-regenerating processes, as it supports the wound-healing process from the initial damage, through inflammation, to the final remodeling phase. pFXIII influences a number of processes involved in general wound healing, as underlined by the reduced wound-healing capacity observed in FXIII-deficient individuals. pFXIII stabilizes the epithelial and mucosal barriers through its diverse effects, including enhancement of clot stability, increased platelet adhesion, reduced edema formation, limitation of bacterial intrusion, and increased infiltration and survival of inflammatory cells and fibroblasts. It stimulates proliferation and migration of the intestinal epithelium, and promotes angiogenic signaling, which together may increase the wound-healing capacities of tissues. Patients with chronic inflammatory conditions and/or recurrent bleeding have reduced levels and activity of pFXIII. The pFXIII level often correlates inversely with disease activity (e.g. in IBD). On the basis of the wound-healing effects of pFXIII, exogenous supplementation of FXIII may increase tissue restitution in a range of clinical conditions that are correlated with reduced pFXIII levels. P. H. Kvist is employed by Novo Nordisk A/S, Maaloev, Denmark. The other authors state that they have no conflict of interest.