A method based on single-particle tests has been developed to characterise the pre-weakening effect of high voltage pulses on ores. A pre-weakening index, PWI, defined as the percentage change in ore breakage resistance indicator (A
                     *
                     b) per unit of specific energy, is used to evaluate the energy efficiency of an electrical comminution machine, and to assess an ore’s amenability to pre-weakening by high voltage pulses. A reduced JKRBT (JK Rotary Breakage Tester) testing procedure using five tests (instead of the standard 12 tests per sample) to determine the ore breakage parameters, makes characterisation by high voltage pulse pre-weakening more practical.
                  A gold–copper ore sample treated by high voltage pulses, based on single-particle tests with a specific energy of 1.6kWh/t, achieved an A
                     *
                     b change from 31 to 84 at a nominal particle size of 30mm, representing a 171% pre-weakening result. X-ray tomography images show the induced cracks/microcracks in the pulses-treated rocks. The pre-weakening effect was found more pronounced for larger fragments, suggesting that the use of high voltage pulses to pre-weaken AG/SAG mill feed may result in more significant benefits in terms of energy savings or increased throughput than pre-weakening ball mill feed.In the 1950s, Russian researchers who used high voltage pulse technology to decompose water into oxygen and hydrogen found that the water shock waves generated by the pulses were powerful and suitable for crushing rocks ( A more efficient technique of rock breaking by high voltage pulses is called electrical disintegration, in which the energy of high voltage pulses is transferred to the rock by electrodes directly contacting the surface of the rock immersed in water. This differs from electrohydraulic disintegration, in which the energy is transferred through the surrounding water in the form of a shock wave impact ( Another term for high voltage pulse breakage is electrodynamic disintegration (including the term electrical pulse disaggregation, EPD), in which the electrodes do not contact the rock surface directly, as a small water gap exists between the electrodes and rock particles ( The term “electrical comminution” is used here to cover electrohydraulic disintegration, electrical disintegration, electrodynamic disintegration, and electrical pulse disaggregation, all using high voltage pulses. In the past half century, research on electrical comminution for the mineral industry has been focused mainly on mineral liberation. There are a number of reports demonstrating the effectiveness of mineral liberation by high voltage pulse processing (  The Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre (JKMRC) has conducted research on electrical comminution in the past five years with the objective of making a step-change in comminution energy efficiency for the mineral industry. One of the research aims is to develop a technique for pre-weakening of ore particles by high voltage pulses. Instead of using nearly 100 The JKMRC work demonstrated that for a number of ores (such as gold, gold–copper, lead/zinc, platinum and industrial rocks), with specific energy levels ranging between 1 and 3 Through experimental study and numerical simulations, the JKMRC researchers find that there are many factors affecting the pre-weakening results ( Initially the pulse fragmentation experiments were performed in an open circuit: a batch of particles about 700 In the open-circuit treatment, over half of the feed particles remained in the parent feed size fraction after the first cycle of treatment using 1.5 In the close-circuit experiment, the ore breakage resistance indicator A number of experiments were conducted to investigate the possible reasons for this anomaly. Three particles of 26.5–45 This indicated that ore particles further from the electrodes did not receive the same pulse discharge energy as the particles under the electrode in the existing design of the selFrag process vessel. The investigation confirmed that the energy consumption recorded by the selFrag instrument was not evenly distributed among all ore particles in the process vessel. The unbroken particles in each cycle treatment may not be attributable to their resistance to high voltage pulses, but rather to the fact that they did not receive pulse discharges. Although it may be argued that shock waves can agitate particles in the vessel, the system does not permit the optimal use of pulse energy for pre-weakening of ore particles. During the three-particle test, three pulses were discharged, one pulse for each particle on average. The product size distribution and the ore breakage resistance indicator In addition, it has been found that water quality affects the efficiency of high voltage pulses. In a laboratory test, minerals with high permittivity are preferentially liberated out of the ore particles. More and more ions are dissolved in the water, which increases the conductivity of water. The increased water conductivity may attract the pulse discharges to the water, rather than to the ore particles. As a result, the process efficiency decreases as the proportion of electrohydraulic disintegration increases, and the electrodynamic disintegration decreases in a batch test using hundreds of continuous pulse discharges. To characterise the pre-weakening effect on a given ore by high voltage pulses, and hence to assess the required energy for electrical comminution in order to achieve such a pre-weakening effect, the recorded energy consumption must be the true energy applied to every ore particle. However, the existing testing procedures do not meet this basic requirement, given the uneven distribution of pulse energy in the existing design of the laboratory scale processing system, and the impact of the water quality on pulse energy efficiency. Therefore a new and unbiased characterisation method should be developed to assess the high voltage pulse pre-weakening effect on ores. To overcome the limitations associated with the previous selFrag batch tests, a single-particle characterisation method has been developed to determine the pre-weakening effect on ore particles. In the new testing method, only a single particle is placed each time inside the process vessel, directly under the electrode and immersed in water. One single pulse is discharged to treat the particle. The specific energy used for a particle in the size range of 26.5–53 The products from each test on the same feed size are combined for sizing and ore breakage resistance testing. Approximately 10   A question may be raised regarding the statistical validity of the single-particle test, since it is not practical to test a large number of particles in the single-particle test. Duplicate tests were conducted to investigate the influence of particle mass on the variations of breakage probability. The breakage probability refers to mass percentage of material broken into sub-parent size fractions in each cycle. The detail of Ore 1 has been described previously. Ore 2 was from an iron oxide copper–gold deposit collected in overseas. The orebody is hosted in intensely sodium metasomatised Archean volcanic and intrusive rocks. The ore is constituted by chalcopyrite, magnetite, minor pyrite, and trace molybdenite. Alteration minerals closely associated with chalcopyrite include amphibole, epidote, apatite, calcite, quartz, and locally biotite. Each ore sample was divided by a rotary divider to form duplicate samples, and the duplicate samples were treated with selFrag at identical conditions respectively. The breakage probability in each cycle was recorded. Standard deviations of the breakage probability between the duplicate samples in each cycle were determined.  More detailed study is under way to investigate the influences of electrical comminution properties of various ores on pre-weakening results. Since variation in electrical comminution properties of a given ore is unknown before pulses-treatment, it is difficult to pre-select a correct number of particles for a single-particle test. It is recommended the pre-weakening characterisation test be conducted with duplicate or triplicate samples. This will allow S.D. be determined, and hence the confidence on the significance level of an effect of interest be established. The use of a single-particle test for ore characterisation is not new. It has been the standard procedure to determine ore breakage characteristics for the point load test, Hopkinson bar test, the Drop Weight test, and the JKRBT test. The same single-particle testing approach that has been successfully applied in mechanical breakage characterisation is adopted and further developed as a robust method for characterising the high voltage pulse pre-weakening effect. The single-particle pre-weakening characterisation method offers a number of advantages over the previous 700 The particle is guaranteed to receive the same pulse input energy. This eliminates any uncertainty regarding whether or not the unbroken particles are attributed to their high resistance to the pulse breakage, or to a machine design factor which prevents the particles from receiving the same level of input energy. Fresh water is used for every particle, thus removing the water contamination influence from the pre-weakening result. The particles with a high resistance to the pulse breakage can be identified. This allows further research be carried out to find how ore properties affect the pre-weakening results. More accurate energy requirements in relation to the pre-weakening result can be established. Since the machine-dependent factor has been minimised in the single-particle tests, the pre-weakening result can be used as a baseline to evaluate the efficiency of other electrical comminution machines (e.g. pilot scale or full scale) treating the same ore. The pre-weakening effect on ore particles by high voltage pulses can be characterised in terms of the percentage change in the indicator of ore resistance to breakage ( The product ‘fineness index’ Taking derivative of Eq. Eq. The use of an ‘average’ set of Eqs. In a standard JKRBT test, particles in four size fractions are tested, each with three specific energy levels, with 30 particles being tested per size/energy level. The JKRBT data are then fitted to Eq. To do one set of the standard JKRBT tests, 360 particles in the designated size fractions are required, which need to be selected from a large amount of particles. This requirement presents a significant burden in the pulse pre-weakening tests, particularly using the single-particle test procedure. A quick way to estimate the There may be a number of limitations associated with the use of single JKRBT test to estimate Mining companies are often interested in knowing the pre-weakening effect on their ores by high voltage pulses, as well as how the pre-weakened ore responds in a grinding mill in terms of mill throughput and energy consumption. The simulation software package, JKSimMet, can predict the performance of a comminution circuit through simulations. For this purpose, detailed ore breakage characteristic parameters are required. To generate sufficient particles for a standard JKRBT test, more than 300 particles in the feed size range of 26.5–53 The reduced JKRBT test is based on the same principle that the first author of the present paper used to derive a reduced DWT test procedure in 2007. The principle can be illustrated by The data consist of 12 testing points (four sizes A reduced JKRBT testing method has been developed, in which only five tests at various energy and size combinations were consistently used to determine the model characteristic parameters. The characteristic parameters, together with the size-dependent model (Eq. A statistical The single-particle pulse pre-weakening characterisation method has been applied to various ore samples. An example is presented in The previous batch test was conducted in a closed-circuit to break all 26.5–45 The data show that the pre-weakening result by the seven cycle closed-circuit treatment (68% change in Evidence of cracks/microcracks is given in the X-ray tomography images of the untreated and the pulse-treated ore particles, as shown in The data in In the single-particle tests, the majority of particles will break when subjected to one pulse. On the other hand, fragments from different ore samples treated by high voltage pulses show different values of Considering the cumulative specific energy as the input and the percentage change in The PWI can be used in two ways. For a given ore treated by electrical pulses, the PWI can be employed to evaluate the efficiency of a machine (such as the laboratory selFrag in comparison with pilot scale selFrag), or the efficiency of a process (such as the treatments in open circuit compared with closed circuit, as shown in this paper), or the efficiency of operational conditions (such as energy input, voltage and water). The larger PWI indicates the higher efficiency of a machine, a process or a set of operational conditions. As shown in Since the single pulse treating a single particle represents the optimum energy efficiency for pre-weakening, the PWI can be used to assess the efficiency of a new design. This is similar to the utilisation of traditional single-particle impact breakage tests. For example, crushing may take up to 1.5 times of the single-particle breakage energy, and a hammer mill may take as high as 3.5 times of the single-particle breakage energy due to its extensive internal circulation ( Another application of the PWI is to assess the amenability of various ores to electrical comminution. Using the standard single-particle tests which represent the optimal pulse energy utilisation to treat different ore samples, the larger PWI value indicates the better amenability of the ore to high voltage pulse pre-weakening technology. It is emphasised that in order to assess the amenability of a given ore sample, the PWI should be derived from the optimised testing conditions, rather than at a set of identical testing conditions. For example, some ore particles may require a higher voltage than others to achieve a desired pre-weakening result. If the machine setting condition does not represent the optimal pre-weakening conditions for a specified ore sample, the effect of machine settings may overstate the amenability of the ore. The PWI offers mining companies, interested in the electrical comminution technology, a clear reference point to evaluate the potential benefits of using electrical comminution on their ores. Since the reduced JKRBT tests on the pulse breakage product are conducted using various particle sizes and impact energy combinations, the data can be used to fit the characteristic parameters of the size-dependent breakage model (Eq. Both pulse-treated and untreated samples show that the larger particles are weaker (higher Research conducted at the JKMRC found that in the existing design of the laboratory scale selFrag installed at the JKMRC, discharges develop in an array around the electrode axis, and particles further from the electrode axis do not receive the same level of pulse energy as the ones directly under the electrode. The pre-weakening effect determined through the standard 700 A single-particle subjected to a single pulse discharge method has been developed to characterise the pre-weakening effect of ores. This method effectively eliminates the impact of machine-inefficiency factor, and decouples the machine-factor from the ore-factor. The results have confirmed that this method can better characterise the ore amenability to the electrical pulse pre-weakening. A reduced JKRBT testing procedure has been developed, which uses five tests per sample on various combinations of particle sizes and impact energy levels, instead of the standard 12 tests. The historic data, including 68 sets of JKRBT tests, were used to validate the reduced JKRBT testing procedure and confirmed that the reduced JKRBT testing procedure can produce statistically identical A pre-weakening index, PWI, which is defined as percentage change in An example of the single-particle pre-weakening test on a gold–copper ore sample shows that the indicator of ore resistance to breakage changed from The authors would like to thank Anglo Platinum, BHP/Billiton, Newcrest Mining, Rio Tinto, Vale and Xstrata in providing the opportunities to test their ore samples using the high voltage pulse technology. Part of the JKRBT data used to validate the reduced JKRBT testing procedure was from the JKRBT Validation Project, which was sponsored by Anglo Platinum, Barrick Gold, BHP Billiton, Rio Tinto and Teck. The authors appreciate the assistance given by the JKMRC pilot plant technicians in conducting part of the experimental work. The detailed comments from the journal reviewers are gratefully appreciated.