Purpose
                  The purpose of this systematic review was to assess the literature evaluating the clinical and radiological outcomes following less invasive surgical stabilisation system (LISS) fixation of distal femoral fractures (AO 32/33).
               
                  Methods
                  A review of EMBASE, Medline, CINAHL and AMED from their inception to November 2008, sources of grey literature and a pertinent hand search of specialist orthopaedic journals was undertaken.
               
                  Results
                  Twenty-one studies assessing 663 patients with 694 fractures were reviewed. The findings suggest that the LISS system may be an appropriate fixation method for the management of distal femoral fractures. However, there remains a high incidence of loss of reduction (n
                     =134; 19%), delayed or non-union (n
                     =40; 6%) and implant failure (n
                     =38; 5%). On analysis, such complications were largely confined to articles published before 2005, therefore during the infancy of the widespread clinical application of this trauma system. On critical appraisal, the evidence-base remains limited by recruiting small, under-powered sample sizes and poorly accounting for confounding variables such as osteoporosis, diabetes, multi-trauma and fracture classification.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Further study is required to assess the outcomes of LISS fixation in specific patient populations, and to compare the outcome of this fixation method to condylar plates and intrameduallary devices, to determine the optimal management strategy for this complex patient group.Distal femoral fractures arise through two principle injury mechanisms. The less invasive stabilisation system (LISS, Synthes Paoli, PA, USA) was developed by the AO/ASIF in the late 1990s. A number of papers have been published assessing the early, mid- and longer-term results of this technique. However, the findings and methodological quality of this evidence-base has not been previously evaluated. The purpose of this study is to therefore systematically review the evidence assessing the radiological and clinical outcomes of the LISS system in the management of distal femoral fractures. All clinical trials investigating the clinical and/or radiological outcomes following LISS fixation of distal femoral fracture AO/ASIF classification AO 32 or AO 33. The review was non-specific to subjects’ age or gender, and included those with isolated injuries or poly-trauma. Cases of periprosthetic and non-periprosthetic fractures as well as pathological fractures were accepted for review. We included unpublished material including university theses and dissertations and conference proceedings, in an attempt to limit publication bias. We included all language publications, except Chinese language articles. Citations were excluded if they were case reports of less than 5 cases, comments, letters, editorials, protocols, guidelines, and review papers. However, the reference lists of review papers were assessed to assess for relevant papers adhering to our selection criteria. Animal and cadaver studies were excluded. Papers which included patients managed with a LISS for distal femoral fractures, but did not differentiate these results from other fixation methods, were excluded. This applied to one paper after assessing ordered full text manuscripts. The primary search employed the electronic databases Medline (1950–October 2008), CINAHL (1982–October 2008) and AMED (1985–October 2008) and EMBASE (1974–October 2008), searched via Ovid using the following terms: “femoral fractures” AND “less invasive surgical stabilisation” OR “LISS”. The secondary search assessed unpublished or grey literature was evaluated using the databases, System for Information on Grey Literature in Europe (SIGLE), the National Technical Information Service, the National Research Register (UK), the British Library's Integrated Catalogue, and Current Controlled Trials database for recently completed trials. A hand search was also undertaken to identify any additional publications adhering to the selection criteria using the journals the British and American editions of the Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery (1997–October 2008), The Knee (1997–October 2008), Injury (1997–October 2008) and the Archives of Orthopaedic and Trauma Surgery (1997–October 2008). Two investigators (TS, CH) followed the defined selection criteria and independently evaluated all identified titles and abstracts. Full manuscripts were ordered of those citations which adhered to these criteria. Where eligibility was uncertain, the full manuscript was ordered. Reference lists of all retrieved articles were assessed to identify any publications not initially identified. Full texts were then screened against the study eligibility criteria by the same two reviewers. If disagreement arose on paper eligibility, a census was reached through discussion. Citations were not excluded on poor methodological quality. The two investigators were not blinded to the source or authors of the identified papers. Data was extracted from those papers which fully satisfy the eligibility criteria. This was tabulated onto a spreadsheet by a single investigator (TS), which was verified by two investigators (CH, RM). The exceptions to this were that data from German publications were extracted by KS. Data extracted included: author names and publication date; study design; sample size; population characteristics including diagnosis and fracture pattern as described, subject age and gender, co-morbidities; presence and type of a joint replacement implant method of diagnosis; method of fracture fixation; clinical and radiological outcome measures; follow-up period; post-operative management; statistical analysis; results; any relevant methodological limitations. After reviewing the search results, there appeared insufficient data on subject characteristics, such as mechanism of injury, time from injury to surgery, proportion of osteoporotic subjects or patient's with diabetes, detailed surgical procedures or frequency of concomitant injuries, to determine whether there was substantial heterogeneity between the studies. Accordingly, it was thought inappropriate to perform a meta-analysis. All included papers were assessed against an appraisal based on the Critical Appraisal Skills Programme The results of the search are demonstrated in The literature presented the findings of 663 patients with 694 fractures. The fractures were classified as AO 33 C ( Eleven articles documented the use of different plates. 5 hole plates were used in 48 cases, 9 hole plates in 213, and 13 hole plates were used for 168 fractures. The use of bone grafting was acknowledged in 11 studies. This included 8 studies which stated that bone grafting was not used in any case, 7 fractures did require bone grafting, whilst 2 cases in 2 studies reported the use of bone cement during their reconstructions. Follow-up period ranged from 3 months  Time to radiological union was presented in 13 papers. Mean time to radiological union was 18.2 weeks ranging from 11 weeks  The CASP appraisal results are presented in The goals for fixation of distal femoral fractures are: anatomical reduction of intra-articular elements, rapid fracture union and, early mobilisation with minimal complications. Although this review suggests that the LISS fixation system may be appropriate for distal femoral fractures, previous authors have suggested that more traditional fixation methods such as external fixation, supracondylar or intermedullary nails and condylar plates may also be indicated. A number of authors suggested that the LISS fixation system can be a relatively easy procedure, simplifying the surgical technique for percutaneous plate osteosynthesis. Failures in plate placement were exhibited in Schütz et al., There was a high incidence of proximal screw pull out in the evidence-base. Authors have cited a number of reasons for why this may be the case. Wong et al. When to commence weight-bearing appears to be an important prognostic indicator to post-operative complications. Although an objective of the LISS is to promote early mobilisation, Button et al., Unlike conventional plating, this review suggested that LISS fixation does not require bone grafting in most cases. The incidences of periprosthetic fractures have increased reflecting an ageing population, and increases in primary arthroplasty surgery. Given the high proportion of cases with open fractures in each case series, the infection rates were reportedly low. Fankhauser et al. The papers included in this review poorly assessed quality of life. Furthermore, mobility was only assessed in Kanabar et al., The results of this systematic review would suggest that the LISS fixation system appears to be a suitable fixation technique to supra- and intra-condylar femoral fractures. However, there remains a high incidence of loss of reduction ( All authors have no financial or personal relationships with other people or organisations that could inappropriately influence (bias) this work. We thank the library staff at the Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital's Sir Benjamin Gooch Library for their assistance in gathering the papers required for this study. 