Rock fragmentation, which is the fragment size distribution of blasted rock, is one of the most important indices for estimating the effectiveness of blast work. In this paper a new form of the Kuz—Ram model is proposed in which a prefactor of 0.073 is included in the formula for prediction of X
                     50. This new equation has a correlation coefficient that is greater than 0.98. In addition, a new approach is proposed to calculate the Uniformity Index, n. A Blastability Index (BI) is used to correct the calculation of the Uniformity Index of Cunningham, where BI reflects the uniformity of the distribution. Interestingly, this correction also can be observed in the Kuznetsov—Cunningham—Ouchterlony (KCO) model, which uses In situ block size as a parameter for calculating the curve-undulation in the Swebrec function. However, it is in contrast to prediction of X
                     50 as the central parameter in Swebrec and Rosin–Rammler distribution functions. The new model is a two parameter fragmentation size distribution that can be easily determined in the field. However, it does not consider the timing effect, or upper limit for sizes, as does the original Kuz—Ram model. The model is used at the Sungun Mine, and it does a good job of predicting the fines produced during blasting.The Kuz—Ram model, which was proposed by Cunningham, has been used as a common model in industry for predicting rock fragmentation size distribution by blasting There are some models that proposed to improve the Kuz—Ram's model's inability to predict the fragment size distribution. The CZM In the CZM model, the size distribution of rock fragments consists of coarse and fine parts. According to CZM, two different mechanisms control the rock fragments produced by blasting. The coarse part is produced by tensile fracturing, and the Kuz—Ram model is used to predict this part of the size distribution. However, fines are produced by compressive fracturing in the crushed zone, for which the Rosin–Rammler function gets a different value of In the TCM model, two Rosin—Rammler functions are used for ROM size distribution. TCM is a five-parameter model in which two of the parameters are related to the coarse fraction, one is related to the fines fraction, and the other two are related to fines part of the distribution. In addition, by replacing the original Rosin—Rammler equation with the Swebrec function, the Kuznetsov—Cunningham—Ouchterlony (KCO) model is arrived at to predict the ROM size distribution Spathis suggested that Riana et al. An empirical equation for the relationship between the mean fragment size and applied blast energy per unit volume of rock (powder factor) has been developed by Kuznetsov The Blastability Index, which was first proposed by Lilly A useful indirect check on the index of uniformity has been performed by Cunningham Based on a modified blastability index, the geomechanical properties of ten blast sites were collected prior to blasting. Several laboratory tests were carried out according to ISRM standards to determine the mechanical and physical parameters such as Young's modulus, density and uniaxial compressive strength and the overall results of these tests and collection have been shown in After estimating the ROM size distribution for each case of blasting at the Sungun Mine, image processing studies were carried out for 10 blast sites muck piles. All blasts results were analyzed after conducting blasting operation at three positions of muck pile (soon after blasting, after loading around half of muck pile and end of muck pile). For image processing, 15 digital photographs were taken from each muck pile position and then processed by the Goldsize program. The analyzed photo results were merged to get a better analysis of the photo analyses. Since there are some fine particles that are hidden, the results obtained by image analysis are always different from those of by sieving. Fines correction usually is the common deal to overcome this problem in practice. Some methods that can be used to correct fines have been discussed in the literature In this paper, for correcting the fines a representative sample was provided from muck pile. The sample was analyzed by sieving and image processing. There were some differences between the sieving and imaging methods. Actually, image analysis did not include particles below 40 After merging the fines and coarse size distributions obtained by Eq. As By analyzing the data from Sungun the two equations below are proposed to predict ROM size distribution. The Rosin—Rammler function is used as the size distribution with To validate the proposed model, five blast sites were studied ( As mentioned in previous sections, Kuznetsov's model is based on geomechanical, geometrical parameters as well as explosive properties. In this research, 10 blast sites were chosen with comparable blast geometry and explosive type. Only the geomechanical properties of rock masses were variable. Rock mass properties are defined by Rock masses are an anisotropic and inhomogeneous media, with different physical and mechanical behaviors in different directions. There are many parameters used in the technical description of rock masses, of which the blastability index uses some, such as rock mass description, joint spacing, joint plane angle, etc. Therefore, geomechanical properties as the most important parameters in rock blasting are not considered explicitly As the blast geometry and the explosive used were equal for all blasts, it can be concluded that these differences arise from the incomplete description of rock mass properties. The blastability index is representative of rock mass properties in the Kuznetsov's equation. Paying attention to the parameters used in the In addition, exponent As the only variable in all 10 blasts is the rock mass geomechanical parameters, it seems that there may be a relation between rock fragmentation uniformity and rock mass properties. Certainly, assessment of rock mass properties effects on size distribution of rock fragments is difficult. Existence of discontinuities with different properties, anisotropy and inhomogeneity of rock mass media, adds to the blasting mechanisms complexity. This complexity indicates that separation of gas pressure and shock wave efficiencies is difficult. Thus, achievement of a relation in this case requires more researches. In Sungun Mine, there are several joint sets, which create uniform blocks. The explosive type used at the Sungun is ANFO, which has high gas energy (EB) and produces high gas pressures. The gas particles passing the joints activate the elder joints and then liberate the insitu blocks. In some sites at the Sungun Mine, blasting creates just few new fracture surfaces; it just produces blocks whose external surfaces are altered. These results strengthen the theory of rock mass properties effects on uniformity of size distribution of rock fragments. In this research, a relation between real uniformity of rock fragments and blastability index was obtained. Through decreasing the joints spacing, the size of insitu blocks becomes more uniform. By releasing adequate gas particles, the blocks will liberate. Boulder formation is common in widely spaced jointed rock mass blasting Since the KCO On the other hand, KCO uses a parameter, In this research, the size distribution of rock fragmentation at the Sungun Copper Mine was predicted by Kuz—Ram model. Results of image processing show that Kuz—Ram model overestimates the ROM size distribution. Therefore, the Results confirm that the uniformity of size distribution of rock fragmentation is a function of rock mass geomechanical parameters. The proposed equation to calculate modified the uniformity index is in the form of a power model. Increasing the Moreover, the new form of Kuz—Ram has some differences and similarities with KCO model. Firstly, it uses Rosin—Rammler function but KCO adopts Swebrec function. The prefactor that are applied to mean fragment size are also different. However, it may rise from different blast sites. Interestingly, curve-undulation parameter, However, the proposed model does not consider the timing effect and upper limit for sizes as the original Kuz—Ram does. It is good to mention that it can also predict the fines produced in the blasting at the Sungun Mine. Five other blast sites were used to verify the newly proposed model at the Sungun; results show its reliability in prediction of rock fragmentation size distribution. The authors wish to sincerely acknowledge the full financial support provided by Sungun Copper Mine and Sahand University of Technology. Grateful thanks are recorded to Dr. Moomivand, Dr. Qanbari, Mr. Hajiloo, Mr. Karbasi and Mr. Mahammadzada for their continuous support in during of the project.