An experimental and numerical investigation on performance of piles with partially-screwed shaft that were installed in sands was presented. Static load tests were conducted on a series of model piles to examine pile–sand interactions and the bearing capacity. The tested piles were varied in thread pitch in order to examine its effects on pile performance. Digital imaging correlations were used to visualise the failure slips of sands at locations of interest. The test results were used to validate a discrete element model (DEM) that was developed to assess the pile–sand interactions at micro-scale. The DEM model was applied to examine the effects of important pile geometric characteristics on the load transfer and bearing capacity of piles. The characteristics included the pitch, length of screw section, and shaft diameter. The simulation results suggested that the screw section and bottommost thread significantly influenced the pile bearing capacity. An optimum geometry of pile that maximised pile–sand interactions and prompted the pile performance was suggested.Piles with screwed shaft, or partially-screwed piles, have been increasingly used as an improved foundation solution in a variety of applications The partially-screwed pile expects to optimise performance of pile. The diameter of the upper shaft section is enlarged or intact which increases the resistance of this section counteracting the greater axial force at the top as presented in Although the presence of screwed shaft has improved performance of pile, the foundation design is usually conducted by referring to methods for shafts which however fail to take advantage of screw threads. An important performance indicator is the ultimate bearing capacity of pile. One approach as suggested in Whereas earlier research work has verified the performance of the partially-screwed piles, discrepancies between the model predictions and the field test results still exist This study was conducted to examine the performance of pile by considering the pile geometry, in particular the details of the thread pitch, length of screw section and shaft diameter. The goals were achieved through conducting load tests on a series of model piles. The piles were varied in screw thread. The digital image correlation was used to capture the pile performance at micro-scale. A numerical model was developed and applied to examine thread- and shaft–soil interactions and to gain an understanding of pile failure mechanism. A parametric study was conducted on representative piles to optimise its design. The set-up that was used for the pile load test is presented in We designed and tested five piles as summarised in We loaded the piles using a displacement-controlled method, as in a static load test. The pile was compressed downward at a rate of 0.3 mm/min, equally 0.05% strain per minute. The loading continued until the pile attained a failure or settlement The DIC is a tool developed to track and visualise full-field displacement and strains of deformed materials. As opposed to strain gauges and extensometers, the DIC gathers fine and extensive details of deformation, and maps it into displacement vectors. An area of interest (AOI) is specified and divided into an evenly spaced grid as presented in In the current study, the AOI had a coverage of 869 (H) × 608 (W) mm, equally 5000 (H) × 3500 (W) pixel, which covers the most area of influence. On the grid, each junction corresponded to a subset of 64 × 64 pixel, the size of which, as per The load–settlement ( We defined the dimension ratio, The sand displacement vector maps obtained by the DIC technique are presented in To gain a further insight into the sand particle displacement, the sand displacement vectors in The vertical displacement of sands beneath the pile is presented in The bearing capacity of the partially-screwed pile that is loaded vertically is contributed by five components of resistance, from the top to the bottom: the shaft skin friction, The shaft skin friction The failure slips of sands that are in the proximity of the shaft–screw junction and the screw threads (except the bottommost one) were constrained to limited zones ( The five components of resistance interact with each other when the pile is compressed to attain its ultimate bearing capacity. The interactions are dependent on the pile dimension ratio χ. In terms of the test results obtained by Mohajerani et al. The ultimate bearing capacities of piles that are predicted in terms of Eq. The DEM simulations were conducted to examine the shaft- and thread–sand interactions, to determine the components of resistance more accurately and therefore to improve the prediction of the ultimate bearing capacity. DEM simulations were conducted on the partially-screwed pile in the earlier study An assembly of discs was poured under gravity into a two-dimensional container of 600 (W) × 1100 (H) mm. The sizes agree with those of AOI that was used in the DIC analysis. The diameters of discs ranged between 2.4 and 4.8 mm. The diameters were up-scaled to reduce the disc number to a value at which the system can conduct stable computation and provide reliable simulation results. As a result the number was effectively reduced from 840,000 to 50,618. This upscaling method has been used in many previous DEM simulations on various particles (e.g. As for the DEM simulation in Although DEM simulation takes advantages in addressing engineering problems in granular and discontinuous materials, there have been limitations identified with its applications. The first is the scale to model. DEM uses an assembly of up to millions of particle number to simulate structures or soils and capture its dynamics. The simulation is relatively computationally intensive, which limits either the length of a simulation or the number of particles. This limitation becomes less significant due to advances in computing power, numerical algorithms and parallel processing capabilities (shared or distributed systems), however remains. The other limitation is determination of model parameters. Many parameters involve micro-mechanical properties (e.g. particle stiffness) and are difficult to measure directly or individually. Indirect calibration is widely accepted and applied, which however is suboptimal due to concern of suitability to new materials. Similar suitability concern arises from contact models adopted in DEM studies. The models are idealized into a range of categories, e.g. linear elastic, nonlinear elasto-plastic, rolling resistance and frictional models, however sometimes are chosen vaguely. DEM elements are also limited in replicating particle shapes, although clumps and clusters are used to reflect texture/angularity of particles. Nonetheless, this particle shape discrepancy is usually accounted for by adjusting element micro-mechanical properties so that in-bulk mechanical behaviour is captured. Conversely DEM provides a numerical tool of simulating discrete matter of a relatively small-scale system, and of describing the micro-mechanical behaviour of the system including particle contact force, grain crushing and particle breakage. To this end, DEM simulations are suitable for granular materials and many geomaterials (e.g., coal, ores, soil, rocks and aggregates) to examine the particulate-scale physical processes and explain the phenomena that is otherwise impossible to observe and discuss using experiment. However, to model a real scale problem, numerical tools for continuum matter is still preferable. The particle rotation field is related to the formation and development of the soil sliding surface. Usually, the particles rolling on the sliding surface is more obvious than that of the other parts The DEM program can capture contact force at any locations, which sheds light on ultimate bearing capacity. A barrier to tackle is to transform the contact forces captured in the two-dimensional simulation to equivalent resistance in the three-dimensional space in which the load tests were conducted. We used the approach developed in To meet the goal of optimising geometric characteristics of pile, it is worth examining the load contributions of individual sections of pile. The sections include the shaft, screw and the base. Their contributions to the bearing capacity, i.e., the load share ratio, are provided in The load share of the threads and rod skin, in relation to the load carried by the screw sections, are provided in In addition to the pitch, the proportion of screw section, The other geometric characteristic of pile that we examined was the shaft diameter This study examined effects of geometric characteristics of partially-screwed pile on the pile performance. The examination was completed through the laboratory model tests, digital image correlations and discrete element modelling simulations. The performance that was examined included the The ultimate bearing capacity reached the maximum value where the dimension ratio of pitch to pile diameter ranged from 1.0 to 1.33. Piles that were in this suggested range can effectively influence sands adjacent to the screw threads and optimally enable the sands to share the load acted on the pile. The ultimate bearing capacity increased nonlinearly with the presence of the screw section. Apportioning 2/3 of the pile length to the screw section was suggested to optimise the bearing capacity and axial force resistance of pile. The screw section shared the load in a capacity greater than the shaft section of the same pile does, for the scenarios examined in this study. Meanwhile, the screw section contributed to the bearing capacity much greater than the corresponding section of shaft pile. The bottommost thread provided the highest resistance, as opposed to the other threads. The sands next to the shaft section and screw rod failed due to skin friction; the sands surrounding the upper threads failed in local shear slips; and at the bottommost thread and pile base, sands failed in globally connected slips. An equation that predicts the ultimate bearing capacity of partially-screwed pile was developed in terms of Mohajerani et al.  The authors declared that there is no conflict of interest. This research is supported by the