The present review, the first of a series of three, aims to describe recent developments in solid-phase microextraction (SPME) technology in the fields of environmental analysis applied to complex environmental matrices. We offer the reader an introductory, concise discussion of SPME fundamentals followed by a perspective on the most commonly used sample-preparation methods. We give particular attention to a comparison of the more recent SPME developments. We especially emphasize the development of new devices, such as cold fiber and thin films. We address quantitation in complex environmental matrices in this review with a concise discussion on calibration strategies for SPME methods.Nowadays, extensive efforts towards modernization of analytical instrumentation have greatly simplified and at times even eliminated the need for complex, laborious sample-preparation methods prior to analysis. However, in most cases, sample preparation still represents the bottleneck in the pursuit of optimum analytical methodologies. In particular, the determination of trace-level analytes in complex matrices often requires the employment of extensive sample-preparation protocols prior to analysis. Steps often involved in sample preparation include extraction of analytes from the matrix, clean-up and pre-concentration, which are conducted in order to achieve adequate sensitivity for a particular analytical method. As such, simpler sample-preparation regimens are sought not only to decrease the time required to process samples, but also to diminish errors associated with each step of the procedure, as, statistically, the amount of uncertainty in a method is directly related to the number of steps that it contains. Automation of the complete workflow, including sample preparation, also improves reproducibility, while decreasing the labor required to prepare samples. Thus, one of the main goals of sample pre-treatment is to reduce the time and the labor involved in multistep sample-preparation techniques. Introduced in the early 1990s, solid-phase microextraction (SPME) addresses several challenges in traditional sample preparation, as it successfully integrates a number of analytical steps, such as sampling, extraction, pre-concentration, and, in case of gas chromatography (GC) applications, sample introduction for instrumental analysis In contrast to conventional exhaustive extraction methods, such as SPE, SPME is a non-exhaustive technique based on the partition equilibrium of the analytes between the sample matrix and the extraction phase. In SPME, the extraction phase can be exposed directly to the sample media (direct immersion, DI) or to its headspace (HS). When the SPME coating is placed directly in contact with the sample, the amount of analyte extracted at equilibrium (n In Equation When the sample volume is large enough (V Equation As depicted in The above explanation is a simplified overview on the fundamentals governing the SPME technique. A more comprehensive discussion in terms of theoretical fundamentals of SPME is out of the scope of the present review; however, readers seeking further SPME theory are strongly encouraged to consult the literature The extraction efficiency in SPME techniques can therefore be enhanced by increasing the magnitude of K Although saturation is rarely encountered in most applications of SPME, readers should be aware of this possibility in order to understand better possible bias in results obtained, and to correct their In summary, a mathematical description of the phenomenon can be given by the following equation for a two-analyte system at equilibrium conditions SPME is available in different configurations, depicted in Automated coupling of SPME to liquid chromatography (LC) was first achieved through the development of in-tube SPME. In contrast to fiber SPME, in-tube SPME consists of an extraction phase coated onto the inner walls of fused-silica tubing The simplified features of SPME contributed to its expanded applications, which, in turn, motivated the ever-growing set of novel advances in SPME sorbents, configurations and applications to a broader scope of sample matrices and analytes. In recent years, a number of review articles on SPME were published We have made a focused effort to provide a critical overview of the most recent advances in terms of development of novel SPME devices and applications within the complex matrices arena, including environmental (Part I), food (Part II) and bioanalysis (Part III). Another topic broadly discussed in the present series of reviews is the concern frequently expressed regarding the ability of SPME to provide reliable quantitation in complex samples due to its non-exhaustive nature. We classify the detailed discussion presented in this series of reviews by matrix, including a critical discussion of novel fundamental findings, developments, and applications of SPME, including their advantages and disadvantages, thus allowing the reader to make a decision over the most appropriate approaches. In this first part, we discuss critically practical strategies when implementing SPME in complex environmental matrices. From the viewpoint of environmental analysis, SPME has been successfully applied to sampling and analysis of volatile and semi-volatile organic pollutants in environmental samples, including water, air, soil, sludge, and sediments In light of the advantages presented by SPME, compared to traditional sample-preparation methods, especially that SPME can be easily deployed for on-site analysis, the following sections present recent developments and special considerations regarding the application of SPME methods to troublesome environmental matrices, such as wastewater and solid samples. Soil and sediment are complex sample matrices containing minerals, organic matter, air and water. Organic matter as part of soil composition can be strongly bound to minerals. Extraction from soil matrices is a process in which solutes desorb from the sample matrix and then dissolve into a selected solvent. Traditional sample-preparation methods include Soxhlet extraction (EPA 3540), automated Soxhlet extraction (EPA 3541), supercritical fluid extraction (SFE) (EPA 3560, 3561, 3562), accelerated solvent extraction (ASE), ultrasonic extraction (EPA 3550C), and microwave-assisted extraction (MAE) (EPA 3556). Such methods are time-consuming and tedious, and some of them require large quantities of organic solvents and/or additional devices. Expensive instrumentation, such as microwave and ultrasonic devices, are sometimes required to facilitate desorption of analytes from the soil-matrix pores. The development of SPME provides an alternative sampling tool for solid samples. In soil or sediment sampling, both DI and HS sampling have been reported ( The major limitation of DI-SPME sampling in soil analysis is the possibility of damaging the fiber coating during agitation due to the high viscosity of the matrix. Conversely, in HS mode, matrix effects can be reduced and the lifetime of the fiber can be improved. In HS sampling, the analytes should be released into the HS before being trapped by the fiber The simplest way to facilitate the release of analytes from the solid matrix is to increase the sample temperature enough to overcome the energy barrier of desorption of the analytes trapped in the soil pore. However, according to the fundamentals of SPME, an increase in sample temperature results in a low distribution coefficient, leading to decreased sensitivity. In order to improve the HS concentration and the distribution coefficient simultaneously, cold-fiber SPME was introduced (CF-SPME). In this approach the fiber coating is cooled while the sample matrix is heated CF-SPME has been applied to the determination of benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and xylenes (BTEX), and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) from the HS of soil and sediment samples Vacuum-assisted SPME is another simple method to improve the extraction kinetics of HS-SPME Regarding the choice of fiber coating, both commercially-available and home-made fibers have been reported for soil/sediment sampling ( Pino et al. The Carboxen/PDMS coating is used for sampling volatile small molecules, such as N SPME was also applied to a variety of solid samples, as summarized in The application of SPME for pesticide sampling in solid samples is relatively scarce, probably due to experimental limitations of the technique in soil applications. First, the strong interaction between pesticide molecules and different constituents of sediments requires other strategies to facilitate the desorption of analytes from the solid matrix. Similarly to the strategies used for extraction of PAHs, LLE Bioavailability of organic contaminants in soil is another popular research area. Exhaustive extraction of contaminants by strong acids, chelating agents and solvents is commonly used. Despite the efficiency of these extraction methods, certain limitations may persist due to destruction, alteration and swelling caused by these methods adversely impacting the soil structure. Contaminant bioavailability is therefore often overestimated because the exhaustively-extracted amounts are markedly higher than those that can be available for biodegradation by microorganisms. Many alternative non-exhaustive extraction methods have been increasingly adopted in the analysis of volatile and semi-volatile contaminants. Several studies utilized SPME as a tool to predict the bioavailability of PAHs New developments aiming to improve the sensitivity of SPME in soil sampling include CF-SPME, thin-film microextraction (TFME), and stir-bar sorptive extraction (SBSE). CF-SPME proved to be a promising technique for solid-sample preparation due to utilization of high sample temperatures. Both fundamental and experimental results demonstrated that the extraction efficiency of CF-SPME improved as the sample-matrix temperature increased TFME utilizes a piece of membrane with a large surface area-to-volume ratio as extraction phase, which enhances the sensitivity without sacrificing the sampling time In SBSE, commercially known as Twister, the extraction phase was coated on a magnet stir bar, rendering a volume ~50–250 times larger than a typical SPME fiber. Due to the large volume of the extraction phase, the SBSE device has better capacity than SPME coating thus can provide more sensitive determinations of trace-level pollutants in water. SBSE was also reported for sampling organic pesticides and phenolic organic pollutants in soil samples. Since solid samples are difficult to agitate, SBSE was usually coupled with other techniques, such as solvent desorption The concentration of analytes in soil samples can be quantified by traditional calibration methods, including external calibration, standard addition and internal calibration. External calibration involves the preparation of a calibration curve by spiking the standards into an aqueous solution, which can be pure water, the extracted solution, or a simulative solution. By using this method, it is assumed that pre-extraction of organic compounds from the soil matrix is exhaustive. Another method used to prepare external calibration involves the preparation of several standard samples using matrix-matched blank samples, such as uncontaminated soil or certified reference soil. However, despite the straightforward approach of matrix-matched calibration, differences in soil composition can significantly influence the slope of the calibration curves Where blank matrices of standardized composition are not available, standard addition is the traditional calibration method of choice. The standard-addition method is accomplished by spiking a series of known concentrations of target analytes in the solid sample The internal standard (IS) approach involves adding a known concentration of an analyte that is not expected to be present in the matrix to be analyzed. This analyte must mimic the behavior of the investigated analytes during extraction and analysis in order to correct for any possible variation in the matrix composition. Calibration is then done by comparing the ratio of the analyte signals to the IS with a known concentration Besides traditional calibration methods, equilibrium calibration and exhaustive calibration methods were also reported for soil-sample quantification Equilibrium calibration is based on the relationship between the amount of analyte extracted at equilibrium conditions and the sample-matrix concentration [Equation In addition to using proper calibration methods, a quantitative SPME method must be validated in order to prove its suitability for its intended use. Validation of the method might include comparison of quantitation results with certified values obtained for reference materials. For example, Guerra-Abreu et al. used focused MAE followed by SPME-GC-MS to extract successfully seven PAHs from certified reference sediment BCR-535. Average recoveries for six of the seven certified PAHs were 85–101% Similarly, Pino and co-workers developed and validated a method for the determination of PAHs in marine sediments using MAE with a micellar medium combined with SPME and GC–MS. The method performed well when analyzing a certified marine sediment (SRM 1941a), obtaining recoveries of 59–112% Wastewater samples comprise variable amounts of natural dissolved organic matter, non-aqueous phase liquids, solid particles, suspended sediments, inorganic ions and dissolved gases, among others, that make their analysis very challenging. The complexity of wastewater is closely linked to its origin (e.g., industrial, municipal or agricultural) and level of treatment (raw, or primarily or secondarily treated). Sample-preparation techniques such as liquid-liquid extraction (LLE) and solid-phase extraction (SPE) have been routinely used to extract and isolate target compounds from their matrices LLE is very simple and does not require complex apparatus; it is also frequently used as a sample-preparation technique in many official methods for wastewater analysis. For example, most EPA methods for wastewater samples are based on LLE procedures. Significant efforts towards miniaturization and automation have been made during the past few years in order to overcome traditional LLE disadvantages, but the LLE approaches described in official methods are still laborious, use relatively large quantities of organic solvents and very often need additional steps, such as back-extraction, evaporation, or clean-up procedures. Nevertheless, the main drawback of LLE when applied to the analysis of wastewater samples is the formation of emulsions due to the occurrence of surfactants SPE is replacing LLE in some official methods for drinking-water analysis due to its low consumption of solvents, clean-up, broad selectivity, easy automation (on-line and off-line), and high throughput. SPE disadvantages include carryover in automated systems, and the need for sample pre-treatments, such as filtration or centrifugation, when dealing with matrices with high levels of suspended solids and particulate matter, such as untreated wastewater samples, due to the possibility of cartridge clogging. Moreover, in some cases, SPE-sorption efficiency may not be enough to achieve the required sensitivity SPME, coupled to GC or LC, has also been widely used in wastewater analysis; however, like other sample-preparation techniques, the occurrence of matrix effects still remains a challenge to be addressed. Many intrinsic characteristics of wastewater matrices can influence the extraction efficiency of the SPME process, such as organic content, solid particulates, sediments, pH and ionic strength. As such, the HS mode could be used instead of the DI mode: by avoiding contact between fiber coating and sample, the risk of fiber damage or fouling is eliminated. However, the applicability of HS-SPME is limited to volatile analytes with high Henry's Law constants. In addition, HS-SPME can still lead to relative matrix effects when used in very complex samples, such as non-treated wastewater, due to the binding of organic matter and sample-to-sample variations in pH, ionic strength or soluble organic content. Another major concern in wastewater analysis is sensitivity: one reason is that many target analytes, such as emerging contaminants, are present at very low concentrations; the second reason is the presence of interfering organic compounds. Some efforts have focused on enhancement of SPME efficiency and its application to wastewater samples. TFME, introduced for the first time by Cudjoe and co-workers, is an SPME technology that uses a flat geometry to increase extraction-phase volume and the surface area-sample ratio, which ultimately results in better extraction efficiency and accelerates extraction rate In turn, Togunde et al. reported the determination of trace levels of pharmaceuticals in municipal wastewater using an automated C One of the main areas of SPME research in recent years was the development of new coatings. Novel extraction phases based on nanomaterials, ILs, molecularly-imprinted polymers (MIPs) and single- or multi-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs/MWCNTs) were applied in wastewater analysis (see Apart from enhanced extraction efficiency and selectivity for the target analytes, the main advantage of novel coatings for wastewater analysis is increased stability in very dirty, complex matrices. Liu and co-workers reported a method for preparation of MWCNTs in fused-silica fibers by strong covalent bonding. The coating showed stability to matrices with high organic content and extreme pH conditions, making it suitable for raw wastewater analysis Similarly, a very selective, stable, solvent-resistant IL-based coating was developed for extraction of polar phenolic environmental estrogens (PEEs) and aromatic amines. It was prepared by the sol-gel technique, allowing for chemical bonding of the IL with the substrate. The performance of this coating was evaluated by analyzing PEEs in sewage waters The efficiency of SPME for acidic or basic compounds strictly depends on the pH of the sample. In wastewater analysis, it is not unusual to deal with these types of compounds, as happens with the analysis of certain emerging contaminants. To address this issue, some new approaches were proposed. Suchara et al. developed a method to change the pH of residual wastewater during extraction of acidic and basic pharmaceuticals. The sample pH was modified during extraction, without pause, by injecting 900 µL of a 0.4 M Na If sensitive enough, SPME may be performed in pre-equilibrium, shortening the extraction time considerably Another issue when working with untreated wastewater samples is the risk of fiber damage, with the subsequent loss of extraction efficiency over time caused by solid particles, sediments, or high amounts of organic matter. Very recently, Valls-Cantenys et al. reported the analysis of flame retardants in wastewater samples from different origins by using disposable PDMS rods. These disposable devices allowed the extraction of the samples without previous filtration or centrifugation steps, thus avoiding unintentional loss of analytes. In spite of the simplicity in extraction, the final procedure included desorption in an organic solvent, evaporation to dryness, and reconstitution steps External calibration is not generally advised for SPME analysis of complex, untreated wastewater samples due to occurrence of relative matrix effects. Its applicability should be evaluated by performing recovery studies with spiked real samples. The most successful strategies proposed to overcome matrix-effect issues include, but are not limited to, the use of ISs, standard-addition calibration and matrix normalization. Matrix-matched calibration is often used in order to account for matrix effects when sampling complex matrices; however, its implementation is cumbersome due to the inherent matrix complexity and the variability of wastewater samples. Within the past few years, some novel SPME calibration techniques were developed to overcome the matrix-effect issue, and some of them were successfully used on wastewater applications Zhang et al. proposed a kinetic calibration based on the symmetry between extraction and desorption profiles for the analysis of pharmaceuticals in municipal wastewater effluents A new approach presented by Gil-García et al. combined standard-addition calibration with a standardization technique based on a multivariate curve resolution-alternating least-squares algorithm (MCR-ALS) Overviews of the applications of SPME technologies in quantitative and qualitative wastewater analysis can be found in Chapter 8 of Handbook of Solid Phase Microextraction The unique properties of SPME have allowed its use in other types of application. For example, SPME has been used to determine partition coefficients and the fraction of contaminants bonded to dissolved organic matter Additionally, SPME was also used to evaluate the solute-solute interaction between a steroidal contaminant, estradiol, and organic matter at different pH values An indirect method for detection of emerging contaminants in surface waters under the influence of wastewater effluents is the application of SPME developments for applications in wastewater analysis have seen substantial growth in the past decade, and we expect efforts will continue towards improving methods and devices. Novel coatings could be developed to increase SPME specificity when used in complex wastewater matrices. We also expect increased interest in coupling SPME with ambient mass spectrometry techniques, such as direct analysis in real time (DART) or desorption electrospray ionization (DESI). The use of SPME devices together with portable instrumentation is an interesting alternative for on-site wastewater analysis. As TFME may also be coupled off-line to GC instrumentation using flexible membranes that are directly desorbed in a thermal desorption unit, their suitability for on-site wastewater analysis could also be explored in the future Environmental analysis is one of the most demanding areas in terms of sensitivity requirements. The overall demand for improvement in analytical methods for environmental analysis has led to the introduction of a new generation of highly-sensitive analytical devices and development of new sample-preparation procedures. Given the great complexity of soil, sediment and wastewater matrices, sample preparation is quite an arduous task. In this context, SPME provides an alternative method for this solid-sample preparation. The fundamental understanding of SPME principles resulted in evolution of the technique towards the development of new extracting materials, configurations and calibration approaches. Despite the fact that some developments are in their infancy, we can see that automation is constantly pushing forward the scope of applications of such devices in environmental analysis in academic and industrial settings. Another important conclusion of this review is that taking advantage of the miniaturized size and the portability of SPME devices greatly facilitates implementation of on-site sampling and eventually on-site analysis when coupled to portable analytical instruments, with the advantage of substantial reduction of errors associated with sample transportation and possible alterations during storage. The authors would like to acknowledge