The influence of aging on serrated yielding and intermediate temperature embrittlement (ITE) of nickel-based C-276 alloy has been investigated by microstructural characterization and tensile tests at temperatures ranging from 300 to 950°C with strain rate of 3 × 10–4
                     s–1. The precipitated phases in the C-276 alloy aged at 870°C for various times were identified as μ phase and M6C. Tensile ductilities obtained at 700°C were found to increase with extending aging time until 12h, and thereafter, it remained almost unaffected by the aging time. Serrated flow was noticed for all temperatures for the solutionized alloy, and the alloy presented the typical ITE. Aging the solutionized alloy at 870°C/36h resulted in a disappearance of serrated yielding in the temperature range of 600–750°C, which is most possibly attributed to the very weak interaction between Mo atoms and mobile dislocation as a result of precipitation. Although aging for 36h at 870°C decreased the tensile ductilities of this alloy below 600°C, the aged alloy showed the absence of ITE and higher yield strength in comparison with solutionized alloy. The tensile ductilities in the aged alloy were insignificantly affected by increasing the temperature until 700°C, beyond which the tensile ductilities were found to increase drastically with temperature.Nickel-based C-276 alloy is a solid solution strengthening Ni–Cr–Mo alloy with face-centered-cubic structure, possessing an excellent combination of corrosion resistance and mechanical properties Many experiments have confirmed that nickel-base alloys possess a brittle behavior in intermediate temperature range (500–900 In the present investigation, both solutionized and aged microstructures were prepared by solutionizing and aging treatment. The objective of this paper is to study the influence of the precipitation on the serrated yielding and ITE of nickel-base C-276 alloy by microstructural observation and high temperature tensile tests. The fractured surfaces of the tensile specimens were observed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Precipitated particles in selected samples were identified by X-ray diffraction (XRD). The material used in this study is nickel-based C-276 alloy whose chemical compositions (wt%) are as follows: 0.01C, 15.6Cr, 16.08Mo, 3.8W, 5.2Fe, 0.5Mn, 0.22Al, 0.08Si, 0.02Co, 0.005P, 0.002 The cylindrical tensile specimens with a gage diameter of 5 The C-276 alloy, which has been solutionized at 1180 XRD patterns were acquired from the extracted residues (matrix dissolved) of the C-276 alloy after aging treatment at 870 Stress-strain curves of the alloy aged at 870  The stress–strain curves for the solution-treated (ST) and 870 Variation of tensile properties, namely, yield strength (YS), ultimate tensile strength (UTS), elongation and reduction in area (RA) for the ST and STA alloy, are presented in   The serrated yielding is considered an instability associated with dynamic strain ageing (DSA), resulting from interactions between diffusing solute atoms and mobile dislocations during plastic flow The results shown in As for the tensile ductilities, the ST alloy exhibits typical intermediate temperature embrittlement (ITE), while the ITE is absent in the STA alloy. The mechanism of ITE varies for different types of alloys. Fournier et al. Nonequilibrium grain boundary segregation (NGBS) theory, which was proposed by Xu et al. The effect of aging on serrated yielding and intermediate temperature embrittlement (ITE) of nickel-based alloy C-276 was studied by means of microstructural characterization and tensile tests in temperature range of 300–950 This work has been financially supported by the Subproject of