Sclerostin, an osteocyte-derived inhibitor of bone formation, is linked to mineral bone disorder. In order to validate its potential as a predictor of vascular calcification, we explored associations of circulating sclerostin with measures of calcification in 89 epigastric artery biopsies from patients with end-stage renal disease. Significantly higher sclerostin levels were found in the serum of patients with epigastric and coronary artery calcification (calcification score 100 or more). In Spearman’s rank correlations, sclerostin levels significantly associated with age, intact parathyroid hormone, bone-specific alkaline phosphatase, and percent calcification. Multivariable regression showed that age, male gender, and sclerostin each significantly associated with the presence of medial vascular calcification. Receiver operating characteristic curve analysis showed that sclerostin (AUC 0.68) predicted vascular calcification. Vascular sclerostin mRNA and protein expressions were low or absent, and did not differ between calcified and non-calcified vessels, suggesting that the vasculature is not a major contributor to circulating levels. Thus, high serum sclerostin levels associate with the extent of vascular calcification as evaluated both by coronary artery CT and scoring of epigastric artery calcification. Among circulating biomarkers of mineral bone disorder, only sclerostin predicted vascular calcification.Vascular calcification and bone disorders are features of the uremic phenotype entitled chronic kidney disease-mineral and bone disorder (CKD-MBD), Among several emerging factors implicated in CKD-MBD, sclerostin, a osteocyte-derived glycoprotein has attracted recent interest. Mutations in the To date, clinical data on sclerostin as an outcome biomarker are inconsistent and elevated sclerostin have been reported to predict either higher mortality, Demographics and clinical characteristics of the ESRD patients undergoing living donor RTx are shown in Moderate and extensive vascular calcification was present in 37 (42%) of 89 patients. As expected ( A strong correlation ( A multivariable GENMOD regression analysis (including age, gender, diabetes, and sclerostin tertiles) showed that diabetes (RR 2.17 (1.12–4.22); Arterial expression of Staining for arterial sclerostin was performed with two different antisclerostin antibodies (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO and Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX) at various concentrations. However, no distinctly positive staining could be detected, neither in calcified nor in non-calcified specimens ( Although we investigated a selected group of younger ESRD patients, histological evidence of medial vascular calcification was present in 42% of the patients, confirming premature vascular aging in ESRD. In the present study, an inverse correlation was observed between sclerostin and bALP, which confirms previous findings of negative relationships between serum sclerostin and markers of bone formation Didangelos In obese mice fed a high-fat diet, TNF upregulates the expression of sclerostin through the nuclear factor-κB signaling pathway. The present study has several strengths and limitations. An obvious strength is the extensive phenotyping and that medial vascular calcification was directly ascertained in arterial biopsies and not evaluated by indirect surrogate markers of vascular calcification, such as aortic calcification by lumbar X-ray, High circulating levels of sclerostin in ESRD patients were associated with the degree of vascular calcification ascertained by histology of arterial biopsies, semiautomated quantification of vascular calcification, and by CAC score. The results of this study suggest that only serum sclerostin (out of a range of several CKD-MBD biomarkers) identifies ESRD patients with vascular calcification. However, the usefulness of sclerostin as a predictor of vascular calcification in the clinical setting appears to be limited. CAC by CT of the heart is a better predictor of the degree of vascular calcification. As vascular expression of Adult ESRD patients undergoing living donor RTx at the Department of Transplantation Surgery at Karolinska University Hospital were invited to participate in the study, which was approved by the regional committee of ethics in Stockholm and adhered to the statutes of the Declaration of Helsinki Principles. Basic characteristics of the 89 included patients are outlined in Within 20 To assess the degree of vascular calcification as a continuous variable, we used semiautomated quantification. Briefly, von Kossa-stained slides were captured at four times magnification using a Nikon Eclipse E1000 light microscope (Nikon, Tokyo, Japan). The tunica media and intima of each slide were manually identified and the area was measured using the ImageJ software ( Total RNA was prepared from 55 arterial biopsies using TRIzol Reagent (Ambion, Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA). RNA quantity and quality were determined using a NanoDrop ND-1000 spectrophotometer (NanoDrop products, Wilmington, DE) and Agilent RNA 6000 Nano Assay Kit (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA), respectively. Random hexamers and SuperScript III (Invitrogen, Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) were used for cDNA synthesis. To quantify the relative gene expression of Sections from frozen arteries were air-dried and postfixed in 50% ice-cold methanol before immunohistochemical staining using an overnight incubation at 4 Cardiac CT scans were performed using a 64-channel detector scanner (LightSpeed VCT; General Electric (GE) Healthcare, Milwaukee, WI) in cine mode. Scans were ECG-gated and a standard non-contrast protocol was used with a tube voltage of 100 Sampling was performed the day before RTx. Advanced glycation end-product autofluorescence was measured using an autofluorescence reader (DiagnOptics BV, Groningen, The Netherlands). Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry ( Data are expressed as median (range 10th–90th percentile) or percentage or relative RR (95% CI). Statistical significance was set at the level of      We thank the patients who participated in the study. We are grateful to all those who carried out the extensive clinical and laboratory work (Ann-Christin Bragfors Helin, Björn Anderstam, Monica Eriksson, Sanna Spännare, and Annelie Ring) in the current study. Swedish Medical Research Council (VR) supported PS’s and LN's research. Baxter Novum is a result of a grant from Baxter Healthcare to Karolinska Institutet.