Ligamentotaxis is now a well-established treatment method for proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint fractures. Despite satisfactory results, the technique is considered complex and the devices cumbersome. The aim of this study was to evaluate a miniaturized dynamic external fixator (Ligamentotaxor®) for the management of these fractures. Eighty-six patients with 88 fractures of the PIP joint were treated at 10 European hand surgery centers. The device was applied within eight days of the injury and was removed 40–45 days after the injury. Treatment complications included superficial infection (4 cases), osteoarthritis (1 case), and localized but resolving complex regional pain syndrome (4 cases). The fracture healed in all cases. At final follow-up (mean: 15.2 months), average range of motion was 70° (range: 0–110°). Functional results were comparable between the 10 participating centers. Pain occurred upon exertion in 47% of the patients, 40% were sensitive to weather changes and 26% experienced constant pain. The mean QuickDASH score was 15.7 (range: 11–37) and 83.7% of the patients had no limitations during their daily activities. The results of this series are similar to those reported in other studies of PIP fracture treatment with external fixators. This technique is reliable and reproducible. The device is easy to handle by surgeons and well tolerated by patients. We think that this simple, reliable technique could be relevant for the management of PIP joint fractures.Digital intra-articular fractures are common and serious injuries. Fractures of the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint have been extensively studied because loss of motion at this joint has the most serious impact on a patient's daily life. The severity of these fractures is related to the sequelae induced by these lesions, such as joint stiffness, persistent edema and chronic pain. Severity is also related to the socio-economic impact of these fractures, which often results in extended time away from work and prolonged rehabilitation. Many functional and surgical treatments have been proposed; as soon as 1922, Hawk The present study reports on 88 PIP joint fractures treated with a dynamic external fixator (Ligamentotaxor This multicenter, retrospective study involved 86 patients with PIP joint fractures who were treated at 10 European hand emergency centers in four countries. Inclusion criteria were a recent (less than 8 days) digital intra-articular fracture and a minimum of 6 months follow-up. Exclusion criteria were associated neurovascular and/or tendons lesions, or need for internal fixation (screws or plates). The clinical result was evaluated after a minimum follow-up of 6 months. Fractures were classified according to Pélissier's classification The fixation device consisted of a dynamic external fixator (Ligamentotaxor Following recovery from anesthesia, the distraction effect was felt directly by the patient, who was then instructed on how to adjust the spring tension on the device. The patient was then able to assess whether or not the distractor was effective, and could adjust the spring tension as needed. The postoperative protocol started with immobilization under distraction for 10 days, followed by passive joint motion for 2 weeks, and finally active motion for another 2-week period. Radiographs were obtained at each stage to assess whether appropriate tension was being applied or the device needed adjustment. The system was left in place for 40–45 days and removed under local anesthesia during a follow-up visit. The technique is illustrated with a clinical case ( Outcomes were evaluated using both objective (duration of treatment, additional treatments and any complications, joint range of motion (ROM), time away from work, regular X-ray checks) and subjective criteria (QuickDASH for global function, satisfaction questionnaire and Visual Analogical Scale [VAS] for pain). Pain was graded as mild (VAS ≤ The series consisted of 86 patients with 88 PIP joint fractures; 80% were males with a mean age of 38.8 years (range: 17–89 years). The fracture involved the little finger in 32 cases, ring finger in 25 cases, middle finger in 15 cases and index finger in 16 cases. Fractures occurred during work (37% of the cases), while playing ball sports (27%) or after a fall (36%). Fractures were classified according to Pélissier's classification, as reported in Additional internal fixation (1.2-mm pin) was needed in nine cases because of persistent displacement of a fragment in unstable fractures. The device was maintained for a mean of 36 days (range: 14–45). The mean follow-up was 15.2 months (range: 6–38 months). Treatment complications included superficial infection (4 cases), osteoarthritis (1 case, device was removed at day 14), and localized but resolving complex regional pain syndrome (4 cases). Fracture healing was observed in all cases. PIP joint flexion averaged 81° (range: 0–115°), mean extension deficit was 11° (range: 0–45°) and the average range of motion was 70° (range: 0–110°). Functional results were comparable between the 10 participating centers. Results did not differ when additional pinning was performed (nine cases) since the final range of motion averaged 62° in this subgroup. PIP residual ROM seemed to decrease with fracture comminution ( Eighty-one patients completed the questionnaires. As far as pain was concerned, 47% of the patients complained of residual pain during exertion, 40% were sensitive to weather changes and 26% experienced constant pain. Pain was graded as severe (5 patients), moderate (11 patients) or mild (6 patients). The mean QuickDASH score was 15.7 (range: 11–37). This corresponded to major disability during daily living (10 cases) or to minor disability during daily living (4 cases). No significant alteration of the QuickDASH score was observed in 72 cases (83.7%). Patients were satisfied or very satisfied with the result (84%), moderately satisfied (11%) or dissatisfied (5%). Of the 38 patients who were employed at the time of the fracture, the mean time to return to work was 2.5 months (range: 0–8 months); one patient changed to another job and one patient lost his job. Management of PIP joint fractures remains challenging. Open techniques The present study was based on 88 PIP joint fractures treated with this device. With a mean follow-up of 15.2 months, the mean range of motion was 70°. Eighty-four percent of patients were satisfied or very satisfied with the result. In 88% of the cases, the patient's daily life was not altered. The Ligamentotaxor Moreover, with experience, the system can tolerate small inaccuracies in pin placement. The device's springs allow adaptable distraction, no matter the position of the pins. In fractures of the head of the proximal phalanx, the proximal pin could not always be introduced perpendicular to the axis of rotation of the joint, but the system allowed the pin to be introduced more proximally. Also, analysis of the postoperative radiographs showed that the distal pin was rarely placed in the condyles of the middle phalanx. Unlike other systems, effective distraction could be obtained with a distal diaphyseal pin. Some authors The results of this series are consistent with published studies with similar devices, since most of the patients presented with an unstable complex fracture that could not have been addressed with non-surgical treatment. The best results were observed in the subgroups with less serious fracture and the results tended to be worse with more complex fractures. The consistency of the results obtained between the participating centers demonstrates the reproducibility of this technique. It is difficult to compare the results of this series with other series since the fracture description is often heterogeneous. However, some publications provided details about fractures types made it possible to compare the results of some fracture subgroups in our series. This is the case for fracture-dislocations of the PIP joint involving more than 50% of the cartilage. The series published by Schenck A low but consistent complication rate for ligamentotaxis techniques is reported in the literature The device differs from other ligamentotaxis systems by its ease of use, the adaptability of its distraction and its low rate of pin infection. We believe this device is a simple, reliable, and reproducible method that can be useful for early management of unstable or complex PIP joint fractures. Philippe Pélissier is the co-inventor of the Ligamentotaxor Since they have made this study possible, we would like to thank our colleagues from other participating centers: clinique la Chataîgneraie (Clermont-Ferrand, France), Clinique Sud (Lille, France), CHRU Jeanne-d’Arc (Toul, France), CHU Saint-Antoine (Paris, France), CHU de Poitiers (France) et Centre de chirurgie de la main (Illkirsh, France), Klinik für Plastische, Ästhetische und Handchirurgie (Magdeburg, Germany), Queen's Hospital (Burton, United Kingdom) and Institut européen de la main (hôpital Kirchberg, Luxembourg).