The depressant action of sulfite and metabisulfite (MBS) for copper-activated sphalerite has been studied in the absence and presence of sodium isopropyl xanthate (SIPX) under both air and nitrogen atmospheres by using the contact angle technique. Results obtained indicate that MBS is a better depressant of sphalerite in the presence and absence of SIPX under both air and nitrogen atmospheres. The simultaneous presence of dissolved oxygen and bisulfate presumably promotes their synergetic action on sphalerite depression. Results corroborate the beneficial effect of using an aeration stage before collector addition in order to maximize the depressant action over the hydrophobizing species present on the sphalerite surface and to avoid xanthate oxidation.Inadvertent activation of sphalerite by Cu(II) and Pb(II) species in the Pb/Cu flotation circuit of complex Pb–Cu–Zn ores may result in the loss of an important amount of sphalerite due to true flotation. Several schemes have been designed to limit the extent of activation or to depress the hydrophobic properties sphalerite acquires. The most common depressants are sulfite, bisulfite and especially metabisulfite (MBS). According to The depression mechanism of sulfite/bisulfate occurs trough a chemical reaction that takes place with the hydrophobic species present on the surface of the mineral. However, in accordance with the observations of This article presents experimental results on the use of sodium sulfite and metabisulfite as depressants of sphalerite activated with Cu(II) and conditioned with sodium isopropyl xanthate (SIPX) under air and nitrogen atmospheres. The experiments were conducted making use of the contact angle and captive bubble techniques. It has been recognized that the contact angle represents a direct measure of mineral hydrophobicity ( The sphalerite crystals used in this work were collected from the mining district of Bismark (Ascension, Chihuahua, Mexico). Elemental analysis of sphalerite crystals, obtained by AAS and ICP analysis, gave the following composition (% by weight): 59.07% Zn, 29.09% S, 0.03% Cu, 5.71% Fe, 0.012% Pb and 6% insoluble. Copper sulfate pentahydrate (CuSO There are several techniques for measuring contact angle on mineral surfaces. These are divided into two groups: those applicable to flat and smooth surfaces (e.g., the captive bubble method), and those used for particulate materials (e.g., capillary penetration method). The most popular method for measuring contact angle is the captive bubble, mainly due to the simplicity of the technique, whose main advantages are only very small quantities of liquid are required and solid surfaces as small as a few square millimeters can be used ( The sphalerite crystals were manually selected and mounted in metallographic resin. The samples were then ground and polished according to the technique reported in the literature (  Additionally, the model proposed by The effect of the simultaneous presence of sulfite (or MBS) and dissolved oxygen on the depression of the activated sphalerite is presented in When using sulfite or MBS in the Pb–Cu circuit where xanthate is generally used, it is recommended to add the depressant and aerate the pulp before adding the collector, in order to prevent the oxidation of xanthate to perxanthate (  Sodium metabisulfite (MBS, Na When Cu(II) activated sphalerite is depressed with sulfite or metabisulfite, the presence of dissolved oxygen contributes to the elimination of hydrophobic species from the mineral surface, due to the joint action of sulfite/metabisulfite and dissolved oxygen. Depression of Cu(II) activated sphalerite with sulfite or metabisulfite in the presence of dissolved oxygen is more effective when about 1