The local composition models have been widely used for the correlation of activity coefficient of nonelectrolyte and electrolyte solutions. A new equation for the excess Gibbs energy function is developed based on the local composition expression of Wilson and the random reference state. This new function, the nonelectrolyte Wilson nonrandom factor (N-Wilson-NRF) model, is presented in the form of a molecular framework so that it can be used for both nonelectrolyte and electrolyte solutions. Without any particular assumptions for ionic solutions, the new function is used to described the short-range contribution of the excess Gibbs energy of electrolyte solutions. The long-range contribution is represented by Pitzer–Debye–Hückel model. With two adjustable parameters per electrolyte, the new model is applied to correlate the mean activity coefficients of more than 150 binary aqueous electrolyte solutions at 25°C. The results are compared with various local composition models such as the electrolyte-NRTL, electrolyte NRF-Wilson and electrolyte-NRTL-NRF models. The comparison of the results with experiment demonstrates that the new model can correlate the experimental data accurately. Moreover, the model shows high precision of predictability for the osmotic coefficient of binary electrolyte solutions.Accurate representation of thermodynamic properties of electrolyte solutions is vital in design of several industrial processes such as natural gas treatment, extractive distillation, crystallization, desalination of water, hydrometallurgy, etc. Thermodynamic modeling of electrolyte solutions can be carried out by two different general approaches In the local composition models, the short-range physical interaction are described by different versions of Wilson local composition expression. Some of the local composition models are limited to electrolyte molality smaller than six of electrolyte such as the Cruz and Renon In these local compositions models, assumptions of speciation of ions and the specific assumptions such as “the ion repulsion of ions around an ionic central cell” and the “electroneutrality” around a solvent central cell were used In the treatment of an aqueous strong electrolyte solution, as proposed before Following the work of Haghtalab and Vera Following the nonrandom two liquid theory In the random state the local compositions are assumed to approach the bulk mole fraction. So the reference enthalpy of the cells in the random state may be written as Following Haghtalab and Vera The molar excess Gibbs function is obtained by integration of Eq. Assuming the temperature independency of Δ Finally, by proper differentiation of Eq. By generalization of Eq. Using Eq. Eq. In this part of our work we apply the nonelectrolyte Wilson-NRF model in correlating mean ionic activity coefficients of aqueous electrolyte solutions. However, we do not use any specific assumptions in regard to ions in the solution. The binary electrolyte solution is assumed to consist of two species: electrolyte ion-pair (1) and molecular solvent (2), so the excess Gibbs energy of the electrolyte solutions can be expressed by Since we apply a nonelectrolyte model for the short-range contribution, one should pay attention to the definition of the electrolyte mole fraction. As mentioned, we consider the electrolyte solution as a binary system in which the electrolyte is considered as an ion pair, so it is necessary that sum of the mole fractions of electrolyte (component 1) and solvent (component 2) is unity. Thus, we may use the following definition for the mole fraction of both components 1 and 2, respectively. Since the long-range activity coefficient is based on infinite dilution, the short-range activity coefficient should be normalized on the same basis. Thus, the unsymmetrical normalization of Eq. Moreover, the unsymmetrical excess Gibbs function is written as Thus, using Eqs. For the long-range contribution, the Pitzer–Debye–Hückel The mole fraction of cation and anion are defined, respectively, as Using Eq. Similarly the activity coefficient of water Finally, the activity coefficient of water is written as The validity of the present model is demonstrated by correlating the mean activity coefficients of 151 strong aqueous electrolyte systems at 25 The model has two adjustable parameters, For optimization of the binary parameters, different data sources for various electrolyte systems were used. The data of Hamer and Wu  The parameters of the model can be used to predict the osmotic coefficient of binary electrolyte solutions. Using the adjustable parameters of Finally, although the present model is based on a nonelectrolyte framework and a great simplicity in the treatment of electrolyte solutions is introduced, the results of the present simplified model are quite comparable with the other electrolyte models. One should note that this new model may have some limitation for the prediction of solid–liquid equilibria in multicomponent electrolyte systems, in which multiple double salts may precipitate in competition with hydrated or unhydrated single salts and common ion effects are widely encountered. Moreover, extension and application of the model to multielectrolyte systems with common and without common ion is under development. A new nonelectrolyte local composition model, N-Wilson-NRF, based on a molecular framework, was obtained. The model was adopted for representation of the short-range contribution of excess Gibbs energy of electrolyte solutions. For the long-range contribution, the Pitzer–Debye–Hückel model has been used. The present model has two adjustable parameters per electrolyte and by correlating of mean ionic activity coefficients, the binary parameters were determined for 151 aqueous electrolyte solutions at 25 water activity Debye–Hückel constant Gibbs energy enthalpy energy interaction parameter ionic strength in mole fraction based molality molecular weight of water number of experimental points gas constant absolute temperature mole fraction charge number of ionic species coordination number activity coefficient nonrandom factor interaction energy parameter stoichiometric number closest approach parameter standard deviation osmotic coefficient calculated experimental excess long-range short-range unsymmetrical convention infinite dilution anion cation ion any compound reference state water mean