The effect of moisture on Shengli lignite breakage behavior and energy efficiency was studied experimentally using a standard Hardgrove mill fitted with a wattmeter. The grinding process concerned both the inputs, namely the occurrence and content of water and instantaneous energy consumption and the outputs, size-reduction and product fineness. Results show that the energy-size reduction process for grinding lignite is markedly influenced by moisture occurrence and content. Removing surface moisture from 37.90% to 16.61% (the air-dried condition) resulted in a slight increase of input energy by 0.04 kWh.t−1 per 10 s. However, with further drying inherent moisture to 0%, the consumed energy significantly increased by 0.16 kWh.t−1 per 10 s. Meanwhile, the mass fraction remained on top size decreased from 42.29% to 24.73% and then to 13.00%, while the pulverized coal production increased sharply from 6.28% to 10.68% and to 23.64%, both at a grinding time of 6 min. The energy efficiency was also significantly improved as the moisture content of lignite was reduced to below the air-dried level. The air-dried moisture content was the inflecting point for lignite grinding in the Hardgrove mill. A two-stage pre-drying system was proposed accordingly.At present, world reserves of lignite and sub-bituminous are estimated at 320 billion tonnes, accounting for about 30% of the worldwide coal reserves The major uses of lignite include direct combustion of pulverized coal, pyrolysis, liquefaction, gasification, and non-fuel utilization For lignite, main in removable moisture can be classified into two categories, namely adventitious surface moisture and inherent moisture bound by capillary forces Optimizing moisture content of lignite in advance is an effective way to improve the pulverization process, to enhance thermal boiler efficiency, and hence to reduce coal consumption. The present work was aimed at investigating the effect of occurrence and content of moisture on the energy-size reduction of lignite in a Hardgrove mill. Breakage characteristics such as instantaneous energy consumption, breakage rates of top size coal, and yield and fineness of ground products were measured. The breakage energy efficiency with respect to moisture content was also determined. The lignite used in this study came from Xilinhot Shengli No.2 mine in Inner Mongolia, China. Air-dried raw lignite was crushed using a lab-scale roll crushing mill and screened into the one specific required size fraction, i.e., −1.25 +0.71 mm using a standard sieve. Shengli lignite was characterized by high moisture, high volatility, and low calorific value. The proximate analysis of Shengli lignite is given in The crushed coal sample was kept in a sealed container to maintain the initial moisture level before using it for grinding tests or preparing it for the moisture contents shown in Grinding tests were conducted in a standard Hardgrove mill, fitted with a wattmeter to record the breakage energy consumption, see To verify the reproducibility of the grinding tests, the grinding of sample 4 for 6 min was repeated three times. The specific energy consumption was recorded, and the size analysis of the ground products was also conducted. Mean values and the 95% confidence limits of each size fraction and the consumed energy were determined, respectively. The results are shown given in  In general, the breakage energy consumption in a comminution process can be calculated by the equation below As shown in  The grinding kinetics of coal samples of a certain particle size can be described by the equation In a coal-fired power plant, fineness and yield of pulverized product directly affect the combustion efficiency and economy of power generation. Generally, the mass fraction of pulverized product greater than 0.2 mm and 0.09 mm should not exceed 5% and 16%, respectively Grinding is energy-intensive, and it is important to know the energy efficiency for a given size reduction process. To describe the degree of fragmentation, a ground product ‘fineness’ parameter The fitted parameters are shown in Generally, to allow lignite to be treated as the high-grade energy source, the moisture content of lignite should be reduced to 10 ~ 20% wt Based on the results of this study, the air-dried moisture content seemed to be the inflection point for lignite pulverization in Hardgrove mill. The breakage rate of the top-size, the yield of the pulverized coals, and the grinding energy efficiency increased significantly when the moisture content of lignite was reduced to below the air-dried level. In fact, removing the surface moisture is much easier and less energy-consuming than reducing the inherent moisture inside the pores. As a result, a two-stage pre-drying system was proposed, denoted by the red frame in The pulverization process is concerned with the relationship between energy consumption and the ground particle size distribution from a given coal feed size. In this study, batch grinding tests were conducted in a modified standard Hardgrove mill, fitted with a wattmeter to record the breakage energy consumption simultaneously. The breakage rate of top size, yield, and fineness of pulverized coal were determined. The classic energy-size reduction model was applied to correlate the fines content and the energy efficiency of coal samples at different moisture contents. The following conclusions were reached: Due to the moisture lubrication effect and energy expenditure on the ground fine product, the specific breakage energy decreased with increasing grinding time. Moreover, drying the lignite to below the air-dried moisture level is accompanied by a significant increase in input grinding energy, which could affect the capacity of a coal mill in a given pulverization process. Surface moisture tended to cause agglomeration of ground product in the Hardgrove mill. As a result, the breakage rates of the top size decreased because of regrinding a portion of the coal agglomerates. After the surface moisture was completely removed, further drying to dehydrate the inherent moisture could effectively increase both the breakage rates of the top size and the pulverized coal production. However, the fineness characteristics of the −0.09 mm showed no significant difference for the sample with different moisture contents. This validates the probability of a Hardgrove machine characteristic. The effect of moisture content on the pulverization of lignite in the Hardgrove mill was noted to be a highly important factor respecting grinding energy consumption and in pulverized coal production. The grinding energy efficiency increased markedly as the feed moisture decreased. Furthermore, it is highly suggested that the moisture content of lignite should be pre-dried to below the air-dried level to meet the aim of reducing energy costs and improving the capacity of the milling system in lignite-fired power plants.  The work is supported by the Future Scientists Program of “Double First Class” of