The drilling comminution is theoretically and experimentally analyzed by a multifractal approach. A generalization of the three classical comminution laws [Rittinger, P.R., 1867. Lehrbuch der Aufbereitungskunde. Berlin; Kick, F., 1885. Das Gesetz der Proportionalen Widerstände. Leipzig; Bond, F.C., Min. Eng. 193 (1952) 484] has been performed to evaluate the energy dissipation in the process and to compute the mass distribution of the particles. A transitional fractal exponent of the fragment size distribution is experimentally demonstrated to exist. As a consequence, a multifractal scaling law for the partial mass of fragments and its physical interpretation is consistently proposed.
                  In addition, we show, both theoretically and experimentally, that the drilling strength is strongly size-dependent and cannot be considered a material constant, as classically supposed. Consequently, a multifractal scaling law for the drilling strength is also proposed.Fractals are self-similar objects Carpinteri Engleman et al. Recently, fragmentation has been studied from a physical Only more recently, a multifractal transition has been observed Relevant works in this area have been performed by Brown Fractal and fragmentation processes have been reviewed by Perfect The novelty of this paper is that the drilling comminution is theoretically and experimentally analyzed by a multifractal approach. According to some experiments on drilling detritus, a multifractal scaling law for the partial mass of fragments and its physical interpretation is consistently proposed. In addition, we show that the drilling strength (energy dissipated over volume removed) is strongly size-dependent and cannot be considered a material constant, as classically supposed. Consequently, a multifractal scaling law for the drilling strength is also proposed. After comminution or fragmentation, the Of course, the complementary cumulative distribution of particles with radius larger than The The total fracture surface area is obtained by integration: Introducing On the other hand, the total volume of the particles is (2< One can assume a material “quantum” of size The extreme cases contemplated by The energy dissipation occurs on a two-dimensional surface according to Griffith Usually, from comminution experiments  The fundamental assumptions of material “quantum” and of self-similarity can be derived from the more general hypothesis that the energy dissipation must occur in a fractal domain comprised, in any case, between a surface and a volume. If we assume From If we assume From So, we have extended A simple model, based on the concept of renormalization, illustrates how self-similar fragmentation can result in a (mono-) fractal size distribution If a cube, in a recursive process, is fragmented at each step with probability If a fragmented cube produces at each step, a generic integer number From the comparison with the well-known definition of fractal set: From In other words, assuming a constant probability of fragmentation Some experiments on conventional drilling perforation (on conventional concrete ( According to these considerations, the following very simple variation of the multifractal exponent As a consequence of The multifractal scaling From these experiments, the characteristic size of the material “quantum” appears to be approximately equal to Theoretical predictions Classically, the drilling strength (energy dissipated over volume removed) is considered a size-independent parameter. On the other hand, experiments show that it could be variable with size (especially at small scale) by several orders of magnitude! In a bilogarithmic diagram of drilling strength versus size-scale (of the volume drilled per unit time), a dimensional transition of the “fractal drilling strength” From The slope of the slanted asymptote is equal to minus one (−1), so that the nominal drilling strength If According to these considerations, the following multifractal scaling law for drilling strength The drilling comminution has been theoretically and experimentally analyzed by a multifractal approach. The proposed theory emphasizes how the energy dissipation in the comminution process occurs in a fractal domain comprised between a surface and a volume The transitional multifractal exponent of the fragment size distribution has been experimentally observed Classically, the drilling strength (energy dissipated over volume removed) is considered a size-independent parameter. On the other hand, experiments The theoretical assumption of a material “quantum” has been experimentally observed and its characteristic dimension (diameter) appears, for the drilled concrete, to be close to 1 μm.  material density fracture energy fracture and friction energy fractal fracture and friction energy or fractal drilling strength total fracture surface area of fragments fractal exponent probability of fragmentation characteristic length of the fragmented volume internal characteristic length of the material number of fragments total mass of fragments mass of fragments with radius smaller than probability size-distribution function for fragments cumulative size-distribution function for fragments fragment size size of the largest fragment size of the smallest fragment (material quantum) drilling strength drilling strength for infinite size fragmented volume energy dissipated during fragmentation The present research was carried out with the financial support of Ministry of University and Scientific Research (MURST), National Research Council (CNR) and EC-TMR Contract N° ERBFMRXCT960062.