We reviewed 44 children with a widely displaced supracondylar fracture of the humerus (Gartland grade III) treated with primary open reduction and cross pinning. The average age was 8 years and the mean delay in presentation was 34h. Comminution of the medial supracondylar pillar was seen in 57% of the cases. After treatment, the range of the elbow motion was restricted in eight patients. Cubitus varus was not seen. There was no deep infection or myositis ossificans. Post-operatively, five children had a temporary nerve palsy. According to Flynns’ criteria, 42 patients had a satisfactory outcome.Severely displaced supracondylar fractures of the humerus are common paediatric injuries and usually present a challenge in management. These fractures are best treated by an early accurate reduction that requires about 120° of elbow flexion for maintenance During the period from January 1996 to June 1999, 194 cases of supracondylar fracture of the humerus were treated at our institute. Fractures were classified radiologically using Gartland’s classification Primary open reduction was performed usually within 6 The medial approach was used to expose the fracture in all the uncomplicated cases. The ulnar nerve was identified, carefully mobilized and gently retracted posteriorly. After decompressing the haematoma, the area was washed with saline and medial column comminution assessed. The fracture was reduced with particular attention to the medial column continuity. The medial column was visualised anteriorly, medially and posteriorly to assess reduction. This safeguards against medial tilt. In patients with brachial artery injury, the anteromedial approach was used. The neurovascular structures were exposed and the fracture approached through the tear in the brachialis. In the two cases with radial nerve palsy, both, the lateral and medial approaches were used. After reduction, crossed K-wires were inserted from the distal to the proximal fragment to stabilize the reduction and the range of elbow movements was checked. Post-operative immobilization was in an above-elbow plaster slab with the elbow in about 45° of flexion only. K-wires were removed at 3–6 weeks after radiological assessment of union and myositis ossificans; 3 weeks for the younger patient (≤6 years) and 6 weeks for the older patient (≥10 years). The patients were followed up first at 6 weeks, then at 12 weekly intervals until there was no further recovery of movement. Assessment at final follow-up included clinical measurement, using a goniometer, of the carrying angle of both the elbows and range of elbow motion. The distal neurovascular status was recorded. Outcome was graded according to Flynn’s criteria  Displaced supracondylar fractures of the humerus in children are commonly associated with complications. Closed reduction and percutaneous cross pin fixation under image guidance is currently the preferred treatment for this injury Our average follow up period of 14 (6–36) months is adequate to comment on the results of open reduction because the end result is usually seen within 3–6 months of surgery. By this time, most of the children regain complete range of movement and growth disturbance only occasionally causes late change in carrying angle Surgical intervention however does not guarantee against cubitus varus and it still remains the commonest complication The other problem is restriction of movement. Fears of loss of motion following open reduction have been dispelled by many recent reports of over 300 cases Four patients had post-operative anterior interosseous nerve palsy. Iatrogenically, this occurs due to excessive retraction of the anterior soft tissues Open reduction of the widely displaced supracondylar fracture is a safe primary treatment option and the fears of significant complications are unfounded. Reduction of the medial column under direct vision virtually eliminates the risk of cubitus varus. Suboptimal closed reduction should not be accepted.