Electrochemical water splitting is considered to be one of the most promising strategies for clean and efficient hydrogen production. In this paper, an in-situ growth of iron-nickel phosphide on nickel foam (FeNiPx/NF) is demonstrated as a self-supported ternary catalyst for electrochemical water splitting. The FeNiPx/NF were prepared by a thermo-reaction between NaH2PO2 and NiFe hydroxide precursors that are in situ grown on Ni foam via a simple chemical precipitation reaction. In this newly proposed method, the nickel foam not only acts as an electrode substrate, but also serves as a slow-release Ni source in the reaction due to its oxidation by Fe3+ in solution. Benefiting from collaborative advantages of bimetallic composite, metallic phosphide, and unique electrode fabrication, the FeNiPx/NF exhibits extraordinarily high activities for both OER and HER with low overpotentials of of 192 and 106mV at 10mAcm−2, 236 and 161mV at 100mAcm−2, respectively. The voltage during the galvanostatic electrolysis is well maintained for almost 400h without any visible elevation, representing the few most stable noble-metal-free catalysts for water splitting.Electrochemical water splitting is one of the simplest and cleanest methods to obtain hydrogen resource, which is considered to potentially address the increasing energy demand. However, it requires high overpotentials for both the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) to obtain decent reaction rates. Currently, the state-of-art catalysts are precious metal or metal oxides, such as Pt, RuO A great deal of effort for highly efficient, earth abundant alternative electrocatalysts has revealed several classes of candidate materials including transition metal oxides Bimetallic crystal materials are attracting considerable attention owing to better catalytic activities often behaved than corresponding monometallic counterparts. The coordination of two metal species could provide richer oxidation states and redox active sites, which are beneficial to electrocatalytic applications Herein we explore the iron nickel phosphide on Ni foam (FeNiP NF is approximately 1 NFs were washed by 3 Control samples were prepared by similar procedures with FeNiP The morphology of the samples was examined using field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM; JEOL, JSM-7000F), transmission electron microscopy (TEM; JEOL, JEM-2100) and atom force microscopy (AFM; Multimode, Veeco Instruments Inc). The crystallographic and composition information was obtained by using powder X-ray diffraction (XRD; SHIMADZU, Lab X XRD-6000). The powder X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurement were performed on a monochromatic Al Ka radiation (Axis Ultra, Kratos, 150 All electrochemical measurements were all carried out on a CHI 660D electrochemical workstation coupling with a three-electrode electrochemical cell with modified-NF as working electrode, Ag/AgCl in saturated KCl solution as reference electrode and graphite rod as auxiliary electrode, respectively. Prior to experiment, electrolyte was saturated by oxygen (for OER) or nitrogen (for HER) bubbles at least 30 The potential was calibrated with respect to reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) by using Pt foil electrode as standard electrode The successful modification of NiFe(OH)  XPS was utilized to verify the elemental compositions and chemical valences of samples. The NF assembled with FeNiP Design of a bifunctional electrocatalyst for water splitting simplifies system design and shortens product development cycles, since only a single catalyst is required. Accordingly, we assessed the electrocatalytic properties of the FeNiP Additionally, we compared the electrocatalysts derived from different phosphorization temperatures (SEM images and XRD patterns can be seen in Figs. S Table S1 lists common evaluating parameters from the catalysts developed in past few years Stability of FeNiP Furthermore, we investigated its operational possibility at a two-electrode system for the overall water splitting (testing equipment seen in the inset of We also presented the long-term stability curve of the as-prepared electrolyzer ( We have established a partial-sacrificial-template synthesis of Fe/Ni phosphides on NF. Benefiting from collaborative advantages of bimetallic composite, metallic phosphide, and unique porous nanosheet structure, the catalyst we proposed shows highly admirable electrocatalytic performance for both HER and OER. Especially for OER, it is one of the best OER performances among reported transition metal-based electrocatalysts in an alkaline medium. An alkaline electrolyzer assembled using two symmetrical electrodes exhibits exceptional stability and high energy efficiency for overall water splitting. The high-efficiency and durability of the FeNiP Dr. Xiao greatly thanks financial support from the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: