Background
                  A review of the literature showed that posterior short-segment fixation including the fractured vertebra (PSFFV) has better outcomes in the treatment of thoracolumbar burst fractures(TBFs) than patients with short-segment pedicle screw fixation(SSPF) alone. However, its efficacy in mild TBFs with load-sharing scores of 3 and 4 points has not been specifically analyzed. The aim of this study was to compare the clinical, functional and radiologic results of PSFFV with SSPF for mild TBFs and to determine whether the screws in the fractured vetebra were necessary for these patients.
               
                  Methods
                  In this retrospective study, sixty-nine patients with mild TBFs were divided into 2 groups according to the number of instrumented levels. Group A included 34 patients treated by SSPF (four screws:one level above and below the fracture), and Group B included 35 patients treated by PSFFV (six screws: including the fractured vertebra). Clinical and radiologic parameters were evaluated before surgery, after surgery, and at follow-up. They included clinical outcomes: visual analog scale (VAS), Oswestry Disability Index (ODI). Being a radiology-based study, the radiologic measures included vertebral wedge angle (VWA), and anterior vertebral height (AVH).
               
                  Results
                  A sum of 69 patients (34 patients in Group A and 35 patients in Group B) were enrolled in the study. The patients in both the groups showed similar outcomes with regards to age, gender, fracture type and site. We did not find any statistically difference between the two groups in corrected rate of VWA or AVH (P > 0.05). In terms of clinical variants such as VAS and ODI scores, there were also no significant differences. However, the SSPF had advantages over PSFFV method in operative time, blood loss, postoperative drainage and postoperative hospitalization time (P > 0.05). There were no serious complications occurring during our study, such as infection, blood vessel injury, spinal cord or nerve root injury. No patient needed revision for loss of correction or failure of instrumentation.
               
                  Conclusions
                  SSPF alone is a safe and effective surgical method for restoration and maintenance of vertebral column stability in treating mild TBFs. It gives excellent clinical and radiological results regardless of whether the fractured vertebra is included in the fixation or not.Thoracolumbar fracture is one of the most common areas of fracture in the axial skeleton The surgical approaches include anterior surgery, posterior surgery, and a combination of anterior and posterior surgery. Short-segment pedicle screw fixation (SSPF) is one of the most standard surgical approaches in treatment of TBFs. This technique has many advantages of preserving segment motion, providing superior correction of kyphosis, and reducing blood loss Although previous studies have demonstrated that PSFFV has better outcomes than patients with SSPF alone This is a retrospective study performed in authors' spinal care center. Under the approval of local institutional review board, a total of 72 patients with mild TBFs without neurologic injury who had undergone PSFFV or SSPF were enrolled. The inclusion criteria for subjects were as follows: age between 30 and 55 years; with load-sharing scores of 3 and 4 points; follow-up exceeding 1.5 years. Our exclusion criteria were as follows: LSC score≥5; long segment instrumentation; combined anterior-posterior surgeries; follow-up of less than 1.5 years; and pathological fractures. All the operations were performed by one of the two authors without any discriminations according to the fixation type. All patients had preoperative anteroposterior and lateral radiographs, and computed tomography (CT) scan of the spine. CT scans were taken to classify the fracture type, to assess vetebral comminution, and to see whether the pedicles of the neighboring vertebrae were intact and able to take the screws. Load sharing score was calculated based on the scoring system described by McCormack et al. The pre-operative, post-operative and follow-up radiographs were evaluated. Analysis of the plain radiographs included: vertebral wedge angle (VWA) and anterior vertebral height (AVH) ( The software Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS, version 17.0) was used for all analyses. the clinical, functional and radiologic results were compared between two groups using Student A conventional open procedure was used in this study. Patients were in the prone position with vacated abdomen. Under general anesthesia, the posterior midline approach was performed. The fracture site was determined with locator and C-arm. In group A, monoaxial screws were only inserted into the vertebra cephalad and caudal to the fracture. Screws were 40 or 50 mm long, depending on the level and size of the vertebra. The internal fixation was applied bilaterally, and cross-links were used to augment torsional rigidity. Reduction of the fracture and indirect decompression of the spinal canal were accomplished by the rod contouring, extension and compression-distraction forces before tightening the screws. In group B, The posterior fixation short-segment pedicle screw fixation included the fractured vertebra. The screws in the fractured vertebra were all polyaxial and were inserted into both the pedicles using freehand technique. Fusion was performed in all patients by using autograft from iliac bone. The degree of kyphosis correction and the position of the screws were assessed by the postoperative radiographs. All patients were periodically followed-up with clinical and radiologic evaluation. After application of the inclusion and exclusion criteria, seventy-two patients who presented to our department with single-segment TBFs without neurologic injury between June 2010 and June 2014 were enrolled in this study. The injury mechanism includes vehicle accident and high falling. Three patients discontinued their visits for unknown reasons and thus were excluded from the study. Finally, a total of 69 patients, including 42 males and 27 females, were included in this study. The participants were divided into two groups: short-segment pedicle screw fixation (Group A, 34 cases) and posterior fixation including fractured vertebra approach (Group B, 35 cases). The mean age of the patients in Group A was 40.67 years (range: 31–54 years), and the male-female ratio was 20:14. As for fracture site, 5 patients were in T11, 12 in T12, 10 in L1 and 7 in L2. The mean age of the patients in Group B was 41.86 years (range: 30–55 years), and the male-female ratio was 22:13. Among them, 4 patients were in T11, 11 in T12, 9 in L1 and 11 in L2. As shown in Group A seemed to have advantages over Group B in operative time, blood loss, postoperative drainage and postoperative hospitalization time. However, no statistically difference was observed between two groups ( As shown in The pre-operative VAS score for back pain in Group A was 8.6 ± 1.2, which was improved to 4.9 ± 0.7 for one week after surgery. At final follow-up, the average VAS score was 1.6 ± 0.9 (range, 1–4). In Group B, it was 7.7 ± 1.5 before surgery, which was improved to 5.2 ± 0.8 for one week after surgery. At final follow-up, the average VAS score was 1.9 ± 0.9 (range, 1–4). As for ODI score, it was 15.5% at final follow-up in Group A, while that of Group B was16.7%. There was no statistically significant difference in VAS and ODI score between two groups. It has been well accepted that short-segment pedicle fixation (SSPF) of the injured vertebral motion segments is one of the standard methods of stabilization for thoracolumbar burst fractures (TBFs). Previous studies have shown its advantages of less intraoperative blood loss, shorter segment immobilisation, shorter operative time, smaller area of muscle dissection, and lesser complications In a prospective randomized study by Guven et al. Several classifications have been described in the literature, with the aims of categorizing these fractures in greater detail, defining instability or helping to choose the best treatment option. Among them, the LSC scoring system developed by McCormack In this study, the preoperative VWA and AVH were statistically similar between two groups. During follow-up, VWA and AVH correction was well maintained ( The novelty of this study is to consider the fractures only for patients with mild TBFs based on the LSC classification, in contrast to the other studies which included fractures of different severity, thereby underlying the results of this study more believable. In this retrospective study, all the patients were enrolled under strict inclusion criteria and exclusion criteria. However, as a result of the intrinsic shortcomings of retrospective study, it's very difficult to determine why some patients in the excluded cohort discontinued their visits, which could possibly bias the outcomes of this study. A prospective study is warranted to avoid such bias. Another limitation of our study lies in the small size samples selected from a single center. Therefore, a multicenter study should facilitate a larger sample size and provide more sound information. Based on the findings of this study, we conclude that SSPF is a safe and effective method of treating mild TBFs. This technique yields excellent clinical and radiological results with a very low rate of failure regardless of whether the fixation includes the fractured vertebral body or not. All participants gave informed consent to take part in the study, which was approved by the Institutional Ethics Committee of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. This work was supported by the Sun Chao and Guan Guoping contribute to study design, data collections, data analysis and manuscript writing. Liu Xinhui contributes to the manuscript revising. Liu Xinhui, Zhang Hailong and Wang Bin contribute to surgeries and technology suggestions. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Chao Sun, Guoping Guan, Xinhui Liu. The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at