The kinetics of anaerobic sulfate reduction was studied in continuous immobilized cell bioreactors, using a consortium of sulfate reducing bacteria (SRB) enriched from the produced water of a Canadian oil reservoir. The effects of carrier matrix, concentration of sulfate in the feed and sulfate volumetric loading rate were investigated. The bioreactor performance, as assessed by volumetric reduction rate of sulfate, was dependent on the total surface area provided by the immobilization carrier matrix. Among the three tested matrices, sand displayed a superior performance with a maximum reduction rate of 1.7g/Lh was achieved at the shortest residence time of 0.5h. This reduction rate was 8- and 40-fold faster than those obtained with biomass support particles (0.2g/Lh; residence time: 5.3h) and glass beads (0.04g/Lh; residence time: 28.6h), respectively. Further kinetics studies with sand as a carrier matrix indicated that the extent of sulfate reduction rate was dependent on the feed sulfate concentration and volumetric loading rate of sulfate. At a constant feed sulfate concentration, increases in sulfate volumetric loading rate caused the reduction rate to pass through a maximum. Contrary to the pattern reported for the freely suspended SRB cells, the increases in feed sulfate concentrations led to lower reaction rates in the immobilized cell bioreactors. The maximum volumetric reduction rate with feed sulfate concentrations of 1, 2.5 and 5g/L were 1.7, 0.8 and 0.7g/Lh, observed at residence times of 0.5, 2.7 and 2.7h, respectively. The SRB consortium used in this study was dominated by incomplete oxidizers. The experimental data for lactate utilization and acetate production rates were in close agreement with those calculated based on the stoichiometry of the involved reactions.Mining operations and mineral processing generate large quantities of waste rocks and tailings, usually rich in sulfidic compounds. Exposure of these sulfidic wastes to oxygen and water, and activities of indigenous microbial population results in formation and release of sulfate, various metallic ions and acidity. The draining water which is referred to as acid mine drainage (AMD), therefore, has a low pH and contains high levels of sulfate and metallic ions. Generation of waste streams containing sulfate and metallic ions is not limited to mining operations and other industrial activities such as flue-gas scrubbing, galvanic processes, battery, paint and chemical manufacturing discharge effluents with similar characteristics A consortium of sulfate reducing bacteria, enriched from the produced water of a Canadian oil field, located in Coleville, Saskatchewan was used in this study. The produced water was provided kindly by Professor G. Voordouw, University of Calgary. Modified Coleville Synthetic Brine (m-CSB), containing per L: 7 The up-flow, packed-bed bioreactors used in this study were made of glass columns ( The effect of immobilization matrix on the performance of the bioreactor (in terms of sulfate volumetric reduction rate) was assessed by conducting three independent experimental runs, using glass beads, biomass support particles (BSP) and sand particles as carrier matrices. Quartz sand particles had a mesh size of −50 to 70 (average diameter: 225 The effect of initial feed sulfate concentration was studied by conducting two additional experimental runs in bioreactors packed with the sand, and fed with m-CSB media containing either 2.5 and 6.7 Concentrations of sulfide and sulfate were determined, using spectrophotometric methods described elsewhere The steady-state profiles of sulfate, sulfide, lactate and acetate concentrations as a function of sulfate volumetric loading rate for three different regions of the bioreactors packed with glass bead, BSP and sand are shown in In the bioreactor packed with glass beads, following the inoculation and a lag period of 3 days, bacterial activity and production of sulfide initiated. The bioreactor was switched to continuous mode when complete conversion of sulfate was achieved in all three ports. Applying volumetric loading rates up to 0.01 The residual lactate concentration was negligible in the middle and upper parts for volumetric loading rate of 0.006 In the bioreactor packed with BSP, increase of volumetric loading in the range 0.001–0.018 At a constant volumetric loading rate of sulfate, the residual concentration of lactate decreased along the length of the bioreactor, while the concentration of produced acetate increased, indicating the progress of the reaction along the length of the bioreactor ( In the bioreactor packed with sand the required time for establishment of steady state at each flow rate was shorter than those required with BSP and glass bead. Complete conversion of sulfate was observed in the lower, middle and upper parts of the bioreactor for volumetric loading rates up to 0.119, 0.425 and 0.771 The coupling of sulfate reduction, lactate utilization and acetate production was again observed ( The carrier matrices employed in this study had markedly different structures and specific surface areas, and as a result employment of these carriers resulted in different total surface areas and void volumes in the bioreactors ( One of the important parameters influencing the reaction rate in an immobilized cell bioreactor is the biomass hold-up which can be defined as the quantity of immobilized cells, plus any freely suspended cells which are present in the system In case of passively immobilized cells, the extent of biomass hold-up is determined mainly by the total surface area available for cell immobilization, although properties of the carrier matrix such as electrical charges and pore size could influence the magnitude of biomass hold-up The steady-state profiles of sulfate, sulfide, lactate and acetate concentrations as a function of sulfate volumetric loading rate for three different regions of the bioreactors packed with sand and fed with media containing 2.5 and 5 With 2.5 The residual lactate concentration remained above zero even at the lowest applied volumetric loading rate. The residual lactate concentration in the lower part was in the range 2.8–3.4 for volumetric loading rates up to 0.327 With 5 The increase in volumetric loading rate initially led to a sharp and then a gradual increase in the residual lactate concentration ( The results of experiments with media containing 1, 2.5 and 5 As expected, the initial concentration of sulfate in the feed also influenced lactate utilisation and acetate production rates, with highest rates observed in the bioreactor fed with 1 Using the experimental data for sulfate volumetric reduction rate and the stoichiometry of the involved reactions, the theoretical lactate utilization and acetate production rates were calculated and compared with the experimental values in the parity charts ( Using freely suspended cells in continuously operated stirred tank bioreactors, Moosa et al. Included in The result of the present study indicated that the performance of an immobilized cell bioreactor depended significantly on the employed carrier matrix, specifically the total surface area which is provided by the carrier. The bioreactor packed with sand, which had the highest surface area for establishment of biofilm, clearly showed a superior performance. Furthermore, kinetics of anaerobic sulfate reduction in an immobilized cell bioreactor was found to be dependent on the feed sulfate concentration and volumetric loading rate of sulfate. At a constant feed sulfate concentration, increases in sulfate volumetric loading rate caused the reduction rate to pass through a maximum, while increases in feed sulfate concentrations led to lower reduction rates, a contrasting pattern when compared with that observed with freely suspended cells. Utilization of an SRB consortium originated from an oil reservoir led to sulfate reduction rates which are higher than those reported previously for systems operated at similar influent pH values. The incomplete oxidation of lactate by this microbial community, however, is a potential drawback which could be addressed through enrichment of a culture incorporating acetate-oxidizing SRB. This work was supported by a Discovery Grant from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC). Provision of a New Opportunity Fund to MN by Canada Foundation for Innovation is greatly appreciated. The authors would also like to thank Richard Blondin for assistance in analytical tasks.