An attempt has been made to evaluate and predict the blast-induced ground vibration and frequency by incorporating rock properties, blast design and explosive parameters using the artificial neural network (ANN) technique. A three-layer, feed-forward back-propagation neural network having 15 hidden neurons, 10 input parameters and two output parameters were trained using 154 experimental and monitored blast records from one of the major producing surface coal mines in India. Twenty new blast data sets were used for the validation and comparison of the peak particle velocity (PPV) and frequency by ANN and other predictors. To develop more confidence in the proposed method, same data sets have also been used for the prediction of PPV by commonly used vibration predictors as well as by multivariate regression analysis (MVRA). Results were compared based on correlation and mean absolute error (MAE) between monitored and predicted values of PPV and frequency.There is an increasing trend towards surface excavation for exploitation of minerals and for infra-structural developmental projects in India. Drilling and blasting is one of the major economical operations to excavate a rock mass. Until now, explosives are a valuable source of energy required for breakage, excavation and displacement of rock mass. When an explosive detonates in a blast hole, a tremendous amount of energy, in terms of pressure (up to 50 To meet the present day demand for coal and other economic minerals, large scale mechanized surface mines are being planned. In these mines, a huge quantity of explosive is consumed to break and displace the overburden of rock mass. These explosives used in a blasting round, create nuisances to the people residing in the close vicinity of the mining area. Sometimes, due to high ground vibration level, their dwellings may get damaged and there is always confrontation between mine management and the people residing in the surroundings of the mine area High ground vibrations, not only do they create problems to the nearby population, but also adversely affects the integrity of the surrounding structures in the mine area. Sometimes, it provokes the population and can put mines into closure. High intensity vibration also damages and chocks the existing ground water conduits and harms the ecology of the nearby area. It may be sometimes responsible for water logging and up-rooting of the plants/trees nearby the mining area. If ground vibrations is not controlled or minimized, it may be one of the main causes for the deforestation in future. Ground vibration may damage the free face and generate a number of back breaks The ground vibration is a wave motion, spreading outward from the blast like ripples spreading outwards due to impact of a stone dropped into a pond of water. As the vibration passes through the surface structures, it induces vibrations in those structures also A number of vibration predictors were proposed by different researchers for the prediction of PPV Because the number of influencing parameters is too high and the inter-relation among them is also very complicated, empirical methods may not be fully suitable for such problems. Currently, tools such as artificial neural network (ANN), maximum likelihood classification (MLC), genetic algorithm (GA), technique for order preference similarity to ideal solutions (TOSIS), support vector machine (SVM), etc. are frequently applied. The artificial neural network is a branch of the artificial intelligence science and has developed rapidly since the 1980s. Nowadays, ANN is popularly used and considered one of the intelligent tools to solve complex problems. ANN has the ability to learn from patterns acquainted before. It is a highly interconnected network of a large number of processing elements called neurons in an architecture inspired by the brain. ANN can be massively parallel and hence said to exhibit parallel distributed processing ANN shows characteristics such as mapping capabilities or pattern association, generalization, robustness or fault tolerance as well as parallel and high speed information processing. ANN learns by examples, thus, it can be trained with known examples of a problem to acquire knowledge about it. Once, appropriately trained, the network can be put to effective use of solving unknown or untrained instances of the problem Maulenkamp and Grima The stability of waste dumps from dump slope angle and dump height was investigated by Khandelwal and Singh Khandelwal and Singh Monjezi and Dehghani This paper mainly shows the application of ANN to predict the blast vibration and frequency at the Jayant opencast mine, NCL, India. The blast vibration prediction of ANN is compared to MVRA as well as commonly used vibration predictors. Artificial neural network is a branch of the ‘artificial intelligence’, which also includes case-based reasoning, expert systems, and genetic algorithms. The classical statistics, fuzzy logic and chaos theory are also considered to be related fields. ANN is an information processing system simulating the structure and functions of the human brain. It is a highly interconnected structure that consists of many simple processing elements (called neurons) capable of performing massively parallel computation for data processing and knowledge representation. The neural network is first trained by processing a large number of input patterns and the corresponding output. The neural network is able to recognize similarities when presented with a new input pattern after proper training and predicting the output pattern. Neural networks are able to detect similarities in inputs, even though a particular input may never have been known previously. This property allows its excellent interpolation capabilities, especially when the input data is noisy (not exact). Neural networks may be used as an alternative for auto correlation, multivariable regression, linear regression, trigonometric and other statistical analysis techniques. A particular network can be defined using three fundamental components: transfer function, network architecture and learning law A network first needs to be trained before interpreting new information. A number of algorithms are available for training of neural networks but the back-propagation algorithm is the most versatile and robust technique. It provides the most efficient learning procedure for multilayer neural networks. Also, the fact that back-propagation algorithms are especially capable of solving predictive problems makes them so popular To differentiate between the various processing units, values called biases are introduced in the transfer functions. Except for the input layer, all neurons in the back-propagation network are associated with a bias neuron and a transfer function. The bias is much like a weight, except that it has a constant input of 1, while the transfer function filters the summed signals received from this neuron. These transfer functions are designed to map the net output of a neuron or layer to its actual output. The application of these transfer functions depends on the purpose of the neural network. The output layer produces the computed output vectors corresponding to the solution During training of the network, data is processed through the input layer to hidden layer, until it reaches the output layer (forward pass). In this layer, the output is compared to the measured values (the “true” output). The difference or error between both is propagated back through the network (backward pass) updating the individual weights of the connections and the biases of the individual neurons. The input and output data are mostly represented as vectors called training pairs. The process as mentioned above is repeated for all the training pairs in the data set, until the network error converges to a threshold defined by a corresponding function; usually the root mean squared error (RMS) or summed squared error (SSE). In The net output from hidden layer is calculated using a logarithmic sigmoid function The total error function is given by The update of weights for the ( Similar logic applies to the connections between the hidden and output layers The study was conducted at Jayant opencast mine of Northern Coalfields Limited (NCL), which is a subsidiary company of Coal India Limited. It is located at Singrauli, Distt. Sidhi (MP), India. The area of NCL lies geographically between latitudes 24° 0′–24° 12′ and longitudes 82° 30′–82° 45′ and belongs to Gondwana super group. The dip of the strata is gentle and varying from 2° to 5°. The coalfield can be divided into two sub basins, viz. Moher sub-basin (312 The overburden in this area is mostly medium to coarse-grained sandstones, carbonaceous shales and shaly sandstones. The mine uses large dragline (24 A total of 174 blast vibration records at different vulnerable and strategic locations in and around to Jayant opencast mine, as per ISRM Representative rock samples were collected from the exposed coal face of Singrauli coal fields and tested as per ISRM Parameters, such as hole diameter, hole depth, burden, spacing, charge length, explosive per hole, velocity of detonation of explosive and density of explosive, were collected from the blast site ( Rock density is one of the critical parameters for the prediction of PPV and frequency in general Feed forward back-propagation neural network architecture is adopted due to its appropriateness for the identification problem. Pattern matching is basically an input/output mapping problem. The closer the mapping, the better the performance of the network is. The objective of the present investigation was to predict peak particle velocity and frequency from relevant parameters such as physico-mechanical properties of the rock mass, explosive properties and blast design parameters. It is difficult to determine all the relevant parameters, which have influence on the blast vibration and frequency. However, the influencing parameters are not independent and some of them are strongly correlated. Hence, it was not possible to use all the variables as input parameters. A three-layer feed-forward back-propagation neural network was developed to predict the PPV and frequency. The input layer has 10 input neurons and the output layer has two neurons, whereas the hidden layer has 15 hidden neurons ( All the input and output parameters were scaled between 0 and 1. The following equation was used for the scaling of input and output parameters: To test and validate the ANN model, a data sets were chosen, which was not used while training the network, was employed. The results are presented in this section to demonstrate the performance of the networks. Coefficient of determination (CoD) and mean absolute error (MAE) between the predicted and observed values is taken as the measure of performance. As Bayesian interpolation MVRA was carried out on 154 blast vibration cases to determine the mathematical expressions for PPV and frequency. The equation for prediction of PPV by MVRA is Eqs. The MAE for PPV and frequency are 1.673981 and 176.826, respectively. The high MAE values of PPV and frequency shows that prediction by MVRA showed very high error.    The figure revealed that ANN predicted PPV is just overlapping the measured PPV line, whereas widely used vibration predictors show very high level of error. This is due to the fact that they do not take into consideration all the influencing parameters of blast vibration. All the conventional predictors have site specific constants and these are not able to predict the safe charge for even other similar mining conditions. The value of site and attenuation constants also varied as the ground conditions changed. Moreover, these are derived based on only two parameters, i.e. maximum charge per delay and the distance from monitoring point to blast face. These empirical predictors are based on linear relation between scaled distance ( The other limitation of the predictor equations is that these cannot predict frequency, even though frequency is equally important for damage measurement and evaluation.  It can be seen that ANN demonstrates superiority over MVRA and widely used vibration predictors. Sensitivity analysis was carried out for all the 10 input parameters to understand the relative significance of each parameter on PPV and frequency ( It was concluded that explosive charge per hole and distance between blast face and monitoring point has the maximum influence on PPV but other parameters also show considerable influence. ANN results indicate very close agreement for the PPV and frequency with the field data sets as compared to conventional predictors and MVRA prediction. Conventional predictors are based on only maximum charge per delay, distance between blast face and monitoring point and attenuation factor. These predictors do not take into account other influencing parameters. Another drawback of the predictors is that they are not setup to give any predictions of the frequency. Although the MVRA prediction was based on 10 parameters, it was not able to predict PPV or frequency accurately. By adopting ANN technique, PPV and frequency level can be predicted prior to the blast. The blast design can be modified accordingly so that blast nuisances can be minimize a greater utilization of explosive energy is achieved. Considering the complexity of the relationship among the inputs and outputs, the results obtained by ANN are highly encouraging and satisfactory. ANN can learn new patterns that are not previously available in the training dataset. ANN can also update knowledge over time as long as more training data sets are presented, and can process information in parallel way. Therefore, the technique results in a greater degree of accuracy than any other analysis techniques. Hence, the technique proves to be economical and easier in comparison to tedious expensive experimental work. The financial support provided by Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, New Delhi to carry out this research is thankfully acknowledged.