Nonisothermal thermogravimetric (TG) analysis was used to evaluate the reactivity of a chromite mineral [(Fe2+, Mg)(Cr, Al, Fe3+)2O4] towards Cl2+CO, Cl2+N2 and Cl2+O2 gaseous mixtures up to 1000°C. Full chlorination and volatilization of reaction products were achieved at about 975°C using Cl2+CO, while only about 40% of the sample have reacted at 1000°C using Cl2+N2 and Cl2+O2.
                  The effect of the temperature on the oxychlorination with Cl2+O2 of the chromite mineral was studied between 600 and 1050°C using isothermal TG measurements. The results show that the oxychlorination of chromite occurs in two stages. The initial stage of the oxychlorination was characterized by average values of apparent activation energy of about 151 and 57kJ/mol for the temperatures lower and higher than 825°C, respectively. While a value of about 262kJ/mol was found for the second stage of the oxychlorination process between 925 and 1050°C. The effects of temperature on the oxychlorination of the simple chromite constituents (Cr2O3, Fe2O3 and MgO) were also studied.Chlorine technology is used for the recovery of several metals such as Ti, Zr, Hf, Nb, Ta, rare-earth elements, etc., from their bearing materials. Korshunov However, chlorination in presence of oxygen (oxychlorination) was applied to separate selectively a group of elements from other ones. In certain cases, the presence of oxygen in the system modifies the thermodynamic feasibility of specific oxychlorination reactions. Recently, Gaballah and Djona This paper is devoted to the study of temperature effect on the oxychlorination of chromite mineral using experimental conditions that minimize the effect of mass transfer phenomenon. To our knowledge, no studies concerning the oxychlorination of chromite were reported in the literature. The sample used in this study is a chromite mineral obtained from its concentrate described in detail previously The thermogravimetric (TG) chlorination tests were performed using 40 This study was started by nonisothermal TGA treatment of the chromite mineral in Cl The derivative of weight loss versus temperature is reported in The main products of the chromite oxychlorination are expected to be CrO To get an insight about the effect of grain size on the chromite oxychlorination, isothermal treatment with Cl The oxychlorination residues corresponding to the extent of reaction ‘ XRD diagrams of the residues corresponding to points ‘a’ to ‘d’ were almost identical. This is probably due to the fact that the different spinels (FeCr The effect of the gas flow rate on the reaction rate was measured to determine the experimental conditions that minimize the effect of mass transfer phenomena. A series of experiments was performed at 1000°C using Cl A series of TGA experiments was carried out in the temperature range 600–1050°C. As the reaction rate was low for The temperature dependency of the reaction rate was determined according to Arrhenius diagram. It was interesting to follow the evolution of apparent activation energy ( Mathematical fitting of experimental data of isothermal oxychlorination of chromite was performed. Different kinetics equations  However, it is difficult to clarify the kinetics of the chromite oxychlorination due to complex composition and structure of the chromite. Thus, a mixed regime of pore diffusion and chemical reaction could control the oxychlorination. Further clarification of the kinetics phenomena of the oxychlorination was performed by initiating another series of TGA tests of chromite oxychlorination between 700 and 1040°C using a Cl  The Arrhenius diagrams of the oxychlorination of chromite ( The mathematical fitting of experimental data for the chromite oxychlorination with Cl Although the simple oxides of chromite mineral are combined in the spinel structure (Fe Details concerning the behavior of these oxides in the oxychlorinating gas mixture were given previously More consist information was obtained during the treatment of these oxides using TG measurements while minimizing the mass transfer phenomena. Wüstite (Fe The other oxides (Cr Concerning the oxychlorination of chromite (first stage), Cr chromite oxychlorination is characterized by an apparent activation energy of about 151 at temperatures higher than 825°C, the oxychlorination of chromite and that of Cr Concerning the oxychlorination of chromite (MgCr While similarities of the chromite oxychlorination with the reactions of its simple oxides with Cl The presence of a reducing atmosphere was necessary to achieve a complete reaction of the chromite mineral with chlorine. Only iron chromite (FeCr The oxychlorination of the chromite occurred in two stages characterized by widely different reactivities of chromite towards Cl The oxychlorination of chromite with Cl This work was performed in the frame of contract No. BRE2-CT92-0173, thanks to the financial support of the European Union (DG-XII). The authors thank Dr. H.L. Schmidt for discussion, suggestion and help. They also would like to thank Dr. J.C. Mugica, Dr. R. Solozabal (INASMET, San Sebastian, Spain) and Dr. M. Coelho (INETI, Lisbon, Portugal) for technical discussions. Authors are indebted to Drs. A. Bonazébi, M. Djona, S. Ivanaj, N. Menad, N. Mirghaffari for discussions and help on different subjects and to Mrs. C. Richard for technical and administrative support.