The mechanisms during pressureless sintering of TiB2 with 0–50 wt.% Ni were analysed by differential dilatometry after mechanical alloying with hard metal beads. Three main stages of sintering could be identified by means of the changing dilatation rate. The first interval (200–600 °C) comprises reactions with oxygen and moisture (H3BO3, B2O3 formation, melting, evaporation). The second stage (600–700 °C) is governed by solid state sintering and reactions of Ni and/or Co with TiB2 yielding Ni3B, Ni2B, the corresponding Co-compounds and the ternary ω-phase of W2NiB2-type. The third main shrinkage interval is due to liquid phase sintering (987–1640 °C) and is accompanied by a significant weight-loss. Both precipitation of ω-phase as well as a (Ti,W)B2 solid solution in form of a core-shell structure are responsible for a grain growth retardation and the homogeneous microstructure. The results explain well all features reported in the corresponding literature while encountering the role of WC, too.In recent times, the increasing demand for novel materials used in armour, hypersonic aerospace vehicles, and electronically conductive ceramics has once again attracted interest to transition metal diboride-based materials such as TiB As TiB Due to its high melting point of 3250 °C TiB In 1984, Baumgartner and Steiger [ Another approach to gain high density is liquid phase sintering where capillary forces generate a fast particle re-arrangement and allow for further densification by the well-known mechanisms such as shape accommodation, dissolution/re-precipitation and skeletal grain growth. Liquid phase sintering, however, also fosters rapid mass transport through the melt and significantly accelerates grain growth in particular by Ostwald ripening. This fact requires further consideration to prevent grain growth such as the use of a minimum volume of liquid phase, the implementation of grain growth-retarding additives, or the formation of lattice strain by structural misfit during growth [ Recently, Fu and Koc reported on liquid phase sintering of TiB If no special TiB In this work, a pressureless sintering system for TiB The influence of milling debris on the sintering of boride-based materials is of general importance, as powder processing by high-energy milling with hard metal beads has become a quite common procedure which is quite often applied by powder suppliers to enhance the sintering activity even if the powder will be used for hot pressing. Moreover, boronization of hard metal cutting tools has also become a popular method to harden surfaces subjected to wear [ Starting material was commercial TiB Shaping of the samples for sintering studies was carried out by cold isostatic pressing of cylindrical specimens in silicon rubber moulds under 630 MPa for 1 min (tapping density 30–45% th.d.; green density 50–60% th.d.). The final green body size was 14 mm in diameter and 21 mm in height, approximately. Since both green body strength and shape accuracy were excellent, no organic binder was added. Sintering was carried out in a resistant-heated tungsten-tube vacuum furnace (Heraeus Combivac, Germany) under 0.04 Pa pressure after three times flushing with 99.98% pure N The densification behaviour depending from the Ni content is shown in The time-dependent densification is illustrated in Looking at the temperature-dependent weight-loss recorded above 800 °C after 2 h of annealing it becomes obvious that evaporation of volatile species starts between 1000 and 1100 °C which is associated with the onset of shrinkage followed by the maximum densification rate. At temperatures above 1350 °C the weight-loss is constant ( As recorded by the dilatometric measurement of the 7.5 wt.% Ni containing greenbody, the sample first expands up to 325 °C and tends to shrink stepwise up to 708 °C. Following, there is a temperature interval up to 1150–1170 °C with an almost unchanged elongation. At 1160–1170 °C, the main shrinkage occurs up to 1600 °C ( Dilatometer curves for Ni concentrations of 5, 10, and 12.5 wt.% do not significantly differ from the measurements for the 7.5% composition. The intensities of the reactions increase slightly with increasing Ni-content, and the temperatures vary in the range of ± 7 K. All sintering curves imply that the main shrinkage of 22% is accomplished at 1700 °C so that pressureless sintering should be possible between 1500 and 1700 °C if an isothermal sintering time is applied. As the dilatation rate is, similar to DTA measurements, very sensitive for both sintering and phase reactions, it becomes obvious that heating up is accompanied by distinct effects between 325–460 °C, 455–510 °C, 605–710 °C, while the main sintering takes place between 1160 and 1600 °C, interrupted by another shrinkage-accelerating reaction between 1230 and 1303 °C ( In order to separate the influence of nickel from that of the mechanical alloying, a pure TiB Comparing the sintering kinetics of green bodies with and without nickel addition, the plots of the dilatation rates exhibit similar effects ( The DTA-measurement of the initial powder mixture with 7.5 wt.% Ni reveals first a very broad exothermic range between 600 and 1050 °C followed by a smooth endothermic effect starting at 1113 °C with a maximum at 1123 °C. The reaction is completed at 1131 °C but immediately followed by another weak endothermic reaction at 1163 °C which changes to a long-lasting exothermic reaction at 1235 °C up to 1400 °C/maximum temperature. During cooling down an exothermic effect is observed at 1038 °C (maximum) followed by a very steep exothermic peak between 1035 and 1029 °C. Repeated heating shows only one endothermic reaction starting at 1317 °C and terminating at 1398 °C while repeated cooling yields an exothermic effect again at 1035 °C. To correlate the DTA and dilatometer results, a superimposition of both curves is presented in The microstructure of the samples mainly consists of three groups of phases. The first is a series of (Ti,W)B The second group of phases comprises ternary borides with a general formula WCoB, the so-called φ-phase (orthorhombic, The last group of phases comprises the matrix, i.e. the liquid phase, which solidifies as Ni The significant weight-loss above 1000 °C in vacuum implies that pore channels are kept open while the surrounding microstructure shrinks during sintering. Accordingly, there are stages of sintering in which the samples exhibit strongly differentiated cross sections. While a heat treatment up to 1000 °C still reveals a homogeneous, open-porous and green-body-like appearance, rising temperature to 1100 °C already indicates concentric zones of different grinding and polishing hardness. Using 5 wt.% Ni, this graded structure is not visible any more after sintering at 1700 °C. With higher Ni-content, the temperature required for homogenisation decreases to 1500 °C A close-up of a corresponding zonal structure in 50% Ni containing sample sintered at 1200 °C is shown in In homogeneous areas of the samples, all phases exhibit an equiaxial shape and an average grain size (d The correlation between the various phases can be taken from the kind of intergrowth. The first visible interaction between the newly generated liquid phase is the partial dissolution of (W,Ti)C and TiB For an understanding of the sintering effects occurring in the TiB First of all, oxygen impurities must be taken into account even if high-purity raw materials have been used since mechanical treatment, drying and handling of powders and green bodies in air will necessarily result in the formation of an oxide layer at the surface of both metal and TiB As next we consider, that metallic Ni and Co were intentionally added or picked up as a debris from the hard metal milling beads. Before melting occurs, these metals undergo At 900 °C, Márquez-Herrera et al. [ Calculations in the ternary B-Ni-W system by Morishita et al. [ At 1000 °C we recorded the onset of a significant weight-loss ( Samples sintered at 1200 °C do not show any further weight-loss but an increasing amount of ω- and γ-phase. This coincides with the end of the endothermic DTA-reaction. Only in the case of 50 wt.% Ni metallic Ni and Ni Going to higher temperatures, the partial dissolution of WC and TiC gives a significant contribution to the melt volume. According to Zhou et al. [ The microstructures of samples sintered between 1200 and 1350 °C are characterised by dense local clusters of liquid ( In conclusion, the addition of Ni to WC-Co-mechanically alloyed TiB As shown in The individual steps of liquid phase sintering are summarised in Unfortunately, all liquid phase sintering systems with TiB Liquid phase sintering of TiB  The The third reaction and The formation of liquid phase is accompanied by a strong The residual liquid phase increases in W, Ti, and B concentration which causes Accordingly, conventional TiB Last, former less-readily accessible literature on boron containing materials dating back to ˜1985 and earlier may reveal helpful information for the interpretation of phenomena supposed to be novel. This research was not funded by any external source. Instead, the author likes to gratefully acknowledge the strong technical support by P. König (powder processing), V. Schmitz (dilatometry), P. Schott (X-ray diffraction), and R. Coenen (ceramography and SEM).