Minimal information exists regarding early complications after operatively treated proximal humeral fractures. Of the 82 shoulders that had osteosynthesis, 42 had a (nonmedical) complication, with 21 requiring further surgery. Of 42 shoulders with complications, 12 were related to incomplete reduction, 16 had loss of anatomic fracture fixation, 9 had delayed healing, 3 had an infection, 1 had rotator cuff failure, and 1 had loose bodies. Fixed-angle plates had lower rates of initial malpositioning and resultant malunion. Of the 22 shoulders requiring hemiarthroplasty, 14 had an early complication. Of these, 7 had complications relating to implant insertion or tuberosity malreduction at the index operation and 7 had problems with tuberosity healing. The rate of complications after operative treatment of proximal humeral fractures is high. All efforts at fracture fragment fixation with osteosynthesis and hemiarthroplasty should be directed at obtaining anatomic fracture fixation that resists displacement.Operative management of fractures of the proximal humerus remains controversial, with results that are often disappointing. The most widely used classification of proximal fractures is comprehensive and complex with reports of low to midrange interobserver and intraobserver reliability. Proximal humeral fracture management is demanding. Anatomic reconstruction can be difficult, and loss of fixation as a result of osteoporotic bone may lead to fracture displacement and malunion. Although several authors have examined the outcomes of operatively treated proximal humeral fractures, there is no report focusing on complications in patients undergoing operative treatment of proximal humeral fractures. Therefore, the purpose of this study was to review the complications of operatively treated proximal humeral fractures at our institution (Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN) to determine the rates of early complications and the potentially avoidable factors that led to their occurrence. We hypothesize that the rate of early complications in patients undergoing operative treatment is higher than previously reported. A computer-assisted search of the surgical database at our institution was performed to identify patients who had operative fixation or arthroplasty for fracture of the proximal humerus from January 1995 to December 2002. Only skeletally mature patients from a 60-mile radius (regional service area) with acute fractures (<3 weeks from injury) were included in the study to eliminate selection problems from our institution’s referral pattern, which frequently deals with unusual or highly complex injuries. Approval for this study was obtained from the Institutional Review Board. All medical records including associated surgical procedures and available imaging studies were reviewed to examine the type and frequency of complications encountered. We identified 138 shoulders that met these criteria (2 patients had bilateral fractures), of which 22 shoulders in 22 patients were eliminated because no radiographs were available for examination. This left 116 shoulders for review. In addition, 12 shoulders in 12 patients had less than 3 months of follow-up, of whom 2 had died, one 7 days after the initial procedure and one at 11 weeks. Therefore, 104 shoulders in 102 patients were reviewed in detail for early complications of operatively treated proximal humeral fractures; 22 shoulders in 22 patients underwent hemiarthroplasty, and 82 shoulders in 80 patients underwent surgical fixation. In the 82 shoulders undergoing operative fracture fixation, the median follow-up was 12 months (range, 3 months to 7 years). The median age was 61 years (range, 17-96 years). Of these 82 shoulders, 19 had follow-up for 3 to 6 months and 63 had follow-up for 6 months or greater. There were 52 female and 28 male patients (2 female patients had bilateral injuries). The mechanisms of injury in the 80 patients included a fall from a standing position (46), a fall from a height or stairs (16), a motor vehicle accident (12), and a motorcycle/all-terrain vehicle crash (6). The median length of hospitalization was 4 days (range, 1-39 days). In the 22 shoulders undergoing hemiarthroplasty, the median follow-up was 2.1 years (range, 3 months to 5 years). The median age was 71 years (range, 29-87 years). Of the 22 shoulders, 3 had follow-up from 3 to 6 months and 19 had follow-up for 6 months or greater. There were 6 men and 16 women. The mechanisms of injury included a fall from a standing position (19), a fall from a height or stairs (2), and a motor vehicle accident (1). The mean length of hospitalization was 4.5 days (range, 2-21 days). Of the 104 shoulders, 42 (40%) had at least 1 associated injury and 14 (14%) had 2 or more associated injuries. Of the shoulders, 12 had an associated rotator cuff tear (7 of which were noted in the 22 shoulders undergoing hemiarthroplasty). There was an associated injury to the upper limb girdle in 25 shoulders, and 12 had a lower extremity injury (including 6 with femur or hip fractures). Of the patients, 5 had chest or abdomen injuries, 6 had injury to the axial skeleton (pelvis or spine), and 4 had facial or head trauma. Standard radiographs included an anteroposterior view of the proximal humerus in internal and external rotation, lateral scapular view, and axillary view. All fractures were classified by the system described by Neer. The operating surgeon reported 41 two-part, 39 three-part, and 23 four-part fractures, as well as 1 head-splitting fracture. Consensus review by the authors demonstrated 49 two-part, 28 three-part, 13 four-part, 2 head-splitting, and 3 nondisplaced fractures. Of the 2-part fractures, 41 involved the surgical neck and 9 were isolated greater tuberosity fractures, of which 3 had associated anterior dislocations. Of the 3-part fractures, 26 involved the humeral neck and greater tuberosity, of which 8 had associated dislocation (4 anterior and 4 posterior), and 3 involved the humeral neck and lesser tuberosity. There were 13 four-part fractures, of which 3 had anterior dislocations. All patients (82 shoulders with osteosynthesis and 22 patients with hemiarthroplasty) were assessed for early complications. This included medical and surgical complications, which were defined as occurring from the time of injury and initial hospitalization up to 3 months postoperatively. Surgical complications included events occurring intraoperatively or technical problems directly related to the implant placement or final fracture reduction. Radiographs were assessed from the initial postoperative radiographs for quality of fragment reduction in the anteroposterior, 60° posterior oblique, and axillary views. A malreduction was defined as a nonanatomic reduction of any fracture fragment (>1 cm of displacement or residual angulation of >20° from a defined 135° head-shaft angle). All patients were followed up until healing had occurred or until 6 months (which defined a delay in healing). The healing status of the fractures was determined by the following parameters. A fracture was healed when there was both clinical (defined by the clinical record) and radiographic evidence of union. Clinical union was defined as a painless fracture site on examination. Radiographic union was defined by bridging callus or (with rigid fixation) direct bone healing between fracture fragments on at least 2 orthogonal radiographic views. Radiographs were examined for changes in fracture fixation over time, such as implant breakage or change in position, as well as fracture fragment displacement (greater tuberosity, lesser tuberosity, and humeral head). Displacement of greater than 1 cm and the direction of displacement (anterior, posterior, medial, lateral, inferior, varus, valgus) for the displaced fracture fragments were determined. Radiographs were also assessed for tuberosity resorption, implant-related problems, humeral head subluxation, and infection. The humeral head was examined to determine the direction and amount of subluxation, which was expressed as a percentage of the width of the humeral head relative to the center of the glenoid. Of the 104 shoulders, 16 had an initial trial of nonoperative treatment that required operative intervention because of fracture displacement or an unstable reduction. In the remaining shoulders, a decision to perform operative intervention was made on the day of presentation. The median time to operative intervention for all fractures treated was 4 days (range, day of injury to 3 weeks). In this retrospective review, the type of surgical procedure chosen was based solely on surgeon preference after assessment of the injury pattern. Cases were distributed to surgeons based on subspecialty interest, surgeon availability, and the urgency status of the case. Operations were performed by 15 different surgeons, all of whom are board-certified orthopaedic surgeons at our institution with ongoing participation in the care of trauma patients. Four of these surgeons have practices largely or primarily consisting of shoulder surgery. Of the hemiarthroplasties, 15 were performed by shoulder surgeons and 7 by nonshoulder surgeons. Of the shoulders undergoing osteosynthesis, shoulder surgeons performed 57 and nonshoulder surgeons performed 25. Of the 82 shoulders undergoing operative fixation, 17 (21%) underwent closed reduction and percutaneous fixation with terminally threaded wires or an intramedullary staple device (Smith & Nephew, Memphis, TN), Postoperatively, patients’ shoulders were placed in a shoulder immobilizer with the arm at the side or with an abduction orthosis based on surgeon preference. Passive range-of-motion exercises for elevation and external rotation were started at the discretion of the operating surgeon and were continued until initial radiographic healing was documented. An active assisted motion program was advanced when the fracture had stabilized. Stretching and strengthening with an elastic strap were started after fracture healing. The association between the 4 most common types of osteosynthesis complications was assessed by use of the Fisher exact test. For the complications of malpositioning and malunion, although the overall test was significant, pairwise comparisons were also performed by use of the Fisher exact test. The Major medical complications occurred in 6 of 102 patients within 3 months of the injury. There were 4 patients who had a pulmonary embolus and 2 who had a myocardial infarction during the initial hospitalization and survived for fracture care follow-up. The median number of hospital days to discharge was 10 (range, 6-18 days). Of the 82 shoulders undergoing osteosynthesis of the proximal humerus, 42 (51%) had an early complication, with 21 shoulders (26%) undergoing reoperation. Of the 82 fractures, 65 (79%) healed without delay or further intervention at less than 6 months whereas 17 (21%) had delayed fracture healing at the 6-month interval. Surgical complications (events occurring during the index procedure not including medical complications) occurred in 12 of 82 shoulders (15%) undergoing osteosynthesis. All 12 shoulders had an incomplete reduction of the proximal humeral fragments on postoperative radiographs ( In the remaining shoulders that had acceptable initial fracture reduction, 13 had loss of fixation with fracture displacement, resulting in malunion in 10 and nonunion is 3. Three patients had implant migration (screw backout or intramedullary rod loosening) without substantial change in fracture position. There were 9 patients who had delayed healing with no evidence of fracture malreduction or displacement. Of these, 8 healed 6 months after the initial injury (3 required revision fixation with bone grafting, with 1 having resultant nonunion). Three patients had a postoperative infection. One was superficial, was treated with oral antibiotics only, and healed without further intervention. Two others were treated for acute deep infection with irrigation and debridement with retention of hardware and intravenous antibiotics. Of these 2, 1 healed in 3 months and 1 went on to have nonunion requiring fracture site and bone grafting with resultant nonunion. Other early complications included 1 patient with a 3-part fracture, with blade plate fixation, in whom narrowing of the acromiohumeral distance and proximal migration of the humerus developed during the course of rehabilitation despite anatomic fracture healing; this patient was considered to have a rotator cuff tear. One other patient was found to have an intraarticular loose body fragment with maintenance of fracture reduction and early short-term healing and underwent arthroscopic fragment removal. There were 6 shoulders that demonstrated humeral head subluxation at last radiographic follow-up (3 posterior, 2 superior, and 1 posteroinferior), of which 5 were associated with other complications including fracture malreduction, fragment displacement, or tuberosity resorption ( The 4 most common methods of osteosynthesis were then compared ( There was no demonstrated difference ( Reoperation was performed in 21 patients (not including routine pin removal). Ten had removal of implanted hardware only at a mean of 6 months (range, 2 weeks to 30 months) because of loosening or a change in implant position, with all fractures achieving union at last follow-up. Three of the ten were in shoulders that had undergone percutaneous fixation, five were in shoulders that had prominent subacromial hardware (via intramedullary devices with tension bands), and two locking intramedullary nails were removed because of screw loosening or penetration of the articular surface. Of the shoulders, 7 had revision internal fixation at a mean of 3 months (range, 1 week to 8 months), of which 4 had revision for fracture displacement (1 with percutaneous pins, 2 with a fixed-angle plate, and 1 with a non–fixed-angle plate). In addition, 3 shoulders had revision fixation for delayed healing (2 fixed-angle plates and 1 non–fixed-angle plate), of which 1 fixed-angle plate was broken and had a positive culture at the nonunion site ( One patient had reoperation for bone grafting only after delayed healing at 9 months, eventually going on to achieve union. One patient had a salvage reoperation for conversion to hemiarthroplasty at 4 months postoperatively for humeral head collapse and tuberosity resorption. One patient had reoperation with arthroscopy after 2 months for loose body excision. There was 1 acute deep infection ( Of the 22 shoulders requiring hemiarthroplasty ( Of the remaining shoulders that had acceptable implant insertion and fracture reduction, 7 had complications directly related to tuberosity healing. Of these, 3 had tuberosity resorption after tuberosity displacement or nonunion, 3 had tuberosity resorption and humeral head subluxation despite reasonable fracture fragment alignment having been maintained, and 1 had displacement of both the lesser and greater tuberosities with resultant nonunion without evidence of significant resorption. Humeral head subluxation was identified in a subgroup of 7 shoulders (32%). Of these, 3 had superior subluxation alone, 2 were anterosuperior, and 2 were posterior-superior. All 7 were a result of associated complications ( There was no difference in the rate of tuberosity or implant malpositioning, nonunion, or humeral head subluxation between shoulder surgeons and nonshoulder surgeons ( Two patients underwent reoperation after hemiarthroplasty for deep infection (one with Of the 104 shoulders examined, 8 had inadequate radiographs to classify the fracture adequately (based on consensus review) and were excluded for the purposes of comparison. In 66 (69%) of the remaining 96 shoulders, there was perfect agreement between the operating surgeons and the consensus reviewers with regard to the number of fracture parts. Of the remaining 30 shoulders, 26 (87%) were graded as having fewer displaced fragments (or a lower Neer classification) by consensus examination of the authors and 4 (13%) were graded as having fewer displaced fragments by the operating surgeons. Nonoperative treatment of proximal humeral fractures is generally recommended for nondisplaced or minimally displaced fractures of the proximal humerus, with satisfactory results being expected. Despite these clinical findings, studies have demonstrated that displaced or malunited fractures have a direct impact on functional outcome, with residual displacement leading to inferior results in patients undergoing osteosynthesis. Intramedullary rod fixation with a tension band Although osteosynthesis with anatomic fracture fixation has not been shown to correlate reliably with final outcome in proximal humeral fractures, In this study, patients who underwent fixation with a fixed-angle plate (blade plate or locking plate) via an open deltopectoral approach had a significantly lower incidence of fracture malreduction and malunion. However, there was no difference in the rate of fracture displacement, delayed healing, or humeral head subluxation between treatment groups. The reasons for the high rate of fixation failure with resultant fracture displacement are not clear; however, lack of adequate fixation in osteoporotic bone appears to be a key component. Those with tuberosity displacement were likely a result of inadequate stabilization of the bony tuberosity fragment, which is often comminuted. Although most authors do note minor or partial changes in fragment position after fixation, stability of the fracture fixation construct with respect to changes in fracture alignment over time has not been uniformly reported or well defined. This study also demonstrated the difficulty in achieving ideal anatomic fracture reduction. Twelve patients who had osteosynthesis and seven who had hemiarthroplasty were identified as having incomplete reductions. Although this may be because of difficulties with soft bone or comminution, we believe that this is likely a result of inadequate use of intraoperative radiographs or fluoroscopy. We now recommend the routine use of intraoperative fluoroscopy to verify hardware placement and an anatomic stable reduction. Boileau et al critically examined the factors that led to functional outcome failures in patients who underwent hemiarthroplasty and found a 27% incidence of lesser or greater tuberosity malpositioning at the index operation, with a resultant 50% of patients with displacement at final follow-up. The results presented in this study support those of Boileau et al Boileau et al The concept of lateralization should be clarified to emphasize a more anatomic humeral head offset. Humeral implants with a straight stem such as the Cofield 2 humeral prosthesis (Smith & Nephew), Aequalis standard humeral prosthesis (Tornier, Monteblanc, France), or Global Fx humeral prosthesis (Depuy, Warsaw, IN) should not be placed in valgus (distal stem angulated medially relative to the humeral shaft). Although stem positioning in this manner may give a false sense of lateralization, the length-tension relationship of the rotator cuff to the humeral implant is not enhanced and acts only to minimize shaft-tuberosity contact. In this study, the 2 patients who had straight humeral stems placed in valgus both had tuberosity resorption and nonunion with proximal humeral migration. Therefore, we recommend straight-stem placement in line with the humeral shaft (avoiding valgus), using the humeral head size to tension the rotator cuff and tuberosity fragments correctly. Humeral prostheses that have a medial offset built into the stem, such as with an apex lateral bend as observed recently with the Aequalis fracture prosthesis (Tornier), should be placed in an appropriate position to allow for anatomic reduction of the tuberosities to the humeral shaft. This concept in fracture prosthesis design continues to evolve. This study did not demonstrate a difference in the rate of complications between dedicated shoulder surgeons and nonshoulder surgeons with respect to fracture malposition, fragment displacement, malunion, or delayed healing. Although this may have been a result of bias, with more complex fractures being treated by the shoulder surgeons, these differences could not be elicited in this study. Fracture classification agreement between operating surgeons and the authors’ consensus was less than perfect, with operating surgeons consistently classifying fractures as more severe than the reviewers. Although this may be a result of findings not identifiable by radiographs alone, we believe that this likely represents difficulties in understanding fracture fragment position with contemporary images. With these factors in mind, as well as information gleaned from this study, our approach to fracture fixation has been modified to include the following treatment principles:  Correct identification and proper understanding of the fracture type are essential. These may require additional radiographs or evaluation with computed tomography with 3-dimensional reconstructions. The fixation construct should be applied to allow compression of the fracture fragments. The use of fixed-angle devices may decrease the frequency of fragment malpositioning and resultant malunion. Fixation constructs (intramedullary device or plates and screws) should be augmented, as necessary, with heavy sutures passing adjacent to bony fragments through rotator cuff tissue and back to the fixation implant to provide maximum implant-fragment stability. The greater tuberosity fixation height should relate well to the height of the upper lateral aspect of the head fragment or humeral head prosthesis. Intraoperative fluoroscopy is recommended to confirm final fracture fragment positioning. When inserting a proximal humeral prosthesis, the proximal aspect of the implant should be narrow enough to allow ample space for bone contact to encourage healing. Humeral implants with large metaphyseal dimensions make anatomic reduction difficult and leave minimal space for bone grafting. Humeral implants with a straight stem should not be placed in valgus, thus compromising the area of bone contact for tuberosity-shaft healing. Humeral stems that have a medial offset in the stem with an apex lateral bend should be placed in an appropriate position to allow for anatomic reduction of the tuberosities to the humeral shaft. Although the best position for immobilization is not known, we now routinely place the shoulder in an abduction pillow to reduce the strain from the rotator cuff on the repaired fracture fragments. From the results noted in this study (high rate of fracture displacement despite anatomic fracture reduction), the length of immobilization has been increased to allow for early healing to occur before mobilization. Limitations in this study are directly related to the inherent problems of retrospective patient review. No comparison group was included for evaluation, and no protocol for directing care was used. Multiple surgeons were involved in treatment. Case complexity bias was accounted for by limiting the cases examined to patients residing in the immediate regional service area. However, the large tertiary referral practice of this institution may have led to a more complex patient population with multiple injuries and comorbidities falsely elevating the complication rates. The length of follow-up was variable in this study. Longer follow-up would likely have yielded further insight into the late-occurring problems that may have arisen as a result of the complications encountered during the early phases of care. Outcome measures for functional assessment were not assessed in this study; therefore, the rate of early complications was not correlated with functional outcome variables. In conclusion, the rate of complications in this study was high and was not related to fracture type, type of fixation, or surgeon expertise. Although these results are directly a factor of how complications were defined, the high rate of malunion, nonunion, and reoperation for patients undergoing osteosynthesis cannot be overstated. We also believe that the rates of fracture displacement and resultant fracture malunion may have previously been underreported and may be the contributing factor for the often disappointing results with proximal humeral fracture operative treatment. Despite the recent advances in arthroplasty techniques,