High mud loss is one of the major drilling problems that has caused severe problems throughout the oil well drilling history. One of the most common methods to reduce mud loss is using lost circulation materials (LCMs). Mud loss and LCMs change mud properties but the latter change that of mud cake as well. The main purpose of this research is to investigate the effect of mud loss and LCMs on mud cake thickness and differential sticking probability. Two mud types (prehydrated bentonite and lignosulfonate muds) are selected as the case studies. For prehydrated bentonite muds, the effect of cellophane and walnut shell additives are investigated. For lignosulfonate muds, the effect of sawdust and mica additives were investigated. Some similar mud compositions are chosen from reference papers in order to calibrate devices and compare the results. The API filter press is used for making mud cakes and testing mud loss. Mud cake characterization equipment is used for measuring the torsional resistance of the mud cake and examining the probability of differential sticking. It seems that the geometric shape of the additive is important in reducing filtrate loss and also reducing the probability of the differential sticking. In prehydrated bentonite muds, walnut shell and cellophane additives are the best reducers of the filtrate loss and the probability of the differential sticking, respectively. Also in lignosulfonate muds, mica and sawdust additives are the best reducers of the filtrate loss and the probability of the differential sticking, respectively.Drilling fluid loss and differential sticking are two important drilling problems that have been investigated in this study. Drilling formations such as high permeable, fractured, induced fractured, and low-pressure formations may lead to drilling fluid loss due to the penetration and movement of drilling fluid into the drilling formation ( According to Drilling fluid loss can greatly increase the drilling cost. The 1991 American Petroleum Institute survey showed that about 20–25% of drilled wells suffer from drilling fluid loss. In the report published by the US Department of Energy, on average, 10 to 20 percent of the drilling costs in high temperature-high pressure wells are spent on mud loss ( The loss of drilling fluid is usually accompanied by the well's stability problems, which eventually causes pipe sticking and even losing the well ( One common type of pipe sticking is differential sticking. Differential sticking is deviation of the pipe towards the wall of the well and its sticking inside the mud cake due to the high-pressure difference between the mud column pressure and formation pressure and high mud cake thickness ( Due to thicker mud cake caused by the fluid passage, drilling fluid loss increases the probability of differential sticking ( Some researchers also believed that treatment of mud loss by improper loss control materials, especially the ones with higher particle size, not only does not reduce the probability of a pressure difference, but due to the large size of the lost circulation materials and thus the formation of a thicker mud cake, can even increase the probability of differential sticking ( The greatest change caused by lost circulation materials is the formation of a low permeability mud cake to prevent mud loss. On the other hand, Mud cake plays a decisive role in the differential sticking process. A soft and thick mud cake increases the probability of differential sticking ( Therefore, it is important to estimate mud cake properties after adding lost circulation materials, because it helps us understand the effect of these materials on increasing or decreasing the probability of differential sticking. In 2003, with the investment of CSIRO Company, The main purpose of this paper is to understand how mud type and lost circulation materials impact the probability of differential sticking and whether lost circulation materials cause differential sticking to be eliminated or increased. The considered variables for this purpose are Spurt loss volume, Filtrate volume (loss volume) at 7.5 and 30 min, Elapsed time to reach 100 ml filtrate loss, Mud cake thickness, the Torsional resistance of mud cake vs. angular displacement, and Maximum torsional resistance at targeted embedment depth. The measuring methods of these variables are fully explained in the methodology and procedure section. This research was carried out in the drilling laboratory and geomechanics laboratory of the Faculty of Petroleum Engineering, Amirkabir University of Technology. Mud weight, mud viscosity, test temperature, filtrate volume (loss volume) at 7.5 and 30 min, elapsed time to reach 100 ml filtrate loss, mud cake thickness, torsional resistance of mud cake vs. angular displacement, and maximum torsional resistance at targeted embedment depth were measured. The maximum torsional resistance of mud cake, mud cake thickness, and filtrate loss variables were considered as the main variables. In In order to confirm data from The muds of During mud making procedure, pH was kept constant at the desired range using a pH meter. After making mud and measuring their density and viscosity, muds were placed inside API filter press cell. As mentioned before, this paper discusses only the filtration problems which cause drilling fluid loss. It is assumed that the only reason for the fluid loss is filtration problems. Subsequently, in this situation, fluid loss volume is almost equal to filtrate volume and it is possible to measure both by the filtration test. The filtration test was carried out under a pressure of 100 ± 5 psi until the 100 mL filtrate loss was reached. At constant pressure, this may take from 20 min up to 48 h or more, depending on the type of mud additives. During the test, the filtrate loss data was recorded at 7.5 and 30 min to check the filtrate loss amount. The next steps are fully explained in When filtrate volume is reached to 100 ml filtration process is finished. Then the mud cell was opened and the excess mud was decanted slowly to avoid any disturbance to mud cake. Then mud cake was washed gently to remove the gel-like top layers using static water. Remember that in all steps mud cake should not be removed from the API cell. Mud and mud cake images are in After washing the mud cake, the thickness of the mud cake was measured by a digital caliper. Then the API cell containing mud cake was placed on the lab jack after fixing a stopper at the filtrate outlet of the cell. This was done to prevent any cake matrix fluid expulsion at the bottom of the mud cake. Then the lab jack was placed in such a way that the semi-spherical foot just touches the extreme top of the mud cake. The rate of embedment of the foot was selected to be 0.25 mm/min using the rate control knob of the step less compression machine. The embedment phase continued until an embedment depth of 5 mm is reached. At the end of the embedment phase, the generated load at targeted embedment depth was allowed to stabilize. The torsional test was performed under the action of stabilized normal load to simulate the overbalance mud pressure acting on the stuck pipe during the application of the torque. The torsional resistance reflects the resistance at equal embedment depth and at equal contact area for different mud cakes. An angular displacement rate of 0.5°/sec was used during the torsional test and a dedicated PC-based software automatically recorded the generated torsional resistance as a function of angular displacement. When the semispherical arm reached a depth of 5 mm the torsional resistance test began with angular displacement (rotation) at a constant rate of 0.5°/sec. Torsion was measured by a torque cell. This torque cell is a part of mud cake characterization equipment. This equipment schematic and the place of this torque cell is shown in By load and torque cells, the mechanical properties of the mud cake including penetration rate, tensile strength, and torsional strength are measured. Also, you can see a picture of this equipment in Maximum torsional resistance shown by the cake against a torsional force from the semispherical arm is called Maximum Torsional Resistance at Targeted Embedment Depth (MTRTED). By using torsional resistance versus angular displacement graph an estimation of the maximum torsional resistance of the mud cake can be obtained. The obtained graphs from different tests for different mud compositions show almost the same pattern. After obtaining information of filtrate loss, mud cake thickness, and finally maximum torsional resistance, it can be expressed which mud and which lost circulation material can aggravate or reduce differential sticking. The first reviewed subject in this section is one of the filtration theories which is introduced by The flow rate of mud through a porous media during the formation of mud cake is expressed by the Darcy law. Therefore, mud filtration is calculated as follows ( In equation By some calculations and assumptions the following equation will be obtained ( In equation With In this relationship, In most filtration studies, the filtration volume is usually plotted versus square root of time. This step is done in this study too. After calculating the slope, dividing it by the filtration area, and then squaring it, values of C can be calculated. The values of C for various compounds and various additives are reported in the next section. In each experiment, sub-variables including laboratory temperature, compressor pressure, mud weight, mud viscosity, and main variables including the amount of filtrate loss at 7.5 and 30 min, elapsed time to reach 100 ml filtrate loss, filtrate loss graphs, C constant values, mud cake thickness, torsional resistance of mud cake vs. angular displacement graphs, and maximum torsional resistance at targeted embedment depth were reported. Finally, the obtained data for filtrate loss, mud cake thickness, torsional resistance, and interaction of these variables were investigated. Then the criterion of mud selection was determined based on better performance. By analyzing these three main variables, a comprehensive analysis of the effect of filtrate loss, its avoidance of differential sticking probability, and the severity of differential sticking removal is presented. Filtrate loss graphs for every mud are presented separately in According to C values, which indirectly represent the slope of filtrate loss versus square root of time graph, it is possible to differentiate between muds and additives with low and high filtrate loss. Accordingly, A4 mud among the reference paper muds, Prehyd 2 mud among prehydrated bentonite muds with walnut shell additive, and Ligno_2 mud with sawdust additive have the lowest C coefficients. As a result, these muds show the best performance in reducing filtrate loss. Also, A3 mud among the reference paper muds, Prehyd 0 mud among prehydrated bentonite muds without additive, and Ligno_1 mud with mica additive have the highest C coefficients. So, these muds show the worst performance in reducing filtrate loss. The reason for filtrate loss reduction is different based on composition and additive type. For reference muds, only the type of ion and additive are the reasons of filtrate loss changes. Among reference muds, A1 mud had no additive, A2 mud contained sodium dissolved ion, A3 mud contained potassium dissolved ions, and A4 mud contained sodium dissolved ion and PAC. Dissolved sodium ion has a larger radius than dissolved potassium ion in water. Larger dissolved ion in water can reduce filtrate loss. On the other hand, it creates a more porous mud cake and, as a result, increases filtrate loss; but its overall effect is to reduce filtrate loss. Also, PAC, which is a soluble cellulose polymer in water, known as a filtrate loss reducer, is another reason for more filtrate loss reduction of A4 mud. In prehydrated bentonite muds, the walnut shell additive has the best performance in reducing filtrate loss. The main reason is the superior strength of the walnut shell (in Prehyd 2) compared to cellophane (in Prehyd 1). Another reason is the shape of the walnut shell particles compared to cellophane particles. Walnut shell particles often have non-homogeneous three-dimensional shapes, but cellophane particles often have flat shapes. Therefore, when using cellophane, if the plates are perpendicular to the filter paper they extremely lose their flow-blocking efficiency. Therefore, at the same concentration, the possibility of blocking the flow and reducing fluid loss by using the walnut shell is higher than that of cellophane. Regarding lignosulfonate muds, due to the same reason for additives of prehydrated bentonite muds, Ligno_2 mud with sawdust additive has the lowest filtrate loss growth rate over time and Ligno_1 mud with mica additive has the highest. Spurt loss values (volumes) are the vertical intercepts of filtrate loss charts. According to According to Another criterion that is defined to measure loss control ability of muds is the time it takes to reach 100 ml loss ( The longer it takes to reach 100 ml filtrate loss, the less the filtrate loss speed is ( Among prehydrated bentonite muds, cellophane and walnut shell additives do not have any significant effect on elapsed time to reach 100 ml filtrate loss, which reflects their ineffectiveness in the long term. But in lignosulfonate muds, sawdust and mica additives have a negative effect on filtrate loss, exacerbate it in the long term, and reduce the elapsed time to reach 100 ml filtrate loss. A1 mud due to its high elapsed time to reach 100 ml filtrate loss can be a good mud for porous formations which are susceptible to differential sticking. A4 mud has the highest elapsed time to reach 100 ml filtrate loss, which is due to the presence of PAC. This material is used as a fluid loss reducer in oil wells. As it is observed, lignosulfonate fluids have high elapsed time to reach 100 ml filtrate loss. This is due to the presence of lignosulfonate and lignite thinners in drilling mud. In this regard, there is a complete explanation in the previous section. As shown in Based on previous studies, as mud cake thickness is greater, differential sticking probability is higher ( According to Of course, there can be deviations. One reason could be the type of additives used. For example, in Ligno_2 mud, sawdust additive has been used. Despite the decline in filtrate loss, it makes a thicker mud cake. So in this case, sawdust additive has a negative effect. Another issue that may be involved in these deviations is the measuring method of mud cake thickness. Generally, the measuring methods of mud cake thickness are not very accurate and they can even destroy mud cake. Today, new methods such as the non-destructive measurement of mud cake thickness by laser beams are presented ( Finally, due to mud cake thickness amounts (shown in Less mud cake thickness. More lubrication in lignosulfonate muds which is caused by lignite and lignosulfonate in their composition. The validity of this second hypothesis will be discussed in the next section. The most important variable in these experiments is the torsional resistance of the mud cake. In this section, the torsional resistance of mud cake against drill string rotation is plotted versus angular displacement as a graph for each mud. The graphs obtained from the experiments are shown in As shown in There are two common methods for freeing a differentially stuck pipe. These are jarring and pulling. Jarring is called to the usage of jars. A jar is a downhole tool that is used to impart a heavy blow or impact load to a downhole tool assembly. Commonly used in fishing operations to free stuck objects, jars are available in a range of sizes and capacities to deliver upward or downward impact loads. Pulling is clear and it means to pull the stuck pipe until it's free. Jarring and pulling are usually difficult operationally methods. But as seen in torsional resistance vs. angular displacement graphs a slight rotation between 5 and 10° can reduce torsional resistance greatly. Therefore, instead of jarring or pulling the drill string during differential sticking, a slight rotation between 5 and 10°, can increase the chance of releasing the stuck drill string in the cake greatly. Because the torsional resistance of mud cake is greatly reduced ( Maximum torsional resistance indicates the highest resistance of the bonds between particles in response to the applied torque ( When the torsional resistance of the mud cake reaches a constant value, there are still increasing and decreasing noises which are due to the interaction of particles and creation of variable friction between the drill pipe and mud cake. This constant torsional resistance of mud cake is seen at an angle of about 40° to the end. It is called remaining torsional resistance. In various experiments on a mud cake sample, variation in maximum torsional resistance was seen, but this difference is negligible and often less than 10%. This negligible difference is due to the different contact surfaces of the semispherical arm with cake particles and the different orientations of the particles ( These experiments have been carried out in small scale. If these experiments run on a true scale, due to the higher active surface, it is expected to measure different numbers for the torsional resistance of the cake ( In The presence of salts will increase the torsional resistance of bentonite muds, because of bonding between their cationic particles and bentonite particles. The larger its cation is, the greater its torsional resistance will be. This phenomenon is evident in A2 and A3 muds. A3 mud has less torsional resistance due to a smaller radius of K ion compared to Na ion in A2 mud. A4 mud has less torsional resistance than A2 mud. This is due to the presence of PAC, the strong repulsion created by PAC, and the breakdown of some cationic bonds. Among reference bentonite muds, A1 mud, due to its high fluency, low mud cake torsional resistance, and also lower mud cake thickness is the best mud which can be used to prevent or to ease differential sticking removal. A2, A3, and A4 muds due to their high filtrate loss have thick mud cakes. So they have more active surfaces, which eventually cause high torsional resistance. Therefore, A2, A3, and A4 muds are respectively muds with high to a low probability of differential sticking among the reference paper muds. Prehyd 2, Prehyd 0, and Prehyd 1 have the highest mud cake torsional resistance, respectively. The main reason is the higher mud cake thickness of Prehyd 2. Prehyd 1 has lower mud cake torsional resistance than Prehyd 0 because cellophane compared to walnut shell has less strength and it has sheet form which causes less conflict between mud cake and the semispherical arm of the device. In lignosulfonate muds, due to their lubricating property, they are generally placed in the group of muds with low torsional resistance that greatly reduces the differential sticking probability. As shown in Ligno_1 mud that contains mica additive has a higher filtrate loss rate, a little bit more mud cake thickness, and less mud cake torsional resistance than the Ligno_0 mud. It seems that mica additive has a negative effect on filtrate loss and mud cake thickness, but it partly reduces the probability and severity of differential sticking. Generally, Ligno_1 mud performance does not differ much from the Ligno_0 mud. Ligno_2 mud cake containing sawdust additive shows the least torsional resistance among other lignosulfonate muds. Sawdust additive leads to less torsional resistance and creates a foamy mud but it has a negative effect on two preceding factors (filtrate loss and thickness). In In this study, the effects of additives on filtrate loss control, mud cake thickness, and differential sticking probability were studied. The main variables including the maximum torsional resistance of mud cake, mud cake thickness, filtrate loss, and other sub-variables have been reported for each mud. Prehydrated bentonite muds compared to lignosulfonate muds have poor performance in filtrate loss, mud cake thickness control, and differential sticking probability reduction. According to the experiments and analyses, the following results are obtained: The larger the cations and the stronger the bonds, the higher the mud cake torsional resistance is. Consequently, differential sticking will increase. The presence of PAC as a lost circulation material can greatly reduce mud cake thickness and torsional resistance. Overall, it greatly reduces differential sticking probability. The lost circulation materials geometric shape affects its performance in filtrate loss control. Generally, additives that are geometrically expanded in space in all directions, compared to additives that are just expanded in two-dimensions and have a sheet or flat shape, have better performance and are more efficient. Prehydrated muds usually have more fluid and filtrate loss, more mud cake thickness, and higher mud cake torsional resistance. Subsequently, the differential sticking probability is higher than the other studied muds. In order to reach the appropriate solution for eliminating differential sticking, the following suggestions are provided for further researches: Improving torsional resistance measurement methods in MCCE Studying the effect of salts on lignosulfonate muds Investigating more effective variables, including additive shape, its strength, other physical and chemical properties, and its effect on differential sticking probability. Research on other additives to achieve the proper mud combination to prevent differential sticking. Matching statistical methods and neural network algorithms based on the results presented in this research and finding the most suitable muds for different conditions.  Filtration volume Time Permeability Area of filter paper Pressure drop Volume of mud cake Volume of the passed filtrate Mud viscosity Mud cake thickness Unit volume of mud flows through the filter and the volume of passed filtrate Vertical intercept at t = 0 Larsen's constant  