Covariance matching constrained kriging is a technique originally developed for estimating linear or nonlinear functional of the variable of interest. Practically this may be regarded as a hybrid system that considers local accuracy property in kriging and preservation of spatial variability in stochastic simulation. The method estimates the unknown vector by adding the constraint to match the variance–covariance matrix of estimated values with the variance–covariance matrix of actual values under unbiasedness constraint.
                  This study applies the method to a certain section of a lignite deposit which is subjected to severe tectonic activity. Lower heating value, ash content, and moisture content are estimated by covariance matching constrained kriging and ordinary kriging and also simulated by sequential Gaussian simulation. Comparisons between these methods show that covariance matching constrained kriging reproduces the spatial variability better than ordinary kriging and gives more accurate estimates than conditional simulation. Covariance matching constrained kriging can be used when spatial variability of the estimations is important as well as local accuracy.Recoverable resources are that part of resources that grade value exceeds a given cutoff value. These resources are typically estimated for a given selective mining block and a number of cutoff values and presented by grade–tonnage curves. Recoverable resources are used in all phases of a mining project, including feasibility, mine planning and production scheduling and therefore should be accurately estimated. The problem here is the one of estimating nonlinear functionals of block means. One way of doing this would be to estimate the mean grade of the selective mining blocks by kriging and to apply cutoffs to the estimated values. However kriging produces smoothed estimates with large values underestimated and small values overestimated. Conditional simulation offers solution for the nonlinear estimation problem, generating values that have the same spatial variability as the actual values. The price to pay for this is loss in accuracy and also biased estimates if the probabilistic model is misspecified. By taking the advantages of these two techniques,  The present study addresses a case study in which CMCK, OK and CS are applied to estimation and simulation of three coal quality variables [lower heating value (LHV), ash content (AC), and moisture content (MC)] in a lignite deposit located in the Ömerler sector of the Tunçbilek coalfield, Kütahya, Turkey. In the study the LHV, AC and MC means of the blocks with size of 25 Estimation criterion may be (1) local accuracy, (2) reproduction of spatial variability or (3) a mixture of both, depending on the problem at hand. In the case of OK the criterion is to estimate local value as accurately as possible. Instead conditional simulation focuses on reproduction of global statistics such as variogram and histogram, CMCK aims to produce estimates that are locally accurate and spatially variable. The CMCK method estimates unknown values such that the variance–covariance matrix of estimated values is matched with the variance–covariance matrix of actual values under unbiasedness constraint. Then CMCK estimator becomes, The data used in this study come from the Ömerler sector of the Tunçbilek coalfield located in the western part of Turkey. Tunçbilek is a district of Tavşanlı–Kütahya and the Ömerler coalfield is located in the northern part of Tunçbilek. The Tunçbilek basin is situated between Tunçbilek and Domaniç (Kütahya) in the northeastern part of a horst–graben system in western Turkey. The metamorphic and ophiolitic rocks and granites of the Pre-Neogene age form the basement of the basin ( Coal blocks, in general, strike N69W and are dipping N7E. The considered part of the coal seam spreads approximately an area of 1.5 In the area under consideration 245 vertical holes are drilled by various bodies. Core samples collected from these drill-holes are analyzed for LHV, AC and MC on an as-received basis. These raw samples had variable intervals with mean of 0.52 Before the estimation, blocks representing the solid model are unfolded. The reason for this is that when estimating faulted and folded blocks, the estimates follow a “zebraic pattern” which is undoubtedly unrealistic. One way of maintaining the correct spatial relationships is to use an unfolding procedure which basically consists of rotating and stretching blocks and sample data. Estimations are made in unfolded space and the estimated values are then back-transformed into original space. For unfolding purpose The lignite seam shows a vertical trend for LHV and AC due to decreasing quality from the top of the seam to the bottom. Prior to estimation, the vertical trend is removed from the data and experimental variograms of these variables are calculated from residuals. The experimental and model variograms of residual variables and direct MC variable are shown in The solid model for the considered part of the lignite seam is divided into 19,774 blocks with size of 25 Block means for three quality variables estimated by CMCK, OK and sGs are compared on the basis of descriptive statistics, histograms, scatterplots, variograms and trend analyses. A swath plot is a graphical display of the grade distribution derived from a series of slices, or swaths, generated in several directions through the deposit. The coal seam is divided into slices along with the direction under consideration and the weighted average of each slice for the respective quality variable is calculated. The averages are plotted against the slice number. Swath plots are drawn for the block model and composites in three main directions: down-hole direction, North–South (NS) direction and East–West (EW) direction. Slice thickness is taken to be 1 Although the swath plots point out similar behavior in the mean characteristics of CMCK and OK estimates, plan views of the estimated block means for LHV, AC and MC shown in Quality-tonnage curves are constructed for all variables and for all estimation methods ( The coal seam under study presents difficult estimation problems such as severe faulting, presence of rock partings in variable thickness in coal horizon and decreasing quality from the top of the seam to the bottom. An unfolding procedure is developed to deal with faulting. To isolate the effect of decrease in coal quality, de-trended data is used. In addition to decrease in quality in down-hole direction the average quality of the coal increases with increasing depth. The composite data for LHV has a left skewed distribution while AC is positively skewed. MC is approximately symmetric. Rock partings in coal horizon resulted in variograms with relatively high nugget effect for LHV and AC. Due to large lateral dimensions of the coal seam compared to its thickness spatial continuity in down-hole direction is considerably low compared to the continuity in horizontal direction. The estimation study shows that CMCK produces estimates spatially more variable than OK and locally more accurate than sGs. CMCK can be a useful technique in cases where spatial variability of the estimations is important as well as local accuracy. Quality-tonnage curves indicate that for all quality variables, average values above cutoff for CMCK and sGs are higher than those of OK and also OK produces high tonnages at low cutoffs and low tonnages at high cutoffs, compared to sGs and CMCK. For further studies, it could be interesting to test CMCK on data having highly skewed distributions. Also, the structure of the K matrix in CMCK equations has direct influence in the system, and the use of different decomposition techniques should be studied. This study is supported by the