Polymers of various types are in widespread use as flocculants in several industries. In most cases, polymer adsorption is an essential prerequisite for flocculation and kinetic aspects are very important. The rates of polymer adsorption and of re-conformation (relaxation) of adsorbed chains are key factors that influence the performance of flocculants and their mode of action. Polyelectrolytes often tend to adopt a rather flat adsorbed configuration and in this state their action is mainly through charge effects, including ‘electrostatic patch’ attraction. When the relaxation rate is quite low, particle collisions may occur while the adsorbed chains are still in an extended state and flocculation by polymer bridging may occur. These effects are now well understood and supported by much experimental evidence. In recent years there has been considerable interest in the use of multi-component flocculants, especially dual-polymer systems. In the latter case, there can be significant advantages over the use of single polymers. Despite some complications, there is a broad understanding of the action of dual polymer systems. In many cases the sequence of addition of the polymers is important and the pre-adsorbed polymer can have two important effects: providing adsorption sites for the second polymer or causing a more extended adsorbed conformation as a result of ‘site blocking’.Polymers are widely used as flocculants for suspensions in many industrial applications, such as mineral processing, papermaking, water treatment and biotechnology In nearly all practical applications, polymer adsorption is necessary to promote flocculation and we shall restrict attention to such cases. Non-adsorbing polymers can cause the well-known phenomenon of In the following sections the nature of polymeric flocculants, their adsorption and mechanisms of action will be discussed, together with an account of flocculation by polymer mixtures. Most polymeric flocculants are of synthetic origin, although some natural polymers, such as chitosan Polymers may be anionic, cationic or non-ionic in nature and all of these types are used as flocculants. Their structures are usually linear chains, but there are some examples of branched or cross-linked polymers that are effective in certain applications Non-ionic: Polyethylene oxide (PEO); polyacrylamide (PAM); polyvinyl alcohol (PVA); polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP). Anionic: Hydrolyzed polyacrylamide; polyacrylic acid (PAA); polyvinyl sulfate. Cationic: Poly(dimethylammonium chloride) (PDADMAC), diallyl dimethylammonium chloride (DDMAC); cationic polyacrylamide (CPAM); polyethylene imine (PEI); polyvinyl pyridine (PVP). Polyacrylamide is the basis of many commercial flocculants Cationic PAM can be prepared by co-polymerization of acrylamide with a cationic monomer, such as DDMAC The most important characteristics of polymers from the standpoint of flocculation are their molecular weight (MW) and, in the case of polyelectrolytes, their charge density (CD). Typical MW values may range from a few thousand up to many millions. Most products have a rather broad MW distribution and this can have significant implications for their effectiveness as flocculants. Water-soluble linear polymers tend to adopt a random coil configuration in solution and a conventional measure of the size of polymer molecule is the root mean-square (rms) end-to-end distance. For some common non-ionic polymers this distance (in nm) is around 0.06 Charge density of polyelectrolytes is a key factor in their effectiveness as flocculants. It depends essentially on the proportion of segments along the polymer chain that are ionized. For strongly ionic groups this just depends on the proportion of cationic monomer in the reaction mix. For weakly ionizing groups, such as carboxylic acid, the degree of ionization depends also on the solution pH. Charge density can be expressed as mole % of ionized segments, or as meq/g. It can be conveniently measured by the technique of colloid titration The effect of polymers on colloidal stability is mainly due to adsorption of macromolecules on particle surfaces and the structure of adsorbed layers formed An adsorbed polymer chain is usually pictured as in Interactions that may be responsible for attachment of polymer segments to surfaces are: Polyelectrolytes will always adsorb on surfaces of opposite charge, simply because of electrostatic attraction. This gives very high adsorption affinity and can lead to an adsorbed configuration that is considerably ‘flatter’ than that shown in Polymers such as PAM This is responsible for the adsorption of non-polar segments of polymer chains on hydrophobic surfaces, as in the case of PVA on silver iodide With anionic polyelectrolytes and negative surfaces, electrical repulsion may prevent adsorption in some cases. It is often found that a certain salt concentration is needed to promote adsorption (and flocculation). Salts with divalent cations such as calcium and magnesium are especially effective. These are known to bind quite strongly to carboxylate groups and may serve as links between these groups and negative sites on a particle surface. This effect has been demonstrated Because polymer adsorption depends on properties of both polymer and surface, the possibility of Polymer adsorption is a second-order rate process, depending on the number concentrations of dispersed particles and polymer molecules. We can write the rate of polymer adsorption in terms of the rate of loss of polymer molecules from solution: The polymer concentration required for effective flocculation is proportional to the particle concentration, because the adsorption is of the high affinity type and virtually all of the added polymer is adsorbed (at least for fairly low surface coverage). This means that the rate of polymer adsorption increases dramatically with increasing particle concentration. For concentrated dispersions (a few wt.%) polymer adsorption is practically instantaneous, whereas for very dilute dispersions (a few mg/L), polymer adsorption may take several minutes or even longer. By making some simplifying assumptions, it is possible to estimate the time, It should be stressed that this approach is not suitable when adsorbed polymer covers a significant fraction of the particle surface. In that case polymer adsorption becomes hindered, since the available surface is reduced, and The magnitude of the rate coefficient in Eq. In order to give some examples of adsorption times according to the previous expressions, we choose the following conditions: Particles: monodisperse spheres, with diameter of 1 Polymer: uniform macromolecules, with an effective (hydrodynamic) diameter of 100 Assuming an aqueous dispersion at 25 Diffusion: 9.3 Shear (G Shear (G At the relatively low shear rate of 50 There have been many experimental studies of polymer adsorption kinetics, including some recent examples From these and other studies, it is usually found that there is a rather rapid initial uptake of polymer, governed by the mass transport rate, followed by a slow approach to adsorption equilibrium, which may take hours or days. A major influence on the later stages of polymer adsorption is the re-conformation (or relaxation) of polymer chains after initial contact with a surface. In the previous discussion, polymer ‘adsorption’ was considered to have taken place as soon as collision between a particle and a polymer chain had occurred. However, this is only the beginning of the adsorption process, since the polymer chain then undergoes changes in conformation until an equilibrium state, such as that shown in  Reconformation rates depend greatly on the amount of polymer adsorbed. With a high adsorption density, there is limited opportunity for polymers to reach the equilibrium adsorbed configuration that is expected for isolated chains. It follows that, for a rapid adsorption rate, polymer chains may arrive at a surface while previously-adsorbed chains are still undergoing re-conformation. When the adsorption rate is low, each adsorbed chain can fully relax before further chains arrive at the surface. Since an adsorbed chain in its equilibrium configuration occupies more surface area than the original random coil (see Another method for investigating relaxation of adsorbed polymers was used by Pefferkorn and Elaissari So far, we have only considered adsorption from solutions of single homopolymers. We now turn attention to effects associated with mixtures of different polymers. Three major effects should be considered: Preferential adsorption of long chains over short ones from solution of polydisperse polymers (almost always used in practice), even if the adsorption energy per segment is the same. Substitution of a part of (more) weakly bound polymeric segments from the surface by preferentially adsorbed segments having higher adsorption energy in the polymer mixture. Complexation of oppositely charged polyelectrolytes in adsorbed layer. In dilute solutions of polydisperse polymers, the longer chains are adsorbed preferentially on the surface because they lose less translational entropy in the solution, while they gain approximately the same (total) adsorption energy An adsorbed polymer may be displaced by another one if the displacer segments adsorption energy is higher by only 0.01–0.1 The slow displacement of macromolecules from the surface by stronger adsorbing ones has a marked effect on the structure of composite interfacial layers. Csaki and Csempesz The thickness of the adsorbed polymer layer is one of the key factors determining the effectiveness of uncharged polymers in flocculating and stabilizing colloidal dispersions. It has been shown by photon correlation spectroscopy and laser Doppler electrophoresis that the thickness of methylcellulose layers on polystyrene and silver iodide surfaces was about two times higher than that for PVP, in a wide concentration range of the polymers in solution Electrokinetic measurements are a powerful tool to investigate the structure of interfacial polymer layers It is also well known that addition of oppositely charged polyelectrolytes to a colloidal dispersion usually leads to a significant decrease in the ζ-potential and to a change in the sign of the particle charge, which is accompanied by destabilization of the system. Adsorption of polyelectrolytes bearing charges of the same sign as the particles is responsible for the increase in the electrokinetic potential and stability of dispersions Csaki and Csempesz In a recent study The adsorption of individual cationic and anionic polyelectrolytes of different charge density has effects on the zeta potential that are just as expected from the sign and density of their charge. For example, the addition of cationic polyelectrolytes to a suspension of negative particles leads to a significant decrease in |ζ| and to a reversal of the particle charge. Changes in the ζ-potential of bentonite are more pronounced for polyelectrolytes with higher charge density – the rise in ζ after the isoelectric point is much steeper and the final positive value reached is higher. This is due to the accumulation of a higher amount of cationic charge in the Stern layer in the case of highly charged cationic polymers. Similar behavior has been observed for polystyrene and kaolin particles. Addition of anionic polyelectrolytes leads to a more than twofold increase of |ζ|, for both bentonite and kaolin particles. Adsorption of anionic polymers on kaolin and bentonite particles at the pH values of the solution (7.2–7.5) is mainly due to non-electrostatic interactions, because at these pH values there are no positive sites on the clay mineral surfaces  Similar behavior was observed for bentonite particles with pre-adsorbed weakly charged anionic polymer or medium charged cationic polymer after addition of a fixed or increasing amount of cationic or anionic polymer to the dispersion. The ζ-potential of particles with adsorbed cationic and anionic polyelectrolytes added simultaneously, also differs very little from that for of particles bearing only anionic polyelectrolyte. Similar behavior has been observed for polystyrene and kaolin To understand the electrokinetic behaviour of kaolin and bentonite particles having adsorbed anionic and cationic polyelectrolytes, we need to consider the surface charge heterogeneity of clay mineral particles. Clay minerals are built up from silica tetrahedral (T) and alumina octahedral (O) layers. These lamellar particles have patch-wise surface heterogeneity, since different sites are localized on definite parts of particles surface. The faces of lamellae both of montmorillonite (2:1 layer silicate, the main constituent of bentonite) and kaolinite (1:1 type silicate) have permanent negative charges due to isomorphic substitutions and pH-dependent charges developed on the surface hydroxyls at the edges. The amount of permanent charges on montmorillonite faces reaches 1 Adsorbed polymers can have major effects on colloid stability. With high adsorbed amounts, the well-known phenomenon of There are two major mechanisms by which polymers may cause destabilization of colloids: Bridging of particles by polymer chains. Charge neutralization by adsorbed polyelectrolytes. Since adsorbed, long-chain polymer chains may have loops and tails extending some way from the particle surface ( Bridging flocculation can only occur if there is sufficient unoccupied surface on particles to allow attachment of segments of polymer chains adsorbed on other particles. In other words the adsorption density should not be too high. Since the number of bridging contacts between particles depends on the amount of adsorbed polymer, an optimum condition (‘optimum dosage’) should exist giving maximum flocculation effectiveness. La Mer A more detailed consideration of the rate of bridging flocculation between areas of bare particle surface, between polymer-coated surfaces, between bare and polymer coated surfaces, If the fractional surface coverage of polymer is In principle, It can also be shown that the minimum stability ratio (corresponding to the maximum flocculation rate) is given by: From measured values of If In the context of bridging flocculation, it is not easy to give a satisfactory definition of ‘surface coverage’, since this depends greatly on the configuration of the adsorbed chains, which, in turn, depends on the adsorbed amount (see For particles that are stable by virtue of their charge, it is necessary for polymer chains to extend far enough from the particle surface to span the distance over which electrical repulsion operates Bridging flocculation is often possible with polyelectrolytes having the same sign of charge as the particles, for instance anionic polyelectrolytes and negative particles. In such cases adsorption occurs despite electrical repulsion between anionic sites on the polymer chain and the negative surface charge. As mentioned above ( The charge density of anionic polyelectrolytes is also important for bridging flocculation of negative particles. In the case of PAM the amount of anionic charge depends on the degree of hydrolysis and it has been found These effects of charge density are strongly influenced by ionic strength. Higher ionic strength would increase adsorption of anionic polyelectrolytes on negative surfaces and reduce the range of electrical repulsion between particles, both of which would enhance flocculation. However, increasing ionic strength would lead to a more compact polyelectrolyte chain, which may be less effective as a bridging flocculant. It is therefore possible that there is an optimum ionic strength for bridging flocculation in some cases, although there is no convincing experimental evidence for such an effect. The most important feature of bridging flocculation is that it gives aggregates (flocs) that can be much stronger than those produced by other means of destabilization, such as by inorganic salts. Very large flocs can be produced by long-chain polymers, even under highly turbulent conditions, as in a stirred vessel. The strength of bridging contacts has been studied by a micromechanics approach Although flocs may be resistant to breakage by high shear, when they A great deal of experimental work has shown that bridging flocculation becomes better with higher MW polymers and that linear chains are generally more effective The following are the more important points regarding polymer bridging: The most effective polymers are linear, with high MW There is usually an optimum polymer dosage, corresponding to quite low adsorbed amounts (typically of the order of 1 For polyelectrolytes there may be an optimum charge density. Ionic strength can be an important factor and the presence of certain metal ions is sometimes crucial Very strong, and hence large, flocs are formed by bridging flocculants, but broken flocs may not easily re-grow. It is frequently found that the most effective polymeric flocculants are those with opposite sign of charge to the suspension particles. The most obvious example is the widespread use of cationic polyelectrolytes for the flocculation of negatively-charged particles. In such cases there is mostly a strong adsorption affinity and neutralization of the particle charge occurs. With excess polyelectrolyte adsorption, the particle charge may be reversed. This raises the question of the role of straightforward charge effects in the destabilization and restabilization of negative colloids by cationic polyelectrolytes. However, because of the polymeric nature of the flocculant, other factors are likely to come into play. For flexible polyelectrolytes, it is often found that the optimum dosage is that which gives near to complete charge neutralization, as evidenced by a zeta potential close to zero An important aspect of charge neutralization by polyelectrolytes is that there is likely to be a mismatch of the spacing between charged segments of the polymer chain and that between charged sites on the particle surface. With cationic polyelectrolytes of high CD, the spacing between charges is quite small, whereas many negatively-charged particles have a relatively low surface charge density. It follows that adsorption of cationic polyelectrolytes occurs in a ‘patchwise’ manner, such that there are regions of excess positive charge surrounded by areas of bare, negative surface. It follows that there could be an additional attraction between approaching particles if the positive and negative regions were suitably aligned. Such an attraction has been directly measured by atomic force microscopy Gillies et al. The electrostatic patch mechanism can be modeled in a semi-quantitative manner In all of the previous discussion on flocculation by polymers it was tacitly assumed that polymer adsorption had reached equilibrium before any significant flocculation had occurred. In fact, as discussed in Contact and attachment of polymer chain to surface. Reconformation, or relaxation of polymer chain to give an equilibrium adsorbed configuration. These processes may take some time, which can have major effects on flocculation. It was shown in The re-conformation rate ( A detailed study by Pelssers et al. For polyelectrolytes with opposite charge to the particles, the re-conformation rate can determine whether bridging flocculation or charge neutralization is the predominant mechanism. Since adsorbed polyelectrolytes usually adopt a relatively flat configuration, it is unlikely that bridging would be significant if equilibrium adsorption were attained. This is likely to be the case in fairly dilute suspensions, where the average interval between particle collisions is larger than the relaxation time of adsorbed polyelectrolyte. In such systems flocculation is dominated by charge neutralization and electrostatic patch effects. However, there are many examples where high MW cationic polyelectrolytes are more effective, especially for quite concentrated suspensions The effect of non-ionic polymer mixtures on flocculation of hydrophobic sols has been studied in detail by Csempesz The kinetics of aggregation of polystyrene, silver iodide and arsenic sulphide particles, were determined, both in the presence and absence of polymer by a turbidimetric method. Methylcellulose, polyvinyl pyrrolidone, polyvinyl alcohol and their 1:1 binary mixtures were used as flocculants, with different electrolyte concentrations (NaCl). Some characteristic results on stability ratios for bridging flocculation of PS latex and silver iodide sol, determined with optimum amount of adsorbed MC, PVP and their binary mixtures, and also for electrolyte coagulation without polymer, are listed in High values of Summarizing the observed trends, we can say that correlation was found between the effectiveness of polymers as flocculants and the thickness of adsorbed polymer layers formed at optimum dosages. The enhanced flocculation effect of polymer mixtures can be ascribed to extended polymer layers formed in competitive adsorption of chemically different macromolecules at the particle/solution interface. There is some useful information in the literature on flocculation of suspensions by polyelectrolyte mixtures. For instance, Yu and Somasundaran The dual polymer system PDADMAC-PAM was found to be very effective for clay suspensions A similar system was studied by Yoon and Deng Recent work by Barany et al. Dual polymer flocculation has been used in a number of industrial applications for more than 30 Lee and Liu Mixtures of strongly charged cationic PDADMAC and PEO with high MW (1.5 Probably the most widespread use of multi-component flocculant systems is in the papermaking industry This paper is dedicated to the memory of Professor N.V. Churaev, who strongly supported the scientific work of one of the authors (then under the name A.A. Baran) in the area “polymers in disperse systems” in Kiev, Ukraine/USSR during the 1970s and 1980s. Part of this work was carried out as part of the TÁMOP-4.2.1.B-10/2/KONV-2010-0001 project in the framework of the New Hungarian Development Plan. The realization of this project is supported by the