Transcalcaneal talonavicular dislocation is a rare injury. It occurs due to forced plantar flexion of the talar head through the anterior portion of the calcaneum. These are severe injuries, often open with potential for skin and neurovascular compromise. Very few cases have been reported in the literature, we report a rare case of open transcalcaneal talonavicular dislocation. A 38-year-old lady driving a car at 70 Antero-posterior, lateral and oblique radiographs of the right foot and ankle were obtained which showed ( The patient was taken to the operating theatre, the wound was adequately excised and washed out, the dislocation and fractures were reduced, and the foot and ankle was stabilised with a uniplanar external fixator ( Intraoperatively the articular cartilage of the talonavicular joint was significantly damaged so a decision was made to fuse the talonavicular joint. She was then put in a below knee plaster, and allowed touch weight bearing at 2 weeks. Ten weeks following fusion she was provided with a below knee removable brace, and was advised full weight bearing. At last review 2 years following the injury she was pain free, mobilising full weight bearing, free of any walking aids. Radiographs of her foot and ankle showed successful fusion of the talonavicular joint with no evidence of avascular necrosis of the talus ( Transcalcaneal talonavicular dislocations are rare, Coltart A detailed description of the transcalcaneal talonavicular dislocation and its variations in injury pattern with methods and treatment and patients outcomes was by Ricci et al. The foot in biomechanical terms is divided into medial and lateral column; the stability of both columns is necessary for optimum locomotion. In the context of transcalcaneal talonavicular dislocation, both columns are severely disrupted. It is important to recognise this disruption while treating such injuries. Attempts should be made to restore the stability of both columns. Medial column stability could be restored surgically by initial reduction of the talonavicular joint and subsequent fusion and lateral column by reduction and maintaining the shape of the calcaneum till it heals. Successful talonavicular fusion usually achieves a reasonably stable and a functional foot, as in our case. The fracture of the neck of the talus in this case with associated trans calcaneal talonavicular disruption adds to the severity of the injury. A remarkable aspect of this injury is that the talus was buried amongst its neighbouring bones. We believe that the chain of events during the injury means that the undisplaced fracture of the talus was the last the occur and through the major part of the injury the talus remained and behaved like a single bone, hence we believe that this case would behave like transcalcaneal talonavicular dislocation, though for description a transcalcaneal transtalar talonavicular dislocation may be used. This case report demonstrates the importance of recognising the severity of this injury. The primary management should be aimed at reduction and stabilisation of the talonavicular joint with management of the soft-tissue injury. Definitive surgery could be delayed until the soft-tissues have healed sufficiently.