Rare earth elements (REE) have been selectively recovered from NiMH battery leach liquors by antisolvent precipitation. The active anode material was leached using sulfuric acid. The REE were then separated from the other elements by precipitation as sulfates after addition of either ethanol or 2-propanol (antisolvent). In a second step, Ni and Co are separated as sulfates by the same technique. The concentration of elements in different acid alcohol mixtures at 25 °C and −10 °C respectively are presented as a function of time after addition of the alcohol, and the optimum conditions for separation of the REE in pure form are presented. Under optimum conditions, 5.6 mol/L (Organic/Aqueous (O/A) volumetric ratio = 0.7) of 2-propanol at 25 °C, 82% of the REE have precipitated 3 h after addition of the antisolvent and the purity is 99.9%.Nickel metal hydride (NiMH) batteries are used to power hybrid electric vehicles (HEV). The NiMH batteries contain high amounts of valuable elements such as nickel, cobalt and rare earth elements (REE). This makes end-of-life NiMH batteries an excellent candidate for urban mining. From a European perspective, this is not only justified by the high economic values of the metals but also by the high supply risk of the critical elements Co and REE The Panasonic prismatic NiMH module HEV battery used by Toyota Prius has been characterized in different studies Precipitation is widely used in hydrometallurgical processes for separation and purification purposes In this work, the selective separation of REE from NiMH battery leach liquor by antisolvent precipitation has been systematically investigated. To the best of our knowledge antisolvent precipitation of REE sulfate salts from NiMH battery, leach liquors have not yet been investigated. It is a suitable method to selectively recover the REE as highly soluble sulfate salts in a process where the solvents can be recovered and reused. A discharged Panasonic prismatic NiMH module HEV battery was used for the experimental work. The battery modules were manually dismantled and the anode active material, containing the main part of the REE present in the battery together with the valuable elements Ni and Co, was scraped from the supports. The active anode material contains 33% by mass of REE and the REE are present in an AB In  The concentrations of Ce, Nd, Pr, Y, Co, Mn and Al after the addition of 2-propanol are presented in The solid phase collected seven days after the addition of 2-propanol, at an O/A ratio of 0.5, (exp. set 2) consisted of a mixture of different solid phases containing REE (see In order to study the solid phases containing Ni and Co, which precipitates at higher O/A ratios, an experiment was performed in which the REE containing solid phase was filtered off 24 h after adding 2-propanol (O/A ratio of 0.5). Thereafter an additional amount of 2-propanol was added to obtain an O/A ratio of 0.9. The solid phase was then filtered off seven days after addition of the antisolvent. The major solid phases detected in this sample were NiSO Scanning electron images of precipitates collected seven days after the addition of 2-propanol, at an O/A ratio of 0.9, is presented in The results when dosing ethanol and 2-propanol respectively at a rate of either 1 mL/min or 3 mL/min was applied are presented in The concentration of the different elements at 25 °C, seven days after the addition of different amounts of ethanol and 2-propanol respectively (exp. set 1 and 2) are presented in At an organic to aqueous (O/A) ratio of 0.5 about 49% by mass of the REE has precipitated seven days after addition of antisolvent while Ni, Co, Mn, and Al remain in solution, both when using ethanol and 2-propanol as antisolvents, see In In The results show that it is possible to separate the elements in 3 groups: (1) REE, (2) Ni and Co and (3) Al and Mn. The optimal condition for selective separation of the REE from the leach solution is an O/A ratio of 0.7, using either 2-propanol or ethanol as antisolvent. In Since the concentration of Ni and Co in the leach liquor decrease to a higher extent than the REE do when decreasing the temperature from 25 °C to −10 °C the potential to separate the REE from the Ni and Co decreases. In addition, cooling the solution to −10 °C cost energy. It is thus better to perform the separation at 25 °C. The fractionated percentages of La, Ce, Co and Ni with respect to the reagent used and at −10 °C and 25 °C can be seen in Antisolvent precipitation can be applied to selectively separate the REE (La, Ce, Nd, Pr, Y) from the other elements present in NiMH battery leach liquor. If the separation is operated in batch scale at 25 °C the REE containing solid phases are preferably filtered of 0.5–1 h after addition of the antisolvent ( The REE are mainly obtained as REE sulfate hydrates which is advantageous due to the high solubility of these salts in water. The salts can thus easily be dissolved and further processed for individual separation of the REE e.g. by solvent extraction or chromatography in preparative scale It is possible to selectively separate rare earth elements (REE) from sulfuric acid NiMH battery leach liquors by addition of ethanol and 2-propanol respectively. The REE precipitates as a mixture of different sulfate phases. The REE can be recovered with negligible co-precipitation of the other elements at an initial concentration of 7.6 mol/L of ethanol and 5.6 mol/L of 2-propanol at 25 °C. The total recovery of REE is 86.5% after addition of 7.6 mol/L of ethanol and 81.9% after addition of 5.6 mol/L of 2-propanol at 25 °C. The concentrations of the different REE 7 days after antisolvent addition correlate with their atomic numbers where the lightest lanthanide La (lowest charge density) is present at the highest concentration while the heaviest lanthanide Nd (highest charge density) is present at the lowest concentration. Yttrium does not follow the trend based on ionic size (or charge density) observed for the lanthanides. The concentration of the elements (7 days after antisolvent addition) is in the same range or slightly lower in 2-propanol compared to ethanol. The concentration difference between the REE and the other main elements present in the leach liquor is less at −10 °C compared to 25 °C and thus it is better to perform the separation at 25 °C. The concentration of La decrease by 7.7% in ethanol and by 2.9% in 2-propanol when lowering the temperature from 25 °C to −10 °C while the concentration of Ni decreases by 42.5% in ethanol and by 66.4% in 2-propanol. The authors would like to acknowledge the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: