High strain rate experiments of chains of glass beads under impact loading demonstrate that first failure develops in either the first or second glass bead, depending on the impact velocity and associated stress propagation. Motivated by this notion of ‘transition failure stress’ we present a series of three-dimensional dynamic simulations of a 10 brittle elastic beads chain under impact of a stiffer elastic bar using the material point method (MPM). The numerical simulation results show that, as observed in the experiments, failure would first form in either the first or second closest brittle elastic bead to the impacting bar, depending on the parametric ratio between an impact-induced maximum tensile stress to fracture strength. Further non-dimensional analysis by varying materials and system parameters in the simulations suggests that this transition failure stress exists universally in brittle materials under impact loading.Stress waves in granular materials have received extensive attention Due to the effects of the interactions among contacting grains under impact loading and the resulting damage, fracture and fragmentation of the individual grains, the propagation of stress wave in multi-grain system can be very complicated. Hence, studying the response of a chain of brittle spheres under impact loading can be a simple and effective way to begin tackling this complicated problem. Job et al. Motivated by the abovementioned problems, this paper explores the following question: in a chain of brittle beads, which bead is likely to fail first under an impact-induced stress wave? This question has been motivated by our recent impact tests on chains of glass beads. Specifically, these tests show that it is often the second closest bead to an impacting bar that fractures first among all the loaded beads. The question here is whether this phenomenon merely depends on material heterogeneities, or whether it may also be dictated by parameters such as impact velocity, duration of pulse or friction between granular particles, etc. To better understand our previous experiments, we perform three-dimensional material point method (MPM) simulations to investigate the behaviour of a chain of 10 brittle elastic beads under the impact of a stiffer bar. Following the setup of the experiments, in the first numerical simulations, the mechanical properties of steel have been assigned to the bars ( The purpose of this study is to understand how stress wave propagation may induce damage in chains of brittle elastic grains under impact and to investigate if the friction coefficient, the initial impact velocity and the length of the impacting bar will affect the failure patterns in the chain using the 3D MPM simulations. More importantly, we aim to explain how the position of the first failure of a bead in the chain is influenced by the abovementioned factors as a function of the material strength and impact velocity. The numerical study performed has been motivated by experimental observations of the breaking of glass beads in a split Hopkinson bar device. In these experiments, a horizontal row of 20 glass beads kept in a channel are impacted at high velocity by a steel bar. The side view of the row of beads is recorded using a high-speed camera at 50,000 fps and the beads undertaking fracture get darker due to the increased diffusion of light where the glass is damaged. To understand the transition in the breaking behaviour of a chain of glass beads upon impact, we perform numerical simulations using the MPM available in Uintah software In order to find whether the initial impact velocity, the length of impacting bar and the friction coefficient will affect the dynamic responses of the brittle elastic beads to impact loading, different simulations are carried out, as shown in Similar to other numerical methods, the results of the MPM can be mesh size dependent In this process, the cylindrical specimen is 140 mm long (same length as that of the 10 brittle elastic beads chain problem) with diameter of 14 mm. Other dimensions are kept the same with the initial velocity of the impacting bar still being 2.5 m/s. In these test simulations, cubic cells are used with four different mesh sizes, namely 1.4 mm, 0.7 mm, 0.35 mm and 0.175 mm. There are two material points along each direction with a total of 8 material points in each 3D cell. The analytical solution of stress history at point A is also shown in To allow easy comparison, a reference simulation is defined with simulation parameters listed in the first row of   It is clear from  When the impact velocity increases to 5 m/s or 10 m/s, it appears that the bottom of each brittle elastic bead can also be damaged due to the high magnitude of tensile stress generated by the high velocity impact at the beginning of the simulation. The failure points will appear at the same locations of the following brittle elastic beads, one by one, with the subsequent propagation of the stress wave.  As can be seen from the history of the largest maximum principal stress of the various beads shown in To investigate whether the observed characteristics of this transition failure stress are universal, we show in Additionally, two more groups of simulations with only a single change made to either the Young's modulus or the density of the beads are shown in Numerical simulations are carried out to investigate the effect of impulse duration on the dynamic responses of the brittle elastic beads by varying the length of the impacting bar between 100 mm and 400 mm, as outlined in the third row of The distributions of the maximum principal stress of brittle elastic beads chain impacted by the right bar of different lengths with impact velocity of 2.5 m/s at time of 250 µs are shown in The previous simulations indicate that there exists a transition for a given material from the fracture of the second closest bead to the impactor to the fracture of the first one as impact velocity is increased. This is indeed what was observed experimentally ( In this study, a three dimensional simulation of a chain of 10 brittle elastic beads under impact loading is performed using the Material Point Method. The simulation results show that after some time, the magnitude of the maximum principal stress in the closest bead to the impacting bar may be lower than that in the second and the rest of the beads. As a result, whether the first or second brittle elastic bead fails first is dependent on the maximum tensile stress level developed in the various beads and the tensile strength of the material. The notion of ‘transition failure stress’ is thus defined in this study. If the fracture strength of the material is above this transition failure stress, then the second bead will fail first. Otherwise, it is the first bead that will fail first. Non-dimensional analysis of the proposed transition failure stress indicates that the experimentally observed failure evolution process is universal as long as the ratios of the Young's modulus and density of the impactor and the target are kept unchanged. The existence of a transition failure stress in a chain of brittle elastic glass beads, as well as the important effect of the velocity and length of the impacting bar on the critical failure circle, provide an important framework for the study of more realistic situations, e.g. sand protection of building against impact or bulletproof vests. The work was supported in part by the