The paper presents a fiber optic impulsive pressure wave sensor, wherein the active element is a small portion of a polarization maintaining photonic crystal fiber (PM-PCF) segment inserted in a Sagnac loop filter (SLF). The sensitive element in the form of a small loop (5 × 7 mm) was created in the sensing head consisting of a carbon tube and a segment of a PM-PCF placed inside it. The SLF was connected to a tunable, uniform fiber Bragg grating (FBG) in such a way, that it created a spectrum shift demodulator. The produced sensor was applied to measure impulsive pressure waves generated by a low voltage electric discharge in water. For a discharge of a capacitor charged to a voltage of 400 V, the measured pressure pulse had an amplitude of 4.52(18) MPa, a duration of 4.82(3) μs and a rise time of 0.98(3) μs. The parameters of the measured pressure pulses correspond well with results of measurements of pressure pulses generated by the same type of discharge and obtained using an elastic bar with strain gauges installed on it and the technique of signal reconstruction. The proposed sensor is easy to build and use, and is insensitive to changes of water temperature and the electromagnetic pulse generated by the electric discharge.Electric discharge in water is used in many fields such as medical lithotripters In measurements of impulse pressures generated by an electrical discharge in water two types of wideband pressure sensors are used: piezoelectric sensors and sensors in the form of an elastic metal bar with strain gauges or piezo-elements installed on it. In piezoelectric pressure sensors the pressure acts directly on a piezoelectric element of the sensor, while in sensors with an elastic bar, the pressure acts on the face of the bar generating in it elastic strain waves processed by strain gauges installed on the side surface of the bar. The natural frequency of the piezoelectric sensors can be as high as 100 MHz There are many designs of fiber optic interferometric, polarimetric and laser pressure sensors for measuring static The paper presents an interferometric fiber optic sensor for measuring impulsive pressure waves generated by an electric discharge, which uses a commercially available PM-PCF with the designation PM-1550-01 manufactured by Blaze Photonics. In this sensor the sensitive element is a small portion of a PM-PCF segment inserted into a Sagnac loop filter (SLF). The sensitive element in the form of a small loop (5 × 7 mm) was created in the sensor head consisting of a segment of a carbon tube and a segment of a PM-PCF placed inside it. The SLF was connected to a tunable, uniform fiber Bragg grating (FBG) creating a wavelength shift demodulator. The produced sensor was applied to measurements of impulsive pressures generated by a low voltage electric discharge in water initiated by a thin copper wire. The parameters of the measured pressure pulses correspond relatively well with results obtained from theoretical relationships and they correspond well with results of measurements of pressure pulses produced by the same type of discharge and obtained using an elastic bar with strain gauges installed on it and the technique of signal reconstruction. The proposed sensor is easy to build and use, and is insensitive to changes of water temperature and the electromagnetic pulse generated by the electric discharge. It is wideband; the bandwidth is not less than 3 MHz.  One part is monitored using an optical spectrum analyzer (OSA, ANDO AQ 6315A), and the other is fed to an amplified detector (AD, Thorlabs PDA400), which is connected to a digital storage oscilloscope (DSO, Tektronix DPO 5034). If the spectrum of the FBG's reflected beam is located in the linear portion of the SLF's spectral transmittance, the shift of this transmittance induced by the pressure acting on the PM-PCF of the filter causes a change of the intensity of the beam at the transmission output, which is proportional to the change of the pressure. The tunable FBG makes it possible to set the operating point of the discriminator in the range of linear operation. The tuning range of the grating is 1545–1555 nm, its 1 dB bandwidth is 0.34 nm and the SNR > 29 dB. The polarization controller (PC) allows to increase the extinction ratio of the transmission spectrum. To ensure the linear operation of the discriminator, the shift of the spectral transmittance of the SLF induced by the pressure should be small compared with the period of the transmittance. For predicted amplitudes of the pressure pulses, ensuring the required shift of the filter's spectral transmittance can be achieved by changing its sensitivity to pressure. The spectral sensitivity of the SLF to pressure can be altered by altering the length of the portion of the PMF, on which the pressure is acting. The sensitivity of the SLF to pressure as a function of the ratio of the lengths of the PMF portion, on which the pressure is not acting and the portion, on which the pressure is acting, is determined below. The spectral transmittance of the Sagnac filter, neglecting the losses of the 3 dB coupler and the attenuation of the PMF and the single mode fiber (SMF) in the loop, is approximately a periodic function of wavelength, namely Minima of the transmission spectrum occur, when the phase condition is satisfied To determine the pressure sensitivity of the spectrum shift of the SLF Taking into account the formula for the group modal birefringence Therefore one can write From relationships Measurements of impulsive pressure waves were carried out, which were generated by a low voltage electrical discharge in water initiated by a thin metal wire. A high voltage oil capacitor with the designation KI 10/100, a capacitance of For a preliminary estimation of the order of magnitude of the amplitude The estimated value of the amplitude When determining the value of this sensitivity is was assumed that the bending of the PM-PCF used for creating the loop of the sensing head does not affect the value of the sensitivity. To verify this assumption a second specimen of the pressure sensor with the length L = 630 mm and As the difference in sensitivities between the two sensors is within the coverage interval of ±3 pm/MPa, it can be assumed that the bending of the fiber in the loop of the sensing head did not cause any decrease of the pressure sensitivity of the sensor. This result is consistent with results of measurement provided in The period of the spectrum of the Sagnac filter is 4.34 nm, so setting the operating point of the discriminator shifted by 0.25 nm in the direction of higher wavelengths in relation to the quadrature point (Q point), a linear operation of the discriminator will be obtained in the range up to 5 MPa with a non-linearity error < 1.1%. The measurement path was calibrated statically by applying a given shift of the Bragg grating spectrum, controlled using the OSA. The relative uncertainty of such a calibration is not greater than 2.5%. As a result a sensitivity of the measurement path of The temperature sensitivity of the proposed pressure sensor at the 1550 nm wavelength can be determined from Changes in ambient temperature cause a shift of the operating point of the wavelength discriminator. It should be corrected before a measurement. The value of this shift can be estimated based on the sensitivity of the sensor to ambient temperature and the temperature sensitivity of the FBG, which is 10.3 pm/K The frequency response of the proposed sensor is determined by the fiber loop of the sensing head. Assuming that one half of the wavelength of the highest harmonic component of the measured pressure pulse cannot be shorter than the diameter D of the fiber forming the sensing head, with the velocity of a sound wave in water The presented pressure sensor is (to the best of the author's knowledge) the first wideband fiber optic sensor designed for measuring impulsive pressure waves generated by an electric discharge in water and the first, with the help of which such a measurement has been carried out. The results of the carried out measurements justify the statement that the proposed fiber optic impulsive pressure sensor built according to the configuration of a Sagnac loop filter containing a PM-PCF and a spectrum shift demodulator enables measurement of impulsive pressures caused by an electric discharge in water. The sensor is easy to build and use, and is insensitive to changes of water temperature and the electromagnetic pulse caused by the electric discharge. It has a wide frequency band of not less than 3 MHz. Changes of ambient temperature cause a shift of the operating point of the discriminator, mainly due to the high temperature sensitivity of the FBG. Therefore, before the measurement, the discriminator's operating point should be checked and its position corrected if necessary. This is sort of an inconvenience of the sensor. It is expected that further work will make it possible to improve the properties of the spectrum shift discriminator and to develop a sensing head with smaller dimensions. The effect of this work should be an improvement of the accuracy of the sensor and its insensitivity to ambient temperature changes.