Customer participation (CP) is often attractive to suppliers. CP can reduce the burden of service delivery for the supplier while also improving customer satisfaction. However, several recent reviews highlight a dearth of research in business-to-business (B2B) contexts. When considering a specific type of actor – customer firm representatives – findings from a 3-year abductive study of a global mining company suggest actor-based antecedents shape CP through prescriptive and normative controls, with interpersonal dynamics between actors moderating these relationships. The findings also suggest service delivery network (SDN)-based antecedents such as SDN process locus, SDN risk orientation, and SDN knowledge orientation, shape CP, with resource availability and the degree of solution integration moderating these relationships. Moreover, CP manifests as one of four main CP contribution profiles: high overall CP, selective (technical) CP, selective (facilitating) CP, and promotional CP depending on individuals' relative commitment and focus. Further analyses revealed that each of these profiles embody different value-in-use (VIU) goals such as risk minimization, quality, efficiency and reputation maintenance.Self-reflections by authors 2 and 3 based on experience Exploring the B2B relationship governance, relationship marketing and services literatures Self-reflections by authors 2 and 3 based on experience Exploring the CP, customer engagement and value co-creation literatures Self-reflections by authors 2 and 3 based on experience Exploring the CP, customer engagement and value co-creation literatures 6 x face-to-face meetings with Finnish mining technology supplier; Informal discussions; Emails; and Field notes Key insight 1 – supported Key insight 2 – supported   Key insight 3 – supported Key insight 4 – supported Exploring the B2B relationship governance, relationship marketing and services literatures Insight: CP antecedents are evident in terms of actor-to-actor and SDN-to-actor interactions Insight: There is little information in the current literature that shows a connection with CP Exploring the CP, customer engagement and value co-creation literatures to identify relevant CP profiles Insight: There has been some consideration of related stylistic behaviors, but no real consideration of CP profiles in complex B2B service exchange as such Exploring the CP, customer engagement and value co-creation literatures to identify relevant CP profiles Insight: There has been some consideration of value and value-in-use as this relates to specific actors, but not as an explanation for CP Insight: VIU goals are likely to underpin CP profiles as decision-making and evaluation criteria. Insight: actor-to-actor CP antecedents include Insight: SDN-to-actor CP antecedents include Development of CP typology based on these dimensions by analyzing narratives common to individuals with various profile combinations Refining the final taxonomy to only those CP profiles that were most prominent in the data Insight: VIU goals of most importance include: Associating the most prominent VIU goals with CP profiles Co-development Document analyses Data matching Independent co-analyses Theoretical insights Managerial insights 6 x meeting exposures with 10 different senior managers/directors in the mining company Email correspondence with respondents to clarify/verify emerging interpretations Field discussions about emerging themes with sales teams and key account managers 3 x Presentations to broader managerial audiences to gain feedback and validation Established the trustworthiness of findings from a practitioner perspective 2 x industry reports 1 x customer study Customer annual reports Supplier annual reports Confidential documents: Strategic positioning analysis report, Customer case histories, Customer surveys, internal customer reports, Internal newsletters, and; Market analyses Triangulation of findings Contextual understanding Part of ‘systematic combining’, an abductive analytical process used in the study Trustworthiness of the findings Established the uniqueness of findings All three authors engaged in independent co-analyses of all data sources. Verbatim interview transcripts, field notes and other documents in NVivo version 11 (amounting to more than 985 pages of text). Trustworthiness of the findings Triangulation of findings Through dialogue, authors established about 80% agreement across all four sets of findings High time commitment High awareness of project High emotional investment Project Manager Technical Manager Specific time commitment Specific awareness of project Specific emotional investment Project personnel with specific skills Technical personnel with specific skills Low, but regular time commitment Modest awareness of project Modest emotional investment Junior personnel ‘learning the ropes’. Individuals with a general skill base applicable across multiple projects. Low, but regular time commitment ‘Big-picture’ awareness of project Modest emotional investment Senior Managers or Partners Risk prevention Confidence in suppliers Independence from suppliers Reliability High functionality Cost minimization Time minimization Social approval Suppliers often desire high levels of customer participation (CP) in service exchange, with many firms now considering CP a means to reduce the burden on their own resource base while also creating more engaging customer experiences ( The purpose of this study is to broaden the theoretical scope of CP so that it is more relevant to complex service settings such as those common in business markets. The study focuses on complex B2B service exchange, which typically relies on the contributions of a set of actors (inclusive of customer and supplier representatives) to implement a technically sophisticated solution over often lengthy implementation processes ( What are the specific antecedents to CP in complex B2B service exchange settings? How does CP manifest in complex B2B service exchange settings as actor (i.e. customer firm representatives) behaviors? What are the underlying drivers of CP in complex B2B service exchange settings? To address these research questions, the study draws on a 3-year investigation of the dewatering solutions division of a major global mining company. Accordingly, the study uncovers actor-based antecedents to CP such as The present study also considers the manifestation of CP in terms of actor behaviors in complex B2B service exchange. By examining actors' relative time investment and task focus on CP, the findings result in a taxonomy of four CP profiles: The outcomes of the study are likely to be of interest for project managers, program managers and other senior managers in buyer firms engaged in complex B2B service exchange. Understanding the effects of actor-to-actor interactions and SDNs on CP can enable supervisors to anticipate likely CP. Equally, understanding VIU goals as the underpinning motivations for employees can help explain CP. Importantly, the links between antecedents, CP and VIU goals that the study uncovers can help as a comprehensive framework for managing CP in complex B2B service exchange. The findings offer a holistic framework that managers can use to determine which ‘levers’ to shape CP. CP has attracted considerable scholarly attention in recent decades. The ‘collaboration’ view of CP sees customers acting as partial employees of the supplier firm to produce service outcomes ( In complex B2B service exchange, CP antecedents are likely to differ from those examined in earlier research ( Of interest in the present study is a specific type of actor: customer firm representatives. These individuals are more consistent with traditional notions of ‘customers’ ( Complex B2B service exchange generally encompasses multiple supplier firms that, from the customer firm's perspective comprise a SDN ( Complex B2B service exchange relies on the contributions of a set of actors to implement a technically sophisticated solution over often lengthy implementation processes ( An essential part of CP is the realization of customer benefits. This is evident across most CP research ( The purpose of this study is to broaden the theoretical scope of CP so that it is more relevant to complex service settings such as those common in business markets. Addressing the research questions requires exploratory theory development, so the authors adopted a qualitative research design ( The authors selected the global mining industry as the research context for the study. Previous studies highlight this setting as empirically rich when considering complex B2B service exchange ( The empirical setting is the dewatering solutions division of the company, which involves operations that include the design, delivery, implementation, and maintenance of constituent parts for dewatering plants. Dewatering is a part of the value chain from ore to metal, which focuses on separating solid and liquid materials to optimize the processes in mineral slurry dewatering, process water reuse and biproduct handling in metals and chemical processing as well as in industrial water treatment. Consequently, the authors embarked on a snowballing approach to access relevant interviewees, meetings and documents ( The research process began in June 2013 and concluded in February 2016. The second and third authors were embedded in the research context for this period. At the time of commencement, the second author had about 2 years of experience in research collaboration with the company, while the third author had been a part-time employee for about 5 years. This provided the research team with an extensive pre-understanding of mining operations and processes, the technical requirements of the dewatering solution and its lifecycle, the operational and political landscape at customer locations, as well as access to key decision makers in the supplier and customer firms. Extended immersion and prolonged engagement in the research context are usually considered key advantages of ethnographic approaches, as they provide bases for a deeper and holistic understanding of the research phenomenon in a natural setting ( The research and analysis approach used in this study is broadly consistent with earlier abductive studies, which often involve establishing the conceptual framework before moving into an analysis phase and then concluding with an interpretation phase ( The first step was to consider the existing literature (a summary appears in With respect to research question # 1: With respect to research question # 1: With respect to research question # 2: With respect to research question # 3: Further assessment of the literature seemed to support the notion that several antecedents originate with other actors. Research in services management highlights supervisors, sales representatives and colleagues are important sources of influence on an individual's behaviors ( In turning to CP stylistic formats, the authors conducted a further exploration of several related literature streams. This exploration confirmed that customers tend to behave in stylistic ways when confronted with a relatively complex service experience. Related studies observe this as co-creation practice styles ( The authors also reviewed current literature that considers value as a fundamental explanation of actor behavior. Several studies highlight value drivers (such as price and product characteristics) as important ( With these observations in mind, the need for further empirical investigation was clear. Accordingly, the authors consulted with the Finnish technology supplier to identify an appropriate set of their customers that would be willing and able to provide the required data. The authors were interested in customer firms that (i) exhibit variation in consumption behaviors, (ii) require similar offerings (dewatering solutions) to allow for comparability, and (iii) allowed access to customer experiences and behaviors. Members of the Finnish technology supplier felt that their customers in Australia, Chile and Peru were the most fruitful avenues given the selection criteria. These were the primary locations for customer firms (as some of the largest mining locations in the world), each context varied in terms of CP, and the customer relationship was most likely to enable suitable access. Subsequently, the authors conducted the primary fieldwork. This includes semi-structured interviews (see Once the compilation of the primary dataset was complete, the authors conducted further analyses. To address research question # 1, the authors conducted thematic coding, followed by selective coding to establish and define major constructs evident in the data ( Throughout the analysis process, the authors conducted independent co-analyses as an initial step. This involves each author obtaining the dataset and addressing each research question separately so as to promote greater objectivity in the findings ( In the third phase, the authors established the credibility of findings through several provisions ( During the study, a wide range of supplementary documentation was also subject to analysis. This enabled the authors to explore the contextual influences relating to the mining industry while also gaining greater depth of understanding in customer and supplier firm dynamics. It also helped to improve the objectivity of the findings ( This section contains the main findings of the study in three sub-sections.  To identify and define actor-based CP antecedents, the analyses concentrate on customer firm representatives' actor-to-actor interactions. The analyses revealed two main types of actor-based antecedent: To identify and define SDN-based CP antecedents, the analyses concentrate on the institutional norms (i.e. implicit social rules) that underpin actor-to-actor interactions that emanate from the SDN. SDN-based antecedents important in the data set include    The analyses also revealed two other important factors:   CP Profiles The analysis then turned to CP formats and, more specifically, to articulating a taxonomy of CP profiles. Through iterative comparisons, the authors concluded that two main dimensions could capture CP in terms of relative contribution to a complex B2B service exchange. These were: Consistency (high vs. low). High consistency involves ongoing, regular commitment to the implementation process, whereas low consistency involves sporadic commitment. Focus (technical vs. facilitating). A technical focus occurs when an individuals' CP activities center on developing the capability of the system or product. A facilitating focus occurs when an individuals' CP activities center on enabling the CP of other actors and usually involves providing a support function (such as finance, human resources etc.). This led to a search through the interview data for vignettes and stories that illustrated these dimensions. Through three rounds of comparative analysis, four generic CP profiles emerged: The next step in the analyses centered on the identification of VIU goals. Through a thematic, then selective coding process, the analyses revealed four main types of VIU goals:     The last phase of the analysis involved searching for associations between VIU goals and CP profiles. The authors searched for vignettes and other evidence that would substantiate the association of a dominant VIU goal with each CP profile. The results of these analyses appear in A series of research propositions emerged through the abductive analytical process, which It appears that actors affect CP through interactions. Other actors are important origins for controls, which can be prescriptive or normative. It is also apparent that the interpersonal dynamic (i.e. the nature of the personal relationship between actors) has important moderating effects. This was clear when comparing supervisor-employee with colleague-colleague interactions. Where a supervisor had more legitimate power, this meant that they were able to control their subordinates more easily.   SDN-based antecedents also affect CP. As a set of underlying institutional norms, SDN-based antecedents influence the behaviors of actors through the enforcement, confirmation and advocacy of a set of implicit rules. These rules shape the behaviors of actors subtly (hence why SDN-based CP antecedents include SDN process locus, SDN risk orientation and SDN knowledge orientation. SDN process locus affects CP by governing the nature of who accepts different responsibilities during the complex B2B service exchange process. This then regulates CP by determining who is accountable for tasks. SDN risk orientation affects CP by governing risk management practices. These include determining when new or different behaviors are acceptable as well as the application of penalties in the advent of failure. This then influences CP by determining the level of acceptable risk an actor can take. SDN knowledge orientation affects CP by governing the nature of information creation or absorption in the SDN. For highly creative SDNs, there may be a greater propensity to share knowledge. For less creative SDNs, the propensity to share information may be lower. Where there is a need for certain knowledge for CP to occur, SDN knowledge orientation determines if and how this knowledge is available. The findings also suggest the degree of resource availability is an important factor since CP generally requires some form of resources (   The findings suggest that CP is likely to be stylistic in complex service delivery contexts. This finding is broadly consistent with earlier research into stylistic actor behaviors in service exchange (   This study addresses calls for CP research in B2B contexts in the extant literature ( By considering SDN-based antecedents, the study also shows the importance of networks as CP antecedents, albeit in a specific sense. The implication of this is that CP is not an isolated phenomenon. Instead, it occurs within a context and this context requires consideration in CP research. It is no longer enough to simply focus on self-service technology or on a specific coordination in CP research. Instead, there is a greater impetus to draw on the social context as a basis for explaining CP. This insight has the potential to link CP to broader notions of consumption such as those involving social groups ( Complex B2B service exchanges also give rise to a different notion of CP. While previous CP research has focused on a fairly narrow and repeatable service experience ( The study also links CP with VIU goals. By highlighting these links, there is now added scope to associate CP with value drivers ( This study implies a set of insights that may be useful for project managers, program managers and other with oversight of complex B2B service exchange (summarized in Should CP still be desirable, managers will then need to consider the actual forms of CP they require. The present study identifies a framework ( Through an investigation conducted in a global mining company, the present study articulates a set of CP antecedents, CP profiles and VIU goals associated with CP profiles relevant to complex B2B service exchange. Accordingly, the study reconceptualizes CP as actor behaviors in a lengthy, technically sophisticated exchange process between buyer firms and a SDN. This broader notion of CP expands its theoretical scope by highlighting the role of social interaction in CP. Rather than an individual accessing self-service technology, CP in more complex service settings requires engagement between a set of actors to accommodate greater ambiguity and uncertainty than in simpler customer transactions. Through its exploration of the social underpinnings of CP, the study addresses calls in the CP literature for greater exploration of the antecedents, the forms and the underlying motivations for CP in complex service settings such as those more common in business markets ( Given the nature of this study, the findings are most relevant to managers in industries such as mining, infrastructure, construction, manufacturing, aerospace, and professional services. While this is consistent with the goals of the study, it also limits the relevance of findings to alternative contexts. It is possible that a range of additional antecedents have escaped attention in this study, so further probing these would prove a fruitful research avenue, particularly given the dearth of research in this area at present ( The research was conducted in the RIVIS (Realizing Intangible Value from Integrated Solutions)-project funded by the The authors would like to thank Paavo Ritala, Asta Salmi, Robyn Prior, Sue Williamson and the anonymous reviewers for their thoughtful suggestions that have helped improve the final manuscript. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. [In addition, where appropriate, respondents where probed for concrete examples, as well as clarification of specific decision making processes and CP practices for each key episode or interaction they described during the interview].