The paper aims at the study of electrical resistance variations of Ni50.9Ti49.1 shape memory wires with different values of cold work at different isothermal cycles for evolution of recovery and recrystallization processes. Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) analysis was used to determine the recrystallization temperatures of samples in different cold drawn states. Optical microscopy was also used to verify the occurrence of the recrystallization process, which could be detected by in situ electrical resistance measurements. TEM results indicated that during annealing at 450°C for 45min, nanocrystalline structure formed in the sample with true strain of 0.6. Result showed that in the sample with a high cold drawn value, the subgrain coarsening occurs during annealing which leads to remarkable decreasing of stored energy in the DSC result. The results also showed that the recrystallization process occurs approximately at 600°C. Newly recrystallized grains were observed after annealing the samples with true strain of 0.2, 0.4 and 0.6 at 600°C for 40, 10 and 10min, respectively.NiTi shape memory alloys are well known for their two unique properties; shape memory effect (SME) and superelasticity. Both of shape memory effect and superelasticity are related to thermoelastic martensitic transformation in NiTi alloys In the past decade, there has been significant interest in NiTi SMAs with nanocrystalline structures. It is suggested that the reduction of the grain size may be beneficial for some mechanical and functional properties It is known that the recovery process results in rearrangement of the dislocation into the cell wall and formation of subgrains within the microstructure. The driving force for the subgrain growth arises from reduction of the stored energy The purpose of the present study is to investigate the temperature applicable for recovery and recrystallization of Ni NiTi wires with a nominal composition of 50.9 Differential scanning calorimetry was performed in helium atmosphere with a cooling and heating rate of 10 The electrical resistance was measured using a direct current four-probe method. This electrical configuration is useful in eliminating the effect of the contact resistance between the NiTi sample and probes Optical microstructural evaluation was performed after grinding, electro-polishing, and chemical etching of the samples. Electro-polishing was done in 21% perchloric acid and 79% acetic acid at 10.5 Further microstructural investigation was done by transmission electron microscopy (TEM), with a Philips CM20 analytical microscope operating at 200    As indicated in Considering    The recovery and recrystallization temperature of the Ni The optical microscopy images showed that the recrystallization process does not occur homogeneously for the sample with The authors are grateful to Professor Gunther Eggeler, Dr. Jan Frenzel from Ruhr University Bochum, Germany for TEM investigations.