A range of coals from different parts of the world was studied to determine if there were any common relationships that could be determined to gain a clearer understanding of the distribution of coal properties within different particle-sizes. The properties examined were proximate analysis, maceral analysis and %Unreactives from image analysis. Each fraction was also pyrolysed in a drop-tube furnace at 1300°C, 1vol% oxygen and a residence time of 200ms and the resulting chars analysed for morphology using image analysis. There were substantial variations between the particle-size distributions of the different coal samples even though they were ground to the same specification for trials on a combustion rig. Ash distributions showed in all cases that the smallest particle size (−38μm) had either the highest ash level or was very close to it. However, the trends in ash level for increasing particle size showed variations between coals with some coals showing increases in ash towards the larger particles. Fusinite content did not necessarily concentrate in the smallest size fraction, however, liptinite content did increase with particle size. %Unreactives generally increases with particle size and is related to char morphology through an empirical parameter, the ACA [5]. In addition the ACA [5] parameter showed the effect of both particle size and %Unreactives on char morphology and clearly showed the significant influence of particle size on burnout. A parameter such as this could, therefore, be used in burn-out models and further correlated with %Unreactives and particle size.Coal is, and will continue to be, a major source of fuel for power generation but, as identified in the latest Foresight publication on Cleaner Coal Power Generation Technology The properties of macerals are described by Stach et al. Macerals however, especially liptinites, rarely occur by themselves and are usually associated with either one or two other maceral types. These associations, normally referred to as microlithotypes, can be seen even in the small particles of pf and, clearly, the properties of particles will be influenced by these associations. For example, liptinite within vitrinite will stop the propagation of cracks and, hence, reduce the brittleness of that vitrinite. In general, bi-maceral and tri-maceral microlithotypes are harder to grind than mono-maceral types. In addition to associations between macerals there will also be associations with mineral matter. This was described above for fusinite and, generally, association with mineral matter will increase the strength of the coal. In summary, therefore, the strength of microlithotypes will depend on maceral associations, mineral associations and stresses during coalification leading to crack formation. The objective of this study was to investigate a range of coals from different parts of the world to determine if there were any common relationships that could be determined to gain a clearer understanding of the distribution of coal properties within different particle-sizes and to investigate the range of reactivity of the particle sizes produced related pf combustion. In particular, this kind of data will have an impact on the development of models for determining combustion behaviour and will affect coal selection for commercial processes. Ten coals, sieved into nine size fractions, were investigated and characterised. Each fraction was also pyrolysed in a drop-tube furnace and the resulting chars analysed for their morphology. The ten coals used in this study were supplied as pf and were sieved into nine size fractions using standard sieves. Proximate analysis was carried out on each fraction using a Stanton-Redcroft STA 1000 thermogravimetric analyser using a programme of temperatures and flows of nitrogen or air as appropriate to reproduce the methods in British Standard 1016 Each coal fraction was also pyrolysed in a drop-tube furnace (DTF). The conditions used were 1300°C, 1    Variations in volatile matter, and, hence, fuel ratio, can be seen in It is generally expected that inertinite and, in particular, fusinite will concentrate in the smaller size fractions, because they are brittle compared with the other macerals. However, as discussed previously there are many factors which will moderate this behaviour. The reactivity to combustion will be affected broadly by the fusinite content, which will be unreactive, and the liptinite content which will be very reactive. For most coals, however, the majority of the organic part of the coal lies between these extremes as vitrinite and, especially for Southern Hemisphere coals, as semi-fusinite. In particular, the semi-fusinite will show a range of reactivity between that observed for vitrinite and fusinite. The reactivity parameter ‘%Unreactives’ gives a measure of the reactivity to combustion allowing for the influence of semi-fusinite, vitrinite rank, etc., and has been shown to give a good correlation with burnout compared with other parameters Collinsville shows a definite increase in %Unreactives with particle size which fits well with the fusinite data and the absence of liptinite in this coal. El Cerrejon, Guasare, Kaltim Prima, and Welbeck have low levels of %Unreactives (<10%) and the variation between particle sizes is not very significant, although for Welbeck the %Unreactives tends to decrease with increase in particle size which again fits with the fusinite and liptinite data. For Westerton the %Unreactives is very much in line with fusinite content within experimental error and noting that although liptinite increases with particle size, the overall levels present of this maceral are low. Pittsburg no. 8 shows a slight tendency for increase in %Unreactives towards larger size fractions. In this case high values of fusinite are seen in both the smaller and larger size fractions and this is not mirrored in the %Unreactives. However, In manual maceral analysis, point counting is independent of the size of that particular maceral fragment. With large numbers of points counted, the size of maceral fragments will be taken into account to some extent by the probability of landing on them. However, repeatability for a 50% abundance, in accordance with BS 6127    There were substantial variations between the particle-size distributions of the different coal samples even though they were ground to the same specification for trials on a combustion rig. These variations must be related to varying coal properties. In some cases this leads to higher percentages of larger particles which will substantially affect burnout in industrial practice. Ash values showed in all cases that the smallest particle size (−38 Fusinite does not necessarily concentrate in the smallest size fraction probably because of liberation problems where maceral associations occur. However, liptinite contents, in all cases, increased with particle size since maceral associations with liptinite reduce grindability. %Unreactives generally increases with particle size and is related to char morphology assessed by the ACA [5] parameter. In addition the ACA [5] parameter shows the effect of both particle size and %Unreactives on char morphology and clearly shows the significant influence of particle size on burn-out. A parameter such as this could, therefore, be used in burn-out models and correlated with %Unreactives and particle size. This work was supported by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council, UK. Powergen plc are also acknowledged for their supply of coal samples and the use of their drop-tube furnace.