Operating conditions during the air classification process, of critical importance for many grinding operations, were tested in laboratory scale. For efficient and satisfactory operation, the most important parameters, such as air flow rate, concentration of material in the air, rotor speed, wear rate, classification capacity and efficiency, require optimization. This paper indicates the influence of operating parameters on the classification process and provides optimization examples carried out by practical testing. On-line particle size and concentration measurement from Malvern Insitec was used to investigate the flow conditions during testing. Direct on-line measurement was possible inside the classifier circuit, thanks to the “multi-scattering” algorithm system, designed for the on-line measurement of highly concentrated particles in flows ranging from static to supersonic.The operating parameters of the air classification process are of critical importance for many grinding operations. Testing in laboratory scale has shown that classification efficiency and product fineness, as well as power consumption for the classification process, are very dependent on the construction and operating parameters of an air classifier ( During the air classification process two dominant forces can be considered: the centrifugal force and the air drag force. There is an additional Coriolis force acting on particles flowing towards the rotor center, however, they will be not considered in this paper to simplify this case. A classifier rotor generates centrifugal forces, when particles are accelerated to the peripheral velocity of the rotor. The air drag forces result from the exposure of particles to the gas flow which is additionally used for pneumatic transport of materials. The centrifugal force ( The air drag force ( Considering a spherical particle, which is in the balance when exposed to these forces, the derived particle size will be Considering further the parameters mentioned above, it can be seen that the air velocity generating drag forces will be decisive in a separation process, as the other factors and parameters are constant or can be easily controlled. Drag coefficient Efficiency of air classification is very much dependent on the material dispersion. When fine particles agglomerate to larger ones and are not dispersed during the process, they will be classified into the coarse fraction instead of being transported through the rotor and further to the fines outlet. It is therefore necessary to provide efficient particle dispersion during pneumatic transport of the feed material. Thus, classifier air flow will again be of critical importance in providing an efficient process. Typical optimization of the operating parameters of the circuit is done by detailed investigation and extensive testing, showing the function between these parameters, products and circuit performance. This type of investigation includes batch testing with many material portions used by the same system with adjusted operating parameters. Below is an example of testing the feed material concentration in the air classifier. The amount of particulate material suspended in the carrying gas will have a strong influence on the apparent air viscosity and density. Therefore, the air drag force will vary with different concentrations of the suspended material. Consequently, the classifying conditions will change with the concentration of solids in the air.  As can be expected, the classifier power demand increases with higher solids concentration. Due to the higher apparent fluid density and viscosity, the rotor load and the pressure drop increase, causing the higher power demand. However, the specific energy, i.e., energy per unit fine size fraction product (kWh/t), decreases. In other words, the amount of solids processed increases more rapidly than the energy consumption with increasing loads. The drawback is the reduced classification efficiency. The concentration of solids in the air can also affect the particle size distribution of the product. The products can have the same top size, but different relative particle size distributions. A high concentration of solids provides a flat particle size distribution curve, and for low concentrations the curve becomes steeper ( Another example of optimal operating conditions concerns the air flow rate and the rotor speed. It is essentially the balance between the centrifugal and air drag forces that determine the cut size of the classified fractions. Typically, if the air drag force is constant (constant air flow rate), a higher centrifugal force (higher rotor speed) will provide finer classification and vice versa. However, if both forces are altered to the same extent (both increased or decreased), the fineness will remain unchanged, but the classification efficiency will be different.  The classification efficiency increases as the air flow rate and rotor speed are raised. In other words, the classification imperfection The optimization mentioned has been applied in the industrial scale. The laboratory operating parameters were scaled up to a large production scale, where the experimentation results were confirmed by full scale production ( As shown in the optimization examples above, there are no possibilities for investigating any dynamic changes during the process and only average parameters are reported at the end of a test. Such testing results are later correlated by various assumptions and conclusions related to the different physical phenomena taking place in the process. The possibility of modeling such a correlation is considered further. Unfortunately, it is not possible to observe any flow pattern for the particle–air phases and their dynamics during adjustment of the operating parameters. Even by simple sampling of the air classifier content using a suction mechanism with a sampling pipe, only the average performance can be observed providing very little information. Additionally, many parts of the system are inaccessible for the measurement of even average particle size and concentration, which makes modeling complicated and unreliable. Introduction of the new particle size measuring technique made it possible to investigate far more parameters than before, and provided new possibilities for particle behavior monitoring. Investigation of the air classification process was also carried out partly by flow mechanics simulations (FLUENT) and by practical testing including particle size and concentration measurements. FLUENT simulations ( As an alternative to the process simulations, Malvern Instruments' Insitec system was used for particle size distribution and concentration measurements. It is a robust instrument designed for the on-line measurement of particle sizes from 0.5 to 1000 μm in particle flows ranging from static to supersonic. The Insitec system is a true on-line system automatically sizing particles directly from the process flow using the laser diffraction principle. Particle size distribution and concentration data are presented via the PC in a real-time system. The most important features of the Insitec system are the solid-state construction for on-line use, and the unique “multi-scattering” algorithm, which allows for wide variation in particle loading. This algorithm allows the Insitec system to function without requiring a significant dilution of the process stream in order to control the particle concentration. The particle concentration can be very wide and ranges from 1 to 10,000 ppm. In the typical air transportation process it corresponds to the concentration range from 2.5 to 25 kg of the material per m A schematic illustration of the Insitec measuring system is given in Additional compressed air inlets are used to generate a stable flow rate through the measuring unit and to protect the sensor lenses from dust agglomeration. It is of critical importance to use a reliable method for a particle size distribution control during processing ( After a short time the circuit stabilized and the measurement showed an excessively fine product at the classifier outlet. The classifier rotor speed was then reduced to achieve the required fineness (coarser material in this case). The transmission indication (which is the opposite to the material concentration) illustrated the final product concentration changes at the classifier outlet. After the classifier rotor speed was lowered, the concentration of the final product was higher and therefore the transmission was reduced. By using the type of on-line measurement illustrated, the circuit start-up was carried out within few minutes. Normally, such operations require much more time and sampling to approve the final product quality. The Insitec measurement system was used to investigate the flow field pattern inside the classifier. It made it possible to indicate particle classification variations along the rotor during production of the 10 μm top size product. It is noticeable that the size distribution of the material circulating around the rotor is quite similar for all measuring points. The material measured at the central part of the rotor indicates a slightly finer size (about 50 μm top size) than the other fractions (almost all of which had a top size of 100 μm). It is not unexpected to have the finest fraction measured at the central rotor part, as the rotor air flow generates the highest rotation in this area and therefore centrifugal forces are at their highest. Quite surprisingly, however, the material produced in this process has the top size of 10 μm. This means that the material particles are accelerated to the peripheral speed of the rotor to separate such fine particles at the very narrow area around the rotor. Thus, high impact on the rotor blades will result in their significant wear rate. This can be a valuable information for classifier construction modification in order to avoid high wear rates of the rotating elements. The most interesting results were obtained by measuring the feed material dispersion at the classifier inlet. This showed the very significant effects of the inlet pipe length where the material was dispersed before reaching the classification (rotor) area. The dispersion effect has been measured by the on-line particle size analyzer installed at the classifier inlet. The length of the inlet pipe was then adjusted to 5 and 2.5 m. The sampled material was sent through the on-line analyzer without dispersion compressed air to measure possible agglomerates in the feed material flow just before the classifier. The same material was tested with dispersing additives which were mixed with the product before testing. The polyalcohol amines (TC 98 RB from Tecnochem) were used to disperse the material. Additionally, after the test the material has normally been analyzed by the analyzer with the dispersion compressed air to identify the reference fineness. Thus, it was possible to identify the effect of the critical length at the classifier inlet both with and without additives. It can be seen that the top sizes up to 140 μm can be measured for a short inlet for conditions both with and without additives. At the same time their variations (shown by a standard deviation in the graph) are very high and reach up to 50 μm. For the longer inlet the measured top size is closer to the real measured reference (90–100 μm) and the size variations are significantly smaller. Additives help to disperse the material more efficiently and it correlates quite well with similar findings when air classification and additives have been used in the fine grinding circuit ( A quite different effect than that found for the material top size is shown in For conditions both with and without the additives, the material shows tendencies for agglomeration rather than dispersion, which can be caused by electrostatic forces generated during the feed material flow. This effect can be of critical importance when ultra-fine classification is considered. It is then critical to provide an efficient dispersion mechanism inside the classifier and not only by pneumatic transport. The information about the flow conditions and particle classification as investigated and described in this paper can be very useful for optimizing various grinding and classification systems. This type of information can additionally be used to optimize construction parameters of the air classifier, by indicating weak points limiting efficient processing. A high acceleration rate of the particles entering the rotor area can be avoided after construction modifications. This can significantly reduce the wear rate of moving parts. Furthermore, the combination of the theoretical simulations (fluid mechanics) and accurate physical measurements can be a very powerful tool for process model development and its verification in future work. By reliable and accurate measuring of the flow conditions in the air classification circuit, improved operating stability can be achieved. It is of critical importance to provide reliable sampling of the material at required points of the circuit for more efficient operation. Thus, low waste of the final products can be achieved. Finally, it is important to provide efficient feed material dispersion before the classification zone. Dispersion resulting from pneumatic transport together with the use of grinding aids (additives) for better disagglomeration can be monitored by the on-line analysis. This can provide valuable information not only for the air classification process, but can be of critical importance for other processing stages of fine particles.