The primary aim of this paper is to introduce Quantitative 3-dimensional Computed Tomography (Q3DCT) for odontoid fractures to assess if fracture characteristics differ between the Anderson and d’Alonso subclasses. Secondarily, we assessed if high energy injury and older age influenced fracture morphology. This retrospective imaging study includes 66 patients who visited one of two level I trauma centers for an odontoid fracture. With the use of 3-Dimensional polygon mesh models we determined the total number of fragments, the volume of each fragment, the degree of displacement of the odontoid, and the fracture surface area. We found that type III fractures consisted of more fracture fragments (median:3, IQR:2–3) than type II odontoid fractures (median:2, IQR:2–3) (p < 0.001). The volume of the odontoid fracture fragment was almost twice as large in type III odontoid fractures (median:19%, IQR:14–25%) as compared to type II fractures (median:10%, IQR:8.5–12%) (p < 0.001). Type II fractures were more displaced (median:3.8 mm, IQR:2.9–6.3 mm) compared to type III fractures (median:2.2 mm, IQR:1.0–3.5 mm) (p < 0.001). This 3-dimensional displacement was predominantly due to substantially more posterior displacement of type II odontoid fractures. In conclusion, type III odontoid fractures were more comminuted, had a larger odontoid fragment, had a larger fracture surface, but were less (posteriorly) displaced when compared to type II fractures. The mechanism of injury and age at diagnosis both dictated the fracture type, but when accounting for fracture type the influence of these two factors on fracture morphology was limited.Odontoid fractures represent 11–15% of all acute cervical spine trauma, and they are especially common in patients over 70 years old More precise determination of odontoid fracture morphology might improve our understanding of the cause of nonunion and could help surgical decision making. Quantitative 3-dimensional Computed Tomography (Q3DCT) is a technique that can accurately determine fracture fragment size, fracture surface area, and –perhaps most important in further distinction of these fractures– 3-dimensional displacement In this paper we will introduce the use of the Q3DCT technique to determine fracture morphology of odontoid fractures. The primary aim of this study is to use Q3DCT to assess if fracture characteristics –fracture fragment volume, surface size of the fracture plane, and degree of displacement– differ between the Anderson and d’Alonso subclasses. Secondarily, we assessed if high energy injury and older age influenced fracture morphology. This retrospective study was approved by our institutional review board. We included all patients 18 years or older who visited one of two level I trauma centers for an odontoid fracture that was confirmed by a computed tomography (CT) scan. We identified patients by using a combination of the International Classification of Disease, 9th revision codes for closed fracture of second cervical vertebra with or without spinal cord injury (ICD9 805.02 and 806.0 respectively) and the Current Procedural Terminology code for CT scan of the cervical spine without contrast (CPT 72125) between October 2013 and September 2015. Patients were excluded when the quality of the CT scan was not acceptable for 3-dimensional modeling of the odontoid: slice thickness over 1.25 mm (n = 31), artifacts or an unclear image of the odontoid (n = 3), previous surgery at C2 (n = 1), and anatomical abnormalities (n = 1). Patients were –in general– scanned on a trauma mattress with a cervical collar resulting in a reasonably standardized head position and therefore comparable cervical spine position among patients. An ante-hoc sample size calculation determined that a minimum sample size of 66 participants would provide 80% statistical power (beta 0.20; alpha 0.05) to detect an effect size of 0.4. We retrospectively included patients starting September 2015 until we identified the required 66 patients (October 2013). All 66 CT’s were uploaded into 3D Slicer (version 4.4.0, Boston, Massachusetts, United States). 3-dimensional polygon mesh models were created by outlining the separate fracture fragments in the coronal, axial and sagittal slices by using a cut off of 200–250 Hounsfield Units to automatically identify cortical bone. All 3-dimensional models were separately saved in a stereolithography (.stl) file format. The 3-dimensional models were then uploaded in Rhinoceros (version 5.0, McNeel, Seattle, Washington, United States) to determine the total number of fracture fragments, the volume of each of the fracture fragments, and the fracture displacement in the anteroposterior, lateral, and cranio-caudal direction. To determine the displacement of the odontoid compared to the C2 body, a 3-dimensional model was created of a non-fractured C2 and used as a template for digital fracture reduction in Rhinoceros. Geomagic Studio (version 2013.0.1, Morrisville, North Carolina, United States) was used to determine the fracture surface area. Electronic medical records were screened to collect: age at diagnosis, gender, type of injury (e.g. fall from standing or sitting, fall from height, motor vehicle accident and pedestrian struck by car) and injury mechanism (e.g. low energy trauma and high energy trauma). Fall from height (including fall from stairs), motor vehicle accident and pedestrian struck were considered high energy trauma. The Anderson and D’Alanso classification was used to categorize all CT-scans of the odontoid fractures We determined the total number of fragments (including the odontoid fragment and the remaining C2), the volume of each of the fracture fragments (including the main odontoid fragment, other fracture fragments, and the remaining C2), the degree of displacement of the odontoid, and the fracture surface area. Volume measurement (in mm Categorical variables are presented as numbers with frequencies. Continues variables are presented as median with interquartile range (IQR) as some variables were non-normally distributed. A Fisher exact rest was used to compare categorical variables. A Mann-Witney- We included a total of 66 patients with odontoid fractures: 40 patients with a type II and 26 patients with a type III odontoid fracture. There were no patients with a type I odontoid fracture. Patients were mostly female (n = 39, 59%) with a median age of 81 (IQR 72 to 88) years. The majority suffered the odontoid fracture due to a fall from standing or sitting position (n = 46, 70%) ( We found that type III odontoid fractures were more comminuted, had a larger odontoid fragment, but were less displaced when compared to type II fractures ( Type III fractures consisted of more fracture fragments (median 3, IQR 2 to 3) than type II odontoid fractures (median 2, IQR 2 to 3) (p < 0.001). The volume of the odontoid fracture fragment was almost twice as large in type III odontoid fractures (19%, IQR 14 to 25%) as compared to type II fractures (10%, IQR 8.5 to 12%) (p < 0.001). Type II fractures were more displaced (median 3.8 mm, IQR 2.9 to 6.3 mm) compared to type III fractures (median 2.2 mm, IQR 1.0 to 3.5 mm) (p < 0.001). This 3-dimensional displacement was predominantly due to substantially more posterior displacement of type II odontoid fractures. We found that type III odontoid fractures were more common after high-energy trauma as compared to type II odontoid fractures ( We found that type II odontoid fractures were more common in older patients ( In this paper we introduce the use of the Q3DCT technique in odontoid fractures. More precise determination of odontoid fracture morphology using quantitative 3-dimensional CT analysis might help surgical decision making and prognostication. We therefore aimed to assess if fracture characteristics such as volume, surface size of the fracture plane, and the degree of displacement differed between the Anderson and d’Alonso Our study has limitations. First, we did not find patients with a type I fracture, which is in line with its low prevalence reported in literature (1.0%) Type II fractures are more prone to nonunion compared to type III fractures Govender et al. We found it interesting that there was no difference in type II odontoid fractures based on degree of injury (low versus high energy) or age, and that type III odontoid fractures only differed slightly (with regards to total volume of fracture fragments) based on degree of injury, but not based on age. Lewis et al. In addition to the described fracture characteristics, other factors such as comorbidities, age, osteoporosis, neurological symptoms, smoking, and expected morbidity (e.g. swallowing problems), need to be considered in the decision for treatment. In conclusion, using the Q3DCT technique we found that type III odontoid fractures were more comminuted and had a larger odontoid fragment (as expected) with a larger fracture surface area. More importantly, we found type III fracture were more anterior displaced while type II fracture were more posterior displaced. Type III were also less displaced when compared to type II fractures. We found that mechanism of injury and age dictated fracture type; but the impact of mechanism of injury and age on fracture morphology accounting for fracture type was limited. Further use of this technique could change the foundation of how we view odontoid fractures. None. Each author certifies that he or she has no commercial associations (e.g. consultancies, stock ownership, equity interest, patent/licensing arrangements, etc.) that might pose a conflict of interest about the submitted article. This study was approved by our institutional review board (#2015P002434/MGH) This study was performed at Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. Departmental. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: