Cerchar abrasivity index (CAI) test is widely used to estimate the tool life and wear in various excavation equipment in mining and tunneling projects. The aim of this study is to analyze the effect of various factors related to the CAI testing procedure. Particularly, sensitivity of CAI results is investigated due to variation of certain testing parameters, including the type of apparatus used, wear flat measurement methods, specimen surface conditions and stylus hardness. Relationship between CAI and certain testing parameters, and its repeatability are also investigated through statistical analyses of a series of CAI tests results obtained from twenty-one selected rock specimens.
               
                  Results
                  show little variation between the type of apparatus used and between the selected wear flat measurement methods. Nevertheless, there is a significant large variation in CAI values according to the changes in specimen surface conditions and the hardness of stylus used. The results show that with an increase in the hardness of the steel stylus the CAI values decrease differently in accordance with the rock type tested.The production of minerals and construction works in the mining and building industry are commonly carried out either by classical (drilling and blasting) or mechanical excavation methods. These excavation methods use tools that interact with the rock, resulting in wear or deterioration of the tools. Particularly, rapid wear in excavation tools used in mining, drilling, and tunneling applications The wear of equipment has long been known to be a significant factor in the economics of any rock excavation process. Predicting the performance of excavation equipment is an important task in the selection of an appropriate excavation method of a project. In the feasibility phase of a project, engineers are challenged to overcome various geotechnical considerations in order to estimate excavation equipment performance and cost. Over the years, several index methods have been developed to offer a reasonable quantitative measure for rock abrasivity. Among them, the Cerchar Abrasivity Index (CAI) has been accepted internationally in the determination of the abrasiveness of the rock and is considered as a reliable indicator for cutter life and cost estimation in excavation projects The CAI test was developed for the first time by the Laboratoire du Centre d′E’tudes et Recherches des Charbonnages (Cerchar) de France in the 1970s for coal mining applications The Cerchar test principle consists of scratching a steel stylus having a known hardness (HRC55 ± 1) with a 90° conical tip which is slid parallel to the rock sample surface by a distance of 10 mm under a constant force of 70 N. The abrasiveness is depicted by CAI and it corresponds to the wear flat size (unit of 0.01 mm, measured under a microscope) formed by a truncation of the cone tip times 10. According to the ASTM-D7625-10 and ISRM-SM, at least five tests must be performed on each rock specimen to achieve the mean CAI value. The speed of the scratching action varies for the two apparatus accepted by ASTM standards and ISRM-SM. It is 10 mm/s for the original Cerchar apparatus and 1 mm/s for the West model. The CAI classification of rock abrasiveness suggested by ASTM standards and ISRM-SM is given in Despite common use of the CAI test, there are some variations in the results which are mainly attributed to differences in the hardness of the stylus used in testing, surface condition of the rock specimens, and wear flat measurement methods Another test parameter that has had a significant impact on CAI is the surface condition of a rock specimen. Yet, there are some ambiguities regarding the preference of the specimen´s surface condition. The CAI studies carried out on rough and saw-cut surfaces show significant variation in their results The CAI test standards require a 10-mm scratching length. Studies on testing length reveal that about 85% of stylus wear is achieved during the first two millimeters of testing length. Only 15% of the CAI is attributed to the remaining 8 mm of the testing length Studies on the effects of varying levels of applied loads show a linear increase with applied load Studies on geomechanical properties and mineralogical composition of rock show a significant effect on the CAI. McFeat-Smith Considering the questions encountered in the previous studies, it has been decided that some ambiguities should be further investigated. The aim of this study is to analyze the effect of various factors related to the CAI testing procedure. Particularly, sensitivity of CAI resulting from changes in certain testing parameters including the type of apparatus (Type-1 vs. Type-2) used, measurement of wear flat (top-view vs. side-view), specimen surface conditions (rough vs. saw-cut) and stylus hardness. A series of CAI tests are implemented on selected rock samples to evaluate the effects of various factors on CAI and its repeatability. Twenty-one sedimentary, metamorphic and igneous rock blocks ( The test apparatus used for the CAI were a replica of original Cerchar (Type-1) and West (Type-2) apparatuses ( Experiments were repeated on three samples with five scratches for each styli and rock specimen. A total of 72 tests (2 apparatuses × 2 specimen surfaces × 6 styli × 3 samples) were carried out for each rock specimen and 1512 (72 × 21 rock specimens) tests for the whole study. The wear flat on the stylus tip was examined with a digital microscope (35× magnification, Measurement repeatability expresses the closeness of the results obtained. Researchers frequently take repeated measurements of a subject with the goal of quantifying variation among measurements. Repeatability of the CAI tests was analyzed using a coefficient of variation (relative variability) of mean CAI, Bland-Altman plot The coefficient of variation is a standardized measure of dispersion of data points around the mean. The CV is the ratio of the standard deviation to the corresponding arithmetic mean which was calculated from five test replications on the same rock specimen for this study. The Bland-Altman plot, or difference plot, is a graphical comparison method between two measurements. It is a plot of the difference against the average of the two methods. The Bland-Altman plot is used to investigate any possible relationship (constant or proportional bias) of the differences between the measurements. The presence of proportional bias is an indication of a lack of equal agreement between the measurements over the whole range. Repeatability, as a parametric statistic, is largely known as the ICC A two-way repeated-measures ANOVA was undertaken with the aid of R, a statistical software An overall summary of the results of this study regarding the effects of various testing preferences on CAI value and its repeatability (reliability) is presented in ICC statistics for the experiment are illustrated in The detailed results and in-depth analysis of the effects of various testing preferences on CAI value in relation to the testing conditions are presented below. According to the ISRM-SM, the length or diameter of the wear flat may be measured from side- or top-view settings, though side-viewing is strongly recommended. This is because the wear flat can frequently exhibit an unsymmetrical shape with splinters or burrs on the tip of the steel stylus that enlarge beyond the wear flat which makes it difficult to determine the true size of the wear flat by top-view measurements. The vertical (top-view) measurement might result in a significant variation in the CAI values. A summary of stylus wear measurements is presented in There are mainly two types of apparatus ( The results related to the effects of testing apparatus on CAI are shown in Current standards on CAI testing recommend that the specimen test surfaces be fresh, flat, and natural or saw-cut. If a CAI test is carried out on a saw-cut specimen surface, then it is recommended that the CAI values be normalized by using one of the following equations: The findings of the effects of specimen surface condition on CAI are presented in The difference (i.e., CAI Test results for all the styli are shown in The CV of CAI in relation to stylus hardness and specimen geological origin (    The data set for each rock sample is also analyzed, and the linear regression coefficients “a” and “b” shown in Eq.  If a similar conversion is carried out for a saw-cut surface, then the result will be 2.65. A comparison with an earlier study by Jacobs and Hagan Considering the questions encountered in the previous studies, it has been decided that some ambiguities should be further investigated. This study is evaluated the effect of various factors related to the CAI testing procedure. As a result of this work, the following comments are made. The Cerchar abrasivity test can be carried out without compromising test results with both apparatuses, as long as it is performed in accordance with the standards. Wear flat measurements can be performed either way from top-view vertically or side-view horizontally, (or even the average value of both views) and may be used interchangeably if it is properly measured. It has been observed that the variability of CAI test results is larger in less abrasive rocks; therefore, one should be extra careful when working with such rocks. Specimen surface preference should be saw-cut since the measurement variation on saw-cut specimen surface is generally lower than that of the rough cut specimen surface. However, whenever styli sliding is observed on a saw-cut surface, it is better to use a rough surface. If the test is carried out on a saw-cut surface, CAI The smallest measurement variability (CV) is observed with the stylus having a hardness of HRC49. However, considering the common use and the small difference between the variability of CAI The author would like to acknowledge the generous financial support given by