Pyrite is part of the tailings from coal mining and presents a great valorization potential technological, economic and environmental in the production of nanoparticles. In this work, pyrite from coal mining was subjected to high-energy milling and the particle size reduction, electrical and optical properties were evaluated. With the milling parameters used, the apparent size of the crystallites was reduced from 34.7 nm to 23.8 nm, resulting in highly unstable particles and charge carriers with low mobility. Due to this instability, submicron particles were observed, in the range of 300–500 nm, with a hydrodynamic diameter of 1257 ± 36 nm. The processed pyrite showed good visible light absorption and an indirect band gap of 1.51 eV.Pyrite (FeS There are reports of natural pyrite nanoparticles (20–80 nm) produced by dry milling in a high-energy planetary ball mill for 6 h with stainless steel balls and a rotation speed of 320 rpm. High-energy milling has gained interest for the production of nanomaterials, being the technique related to advantages such as cost effectiveness, the production of large amounts of nanoparticles, and the ease of the process This work subjected Brazilian pyrite from coal mining tailings to high-energy milling and determined its electrical and optical properties as a function of particle size reduction. The pyrite used in this study is from the coal industry waste of Treviso city, SC, Brazil, and it was submitted to comminution processes in a jaw crusher, disc mill and eccentric mill with high-alumina balls (denoted as “coarse pyrite”). The high-energy milling was conducted in a two-step in LabStar NETZSCH mill. In the first, the milling elements were zirconium oxide beads stabilized with yttrium ranging from 1.4 mm to 1.6 mm in diameter, with a total milling time of 3 h and a rotation speed of 3000 rpm. The process started with a suspension in deionized water with a solids content of 3.2% (mass %). After the first hour, more pyrite was added to the mill and this content was raised to 6.2% and after two hours, to 9.1%, where remained until the end. The waste submitted to this milling step is denoted as “HEM1 pyrite”. In the second step, the milling elements ranged from 0.4 mm to 0.6 mm in diameter with a milling time of 2 h and suspension with solids content of 3.2%. The two-stage milled waste is denoted as “HEM2 pyrite”. After each step, the solid phase of the suspension was separated by centrifugation and dried in a vacuum oven at 40 °C. The particulate size distribution of coarse and HEM1 pyrite samples was evaluated in a Cilas 1064 laser granulometer using water as the liquid medium, and the hydrodynamic diameter of HEM2 was estimated in a Malvern Zetasizer Nano ZS with the sample dispersed in 70% ethyl alcohol. Characterizations included X-ray diffraction (Shimadzu XRD-6000 diffractometer, CuKα radiation), X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (Bruker S2 Ranger XFlash Technology XRF), absorption spectra obtained with a Shimadzu UV-2450 spectrophotometer, infrared spectroscopy (Shimadzu IRPrestige-21 FTIR) and transmission electron microscopy (JEOL JEM-1011 TEM). The majority carrier, carrier concentration and Hall mobility were measured at room temperature by the van der Pauw method, using a Keithley 220 programmable current source and Keithley 182 voltmeter. The magnetic field was 0.328 T and the direct current was 1 μA. Samples of 0.500 g in the prism format with square 100.00 mm The particle size distribution of the coarse pyrite revealed a D HEM2 showed some instability, with a variation in the average particle size for each replicate of the test. The presence of submicron particles in the range of 300–500 nm was observed. Due to suspension instability, these particles made a minor contribution to most of the results. The hydrodynamic diameter of HEM2 was 1257 ± 36 nm. The coal mining waste consist of three fractions, rich in pyrite, rich in clay minerals and rich in carbon The XRD data of The coarse pyrite was shown to be an n-type semiconductor, and crystallite breakage caused surface defects, namely, incomplete bonds on the surface of the crystals that were responsible for increasing the carrier concentration (n), 6.96 × 10 In The Hall mobility (μ The spectra of Knowing that Al and Si can act as dopants The pyrite from coal mining is an n-type semiconductor with an indirect band gap of 1.51 eV. The high-energy milling proposed in this work reduced the apparent size of the crystallites. This reduction caused surface defects responsible for the particle instability and less mobility of the charge carriers. This change in the crystallinity did not promote large changes in the optical properties of the material. As high-energy milling involves many parameters, measuring the influence of each parameter on the final particle size and crystalline structure of the pyrite requires extensive studies. A suitable combination may achieve high-crystallinity pyrite nanoparticles, a material with strong technological appeal and low cost, especially because it is an industrial waste. The authors declare no conflict of interest. The authors are grateful to