Vertical spindle mills (VSMs) are widely utilised in coal power plants that account for more than 40% of the electrical energy generated worldwide. These mills can consume up to 1% of the gross power generated by the plant; and hence, present a good scope for optimisation. However, optimisation requires better understanding of the operation of these mills and reliable models to be used for investigating optimisation opportunities.
                  A new model of VSMs has been developed which enabled interlinked simulation of comminution and classification operations that occur in the mill. The multi-component models incorporate the effects of size and ash distribution in coal feed, air and coal flow rate and power drawn by the mill. Both models utilise the size-by-size density distribution of the coal streams. An efficiency curve model based on settling velocity was used to describe and distinguish difference in behaviour due to variable density of the components and their composites in the three classification regions. The matrix comminution model works with a selection function that is only dependent on size and a three dimensional breakage function that is size, density and energy dependent to account for the differences in breakage of components and composite particles.
                  It has been demonstrated that, the particle size distributions and flow rates corresponding to the streams in the mill and its product can be estimated with a very good accuracy. A reasonable prediction is also found for the density distributions in these streams.One of the oldest and most widely spread technology in generating electricity is the fossil fuel fired generators that utilise steam power. Steam is produced from water in the boilers by the heat supplied from fuel burners. In 2010, more than 40% of the world electricity generation was from coal power plants ( There are studies in the literature on the operation of these mills that deal with the optimisation problem through detailed pilot or industrial scale testing, modelling and simulation of laboratory, pilot and industrial scale mills. Batch comminution kinetics of single-size fractions of different individual ( Size reduction operation in full scale mills have been described with size mass balance breakage models and classification functions for relevant classification zones calculated either empirically ( In addition to the size reduction and classification operations in the mill, some of the researchers have considered the pressure drop ( None of the above studies considered coal as a multi-component material. However, coal, mineral matter and composite particles are substances that could be expected to behave differently both in comminution and classification processes. The VSMs combine two interacting operations, i.e. comminution and classification processes, within single equipment and a model for these mills require de-coupling of these processes to construct individual models of each operation and describing the interaction between them. This exercise requires detailed sampling from the mills; and a full mill survey comprises conventional samples (i.e. coal feed, product and mill reject), ball product and, separator feed and reject streams. A new methodology has been developed to collect non-conventional samples, which has previously been described in Samples collected utilising the newly developed method enabled separate investigation of the two operations with the information collected during detailed sampling surveys carried out on a Babcock-Hitachi 10E10 mill in an Australian power plant processing high-ash bituminous thermal coal ( Samples collected from the mill during five sampling surveys were air dried for moisture determination, analysed for size from 90 Construction of a multi-component model for VSMs required a number of intermediate data analysis and model development stages as summarised in the following sections. Major findings from simulation studies are also detailed and discussed. Evaluation of ash content data corresponding to the tested density fractions yielded a simple equation relating these two parameters to each other as given in Eq. A multi-component appearance function (MCAF) has been developed for describing the breakage characteristics of the mill feed coal samples broken in particle beds under compression. The smallest size fraction tested was 4 Eq. The t The flow rates, particle size distributions and size-by-size ash contents of the streams entering and leaving the mill body and separator classifiers (C The ash content estimates for some sizes of separator and mill body reject streams from The resulting ash distribution by size presented in The gross power drawn by the mill was found to be linearly related to the ratio of mass flow rates of coal to air; and, an estimate of no load power (118.8 In order to calculate selection function for each surveyed condition, t The selection functions estimated with gross ECS ( The density of the daughter particles after breakage was assumed to be equal to the density of the mother particle based on observations of non-preferential breakage for this specific coal ( The conventional way of expressing the efficiency of a physical separation is to utilise either the particle size (e.g. efficiency curve for classifiers) or density (e.g. partition curves for coal preparation plants). However, the physical separation process in a pneumatic classifier could be described better by plotting the efficiency values against a parameter that includes both the size and density of particles, e.g. settling velocity. The settling velocity of particles corresponding to each size fraction and density bin combination was conveniently calculated using the The size-by-size density fractioning of the samples around the classification regions for Survey 1 enabled construction of size-by-size density distribution of particles in each stream which is readily converted to settling velocity (aerodynamic size) for each size and density fraction. The mass split to fines streams for mill body and separator classifiers is illustrated in The aerodynamic classification function is a more detailed relationship than conventional methods of describing classification and is required for a complete multi-component simulation model, i.e. it provides the link between the comminution and classification models both in terms of particle size and density. Since the density fractioning data for the streams around the classifiers are only available for Survey 1, it was not possible to calculate aerodynamic classification function using experimental density and size data for other surveys and directly relate the model parameters to the operational variables; e.g. air flow. However, model parameters used in simulation did show a relation with air flow rate (see A simulation programme incorporating multi-component matrix comminution and classifier models, interlinked with aerodynamic size, have been coded in Matlab as interacting models and were tested together as a closed circuit comminution–classification machine. A multi-dimensional coal feed flow rate grouped in root two ratio size fractions each with four density bins (< The specific comminution energy corresponding to each survey conditions were also calculated and used together with size and density bins to construct MCAF matrices in a similar manner to open circuit (single pass) calculations ( The classification operations at the mill rejects, mill body and separator classifiers (C The simulator starts the first iteration with input feed as a size by density matrix and computes the breakage product for each size and density bin of the coal feed with the MCAF and selection matrices. The breakage (ball) product is split into two streams at the mill reject classifier (C Following the first simulation pass, the feed vectors to the comminution model are constructed by summing the flowrates in each corresponding size and density bins of the coal feed, mill body reject and separator reject streams. The simulator then uses the same algorithm as in the first run to calculate the new distributions for the product, reject and re-circulating streams of the mill. The iterative calculation is terminated when the flow rate of the streams leaving the mill differ from the coal feed flow rate no more than the allowed convergence value of 10 The parameters describing the comminution and classification models were estimated by simple manual adjustment targeting to achieve good agreement with the experimental data and are summarised in The parameters reported in The parameter s calculated for mill rejects classifier in Survey 2 is not consistent with other surveys since, the amount of material rejected from the mill in Surveys 1, 3, 4 and 5 are negligible (< The mass balanced flowrates for each flow in the model structure are compared with simulation results in The particle size distributions were calculated by summing flow rates across the density bins for each size and proportioning to the total flow rate. The simulation results compared with mass balanced particle size distributions and flow rates within the mill for Survey 1 are illustrated in The behaviour of different components and composite particles was investigated utilising the density distribution in some size intervals calculated from the flow rates of material in each density bin. The results obtained from simulation are illustrated in The density distributions in 5.6 Density distributions at finer sizes, reported in The density distributions were converted to ash content distributions for each size fraction in each stream calculated by the simulator using Eq. The ash content was found to decrease with increasing size for all the streams in the mill up to about 10 Common sets of values for exponent term (s) and the by-pass value (E The parameters defining the selection function, x′ and t in Eq. The comminution model has been combined with the classification models incorporating the effects of feed size, coal feed ash distribution, air flow rate and power drawn by the mill. Both models utilise the size-by-size density distribution of the coal streams; while only one survey had corresponding size by density information, it has been possible to adjust the simulation models to agree with the available data size and ash data for the remaining surveys. The predictions for the particle size distributions, flow rates and density distributions in the streams in the mill and its products by the simulator have been demonstrated. The simulator utilises an efficiency curve model based on settling velocity of particles for the three classifiers to distinguish difference in behaviour of the components and composites due to variable density. The matrix comminution model works with a selection function that is only dependent on size and a three dimensional appearance function that is size, density and energy dependent to account for the differences in breakage of components and composite particles. It is shown that the models are capable of successfully reproducing the particle size distributions and the flow rates for all the streams that are either sampled or calculated by mass balance. The density and ash measurements are more difficult; but, the agreement of the models to these is considered satisfactory. While the number of tests was severely limited by time and operational requirements, it has been possible to determine the relations between operating variables and the model parameters so that predictions can be made. Once the feed has been characterised, the predictions can be used to investigate mill performance for a range of different operational requirements.  coefficients ore dependent model parameters ball feed dimensionless diameter and velocity, respectively size fractions in feed and product breakage and selection functions in comminution model specific comminution energy (kWh/t) classification efficiency asymptote values for E kilowatts multi-component appearance function density of pure coal, mineral matter and composite particles, respectively (g/cm selection exponent and size, respectively tonnes of material in ball feed and coal feed, respectively the cumulative percent passing the one tenth of the geometric mean of the tested size range settling velocity and u critical size for ash content distribution (mm) i top size of the tested size fraction (mm) Authors thank the financial support by