The relevant adsorption of cis-[Pt(NH3)2(P2O7)]2− (phosphaplatin) on hydroxyapatite nanocrystals (nHAP) was observed and studied in water suspension. Phosphaplatin cytotoxicity, which is very low for HeLa, MCF-7 and HS-5 cell lines could be enhanced, reaching that of cisplatin, by interaction with solid nHAP. This effect stems from nHAP ability to catalyze the phosphaplatin hydrolysis, producing the same hydrolytic species responsible for cisplatin antitumor activity.After discovery of its antitumor activity, the Bose et al. discovered a new class of platinum based antitumor active molecules with two To date, a lot of research activity is directed to the development of new strategies for the controlled delivery of drugs. This aspect is particularly critical in the case of antitumor drugs, where therapeutic and toxic doses are generally similar, causing severe side effects. In this context, the use of nanoparticles has recently been proposed for their peculiar drug releasing properties In the family of The effective adsorption of MTT cytotoxicity tests on HeLa, MCF-7 and HS-5 cells, in the 24–72 MTT cytotoxicity tests were used to evaluate the effects of administration to cultured cells (of different origin and known for their differential sensitivity to platinum complexes) of preparations containing both The effect of a constant amount of It should be noted that the optimum The cytotoxicity level of The results of the MTT tests performed on the The time-course analysis at 10 The results of the MTT tests performed on the MCF-7 The time-course analysis at 10 The results of the MTT test performed on the HS-5 cell line ( The time-course analysis at 10 μM ( Altogether, our results confirm that Although the sole nHAP seems able to enhance cell growth, the increased cytotoxicity of In an effort to rationalize the previous findings, we comparatively followed the evolution of the In neutral water the Previous results suggest the possible use of a novel therapeutic approach based on nHAP acting as a trigger to activate The here reported adsorption tests of All solvents and reagents, except otherwise stated, were purchased from Aldrich Chemical Company and used as received. Plate shaped hydroxyapatite nanocrystals, were synthesized according to a previously published method The NMR spectra were recorded on a Bruker Avance DPX 600 or 400, at 300 For the determination of platinum concentration, each sample was previously heat treated with 0.5 HeLa (human epithelial carcinoma) and MCF-7 (human breast adenocarcinoma) cells were maintained in DMEM (Gibco — Life Technologies) medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and antibiotics (50 The cytotoxicity of nHAP, platinum complexes and nHAP/platinum complexes mixtures were measured by MTT assays [Sigma Aldrich: 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide]. Briefly, cells were seeded in 96-well plates (1 Significant differences (p We were able to identify, by A mother solution of Na We gratefully acknowledge Prof. G. Natile (University of Bary, Italy) for active discussion. The University of Salento (Italy), the PON 254/Ric. Potenziamento del “