Respirable coal dust particles range from one nanometer to ten micron. Their Reynolds number (defined as 
                     
                        R
                        
                        =
                        
                        
                           
                              dv
                           
                           σ
                        
                     
                   , where, d is the particle diameter; v is the settling velocity in air, and σ is the kinematic viscosity of air) is typically less than one and mean free path, l on the order of 10-5 cm. Particle motions when their radius, r, is much larger, equal to, or much smaller than l are individually addressed. Settling velocity is defined and mathematically derived. Respirable dust is divided into settling and nonsettling portions. Particles less than 0.5 micron (unit density) do not settle down and remain afloat. The aerodynamic shape factor, defined as the ratio of projected diameter to Stoke's diameter, was determined to be 1.42 on an average for fine coal particles. The mass distribution of coal particles and experimental procedures for its determination are discussed. Anthracite appears to have more fine dust (less than 1 micron) than lower rank coals. It leads to about 1.43 times higher rate of deposition in the lungs, increasing the chances of coal worker's pneumoconiosis (CWP). Finally, the chemical composition of respirable dust is discussed. Silica and iron sulfate appear to be more significant than coal dust itself in the growth of CWP.Settling Velocity of Small Particles Due to Gravity (Stoke's Formula) Derivation of Settling Velocity When r ≫ ℓ Settling Velocity When r ≪ ℓ Settling Velocity When r ≈ ℓ Aerodynamic Shape Factor for Dust Particles NonSettling Fraction of Respirable Dust Size Distribution of Respirable Dust Particles Normal Distribution The Log Normal Distribution The Rosin–Rammler Distribution Determination of Mass Distribution for Fine Coal Dust Particles Experimental Procedure for Mass Distribution Measurement Calculation of Stoke's Diameter for a Given Time, t Chemical Composition of Respirable Coal Dust References Although fine dust particles behave like gases, there are significant differences that warrant a separate treatment. Respirable dust particles range from 10 Fine particles: These particles have an aerodynamic diameter of 10 Stoke's diameter: It is the diameter of a spherical particle of the same density and the same settling velocity as the nonspherical particle. Aerodynamic diameter: It is equal to the diameter of a sphere of unit density that has the same settling velocity as the “Stoke's diameter” of the particle with a specific gravity of Settling velocity: It is the displacement of a particle under gravity per second. It will be derived and discussed later. Diffusivity: Small particles have a diffusivity coefficient like gases. It is given by D in the equation Displacement by Brownian motion: Fine dust particles have a random Brownian motion too. The finer the size of a particle, the greater the Brownian displacement. Thus, below a certain size (typically around 0.5 Relaxation time, (T): Each particle has a characteristic “relaxation time”, T, that has a unit of time (s). The settling velocity, v Mean free path: It is the average distance travelled by a moving particle between successive impacts (collisions) that modify its direction or energy or other particle properties. Particle Reynolds number: It is defined as R, where These characteristics of particles ranging from 10 It is to be noted that mean free path, When a small dust particle is floated in a medium such as air, it is pulled down by gravity, Fg, and the motion is resisted by the viscous force of the medium, Fm. The settling velocity, v Case 1. Case 2. Case 3. In all cases, the derivation of mathematical equation is based on the following assumptions: Incompressibility of the medium (air). Infinite extent of the medium (no boundary influence). Very small rate of movement. Constant rate of movement. Rigidity of particle (always true for solid particles). Absence of slipping at its surface. For a detailed discussion of the above factors, a reference can be made to Fuchs For a force balance, the rate of change of momentum, M′v equals force due to gravity, Fg, less resistance due to medium, Fm. Let the particle radius be r, particle density, Hence, Substituting for M′ and transposing, Let us call Hence, The constant settling velocity of the particle is called V Hence,  In this case, the resistance of the medium, Fm, is derived as The value of Settling velocities can be derived in the same manner as shown in Article 8.1.1. For a more rigorous analysis of Fm in Article 8.1.1, Cunningham  This is the most generalized estimate for Fm, and both estimates of Fm ( Most accepted values of A, Q, and b are 0.879, 0.23, and 2.61, respectively The term Fuchs The size of a respirable dust particle in the range 0.01–10 It is related to the Stoke's diameter of the particle by a term, “aerodynamic shape factor”. Thakur In an experiment, he measured the projected diameter of coal particles for given Stoke's diameters of 4.87, 3.40, 2.40, and 1.81 Statistical analysis of all data further showed that the variations in ASF were significant at 0.05 level of significance for both the Stoke's diameter and material type, including different ranks of coal Thakur Settling velocity for a particle was already derived in article 8.1. Brownian motion of particle suspended in air is given by Einstein Einstein defined, Fuchs Hence, for upper limit for nonsettling particle size, Rearranging, Assuming  Substituting the value of B and squaring both sides in An example: Using  K g Hence, To confirm this value from other published data shown in The diameter of particle that has the same velocity as settling velocity as the displacement by Brownian motion is 0.6 The fine particle universe consists of particles of different sizes. The number of particles, surface area of particles, or the mass (weight) of the particle associated with different sizes is called the number distribution, surface distribution, or mass distribution of the particles, respectively. It can be expressed as a frequency distribution or a cumulative distribution. In frequency distribution, the percent number or mass (frequency) associated with particle size is plotted on the y-axis against the size on the x-axis, respectively. In cumulative distribution, all frequencies below the particle x or above it are plotted against the particles size. Different particle universes follow different distributions. We will discuss only three distribution laws here. This is found to be most applicable to only particles created by chemical processes, such as condensation and precipitation. It usually does not represent well the size distribution of solid particles. Mathematically, The number of particles with a diameter between x The normal distribution has very limited application for particles created by broken solid materials. The number distribution of This distribution appears to fit many fine solid particles created by comminution (milling, grinding, crushing). Pulverized silica, clay, granite, limestone, and quartz yield size distributions that satisfactorily fit the log normal distribution Mathematically, it is obtained by replacing x in The number of particles between x For the mass (weight) distribution, weight fraction between x Broken coal behaves a bit differently than silica or limestone. The cumulative mass frequency of large or fine coal particles is best described as the Rosin–Rammler (RR) distribution Let us consider the distribution of broken coal obtained by sieves. Calling the quantity (in percentage) which passes the sieve, that is, the weight percentages of particles smaller than the sieve opening, Y, and the quantity retained on the sieve, that is percentage by weight of particles bigger than the sieve opening, R, we obtain by plotting either Y or R against the particle size a straight line called the “fineness characteristic curve” of the material. Y Integrating Taking the log to the base, we have: Hence a plot of A smaller value of n means a flatter gradient of mass distribution and hence a higher proportion of mass in finer sizes. This has a serious health implication. Using the lung deposition curve of Although a rigorous quantitative estimate of percentage deposition of dust in lungs is not feasible for lack of lung deposition efficiency values for particles below 0.5 Thus for the same level of respirable dust in the mine air, a mine worker in an anthracite mine will receive a dust dose that is 1.43 times higher than that of a mine worker in a high-volatile bituminous coal mine. This indicates that anthracite miner's lungs will be damaged faster and partially explains why the rate of CWP is globally higher in anthracite mines. There are other reasons (chemical composition) for this anomaly that will be discussed later in the chapter. In recent years, many sophisticated instruments have appeared in the market that measure the number or the surface area of particles (such as light scattering instruments), but they fail to produce true mass distribution of the fine respirable dusts. Instruments that measure the electrical conductivity claim to measure the volume of the particles but do not yield a true mass distribution. The only reliable device that gives good mass distribution is the Andreasen pipette The apparatus consists of a graduated cylinder, w; with a stopper, L, that has a hole in it; a pipette, P, that can hold 10 The following procedure was followed and is recommended for such work The density of the coal dust (−37 Sufficient dust was weighed out so that on dilution with 550 A suspension of the weighed coal sample was made in 100 The suspension was next transferred to the cylinder and fluid volume was made up to the 20 The stopper, L, was inserted, and the apparatus was insulated with glass wool. About 20 The small vent in the stopper was closed with a finger, and the apparatus was shaken for 2 A clock was started as soon as the shaking was stopped, and the apparatus was put on a firm stand. The first sample was taken immediately by drawing 10 The sample was drained into a preweighed aluminum container and dried in an oven at 105 Subsequent samples were withdrawn at precalculated intervals to have experimental data uniformly spread over the range 0–37 Settling velocity was earlier calculated in v Hence, The r values for each time interval, t, was calculated for plotting on an RR graph. The weight of each successive sample was expressed as a percentage of the first sample that gave the cumulative mass (weight) frequencies. The results were plotted on an RR graph as shown in  It is clear from   The submicron (most dust particles found in human lungs) fraction of dust from various coal types are as follows: Lignite is mostly mined by surface mining and is not of concern for CWP. Coal seams are not all coal; it also contains rock bands in it. Besides, the roof and floor are also mined to a little extent with coal. Calcium carbonate dust is profusely used in mines to neutralize coal dust. Diesel engines, if used, add diesel particulate matter to respirable coal dust. The resulting coal dust, therefore, contains many minerals and elements in small proportions besides carbon.  As far as the growth of CWP is concerned, only a few elements, besides carbon, play an important role; namely silicon and iron. Silica may play the most important role. It occurs both as an oxide and in the crystalline form. Trydimite and cristobalite forms of crystalline silica are more fibrogenic than alpha quartz. Most coal seams contain less than 2% silica, but the coal mine respirable dust in US and British mines contain 4%–5% silica The role of iron sulfate in coal dust–induced lung injury and injury owing to iron to proteins in human and rat alveolar microphages have been investigated Finally, one needs to consider the role of free radicals on the respirable dust particles in the growth of CWP