Background
                  This injury has not been reported previously in the thoracic spine. All previous open fracture dislocations of the spine have been reported in the lumbosacral spine with three posterior and two anterior dislocations.
               
                  Purpose
                  To describe the treatment of an open thoracic fracture dislocation with primary open reduction, posterior stabilization, and fusion.
               
                  Study design
                  Case report.
               
                  Methods
                  A 25-year-old male pedestrian was struck by a car sustaining an open fracture dislocation of T8 on T9 with complete transection of the spinal cord. The accident resulted in complete paralysis of both lower extremities, a paraspinal hematoma from T4 to T12, and bilateral pneumothoracies. After wound irrigation and debridement, an open posterior reduction and stabilization was completed. The wound was closed primarily.
               
                  Results
                  Two years after surgery, there was a solid fusion and no evidence of infection. The patient has persistent paralysis of both lower extremities.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Open thoracic spinal fracture dislocations can be effectively treated with primary open reduction and fusion with instrumentation.Open fracture dislocations of the spine are extremely rare injuries, and few reported cases are found in the literature A 25-year-old male pedestrian was struck from behind by a car and sustained an open fracture dislocation of T8 on T9 with complete transection of the spinal cord. The accident resulted in complete paralysis of both lower extremities, a paraspinal hematoma from T4 to T12, and bilateral pneumothoracies. After the accident, the patient was carried into the emergency room by a friend where he was presented to the triage desk. Subsequently, he was evaluated according to Advanced Trauma Life Support protocol, and his injuries were identified formally. Throughout his evaluation, the patient remained hemodynamically stable and was cleared for operative management by the trauma service ( In surgery, the patient was positioned supine, and general endotracheal anesthesia was administered. A complete series of X-rays was then completed to assist in surgical planning. Using a Jackson table, the patient was positioned prone, and the posterior thorax was prepared and draped sterilely. An ellipse of traumatized skin was removed with the accompanying subcutaneous tissue to the level of the deep fascia, and the incision was extended distally into the lumbar spine. The posterior elements were then exposed from T7 to T12, and the T8–T9 fracture dislocation was identified. At this level, there was extensive comminution through the posterior elements, but the facet dislocation evident on presentation had been reduced during surgical positioning. Two 5.5 mm×40 mm pedicle screws were placed at T7, and 6.25 mm×40 mm pedicle screws were placed bilaterally in T8, T10, and T11. A 6.25 mm×40 mm pedicle screw was placed unilaterally at T9 because comminution prevented instrumentation of the left pedicle. Spinal rods were then contoured and placed into the polyaxial pedicle screws, and the locking mechanism was applied and tightened. To augment the stabilization, 30 mL of bone marrow was aspirated from the iliac crest and mixed with Healos bone graft substitute (DePuy Spine, Raynham, MA, USA). The resulting mixture was introduced into the decorticated lateral gutters from T7 to T11. A thorough irrigation and debridement was completed, and the wound was closed primarily in layers. The distal extent of the surgical wound was extended to allow for a tension-free wound closure ( Postoperatively, the patient was transferred to the surgical intensive care unit where a spinal cord injury steroid protocol was implemented for 24 hours. For antibiotic prophylaxis of the open fracture dislocation, the patient received cefazolin for 72 hours and gentamicin for 24 hours. On postoperative day 4, the patient was transferred to the floor where he was fitted with a thoracolumbosacral orthosis, and acute spinal cord rehabilitation was initiated. The patient was discharged 11 weeks after admission. Two years after his injury, he continues to have complete paralysis of both lower extremities but performs his own activities of daily living, including transfers, with minimal assistance and translocates using a wheelchair. He has had no wound complications or signs of deep infection at the site of his open fracture dislocation ( Prior case reports have shown that extreme trauma can result in open anterior or posterior lumbosacral fracture dislocations In this case, a pedestrian struck by a car sustained an open fracture dislocation of the thoracic spine, an event not reported previously. Definitive management at the time of presentation with thorough irrigation and debridement followed by primary posterior stabilization resulted in a successful outcome without complication. This approach is supported by similar reports in the lumbosacral spine. However, the success of this case reflects the importance of early and complete wound management. In light of the initial degree of contamination, after the irrigation and debridement, it was elected to proceed with an instrumented fusion using a synthetic bone graft substitute. Had the initial wound been prohibitive or if the debridement was less than complete, staged management would have been necessary. With this in mind, the rarely seen open fracture dislocations of the thoracic and lumbosacral spine can be successfully treated with appropriate wound management at the time of presentation followed by posterior stabilization and fusion.