This paper presents the investigation on the local bond stress-slip behaviour of lightweight oil palm shell concrete (OPSC). The bond properties of the OPSC specimen with varying reinforcing bar diameters (12 and 16mm), concrete cover sizes (50, 75 and 100mm) and compressive strengths (25 and 35MPa) were explored. A concrete cover size to reinforcing bar diameter (C/D) ratio of more than 4.17 resulted in pull-out failure while the ratio of 3.13 caused splitting cracks in the OPSC specimens. The reinforcing bar diameter, concrete cover size and compressive strength affected the normalized bond strength, provided that the splitting failure occurred in the concrete specimens. The proposed bond model for splitting failure incorporating the C/D ratio used in the closed-form solution for prediction of the serviceability crack width was found to give good estimation of the experimental results obtained from the full-scale beam tests.The bond between the reinforcing bar and the surrounding concrete, the effectiveness of which depends on the transfer mechanisms at the interface, is crucial for the structural performance of reinforced concrete (RC) members. The most effective means of achieving a bond is through the use of ribbed reinforcing bars, which have a large deformation pattern rolled onto the surface. Three main components contribute to the bond between the reinforcing bar and the concrete – shear stress due to chemical adhesion between the reinforcing bar and the concrete, frictional forces between the reinforcing bar and the concrete at the rib interface, and the mechanical anchorage or bearing of the rib against the concrete surface The bond behaviour has a significant influence on tension stiffening since it controls the ability of the reinforcement to transfer tensile stresses to the concrete In recent research by the authors on utilizing waste oil palm shell (OPS) as lightweight aggregate to produce lightweight OPS concrete (OPSC), preliminary investigation of the bond properties revealed that the bond strength of OPSC was generally higher compared to conventional normal weight concrete (NWC) with similar compressive strength. For example, the maximum bond stress obtained from a well confined specimen was in the order of In most cases, the bond pull-out failure is ideal for achieving the maximum capacity of the bond strength between the reinforcing bar and the concrete. However, in cases where bond-splitting failure occurs, the use of bond properties obtained from well-confined specimens may grossly overestimate bond strengths and hence anchorage capacities In the past, researchers carried out numerous studies on the effects of concrete cover and reinforcing bar diameter since both determine the C/D ratio, and, consequently, the confinement effect. Generally, the bond strength decreases with larger diameter reinforcing bars A bond equation incorporating the confinement effect could provide a safer design basis for engineers in dealing with splitting failures as well as significantly enhance the prediction of the cracking behaviour of RC members using numerical models. This is particularly important in the case of LWC, such as OPSC, where little research work had been done in the past to address such an issue. Therefore, in this research, the bond behaviour of lightweight OPSC incorporating the effects of three different concrete cover sizes, two reinforcing bar diameters and two concrete compressive strength grades was investigated. The bond equation proposed is then used in the moment-rotation analysis to obtain predicted cracking behaviour through closed-form solutions, and compared to that obtained from the experimental results from testing full-scaled RC beams to verify its usability. The binder material used in this study consisted of ordinary Portland cement (OPC) and ground granulated blast furnace slag (GGBS) at a ratio of 4:1 by mass. The OPC used was of grade 42.5 with a specific gravity and surface area of 3.10 and 3520 Crushed OPS and manufactured sand were used as coarse and fine aggregates, respectively. The crushed OPS used was between 2.36 and 9 Potable water, which was free from impurities and contaminants, was used for the concrete mixes. A polycarboxylate-ether based superplasticiser (SP) was added to facilitate the workability of the fresh concrete. High yield ribbed steel reinforcing bar of grade 500 Two mix proportions were adopted to produce OPSC with two different cube compressive strength classes, namely, grade 25 and 35 In this study, the variables chosen were the size of concrete cover and reinforcing bar diameter in OPSC with two different compressive strength classes of 25 and 35 The compressive strength test was carried out on 100 Based on modifications to RILEM 7-II-128, the bond test was carried out on the concrete specimens using the pull-out test, as illustrated in The flexural test was carried out on duplicates of reinforced OPSC beams with a total tension reinforcement area of 452 The mean compressive and splitting tensile strength results for all mixes are presented in In the study, all the prism specimens exhibited pull-out failure except specimens PO1-b-50 and PO2-b-50; splitting cracks were observed on the sides of the OPSC specimens, as shown in Assuming uniform stress distribution, the bond strength can be determined as follows: Generally, the bond strength of OPSC from PO1 series exhibiting pull-out failure was about 17.4 to 19.6 As shown in In the past, researchers reported that the bond strength was higher when the reinforcing bar embedded in the concrete was smaller As described in previous sections, since both the concrete cover size and reinforcing bar diameter influenced the bond strength of the OPSC, it is essential to use the C/D ratio to fully ascertain the confinement effect of concrete on the bond strength. In CEB-FIP As expected, when comparing OPSC with two different compressive strength grades, it was found that the OPSC of the PO1 series exhibited a higher bond strength compared to the corresponding specimens of the PO2 series ( In order to eliminate the effect and variation of compressive strength, the bond strength normalized by the compressive strength is usually adopted. The normalized bond strength is determined from the following equation In general, when the normalized strength is considered, the effect of the compressive strength grade is less prevailing. For the OPSC specimens with pull-out failure, the normalized bond strength was found to be about 3.5 with a maximum deviation of 15%, which agrees well with the normalized bond strength reported in previous research work According to the results given in As shown in For the splitting bond failure, five stages could be observed. The first stage is similar to the pull-out failure where there was an initial linear relationship between the bond stress and slip. Then, in the second stage, upon formation of internal cracks, similar to the pull-out failure mode, the bond stress-slip curve became non-linear. However, for the splitting failure of the OPSC specimen in this study, the stiffness of this non-linear curve was much lower compared to that observed for the pull-out failure and resulted in the increase of slip at a higher rate. The rapid propagation of the internal cracks to the concrete surface and when the tensile strength of the concrete was exceeded, splitting cracks were formed. Hence, the bond strength of the specimen, as observed in For a C/D ratio of above 4.17 in which pull-out failure occurred, Eqs. The values of 3.5 taken for τ In the case of splitting failure of concrete specimens, since the C/D ratio has a great influence on the bond strength, researchers in the past have incorporated the C/D ratio in the bond strength equations Therefore, based on the experimental results found in this investigation on OPSC, the parameter α Based on the moment-rotation approach, Visintin and Oehlers The moment-crack width relationships were obtained through testing of the OPSC beams for flexure. The crack widths were measured at the mid-span of the beams at the bottom soffit during the serviceability stage. The RC beams failed in typical flexural failure mode due to the under-reinforced design of the RC beams and no shear cracks were observed as sufficient shear reinforcement were provided in the shear span of the RC beams. As shown in both Based on the investigation of the bond properties of OPSC carried out in this study, the following conclusions can be drawn: OPSC specimens with C/D ratio of 3.13 exhibited splitting bond failure where the OPSC specimens with C/D ratio exceeding 4.17 exhibited pull-out failure. The bond strength of OPSC specimens with splitting failure was about 50% lower compared to the corresponding OPSC specimens with pull-out failure. The use of smaller reinforcing diameter and larger concrete cover size gave higher bond strength to the bond specimens with splitting failure mode due to the additional confinement effects provided. If pull-out failure mode occurred, the reinforcing bar diameter and concrete cover size had little influence on the bond strength of OPSC. OPSC specimen with higher compressive strength had higher bond strength but no significant effect was observed on the normalized bond strength. Bond stress-slip relationships for pull-out failure and splitting failures were proposed for OPSC and gave good match to the experimental bond stress-slip curves obtained. Closed-form solution incorporating bond-splitting failure was found to give a good prediction of the serviceability crack widths observed experimentally through full-scale RC beam tests. In short, this study has presented a proposed general bond stress-slip relationship of OPSC for specimens with pull-out (C/D ratio exceeding 4.17) and splitting failures (C/D ratio of 3.13), which gives good match to the experimental findings as well as useful prediction of serviceability crack widths of RC beams. This research work was funded by the