Background
                  Several fixation methods may be used for displaced lateral malleolar fractures. We aimed to compare clinical and radiologic outcomes associated with use of locking one third tubular plate vs. anatomical distal fibula locking plate in lateral malleolar fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  A total of 62 orthopedic patients operated for lateral malleolus fracture were included in this retrospective study. Patients were divided into two groups regarding the plate used for fixation as locking one third tubular plate (group I; n=37) and locking anatomical distal fibula plate (group II; n=25). Data on Danis–Weber ankle fracture classification (Type A, Type B), duration of follow up, clinical outcome [ankle range of motion (ROM), American Orthopaedic Foot & Ankle Society (AOFAS) score], radiological outcomes (adequacy of reduction, loss of alignment), time to fracture healing and complications were recorded in study groups.
               
                  Results
                  No significant difference was noted between groups in terms of AOFAS score [87.0 (73–100) vs. 85.0 (71–100), respectively (p=0.339)] and no patients had severe restriction in sagittal and hindfoot motion in both groups. The two groups showed similar healing time [9.0 (7–13) weeks vs. 10.0 (8–13) weeks, respectively (p=0.355)] and complication rate [0.0% vs. 4.0%, respectively (p=0.403)].
               
                  Conclusions
                  This study revealed no significant difference between use of locking one third tubular plate and locking anatomical distal fibula plate in lateral malleolar fixation, in terms of clinical and radiological outcomes, complication rates and fracture healing time.Ankle fractures are among the most common injuries while distal fibular fractures comprise the most common type of ankle fractures that usually occur in a relative young and active population There are several fixation methods for lateral malleolar fractures as plate fixation via one-third tubular plate, dynamic compression plate and locking plate with or without an independent lag screw The present study was therefore designed to compare clinical and radiologic outcomes associated with use of locking one third tubular plate vs. locking anatomical distal fibula plate in lateral malleolar fixation. Patients that were operated in our hospital for ankle fractures between 2013 and 2016 were analyzed retrospectively in the study. A total of 139 patients were operated for ankle fractures in this time period. Patients with bimalleolar/trimalleolar fracture (n Patients were divided into two groups based on locking plate fixation technique including locking one third tubular plate (group I; n Data on Danis–Weber ankle fracture classification (Type A, Type B), use of an interfragmentary screw, duration of follow up, complications and time to fracture healing were recorded for all patients. Patients were operated with a pneumatic tourniquet in supine position. All patients were examined for possible sydesmotic injuries during the surgery with external rotation stress test under fluoroscopy; widening more than 5 A short leg cast was applied for soft tissue control on the first 3 days. After 3 Clinical outcome was assessed by both the ankle range of motion (ROM) from the full extension to full flexion and by American Orthopedic Foot & Ankle Society (AOFAS) clinical scoring system Complications (superficial infection, deep infection, loss of reduction, nerve injury etc.) were recorded during the inpatient period and every follow-up time point. Statistical analysis was evaluated with Statistical Package for Social Sciences (IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, version 21 New York, USA). Categorical variables are summarized as frequencies and percentages; continuous variables are summarized with median and minimum/maximum values. Comparison of categorical variables in study groups were performed by chi-square and Fisher’s exact tests. Due to non-normal distribution patterns of continuous variables, group comparisons were done by Mann Whitney U test. Type 1 error level was set 5%. p No significant difference was observed between groups in terms of age [group I: 44.0 (21–59) and group II: 40.0 (23–58) years] and Danis–Weber ankle fracture classification category (Type A in 51.4% in group I and 48.0% in group II) ( No significant difference was noted between the two groups in terms of median (min-max) values for AOFAS score [87.0 (73–100) vs. 85.0 (71–100), respectively (p Two groups showed similar healing time [9.0 (7–13) weeks vs. 10.0 (8–13) weeks] and complication rate (0.0% vs. 4.0%, respectively). Total screws used for plate fixation was significantly higher in group II [6 (4–9) vs. 7 (5–9) in group I and II respectively, p Follow-up duration was 35.0 (28–43) months in group I while 29.0 (27.0–30.0) months in group II. Follow-up duration of group I was found significantly higher (p Our findings revealed no significant difference between use of locking one third tubular plate and anatomical distal fibula locking plate in treatment of displaced lateral malleolar fractures regarding clinical and radiological outcomes, complication rates and fracture healing time. Alongside similar AOFAS scores between two techniques indicate an overall favorable outcome in terms of pain, function, gait and alignment Based on no superiority of one locking plate technique to the other in terms of AOFAS scores, ankle ROM, alignment, healing time, and complication, our findings indicate similar efficacy of locking one third tubular plate and anatomical distal fibula locking plate in lateral malleolar fixation. Treatment of lateral malleolar fractures with an anatomical plate will increase the cost of treatment as a result of higher price of the plate and more screws used as demonstrated in this study. In consideration of these findings; anatomical plates must be reserved for further distal fractures with comminution that has limited place available for distal screw insertion to gain a secure fixation. Further studies are needed to find out the exact indications for using the anatomical locking malleolar plates. Locked plating is considered to provide a low profile but stiffer screw-plate construct and increased rigidity of the implant and a higher failure torque to avoid screw loosening and subsequent pullout with poor bone quality Although non-locking vs. locking plate systems have been investigated in several studies, along with comparisons between other types of distal fibula locking plate techniques, to our knowledge no data are available in literature regarding the comparison of locking one-third tubular and anatomical distal fibula locking plates specifically in lateral malleolus fixation. In an analysis of three plate systems for lateral malleolar fixation by Huang et al., when compared with one-third tubular plate, locking compression (LCP) distal fibula plate was reported to be associated with higher functional scores in patients with Weber A fracture, while LCP metaphyseal plate had higher functional scores and less healing time regardless of the type of fracture Biomechanical comparison of four different lateral plates constructs for distal fibula fractures by Eckel et al. revealed no significant difference with use of a standard one-third tubular plate with interfragmentary lag screw, a LCP locking plate with lag screw, a low-profile locking plate with lag screw, or a non-locking plate Increased number of used screws in the anatomical distal fibula locking plate than locking one-third tubular plate group in our study seems consistent with wider design of fibular locking plate than one-third tubular plate The treatment cost varies between two plates as locked anatomical plates have higher cost when compared to tubular ones. As two distal locking screws were reported to provide adequate biomechanical stability even for osteoporotic distal fibular fractures Lack of syndesmotic injuries may be a limitation of this study. Anatomical plates; that allow more screws, may have a major superiority over tubular plates that may change clinical outcomes. There are several methods to identify syndesmotic injuries during surgery reported before In conclusion, this study demonstrated that locking one-third tubular plates provide similar clinical and radiological outcomes with anatomical distal fibula locking plate and reduce treatment cost thus must be considered when treating displaced lateral malleolar fractures. Authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. None.