The transverse rupture strength (TRS) of WC–Co composites is often loosely viewed as an equivalent of “toughness” which increases as hardness decreases in the industry. The results of this study, conducted using a controlled group of WC–Co samples with consistent TRS values, suggest a different correlation between the TRS and hardness of WC–Co composites. It was shown that TRS is closely related to the hardness and facture toughness. Within a hardness range of 800<Hv<1500kg/mm2, TRS appears to first increase and then decrease as the hardness increases. It reaches a peak value at Hv≈1300kg/mm2. While in the past TRS of WC–Co has been used as a indicator of porosities of WC–Co materials, the result of this study is understood on the basis that these samples are porosity-free because most products of WC–Co today contains very little (if any) porosity owing to modern advances in processing technologies. When the effect of porosity is negligible, TRS is determined by intrinsic mechanical properties which are dependent of microstructure and compositions. The relationship between TRS and hardness and the fracture toughness is explained by a qualitative model based on the work hardening and flow stress of the cobalt binder phase.One of the most frequently used mechanical properties of cemented tungsten carbide (WC–Co) composites is their transverse rupture strength (TRS) Secondly, because of its sensitivity to pores and other defects, TRS is often also viewed as a measure of “toughness” by application engineers as well as metallurgical engineers. When a WC–Co composite contains significant porosity, the strong correlation between its TRS and the fracture toughness is easily understood. The pores are viewed as existing defects, of which the critical size is related to critical stress and the fracture toughness by A notion that has historically been quoted by application engineers in the industry is that TRS is inversely proportional to hardness of WC–Co materials. TRS increases when hardness decreases within a range and this trend plateaus when Hv This study examines interrelationships between TRS, hardness, and fracture toughness using a controlled group of samples with varying cobalt content and grain sizes. The relationships between the TRS, hardness, and fracture toughness are analyzed based on the flow stress and work hardening of cobalt during 3-point bending tests. The dependence of TRS on microstructure parameters is inherent to its dependence on other intrinsic mechanical properties. To understand the interdependence of TRS, hardness, fracture toughness, and microstructure, it is important to isolate the effects of microstructure parameters and the intrinsic correlation between the hardness and TRS. A group of samples are designed with varying hardness levels. Each hardness level is achieved by varying grain sizes and cobalt content to obtain three different types of microstructures, namely low Co content-large grain size, medium Co-medium grain size, or high Co-fine grain size. By comparing data from these samples, it is possible to resolve the effects of microstructure and the effects of intrinsic mechanical properties such as hardness. If the effects of microstructure are dominant, then for each hardness level that will be examined, the TRS values will vary depend on their microstructure characteristics. If the effects of intrinsic mechanical properties are dominant, then there will be a clear correlation between TRS and hardness even when the same hardness level can be achieved via different microstructures. Samples were fabricated using laboratory ball milling method and sinter-HIP furnaces. Porosity is at minimum level with porosity ratings at A02B00C00 or less according to ASTM-B276-91. It is important to note once again that porosity has strong influence on TRS values of WC–Co composite. But when porosity levels are lower than detectable levels using conventional methods, it is reasonable to assume the TRS values will reflect the intrinsic mechanical properties of the material which is the focus of this study. TRS samples were prepared and measured following ASTM-B406-90. All samples were ground to dimensions using resin-bound diamond grinding wheels and surface grinders to achieve dimensional accuracy as well as good surface finishes. Surface roughness of a specimen must be  Using these data, we will first reaffirm the dependence of mechanical properties on microstructure parameters, namely cobalt content, grain size, and the mean free path (MFP) which have long been established in the field. Then, the focus of our analysis will be on the relationship between TRS and fracture toughness and hardness. Microstructure parameters included in this study include cobalt content, grain size, and the mean free path between WC grains.  In order to study the relationships of TRS with Hv and  It is noted that when Hv  Secondly, a new correlation is observed between TRS and Hv within the range of 900 It is noted here that the correlation as shown in It should also be noted that the correlation in The most significant result of this study is the correlation between TRS and Hv as illustrated in As stated earlier, TRS is the tensile stress at which a sample fails during a three-point bending test. It is essentially a “tensile strength” property that should be proportional to the tensile strength of the material. During an actual three-point bending test, a specimen would experience plastic deformation, crack initiation, and crack growth processes before fracture, even though the plastic deformation of WC–Co is usually small and difficult to detect when cobalt content is very low. Therefore, TRS is defined as the maximum flow stress during the deformation, crack initiation, and crack propagation processes before the specimen fractures. Yield strength of WC–Co composite can be given by the rule of mixture as In any conventional WC–Co composites, the dimension of cobalt phase between WC grains, which is measured by the mean free path (MFP), is in the order of less than 2–3 In Eq. Eq. First, the hardness of the composite is proportional to Since the hardness is inversely proportional to the cobalt content, the relationship between the term ( This model does not explain the data at Hv But if we view the fracture process during TRS testing as consisting of crack initiation and propagation processes and assume the ideal case when the effects of porosity is negligible, the crack initiation process will dominates when the hardness is very high and the fracture toughness is very low. Therefore the higher the hardness is, the higher the stress that is needed for crack initiation and hence the higher the TRS. The data and analysis of the present work demonstrate that the transverse rupture strength of WC–Co composites is directly related to intrinsic mechanical properties, namely hardness and fracture toughness, when the effects of porosity are negligible. TRS should not be used as a fracture toughness measure. The relationship between TRS and hardness is also not unidirectional, rather it is complex. Within a range of 800 The author acknowledges that this paper is partially based on a poster presentation at Euro PM96. The author is also grateful for many constructive comments and suggestions made by Professor Silvana Luyckx and Dr. Brian Roebuck. Several changes were made to the original manuscript based on their view points.