It has been demonstrated that laser induced breakdown spectrometry (LIBS) can be used as an alternative method for the determination of macro (P, K, Ca, Mg) and micronutrients (B, Fe, Cu, Mn, Zn) in pellets of plant materials. However, information is required regarding the sample preparation for plant analysis by LIBS. In this work, methods involving cryogenic grinding and planetary ball milling were evaluated for leaves comminution before pellets preparation. The particle sizes were associated to chemical sample properties such as fiber and cellulose contents, as well as to pellets porosity and density. The pellets were ablated at 30 different sites by applying 25 laser pulses per site (Nd:YAG@1064nm, 5ns, 10Hz, 25Jcm−2). The plasma emission collected by lenses was directed through an optical fiber towards a high resolution echelle spectrometer equipped with an ICCD. Delay time and integration time gate were fixed at 2.0 and 4.5μs, respectively. Experiments carried out with pellets of sugarcane, orange tree and soy leaves showed a significant effect of the plant species for choosing the most appropriate grinding conditions. By using ball milling with agate materials, 20min grinding for orange tree and soy, and 60min for sugarcane leaves led to particle size distributions generally lower than 75μm. Cryogenic grinding yielded similar particle size distributions after 10min for orange tree, 20min for soy and 30min for sugarcane leaves. There was up to 50% emission signal enhancement on LIBS measurements for most elements by improving particle size distribution and consequently the pellet porosity.The determination of macro (P, K, Ca and Mg) and micronutrients (B, Fe, Cu, Mn and Zn) in plant leaves is of key importance to evaluate the nutritional status of crops of economic interest and is commonly used for the detection of nutritional deficiencies, that may limit the production and/or quality of e.g. fruits, vegetables and cereals In general, the direct determination of essential elements in plant materials is carried out in leaves properly collected, and requires, at least, three sample preparation steps, namely cleaning (washing), drying and homogenization According to Markert Indeed, the choice of the grinding method generally depends on the following parameters Rossbach and Zeiller Both cryogenic grinding Arroyo et al. LIBS analysis of pellets of plant materials aiming at the determination of macro and micronutrients have been recently described The aim of this work was to evaluated sample preparation procedures for the comminution of leaves prior to pellet preparation for the determination of macro (P, K, Ca and Mg) and micronutrients (Fe, Cu, Mn, Zn and B) by LIBS. Cryogenic grinding and ball milling were investigated for sugarcane ( Experiments were carried out with a Q-switched Nd:YAG laser (Brilliant, Quantel, France) at 1064 Individual test samples (i.e. 15 A model ESA 3000 spectrometer (LLA Instruments GmbH, Germany) equipped with echelle optics and focal length of 25 The collection of leaves was carried out taking into account the agricultural recommendation for plant diagnosis. Leaves of orange tree, soy and sugarcane were washed separately with running tap water and further rinsed twice with distilled water and three times with ultrapure water Cryogenic grinding was performed in a cryogenic mill (Spex model 6800, USA) with a self-container liquid nitrogen bath. The pre-cooling time was 5 Planetary ball milling was carried out in a Retsch model PM 400 mill (Germany) which was furnished with four grinding agate jars (250 Pellets of ground leaves were prepared in a Spex model 3624B X-Press by transferring approximately 0.5 The determination of particle size distribution of the comminuted leaves was performed by low angle laser light scattering using an LS 13 320 Tornado Dry Powder System (Beckman Coulter, USA), according to the ISO guide 13320-1:1999. Pellets porosity was determined by using a mercury porosimeter (Aminco 5000 The morphological characteristics of the analyzed pellets (i.e. craters) were evaluated using a LEO scanning electron microscope (Stereoscan 440, United Kingdom). Pellets were covered with a thin Pt layer during 80 The crater volume on the pellet surface after laser ablation was determined with a Taylor Hobson Precision perfilometer (Formtracer SV C525, United Kingdom). The fiber, lignin and cellulose contents of the orange tree, soy, and sugarcane ground leaves (<600 In order to verify the potential contamination occurrence during the comminution procedures with planetary ball mill (i.e. agate devices) or cryogenic mill (polycarbonate tubes and stainless steel devices), all ground materials were microwave-assisted acid digested in triplicate and analyzed by radially viewed ICP OES (Vista RL, Varian, Australia) with the operational conditions described elsewhere It has been frequently mentioned that LIBS is a spectrochemical technique with a minimal or no sample preparation steps. However, in view of the inhomogeneous character of powdered materials, several drawbacks could be expected for quantitative analysis of plant materials The microheterogeneity of elements is an intrinsic characteristic of natural samples Pellets prepared with leaves after cryogenic grinding for 10, 20, 30, 40, and 50 The fiber, cellulose and lignin contents in plant leaves were determined in order to investigate the correlation between material composition and duration of the grinding step ( Initially, the planetary ball milling experiments with 250  On the other hand, by taken into account the presence of some elements of interest in the components of the grinding materials, experiments were also carried to evaluate the possibility of systematic errors due to contamination. Agate material is composed mainly by Si (99.9%) and, according to the manufacturer, Al, Na, Fe, K, Mn, Mg and Ca are also present in relatively low concentrations (≤0.02% m/m). In case of cryogenic grinding, the magnetic bar and the end-plugs are composed by stainless steel 440 The reproducibility of laser–sample interaction and, consequently, the repeatability of measurements depend on particle size used for pellet preparation. The particle size distribution and SEM images of craters produced by laser ablation in pellets prepared with particles of orange tree, soy and sugarcane leaves after ball milling and cryogenic grinding are shown in The SEM images and perfilometric analysis showed that pellets prepared with particles obtained by both grinding procedures presented similar crater morphologies, although slight differences were found among plant species. It was observed that leaves with lower fiber content such as from orange tree ( Although not shown, the smaller the particles the smaller the pellet porosity, and this could be another factor contributing for better crater uniformity. In this work, it was observed that porosity varies by varying the plant species and the grinding method. In spite of similar particle size profiles after comminution, only soy leaves by both cryogenic grinding and ball milling as well as sugarcane leaves with ball milling, presented approximately the same pellet porosity (16%). On the other hand, up to 31% porosity was found in pellets of sugarcane leaves and orange tree leaves after cryogenic grinding. This shows why precaution is recommended for LIBS calibration with different plant species, under the experimental conditions outlined in this contribution. Particle size is an intrinsic parameter that influences emission signal intensities in LIBS. Small particles reduce pellet porosity and may influence the ablation process and up to 50% emission signal enhancement on LIBS measurements were observed for most elements. Both planetary ball milling and cryogenic grinding presented good performances for comminuting knife mill ground leaves, allowing simultaneous grinding and homogenization of four independent samples, and can be recommended for pellets preparation for LIBS. The comminution time for getting similar and appropriate particle size distributions depends on the grinding process, on the plant specie and on fiber and cellulose contents. Data obtained herewith suggest that matrix effects can be minimized by using particles smaller than 75 Financial support and fellowships from