At present, heterogeneous and fine-grained masonry rubble can only be recycled at very low level. To overcome this limitation, the material was employed as feedstock for the production of lightweight aggregates in a thermal process similar to that used in the manufacture of expanded clay and expanded slate. To that end, the fundamental suitability of masonry rubble as a raw material was evaluated. Experiments were carried out which indicated that lightweight granules with defined, adjustable properties similar to those of natural-material-based aggregates could be manufactured from masonry rubble. Structural lightweight concretes produced with these secondary aggregates achieved comparable performance to lightweight concretes produced with conventional expanded clay. Lightweight recycled building material aggregates represent a product that hardly requires any primary resources in its manufacture. In principle, the technique also seems to be well suited for high-quality recycling of other mineral waste materials.At present, the mix of various wall construction materials, mortar, plaster, and further components that make up recycled masonry rubble cannot be adequately utilized. This results from the considerable heterogeneity of the material composition and the large proportion of fines. In In the future, strict closed-loop recycling laws and limited landfill capacity will prevent the disposal or application of these materials as fill or in the construction of landfills completely. In this context, a technology for the manufacture of lightweight aggregates from masonry rubble was developed as part of a joint research project. These lightweight construction aggregates are produced from mineral construction waste and can be employed in the manufacture of lightweight mortars and concretes. To date, lightweight aggregates have been primarily manufactured from natural resources. In areas with a volcanic history, that includes naturally occurring stone such as pumice, tuff, and lava. These materials are quarried and processed for use as lightweight aggregates for the manufacture of mortar and concrete. Other lightweight aggregates are produced synthetically, through a thermal technique – analogous to the natural process – that expands and stabilises the granulate material. Clay and slate that meet the following requirements are natural raw materials for these synthetic lightweight aggregates: When heated, the material must achieve a pyroplastic state with a favourable viscosity. A quantity of gas sufficient for pore formation must develop within the pyroplastic temperature range. Industrial by-products are another source of raw materials for the manufacture of lightweight aggregates. Well known examples include coal fly-ash and bottom ash from power plants, which can be directly employed following mechanical processing. Recovered glass can also be used as a feedstock for lightweight aggregates Coal wash waste and flotation residues from coal processing, as well as with the addition of red mud Ash from combustion processes Fine particle waste from pumice processing Uncontaminated or contaminated sediments and sludge from rivers, lakes, and water reservoirs, as well as sewage sludge Thus, the raw materials are extremely diverse. They originate from different sectors of the waste industry. So far, building rubble has been missing from this range of materials, despite being quantitatively the dominant type of waste. Whether building construction and demolition wastes (CDW) can be used to manufacture lightweight aggregates, and thereby enable a closed cycle for fine-grained and heterogeneous materials, is the topic of the research presented in this paper. The quantity of masonry accumulated since 1950 in existing building stock in Germany is illustrated in In contrast to concrete rubble and unmixed clay brick rubble, masonry rubble consists of multiple components. As well as brick, other construction materials present can include calcium-silicate brick, aerated autoclaved concrete, precast concrete, or natural stone. Additional components can include lime mortar, lime cement mortar, cement mortar, interior and exterior plasters, insulation, tiles, and façade panels. Recycled aggregates manufactured from this material through comminution and screening can vary greatly in their composition. This has been confirmed by the results of sorting analyses of processed masonry rubble ( Within a batch of material there may be a variety of building materials with greatly differing properties. This diversity of materials is reflected in the width of the frequency distribution of the particle density ( To date, the consideration of chemical composition as a characteristic of masonry rubble is rarely made. The exceptions are the works by Mineral-bound building materials as aerated autoclaved concrete, calcium silica brick or concrete lie virtually along one line in an unmixed state. Their Al With few exceptions, the composition of all 46 samples of masonry rubble analyzed fell into the marked area suitable for expanded clay production according to the literature. Thus, the reuse of masonry rubble using technology similar to that for expanded clay production is an alternative worth considering. First, the conditions for manufacturing the lightweight aggregates were experimentally investigated. For that purpose, masonry rubble MW 1 with a brick content of 48 The influence of the material composition of the raw materials was investigated in a second step. Five samples of masonry rubble were taken from recycling facilities. Their brick content varies between 0 and 80 The thermal treatment was carried out in a laboratory rotary kiln with the parameters shown in The following methods were used for the characterization of lightweight aggregates produced: The particle density was measured with a powder pycnometer. It works on the principle of volume displacement of a “fluid-like” powder The single grain strength is determined using a pellet testing device. The grain of material is placed between a pressure plate and a punch and subjected to a linearly increasing load. The maximum force at the moment of failure is used as the measure of grain strength, applied over a circular area calculated from the diameter of the (presumed) spherical particle. A comparison with the grain strength measured at a defined particle bed with a pressure plate showed a satisfactory agreement. As the results in The influence of the silicon carbide content on the expansion process was analyzed for a firing temperature of 1180 The influence of the brick content of the masonry rubble on the density of the lightweight aggregate is illustrated in The lowest densities were achieved with brick contents between 40 and 70 As a conclusion from the experimental results can be derived that masonry rubble is suitable as raw material for the manufacture of stable granules with a density of 1800 The properties of the manufactured lightweight granulates were assessed through a comprehensive experimental program. In addition to determining bulk, particle and true densities, the investigations included water absorption, chemical properties, and environmental compatibility. If water absorption and particle strength are considered dependent on particle density ( The water absorption of the manufactured lightweight aggregates is comparably less than that of the expanded clays included in these analyses. In terms of particle strength, the manufactured lightweight aggregates did not differ from expanded clay. The low water absorption can be explained in terms of the specific microstructure of the particles as shown in The particle density distribution of the manufactured aggregates shown in The aggregates produced meet the specifications for the chemical properties of aggregates and the required environmental parameters. The contents of water-soluble chloride, acid-soluble sulfate and total sulfur were tested according to DIN EN 1744-1 Extensive analyses of lightweight concretes with dense structure were undertaken in order to verify the applicability of the lightweight aggregates The lightweight concrete was manufactured with aggregates with a grading that fits the AB8 line, 450 In terms of its mechanical strength and modulus of elasticity, concrete produced with the newly developed lightweight aggregates had similar values to the comparison concrete produced from conventional expanded clay ( With 28-day compressive strengths between 35 and 50 Lightweight concrete elements were produced in a concrete plant under practical conditions using lightweight aggregates (particle size groups 2/4 and 4/8 The manufactured aggregates produced fresh and hardened concretes with properties on par with those made from expanded clays. From all tested properties, it follows that the lightweight aggregates from masonry rubble have a great potential as aggregates in construction industry. They can be used as aggregates for structural lightweight concrete as well as for concrete blocks or elements. Because of their low thermal conductivity, the aggregates from masonry rubble are also useable as bulk insulation material. Manufacture of the lightweight aggregates can be accomplished using expanded clay production technology, according to the primary process steps illustrated in In terms of consumption of primary resources, manufactured lightweight aggregates from masonry rubble presents a nearly “primary resource free” product. Only the expanding agent and the release agent, which are partially consumed in the thermal process, need to be added. Silicon carbide, which is otherwise a waste product of sanding and cutting processes, could be employed as an expanding agent. The manufacture of conventional expanded clay serves as a reference for considering the energy consumption of the recycled material. Like the process described here, production is divided into the following steps: coarse crushing of the raw material, grinding, and granulation, followed by thermal treatment in a rotary kiln. Assuming that the ‘cold’ process steps don’t differ in their energy demand, the thermal processes can be considered in terms of energy savings and additional energy costs ( Various analyses indicate that an increase in gypsum content in demolition debris will need to be taken into account in the future The manufacture of synthetic lightweight aggregates as per the process developed for recycling masonry rubble brings a range of further industrial byproducts and wastes into consideration. According to the survey in Coal wash waste and flotation residues from coal processing, as well as with the addition of red mud. Ash from combustion processes. Fine particle waste from pumice processing. Uncontaminated or contaminated sediment and mud from rivers, lakes, reservoirs, industrial processes, or sewage sludge. The raw materials are extremely diverse. The principle of the technique appears to be predestined for the high-quality recycling of mineral wastes. Combined with the application of substitute fuels, which appears possible based on the required temperatures, a nearly primary resource and primary energy free technique could be developed. The results of the project show strikingly that material that was previously only considered appropriate for low-value recycling can in fact be processed into a high value product, conditional upon the availability of the appropriate technology. A big advantage of the lightweight aggregate manufactured from masonry rubble is that the production process requires almost no primary resources. Industrial production of lightweight aggregates from recycled masonry rubble could provide the opportunity to replace natural pumice and expanded clays and reduce the use of natural resources. The research project “