Laboratory experiments are a vital tool for assessing elastic properties of rock and determining the underlying geomechanical processes that inform large scale, predictive models. In some cases, relative values of elastic properties are sufficient, but absolute values are necessary when comparing between locations and to address upscaling from lab to field settings. However, determining absolute values of ultrasonic velocity and elastic parameters in laboratory experiments is often complex and hampered by apparatus design. Moreover, measuring the evolution of elastic properties with shear deformation has proven especially difficult. Here, we describe a method that allows measurements of P- and S-wave velocity as a function of shear deformation under stresses of 10's of MPa. The approach includes rigorous calibration experiments and accounts for the evolution of impedance contrasts at sample interfaces as a function of strain. We describe our method by applying it to sheared layers that represent simulated fault zones composed of clay-quartz mixtures and fault rocks recovered from drilling. P-wave arrival times range from 10 to 20 μs and wave speeds are 2–4 km/s during shear of layers a few mm in thickness subject to normal stress of 25 MPa and shear strains >30. Travel time data for apparatus calibration are fit with rational functions and root mean square error is used to assess uncertainty. Wave speed varies systematically with shear stress and increases with shear strain due to comminution, compaction, internal strain localization and shear fabric development.Laboratory experiments have been used for decades to measure the mechanical and elastic properties of Earth materials, including rock, soil, sediment, and ice. While relative changes in velocity can be retrieved without knowledge of the absolute wavespeed when changes in time of flight and sample thickness are small, Here, we describe a method to obtain absolute elastic wave velocities during direct shearing experiments. The method provides instantaneous velocities under load, which can be used to track the evolution of friction, compaction, permeability and other rock properties with progressive deformation. We describe the method using data from friction experiments performed in a double direct shear configuration, on synthetic fault gouge composed of a range of mixtures of Ca-montmorillonite and quartz powder, as well as on marine sediment that represents the protolith for material entrained along the subduction plate boundary offshore Sumatra, obtained by drilling during International Ocean Discovery Program (IODP) Expedition 362 (McNeill, Dugan, Petronotis, & Expedition 362 scientists, 2017). The purpose of this paper is to describe our methods to: 1) calibrate arrival times of ultrasonic waves through rock samples and the laboratory deformation apparatus, 2) calculate absolute ultrasonic velocities and elastic moduli for a range of materials tested, and 3) present an empirical approach for generalizing our method for a variety of loading configurations, deformation apparatus, and materials. We conducted double direct shear experiments using a servo-controlled, biaxial deformation machine ( We used in-house built load cells with a resolution of ±0.1 kPa Experiments began by applying a 25 MPa normal stress and then samples were left until the layers compacted to a steady state layer thickness (generally 20–90 min). Layer normal stress was maintained constant to ±0.05 MPa by high-speed, hydraulic servocontrol. After initial compaction, we sheared layers to displacements of ~40–60 mm, corresponding to engineering shear strains of ~20–100. We calculated shear strain γ as the sum of each shear displacement increment All experiments were conducted at room humidity (11.8–72.6%) and temperature, at layer-normal stress of 25 MPa, and at a shear velocity of 21.45 μm/s. Shear displacement was imposed with servocontrol and maintained constant to ±0.1 μm/s. We focus here on data for shear strains <20. We describe our method using data from sheared layers of synthetic fault gouges composed of varying proportions of smectite and granular quartz, and natural samples of marine sediment collected by drilling off the Sumatra subduction zone ( In addition to mechanical data, we measured elastic wavespeed continuously during shear using 1.27 cm-diameter, 500 kHz shear wave piezoelectric (PZT) transducers embedded in the side forcing blocks. To define travel times, we pick P- and S-wave arrival times in each waveform ( Our travel time measurements document the elastic wave speed through the steel forcing block assembly and gouge layer in aggregate. However, to define absolute travel times and wave velocity for the rock sample, we must independently determine the travel times through the forcing blocks. This presents two challenges: 1) Because the blocks are grooved, we cannot simply place them in contact and apply a load; the grooves acquire microscopic damage during use at high pressure and thus they do not mate perfectly even under load; and 2) The sample material trapped and entrained within the grooves of the forcing blocks evolves and densifies as the layer is compacted and sheared. Thus, this material has different properties from the bulk sample and evolves independently as a function of shear. As a result, the remnant material in the grooves must be treated separately, as part of the loading assembly, because it affects the total travel time but is not part of the gouge layer of interest. There is an added complication: unlike the steel forcing blocks, the properties of this material vary as a function of shear strain. To address these issues, we developed an empirical method to determine the travel time through the forcing blocks and grooves, so that it can be subtracted from the uncalibrated arrival time to define travel time through the shearing gouge layer. Section We determine empirically the arrival time of ultrasonic signals through the experimental loading configuration. This travel time, which we term TT After picking the raw arrival times and checking against our cross-correlation method, we define a best-fit for data on travel time and sample thickness. This process is repeated for a series of individual shear strains (γ = 0–20; increments of ~1) ( We use about 20 individual determinations of zero travel time for each sample to construct a calibration curve that defines zero time continuously as a function of shear strain ( Our data for travel time and layer thickness are reasonably well fit with rational or exponential functions ( Using the calibration curves developed in step 2, we then subtract TT To define absolute velocities, we use a time-of-flight technique with the corrected arrival times (TT The layer thickness is monitored continuously via the horizontal DCDT, and changes throughout shear ( The resulting P- and S- wave velocities for each gouge are shown in The calibration method we describe provides a robust way to obtain absolute wave speeds for any material, and can be used in a range of deformation configurations, and is particularly useful for cases where travel time through the apparatus assembly varies as deformation progresses (for example, in the case of large changes in stress, the compression of porous frits used to distribute fluids, etc …). In our case, grooves in the forcing blocks are vital as they force shear to occur within the gouge layer instead of between the gouge layer and the steel blocks; however, they also trap gouge material that then becomes a part of the forcing block assembly for the purpose of calibration. As the gouge within the grooves evolves with shear strain due to comminution and enhanced packing, the arrival time through the forcing block assembly also evolves. Our method accounts for this and provides a continuous suite of zero travel times (times required for elastic waves to pass through the forcing block assembly). In recent studies using this method, The ability to apply this method to a large range of materials allows us to investigate important micromechanical processes for a large range of geological systems and settings. Velocities paired with friction data gives insight into factors that control elastic and mechanical processes within fault zones. In addition, if experiments allow for porosity calculations, this method also provides a means to define shear and bulk moduli, which provide further insight into material rigidity and stiffness, as well as micromechanical processes, and ultimately feed into interpretation of fault slip mode The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. We thank S. Swavely for technical help in the laboratory and Parisa Shokouhi and Charles Ammon for key discussions. We also thank and acknowledge the work of Karissa Rosenberger, Michael Underwood, and Peter Vrolijk for their compositional analysis of the IODP samples used in this study. We gratefully acknowledge support from the