The Optical characteristics of InAs quantum dots (QDs) embeded in InAlGaAs on InP have been investigated by photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy and time-resolved PL. Four different QD samples are grown by using molecular beam epitaxy, and all the QD samples have five-stacked InAs quantum dot layers with a different InAlGaAs barrier thickness. The PL yield from InAs QDs was increased with an increase in the thickness of the InAlGaAs barrier, and the emission peak positions of all InAs QD samples were measured around 1.5μm at room temperature. The decay time of the carrier in InAs QDs is decreased abruptly in the QD sample with the 5nm InAlGaAs barrier. This feature is explained by the tunneling and coupling effect in the vertical direction and probably defect generation.The formation of self-assembled quantum dots (QDs) during the growth of highly lattice-mismatched hetero-epitaxy systems has provided the prominent way for optoelectronic device applications such as laser diodes and light emitting diodes. The emission wavelength of self-assembled In(Ga)As QDs on GaAs substrate is typically around 1.0 In order to get high maximum modal gain for the QD lasers, the spatial QD density within a layer and the number of QD layers should be as high as possible. For stacked layers, the nucleation characteristics of QDs strongly depend on the thickness of the barrier layers, resulting in the modification of the optical characteristics In the present work, the optical characteristics of five-stacked QD layers embedded in various InAlGaAs barrier thicknesses were investigated by photoluminescence (PL) and time-resolved PL measurements. The samples used in the present work were grown on n-doped (0 For PL measurement, an argon ion laser with the wavelength of 514.5 Time-resolved PL measurements were performed using the up-conversion technique    Based on PL and time-resolved PL, we have investigated the optical characteristics of InAs QDs with various InAlGaAs barriers thicknesses on InP. The PL emissions of InAs QD samples show the peak position around 1.5 This work was supported by Institute for Nano Technology applications of Inje University and grant No. R01-2002-000-00096-0 from the Basic Research Program of the Korea Science & Engineering Foundation.