Background
                  Two-dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) computed tomography (CT) have been increasingly used in various intra-articular fractures including pilon fracture. However, no study has investigated intraobserver and interobserver reliabilities of pilon fracture classification using 3D CT images.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  (1) Intraobserver and interobserver agreements of fracture classifications and treatment recommendations will improve by using 2D CT images compared to using plain radiographs only; (2) agreements will improve by adding 3D CT images compared to adding 2D CT images; and (3) agreements of orthopedic residents rather than specialists will be influenced more by imaging modality.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Ten orthopedic specialists and 10 residents completed a survey to classify the fractures according to the Rüedi-Allgöwer and AO/OTA classifications and to select treatment options using 25 pilon fracture images. The survey was conducted using plain radiographs, with 2D and 3D CT images introduced 3 and 6weeks later, respectively. Kappa coefficients were calculated to determine reliabilities.
               
                  Results
                  Intraobserver reliabilities for fracture classifications in specialists significantly improved by using 2D images compared to using plain radiographs only. Addition of 3D CT did not significantly improve intraobserver reliabilities compared to those with 2D CT. Use of 2D CT images significantly improved overall interobserver agreement of both classifications, with the improvement being greater for residents. Use of 3D CT images did not improve the interobserver reliability of both classifications. Overall interobserver reliabilities for treatment recommendations did not significantly differ according to the imaging modality. However, interobserver agreement among residents significantly improved from slight agreement using radiographs only to fair agreement using 2D CT images.
               
                  Discussion
                  Intraobserver and interobserver reliabilities of pilon fracture classification and treatment recommendations did not improve between using 3D and 2D CT. Using 2D CT images improved the intraobserver and interobserver reliabilities of the fracture classifications in specialists and the interobserver reliabilities of the fracture classifications and the treatment recommendations in residents.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  IV, case control study.The main objective of pilon fracture treatment is to restore congruency of the articular surface as in other intra-articular fractures However, to the authors’ best knowledge, no study has investigated intraobserver and interobserver reliabilities of pilon fracture classification using 3D CT images. Moreover, improvement in these values with the use of 2D CT images compared with the use of plain radiographs alone has not been well investigated. Therefore, the questions of the current study were as follows: whether 2D and 3D CT will affect the intraobserver and interobserver reliabilities of fracture classifications and treatment recommendations for pilon fractures; whether the effect of imaging modality on the reliability may differ according to the surgeons’ experience. The hypotheses were as follows: reliabilities of the fracture classifications and treatment recommendations will improve by using 2D CT images compared to using plain radiographs only; reliabilities will improve by adding 3D CT images compared to adding 2D CT images; using 2D and 3D CT images, reliabilities would show more improvement in orthopedic residents than in specialists. The study was performed after obtaining approval from the institutional review board (registration number and ID: 2018-01-044/Date of Issue: 7th Feb 2018). The inclusion criteria were as follows: distal tibial intra-articular fracture (43 B and C type fractures by AO/OTA classification) with anteroposterior, lateral, oblique, and mortise ankle plain radiographs, 2D CT images in the axial, coronal, and sagittal planes, and 3D CT images obtained within 1 week of initial trauma. Between 2013 and 2015, 32 pilon fractures were treated in our hospital. The exclusion criteria were as follows: those who underwent previous operations on the affected ankle (1 case); inadequate plain radiographs or CT images (2 cases); without CT scan (4 cases). Finally, 25 pilon fractures were analyzed. All CT images were obtained using Optima CT 660 scanner (GE healthcare, Milwaukee, WI, USA) with 2-mm thick slices at the same hospital. Coronal and sagittal 2D reconstructions were performed on the scanner and volume-rendering 3D image reconstruction on a separate GE Advantage workstation ( External fixation was performed in cases with open fracture of Gustillo-Anderson type II or more (3 cases) or those with subluxated ankle (2 cases) or poorly maintained reduction showing protruded bony fragment under the skin even after closed reduction (6 cases). In 11 patients with an external fixator, CT scan was performed after external fixation. For remaining patients, CT was performed after closed reduction and splint application by an orthopedic surgeon. All identifying data, including age and sex, were obscured for blinded evaluation. Twenty independent investigators, including 10 orthopedic specialists (6 general orthopedics, 4 university hospital orthopedic surgeons including 2 with other specialty rather than traumatology/foot and ankle, 1 traumatologist, and 1 foot and ankle specialist) and 10 orthopedic residents (4–5 post grad year), completed a survey. The senior author, who treated pilon fracture patients, reviewed and included cases; however, he did not perform surveys to avoid bias. The survey consisted of three questions per case, with questions for Rüedi-Allgöwer and AO/OTA classifications. Diagrams for each classification were provided ( conservative treatment; open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF, including arthroscopy-assisted operation); closed reduction and internal fixation (CRIF, including minimally invasive plate osteosynthesis). Initially, the observers classified the fracture pattern and selected a treatment plan using plain radiographs only. Three weeks later, the same survey was performed using plain radiographs and 2D CT images. After a 3-week interval, the observers performed the survey again using plain radiographs, 2D CT images, and 3D CT images. To evaluate intraobserver agreement, the same three survey rounds were also performed 3 A biomedical statistician performed the analysis. To assess the intraobserver agreement, Cohen's kappa The interobserver reliability was also analyzed. Fleiss kappa For intraobserver reliability, the number of subjects required was calculated as 24, assuming an even distribution of each item, anticipated kappa value of 0.5, and desired type I error rate of 0.05. For interobserver reliability, the number of subjects required was calculated as 21 subjects, assuming 6 observers with an even distribution of each item, anticipated kappa value of 0.4, and desired type I error rate of 0.05. As the number of observers increases, the number of subjects required decreases According to Landis and Koch The distribution of fracture classifications, and treatment recommendations, which selected by the largest number of the residents and specialists, are presented in For the Rüedi-Allgöwer classification, specialists showed moderate agreement with the use of plain radiographs only and substantial agreement with the addition of 2D and 3D CT images ( For the AO/OTA classification in specialists was fair with the use of plain radiographs only and moderate with the addition of 2D and 3D CT images. Addition of 3D CT significantly improved the agreement compared with plain radiographs only ( For the treatment recommendations, intraobserver reliability was moderate in the specialists with plain radiographs only and with the addition of 2D and 3D CT images ( With the use of plain radiographs only, overall interobserver reliabilities of both fracture classifications showed a fair agreement. Addition of 2D CT images significantly improved the overall interobserver reliability of both classifications ( Overall interobserver reliabilities for selecting treatment recommendations were all fair with the use of plain radiographs only, addition of 2D CT images, and addition of 3D CT images; and the change was not significant. Specialists showed moderated agreements in all three survey rounds, which was significantly higher interobserver agreements that residents with all imaging modalities ( In the present study, the additional use of 3D CT images did not improve the reliabilities among the orthopedic surgeons regardless of their levels of experience. The addition of 2D CT images improved the intraobserver reliabilities of the fracture classifications in specialists and the interobserver agreement of the fracture classifications and treatment recommendations among specialists and residents. CT has been regarded a useful tool for identifying fracture morphology and planning treatment of pilon fractures However, previous studies have revealed that the use of 2D CT images failed to significantly improve the reliability for fracture classifications Notably, the impact of using 2D CT images on the improvement in the kappa coefficient of the fracture classification was more prominent among the residents than among the specialists. Furthermore, the interobserver agreement of the treatment plans increased only in the residents with 2D CT images. There can be several reasons for this. First, articular fractures not severely displaced or depressed can be identified more easily using CT images than using plain radiographs In this study, the addition of 3D CT images was proven to be unhelpful on the reliabilities of fracture classifications. Given that axial loading is the main injury mechanism, identifying depressed articular fragments is the most important step in understanding pilon fracture morphology. Although it is a three-dimensional imaging technique, 3D CT presents the processed image on a 2D plane and only provides visualization of the bone surface. Therefore, it is difficult for 3D CT images to more clearly show the depressed fragments than the sagittal and coronal images of 2D CT. Previous studies evaluating the usefulness of 3D CT images for classification of other fractures also reported that 3D CT provided no benefit In the present study, interobserver agreements of the Rüedi-Allgöwer classification with all imaging modalities showed a higher value than those of the AO/OTA classification. The AO/OTA classification is more complex than the Rüedi-Allgöwer classification in terms of metaphyseal morphology and intra-articular part. Therefore, even with its lower agreements, AO/OTA classification can be helpful in planning detailed treatments. It can be reasoned that using 3D CT images is advantageous for deciding treatment strategies, as these images present more detailed information on the meta-diaphysis. However, in the current study, using 3D CT images did not improve agreements of the treatment recommendations. The oversimplified question may be responsible for this result. Further survey with more detailed consideration of treatment option including specific fixator use or bending of plates is necessary to show usefulness of 3D CT images. Notably, slight-to-fair agreements were found for treatment strategy in residents. This low agreement for treatment choice is mainly due to the difference in opinion on whether to perform CRIF or ORIF in relatively complex articular fractures. Therefore, the importance of anatomic reduction in the treatment of intra-articular fractures in resident education should be emphasized. This study had several limitations. First, a simple question on the treatment recommendations was used for ease of analysis, which may have affected the results. Furthermore, the treatment option was decided on without clinical data of patients and may have affected the results. Second, only 5 residents completed survey for intraobserver reliabilities. Finally, the fact that less than half of the patients underwent external fixation before CT scan may have affected our results. However, even in patients without external fixation, closed reduction and long leg splint were performed before CT scan to obtain better images and to minimize bias. Using 3D CT images did not improve the intarobserver and interobserver reliabilities of the classification and treatment recommendations for pilon fractures, whereas using 2D CT images improved the intraobserver and interobserver reliabilities of the fracture classifications and interobserver agreement for treatment recommendations. Residents may benefit more than specialists from using 2D CT images. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. This research was supported by Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the S.-E. Byun: study design, data analysis, and manuscript writing. W. Choi: study conception and design. Y. Choi: study conception and design, revising manuscript (corresponding author). T.-K. Ahn: data analysis. H.K. Kim: data analysis and manuscript writing. S. Yoon: data acquisition and revising manuscript. J. Lee: statistical analysis. D.-S. Choi: data acquisition. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 