The interface evolution of Ti/Ni multi-layered composites produced by accumulative roll bonding after heat treatment was investigated in this study. The influence of heat treatment temperature on the microstructure and chemical composition of the Ti/Ni interfaces were examined by scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with an energy dispersive spectroscopy system (EDS) and transmission electron microscope (TEM). Phase composition and transition behavior of interfaces of the Ti/Ni multi-layered samples were studied by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and a differential scanning calorimeter (DSC). Only from the viewpoint of ΔG, ignoring the impact of other factors, the formation sequence of Ti–Ni IMCs is TiNi3→Ti2Ni→TiNi at the beginning of the diffusion reaction. With temperature increases, the microstructure of the composite is a mixture structure with alternating TiNi and Ti2Ni layers and the boundary morphology of each diffusion sub-layer transforming from an initial smooth and clear boundary, to the flocculent structure of the TiNi and Ti2Ni transition layer. The DSC results revealed a good martensitic and reverse transformation behavior from B2 to B19’ of Ms at around 64 °C. With temperature increases, the austenite transformation temperature (TA) slowly shifts to high temperature and the change of martensite transformation temperature (TM) is not obvious. The phase transition hysteresis (Ap-Mp) from 5.9 °C of the 550 °C × 10 h heat treatment sample increases to 33 °C of the 770 °C × 10 h sample.Considerable attention has been garnered by Ti/Ni multi-layered composites due to their vast technological applications in various areas of science and technologies. An example of their usefulness is in the field of soft X-ray and neutron optics, due to the excellent contrast factor of hot and cold neutrons [ At present, methods of preparing Ti/Ni composite mainly include explosive joining [ In the recent years, ARB has been increasingly used to produce metallic multi-layered composite (MMC) sheets. The ARB technique has been successfully applied in the fabrication of various metallic multi-layered composites of bi-metal systems, including Al/Ti [ The influence of heat treatment temperature on the growth of diffusion layer and the evolution of interface microstructure remains unclear. In particular, there is still little research on the heat treatment temperature and phase transformation relationship of Ti/Ni multi-layered composites fabricated by ARB. Therefore, research on the temperature and interface evolution relationship of Ti/Ni multi-layered composites is a significant topic with practical and theoretical significance. In this paper, the main objective is to investigate the influence of heat temperature on interfacial evolution of the Ti/Ni multi-layered composite. The formation and growth rules of IMCs on the interface of Ti/Ni multi-layered composite fabricated by ARB are also discussed. Commercial-purity titanium TA2 and pure nickel N6 foils with a dimension of 0.7 mm (T) × 75 mm (W) × 100 mm (L) were used in the experiments. The principle of accumulative roll bonding processing is illustrated in After rolling, the samples were formed by isothermal heat treatment. According to Ti–Ni phase diagram and related research, heat treatment experiments were carried out in a muffle furnace at 300, 550, 670, 720 and 770 °C(±1 °C) for holding times of 10 h in order to study the full diffusion of the Ti/Ni interface. They were then air-cooled to room temperature (RT). The furnace was first evacuated and then backfilled with argon gas of five-nine purity to provide an inert atmosphere. After annealing, the samples were prepared for metallographic examination by sectioning transverse to the reaction interface. The specimens were mounted in epoxy resin and polished. The interfacial microstructure and chemical composition of Ti/Ni multi-layered composites were characterized using a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM, JSM-6460F) equipped with Energy Disperse Spectroscopy (EDS). Semi-quantitative EDS analysis was performed to estimate the composition of different diffusion phases at the Ti/Ni interface. The phase composition and crystal morphology of the specimens were then characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEM-200CX), respectively. XRD analysis was performed on Bruker-D8AA25 diffractometer with parallel beam optics using Cu Ka diffraction patterns. Angle 2θ was scanned in the range from 30° to 80° at step of 0.02°, in time sequence of 10 s. A piece cut from the rolling specimen in the rolling direction (RD) was chosen for TEM observations. The specimens were mechanically polished and then twin-jet electro-polished using electrolyte consisting of 5 vol% per chloric acid (HClO For the Ti–Ni system, there are nine possible reactions: According to the data table of inorganic thermodynamic properties [ According to the second principle of thermodynamics, the possibility and sequence of the compounds formation are closely related to its free energy [ Other studies into the generating sequence of IMCs showed that the TiNi The interfacial microstructure of Ti/Ni multi-layered composites after rolling and annealing at different temperatures for 10 h are presented in The interface micrograph of Ti/Ni multi-layered composites after 6ARB rolling and heating treatment at different temperatures for 10 h are illustrated in From  In order to further determine the distribution of interface elements, EDS point measurement was performed. The EDS point analysis across the interface of the Ti/Ni multi-layered composite is shown in The typical XRD pattern of Ti/Ni multi-layered composites rolled and heated at different temperatures are presented in  Different crystal structures correspond to different deformation modes [ The TEM-SAED images of Ti/Ti The TEM-SAED images of TiNi/Ti The DSC curves of Ti/Ni multi-layered composites after heat treatment at different temperatures for 10 h are shown in The evolution of phase transformation temperature with varying heat temperature is illustrated in If the transition hysteresis was defined as the difference of A Moreover, In this study, the effect of heat treatment upon the interfacial evolution of Ti/Ni multi-layered composites by accumulative roll bonding was intensively investigated. The results are summarized as follows: Only from the viewpoint of ΔG, the formation sequence of Ti–Ni IMCs is TiNi The microstructure of the Ti/Ni interfaces illustrated that as heating temperature increased, the boundary morphology of each diffusion sub-layer was transformed from an initial smooth and clear boundary, to the flocculent structure of the TiNi and Ti The composition ratio of Ti and Ni for the composites in this paper is 2:1. Under these conditions the Ni elements were consumed first through the diffusion reaction, then the remaining Ti reacted with newly generated TiNi The DSC results revealed a good martensitic and reverse transformation behavior from B2 to B19′ of Ms at around 64 °C. With temperature increases, the austenite transformation temperature (TA) slowly shifts to high temperature and the change of martensite transformation temperature (TM) is not obvious. Concurrently, the heat treatment temperature increased from 550 °C to 770 °C, and the transformation hysteresis (A This work was financially supported by the