Flood extremes are driven by highly variable and complex climatic and hydrological processes. Observational evidence has identified that seasonality of climate variables has a major impact on flood peaks. However, event-based joint probability approaches for predicting the flood frequency distribution (FFD), which are commonly used in practice, do not commonly incorporate climate seasonality. This study presents an advance in event-based joint probability approaches by incorporating seasonality using the hybrid causative events (HCE) approach. The HCE was chosen because it uses the true causative events of the floods of interest and is able to combine the accuracy of continuous simulation with the computational efficiency of event-based approaches. The incorporation of seasonality is evaluated using a virtual catchment approach at eight sites over a wide range of Australian climate zones, including tropical, temperature, Mediterranean and desert climates (virtual catchment data for the eight sites is freely available via digital repository). The seasonal HCE provided accurate predictions of the FFD at all sites. In contrast, the non-seasonal HCE significantly over-predicted the FFD at some sites. The need to include seasonality was influenced by the magnitude of the seasonal variation in soil moisture and its coherence with the seasonal variation in extreme rainfall. For sites with a low seasonal variation in soil moisture the non-seasonal HCE provided reliable estimates of the FFD. For the remaining sites, it was found difficult to predict a priori whether ignoring seasonality provided a reliable estimate of the FFD, hence it is recommended that the seasonal HCE always be used. The practical implications of this study are that the HCE approach with seasonality is an accurate and efficient event-based joint probability approach to derive the flood frequency distribution across a wide range of climatologies.Estimation of the design flood is the key input to flood risk assessment and development of flood protection measures. Flood extremes are driven by highly variable and complex climatic and hydrological processes. Observational evidence has identified that seasonality of climate variables has a major impact on flood peaks. For example, melting snow and heavy summer rains in the Ethiopian highlands give rise to the famous inundation cycle of the Nile. The ‘flood of the century’ in Southern Manitoba was caused by a combination of high antecedent soil moisture, heavy winter snowfall and a rapid spring melt ( The influence on the flood frequency distribution of the interaction between the seasonality of climate variables and catchment properties has been identified in numerous studies. For instance, Flood frequency analysis (FFA) is a widely used technique that relies on a fitting a probability distribution to streamflow data records. However, its reliance on long streamflow records means it has significant limitations in predicting future flood behaviour under land-use change and future climate change. This is because FFA cannot predict the impact of changes in the interplay of different flood producing variables, such as extreme rainfall and antecedent catchment conditions. On the contrary, derived flood frequency (DFF) methods are based on weather models and rainfall-runoff (RR) models which can potentially capture the effect of climate variables and catchment properties on floods. Therefore they have a greater potential for predicting the flood frequency distribution under future climate and land use changes. Existing DFF methods can be broadly categorised into continuous simulation (CS) ( CS approaches, which use a weather generator and a RR model to generate a long series of streamflow data to estimate the flood frequency distribution (FFD), go back at least as far as the 1950s ( EB approaches are more computationally efficient than CS because they focus the simulation effort only on flood events, e.g. Event-based JP approaches take into account the joint probability nature of flood producing variables, thus avoiding the predicament of selecting a single magnitude for either the extreme rainfall or antecedent catchment conditions. The derived flood frequency distribution is calculated by solving the integral of the joint probability function of the input variables of the rainfall-runoff transformation (e.g. rainfall intensity/duration and antecedent catchment condition) using the total probability theorem. Solutions to this integral can be either analytically derived ( Irrespective of the method used to solve the total probability integral there remains the question of how to select the distributions of input variables. For instance, The hybrid-causative event (HCE) approach ( The SCHADEX method ( Despite many studies identifying that seasonal climate variability has a strong impact on flood peaks, it is not commonly included into the EB-JP for flood estimation. For example, One of the first studies to incorporate seasonality into EB-JP for flood frequency estimation was However, the requirement to use simple RR models to develop analytical expressions limits the practical adoption of these quasi-analytical Monte Carlo approach. For example, In contrast, the HCE approach does not rely on the development of analytical equations that link peak flow to rainfall characteristics and can be applied to a wider range of stochastic rainfall and rainfall-runoff models. However, because the HCE (  In summary, this review of the literature has identified that despite the significant observational evidence of the impact of seasonality on flood peaks, there are few studies that incorporate seasonality into event-based joint probability approaches, commonly used in practice. This study seeks to address this research gap, through the following specific aims: (1) Incorporate seasonality into the HCE approach. The HCE approach was chosen because it is an event-based approach that uses the true causative events to estimate the FFD. (2) Evaluate the seasonal HCE approach using a wide range of realistic virtual catchment case studies which capture the range of climate zones in Australia. This aim will also investigate the need to include seasonality in the HCE approach by comparison against the non-seasonal HCE for a range of sites. The discussion will examine the reasons why seasonality is important for predicting the FFD for different sites. (3) Develop and evaluate the method for choosing the optimal short rainfall record for the short CS run to obtain reliable FFD predictions in the seasonal HCE approach. One of the advantages of the HCE approach is that only a short CS run is required. The question remains of “How to choose the optimal rainfall record for this short CS run to achieve reliable FFD predictions?” This is investigated by adapting the approach from The paper starts with a brief review of the current HCE approach followed by the modifications required to incorporate seasonality. The seasonal HCE approach is then applied to an Australian catchment subject to different climate scenarios from eight sites that represent the range of climate zones in Australia. Section  The exceedance probability of event streamflow discharge ( To solve Eq. Eq. where As mentioned in the introduction, due to differences in the climatic processes in different seasons, mixed distributions may be present in the flood peaks data ( Adapting the approach to incorporate seasonality developed by The corresponding peak over threshold distribution can be obtained by normalising the upper part of this distribution by applying Eq. This can be converted to a where The seasonal maximum flood distributions need to be combined to obtain the annual maximum FFD. Assuming the flood peaks in different seasons are independent of each other, the annual FFD, which is the maximum of the seasonal maxima, can be calculated as: Note that either a single threshold value An important issue in implementing the seasonal HCE approach is deciding how many seasons, In the procedure described above, a short rainfall record is extracted from the simulated long rainfall record and use to drive the short term CS of the RR model for the estimation of the soil moisture distribution and POT model parameters. This introduces uncertainty in the subsequent flood estimation because a short rainfall record may not be representative of the longer record due to sampling variability. To solve this problem, where The general procedure of the seasonal HCE approach is summarised as follows: Generate a long time series of rainfall using a stochastic rainfall model. Decompose this long time series of simulated rainfall into seasonal rainfall records and use them to estimate the daily rainfall distribution for each season – the Select the optimal short rainfall record from the long time series generated in Step 1 according to Eq. Decompose the short records of soil moisture and streamflow values generated from Step 2 into seasonal records. Use the seasonal soil moisture records to estimate the soil moisture distribution for each season – the Select a single occurrence rate of POT for all the seasons. Use the seasonal streamflow records generated in Step 2 to estimate the flow threshold value according to the selected occurrence rate and the occurrence rate model parameters for each season. Insert the input variable distributions (rainfall Convert the peak over threshold distribution from Step 5 into the seasonal maxima FFD, using Eq. Insert the flood peak distribution obtained for each season into Eq. In the seasonal HCE approach, stochastic rainfall is used instead of observed rainfall. The advantage of using a stochastic rainfall model is that it enables the generation of a sufficiently long time series of synthetic rainfall (in the case study of this paper: 10,000 This section outlines the case studies used to evaluate the seasonal HCE approach. For each of these case studies, the distribution of the annual peak daily flows is to be estimated, hereafter referred to as the annual flood frequency distribution (FFD). To evaluate the performance of the seasonal HCE approach a The long term rainfall record is simulated using the disaggregated rectangular intensity pulse (DRIP) model ( The rainfall-runoff model used for the simulation of the streamflow data is the GR4J model ( The HCE approach of The modified GR4J was calibrated to the daily rainfall, evaporation and streamflow data of Scott Creek catchment in South Australia. The period of the observed data spans from 18 April 2000 to 9 July 2003 without missing values. The Nash Sutcliffe coefficient was 0.8, indicating reasonable model performance. After the model calibration, long term (10,000 Before testing the seasonal HCE approach, it is useful to investigate the seasonal patterns of the hydrological variables.   The 10,000 The importance of including seasonality into the HCE approach is investigated. Hence, both the non-seasonal and seasonal HCE approach are applied to the eight sites and the results compared. To investigate how many seasons are required in the seasonal HCE approach, two cases are trialled: four seasons, named using the Austral seasons (spring: SON, summer DJF, autumn MAM and winter JJA) and twelve seasons (monthly). The entire long rainfall (10,000  Overall, these results show that the need to incorporate seasonality varies from site to site. For those sites that require incorporation of seasonality, the difference in predictions of the FFD between the 4 and 12 season options was fairly minimal, hence the use of four seasons appears to produce satisfactory results. However, examination of the climatology alone does not provide a satisfactory explanation for why some sites need to include seasonality and some sites don’t. For example, Perth and Adelaide are classified as high and low need for seasonality, but both have similar climatology (see The strategy described in Section To quantify the prediction accuracy of the seasonal HCE approach using the optimal short records, the Nash Sutcliffe coefficient was calculated using the seasonal HCE and the virtual truth flood magnitudes for the average return intervals (ARIs) of 2, 5, 10, 20, 30, 50, 75, 100, 200, 300, 400 and 500 Visual comparison of the FFD based on the seasonal HCE with optimal short record and the virtual truth FFD is presented in The results demonstrated that the seasonal HCE approach worked well for all the case study sites. However, the need to include seasonality to provide reliable predictions of the annual FFD varied from site to site (Section The key difference between the seasonal and non-seasonal HCE approach is, for the seasonal approach, the input distributions of rainfall and soil moisture are calculated on a seasonal basis, while in the non-seasonal HCE, the non-seasonal or marginal distributions are used. To explore if the differences in these distributions explain the need to include seasonality, the differences in the seasonal daily rainfall  For Darwin and Perth, which are classified as “high need for seasonality” sites, there are large differences between the seasonal and non-seasonal distributions. These large differences partly explain why these sites have a high need for seasonality. For Alice Springs and Brisbane, which are classified as “no need for seasonality”, there are very small differences between the seasonal soil moisture distributions and the non-seasonal soil moisture distribution, which is the likely reason why these sites have “No need for seasonality”. However, for the remaining sites the differences between seasonal and non-seasonal soil moisture cannot explain why they are classified as either high, low or no need for seasonality. Consider Melbourne, it is classified as “high need for seasonality”. However, the difference between the seasonal soil moisture distribution and the non-seasonal distribution is smaller than for Adelaide, and similar to Hobart, both of which are classified as a “low need for seasonality”. Sydney has higher differences in the seasonal soil moisture than Melbourne, but is classified as “no need for seasonality”. This suggests further work is required to understand the complex interplay between rainfall and soil moisture seasonality to explain why some sites need seasonality while others do not. To further understand this, For sites classified as “no need for seasonality”, such as Alice Springs, although extreme rainfall shows a significant seasonal variation, soil moisture is nearly constant throughout the year. Therefore in the total probability method, there is no need to identify seasonal rainfall and soil moisture distributions, as rainfall is always combined with a constant soil moisture distribution. For Brisbane, the soil moisture shows little seasonal variation and is not in coherence with the seasonal variation in extreme rainfall. For Sydney, the soil moisture shows a moderate seasonal variation, but there is little coherence with the seasonal variation in extreme rainfall. Hence it appears that low seasonal variation in soil moisture and/or a lack of coherence with seasonal variation in extreme rainfall is a common factor for sites classified as “no need for seasonality”. Sites with a “low need for seasonality”, for example Adelaide, show a similar pattern to Perth, (seasonal variation in soil moisture coherent with seasonal variation in extreme rainfall), however the magnitude of the seasonal variation is reduced for Adelaide, compared with Perth. Similar for Hobart, the seasonal pattern of soil moisture and rainfall is similar to Melbourne, but the magnitude of the seasonal variation is lower than Melbourne. Hence this could be a potential reason why the bias from using the non-seasonal approach for these Class 3 sites is lower than for Class 1 sites. In summary, this investigation suggests that the following hydro-climatological factors qualitatively influence whether a site requires seasonality or not are (1) the magnitude of the seasonal variation of soil moisture, which is determined by the coherence between seasonal variation in rainfall and evapotranspiration (2) the magnitude of the coherence between the seasonal variation in soil moisture and seasonal variation in extreme rainfall. Future research is required to develop quantitative measures that characterise the complex interplay between rainfall and soil moisture seasonality to explain why some sites need seasonality while others do not. A further insight from The results of Section This study provides further evidence that the HCE is a potentially practical tool to accurately and efficiently estimate the annual FFD. The seasonal HCE approach is able to accurately reproduce the “virtual truth” annual FFD for a range of realistic case study sites. These sites capture the wide range of climatologies typical of Australia, including winter and summer dominated rainfall, uniform seasonal and tropical monsoonal rainfall – with catchments having runoff coefficients that range from 0.04 to 0.3. This study complements the previous proof of concept study ( While these two studies demonstrate the practical potential of the HCE approach, there remain a number of issues to resolve to enable practical application: (1) Using more complicated rainfall-runoff models (with multiple soil moisture stores, spatial distributed), (2) application to sub-daily case studies and estimating instantaneous peak flows, rather than daily volumes. The HCE approach that included seasonality in extreme rainfall and antecedent soil moisture distributions always produced the estimates of FFD with minimal bias. In contrast, when seasonality was ignored, the HCE approach could produce significant biases in the estimation of the annual FFD with the bias magnitude varying between sites. Hence, the practical implications are that event-based approaches need to include seasonality, otherwise they may produce biased estimates of the annual FFD. Investigations (see Section This paper has presented an advance on event-based joint probability approaches for deriving flood frequency distributions. By first, incorporating seasonality into the HCE approach and second, undertaking evaluation on a series of virtual catchment case studies representing a wide range of Australian climate zones. In terms of incorporating seasonality, it was found that the seasonal HCE approach provided excellent predictions of the virtual truth FFD for all sites. Comparing the results with the non-seasonal HCE, it was found that for some sites, the non-seasonal HCE produced similar results to the seasonal HCE, while for other sites, the non-seasonal HCE over-predicted the flow for a given return period. Investigation as to why some sites required allowance for seasonality to provide reliable predictions of the FFD, revealed that the magnitude of the seasonality of soil moisture and its coherence with the seasonal variation in extreme rainfall plays an important role. However further research is needed to understand the complex interplay between impact of seasonal variation in soil moisture and extreme rainfall and its impact on flood quantiles. For two sites with low seasonal variation in soil moisture, the seasonal HCE was not needed. However, for the remaining sites it was difficult to predict Evaluation of the seasonal HCE and the accompanying method used to identify the optimal short rainfall record over a range of sites with distinctly different climatology showed that it provided reliable predictions of the annual FFD. The climatology of the sites ranged from Mediterranean (wet winters, dry hot summers), temperate (uniform rainfall) sub-tropical/tropical (with wet summers and dry winters) and desert sites with erratic monsoonal rains in summer and spring. The practical implications of this is it provides greater confidence that the HCE approach provides an accurate and efficient tool to derive the flood frequency distribution because it has now been tested on a wide range of climatologies. Future research will focus on incorporating more comprehensive hydrological models into the HCE approach. The RFortran (