Phytomining, now called agromining, consists of growing hyperaccumulator plants in order to farm metals and recover them from the biomass. This technology enables us to extract metals from secondary resources (e.g. metal containing-soils, mineral wastes, polluted soils) and manufacture high-value products. It has proved feasible for nickel, since more than 400 hyperaccumulators have been identified worldwide, able to accumulate at least 1% Ni in their tissues. Moreover, Ni is a target metal with a relatively high economic value.
                  We have recently designed and patented a method for the synthesis of a nickel salt, ammonium nickel sulfate hexahydrate (ANSH: Ni(NH4)2(SO4)2·6H2O), from the biomass of the hyperaccumulator plant Alyssum murale, grown in the Balkans. In this contribution, the process has been improved in order to save water, energy and chemicals, while producing a high purity salt. The biomass is dried and ashed, potassium is removed by washing ash with pure water following a cross-current pathway, nickel is extracted by acid leaching (2M H2SO4, 95°C, 2h, mass fraction of 10%). The leachate is neutralized by Ca(OH)2 to reach a pH of 4–5 and magnesium is removed by precipitating MgF2 after addition of NaF. Then volume is reduced by evaporation and ANSH crystallization is run at 2°C for 4h. The crystals are dissolved and a second crystallization is run. The final ANSH was characterized by combined techniques (ICP-AES, XRD and gravimetric analysis), and the purity was 99.1±0.2%.Phytomining consists of growing metal hyperaccumulator plants in order to farm metals and recover them from biomass ( Extensive literature is available on Ni hyperaccumulator plants, their identification, ecophysiology, and the investigation of metal speciation in the plant tissues ( The feasibility of extracting metals directly from hyperaccumulators by hydrothermal processes has been demonstrated ( The aim of the present work is to improve this process, in order to save water, chemicals and energy. Each stage of the process was re-visited and significant improvements are proposed to optimize the process and produce a salt of higher purity.  Sulfuric acid (95–97%), ethanol (99.8%), ammonium hydroxide (25% NH Preliminary experiments consisted of washing the raw ash with deionized water under mechanical stirring with a three-blade turbine (Heidolph Bioblock Scientific). Three mass fractions of ash (10, 15 and 20%) and three rotation speeds (500, 1000 and 2000 The first washing method (M#1) consisted of washing the ash twice, each time with deionized water with an intermediate filtration stage. All the filtrations were performed on a set-up composed of a Büchner funnel (Labbox) and a vacuum pump (Fischer Scientific), using ashless filter papers (Sartorius, 391). The ash was successively called A The second method (M#2), a so-called cross-current method, has been designed to minimize water consumption. It consisted of 3 following steps ( Acid leaching was conducted by mixing 5 or 10 The acid leachate L To precipitate MgF To crystallize ANSH, a mass of ammonium sulfate corresponding to an excess of 20% was added to L Biomass and ashes were analyzed by ICP-AES after mineralization and by X-ray diffraction (XRD) with the procedures already described ( XRD analysis of crystals was carried out on (Rigaku–Miniflex II diffractometer), with a scan range from 10° to 80° at a scanning speed of 1.0° Gravimetric analysis consisted of performing the precipitation of Ni All the characterizations were done in triplicate, allowing calculating standard deviation for each result. Preparations of Two parameters were tested to improve potassium removal: the solid fraction (10, 15, 20%) and the stirring speed (500, 1000, 2000 The comparison of XRD analysis of the raw and washed ashes ( Method M#1 was tested with successive washing steps. The second and third ones enable us to remove respectively 12.9 Studies of dissolution kinetics were done at the highest mass fraction (20%) and lowest stirring speed (500 Method M#1 required at least 8 At this step, the mass of the ash has decreased from 30.0 to 22.0 Three parameters may influence leaching effectiveness: acid concentration, temperature and duration. Previously, we found that leaching with 1.9 The comparison between XRD analysis of the washed ashes (A Leachate (L Here, NaOH was replaced by Ca(OH) Preliminary experiments have shown that the mass fraction of Ca(OH) Initially, ANSH was crystallized without stirring. This time, the solution was stirred (magnetic stirring). At the end, crystal purity (based on Ni content) was assessed by several techniques and compared with salts#1 and #2. For salt #1, a purity of 99.6 The elemental concentrations in the crystals measured by ICP-AES after each crystallization step are given in Moreover XRD patterns (peaks at 2-theta of 16.46°, 21.50°, 23.60°, 29.50°, 31.99°, 36.97°, 40.86° and 41.90°) were consistent with the peaks of ANSH from AMS data ( The flow sheet of the new process is presented in The mass balance ( This study details the improvements of the process that we designed to produce ANSH from the hyperaccumulator plant The economic feasibility has been proven ( The authors thank the