Biological ferric iron production was combined with ferric sulphate leaching of chalcopyrite concentrate and the effects of pH, Fe3+, temperature and solids concentration on the leaching were studied. The copper leaching rates were similar at pH of 1.0–1.8 and in the presence of 7–90gL−1 Fe3+ despite massive iron precipitation with 90gL−1 Fe3+. Increase of the leaching temperature from 50°C to 86°C and solids concentration from 1% to 10% increased the copper leaching rate. Increase in solids concentration from 1% to 10% decreased the copper yields from 80% to 40%. Stepwise addition of ferric iron did not improve the copper yields. CuFeS2, Ag and Cu1.96S potentials indicated the formation of a passivating layer, which consisted of jarosite and sulphur precipitates and which was responsible for the decreased leaching rates.Bioleaching is widely used for the recovery of copper from sulphide ores by dump, heap or in situ leaching. Reactor leaching processes for chalcopyrite concentrates are being developed. Sulphidic minerals can be biologically leached by non-contact, contact or cooperative leaching mechanisms (for reviews, see The use of biologically generated ferric iron for chalcopyrite concentrate leaching offers advantages. Neutralization costs are significantly lower than in complete chalcopyrite oxidation, as the sulphur moiety of chalcopyrite is oxidized to polysulphides and elemental sulphur ( As the rates of chemical reactions generally double with every 10 In this work, chalcopyrite leaching was performed in two separate stages. The high-rate biological ferric oxidation process at 35 Copper concentrate obtained from Pyhäsalmi Cu–Zn mine in Finland (Outokumpu Oyj) was used throughout the experiments. The concentrate consisted of 25.4% Cu, 27.9% Fe, 2.2% Zn, 0.76% Pb, 32.6% S, 9.6 The influences of solution pH (0.8–1.9) and ferric iron concentration (7–90 The effect of temperature and solids concentration on ferric leaching was studied at 50 With 10% solids concentration, the ferric solution was periodically changed in order to provide enough ferric ions to the solution and to simulate a continuous-flow leaching system. Once no more than 60% of ferric iron was consumed in the leach liquor, solids were allowed to settle down and the liquid was discarded before the addition of a fresh preheated ferric leaching solution. Ferric addition experiments were conducted in stirred tank reactors described above. The reactor conditions were as follows: liquid volume 1.5 Working electrodes ( Redox potential (Eh) was measured using a Hamilton Pt-ORP platinum electrode, pH using a WTW Sentix 41 or Orion SA720 pH-meter and temperature with ama-digit ad 15th digital thermometer. Ferrous iron concentration was determined using a UV 1601 spectrophotometer (Shimadzu Europa GmbH) by the colorimetric The effect of stepwise addition of ferric iron on copper yield was studied. Stoichiometric ferric iron addition in 1, 2 or 5 doses resulted in similar copper leaching yields (38–44%) in 15 The effects of Fe The effect of temperature was studied to determine the optimal temperature range for ferric sulphate leaching of chalcopyrite concentrate. Increase in the leaching temperature increased the initial rate of the copper leaching, but did not clearly affect the copper yield ( CuFeS After determining the effects of pH, Fe The combination of biological ferric iron production with ferric sulphate leaching of chalcopyrite concentrate resulted in fast initial copper leaching rates, followed by decreased leaching rates probably due to jarosite and sulphur layers. This work demonstrates that copper leaching rates were similar at pH of 1.0–1.8 and in the presence of 7–90 Increased temperature increased the chalcopyrite leaching rate, which was observed also by The increase of the solids concentration from 1% to 10% increased the copper leaching rate, but simultaneously decreased the copper yield from 80% to 40%. The decrease in the copper yield was probably due to the strong chemical and electrochemical fluctuation. The rapid increase of solution potential at the time of the solution change indicates that the chalcopyrite surface was polarized, leading later on to slower reduction of ferric ions ( Sulphur and jarosite precipitates covered the chalcopyrite surface. Since elemental sulphur and intermediary copper sulphides are less reactive than chalcopyrite ( In conclusion, the two-step biological ferric sulphate production combined with ferric sulphate leaching of chalcopyrite at 86 This work was funded by the graduate school of Tampere University of Technology and Outokumpu Oyj. We thank Minna Männistö and Virpi Salo for the construction of the reactors.