The strontium salts Sr(cholate)2, (Compound 1), Sr(dehydrocholate)2, (Compound 2) and Sr3(3-dehydrocholanoyliden-l-tartrate)2, (Compound 3) have been prepared and characterized. The potential anti-osteoporotic activity of these compounds was tested on human primary osteoblasts (hOBs) and human primary osteoclasts (hOCs) in comparison with the bioactivity of strontium ranelate, previously registered as drug in the treatment of post-menopausal osteoporosis. Our results led to the hypothesis that the tested compounds, particularly Compound 2, may have requirements for modulating skeletal tissue regeneration or at least down regulating the loss of bone mass. In fact, all tested compounds have been shown to induce maturation in human primary osteoblasts (hOBs) and apoptosis of human primary osteoclasts (hOCs) at the same time.Evidence is growing that strontium (Sr) influences bone cells and bone metabolism in vitro and in vivo. Many studies have shown that Sr SrR is hypothesized to be a dual-acting agent with both anti-resorptive and anabolic skeletal benefits The precise molecular mechanism responsible for SrR effects is not clear and needs to be investigated. Functional analyses that have been performed suggest that different signaling pathways may be involved in the osteoblastic and osteoclastic responses to SrR Although, SrR is now being administered to women for osteoporosis, it could have potentially therapeutic value in different osteopenic disorders, including Paget’s disease and cancer with bone metastases. To avoid possible adverse reactions in the greater population, it may be important to design analogous compounds that are better tolerated. Since it is evident that the therapeutic action of SrR is due exclusively to Sr Analysis of the characteristics of bile acids indicates that their anions may be promising alternative carriers for Sr 3-Dehydrocholanoyliden- The amount of strontium in each sample was determined by atomic absorption spectroscopy using 460.7 Samples and standards were added to 0.1% KCl solution, the 0.1% KCl solution being used as a calibration blank. Because considerable ionization of strontium occurs in an air-acetylene flame, it was controlled by the addition of an alkali salt. A calibration curve was made after reading four standard strontium solutions (1, 3, 5, 10  Elemental analyses: see IR (KBr, cm    The solubility in water of Elemental analyses: see IR (KBr, cm    The solubility in water of Elemental analyses: see IR (KBr, cm   Human primary osteoblasts (hOBs) were obtained and cultured as previously described Human primary osteoclasts (hOCs) were prepared as reported by Matsuzaki et al. The alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity was evaluated in confluent hOBs by the hydrolysis of The extent of mineralized matrix in the plates was determined by Alizarin Red S staining (Sigma) in the cells cultured for up to 35 Tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) staining was performed as previously reported Immunocytochemistry analysis was performed employing the streptavidin–biotin method utilizing the Ultraystain Polyvalent-HRP Immunostaining Kit (Ylem—Avezzano (AQ), Italy). Cells grown in chamber slides were fixed in cold 100% methanol, and permeabilized with 0.2% (v/v) Triton X-100 (Sigma Aldrich, Chemical Co. St. Louis, MO, USA) in TBS (Tris-buffered saline). Cells were incubated in 3% H Cells were then incubated at room temperature with anti-polyvalent Biotinylated Antibody (Ultraystain Polyvalent-HRP Immunostaining Kit, Ylem—Avezzano (AQ), Italy). After rinsing in TBS, Streptavidin HRP (Ultraystain Polyvalent-HRP Immunostaining Kit, Ylem) was applied; then Substrate-chromogen mix (AEC Cromogeno kit, Ylem) was added. After washing, cells were mounted in glycerol/TBS 9:1 and observed using a Leitz microscope. At the end of appropriate days of treatment, cells were rinsed twice with PBS solution and fixed for 25 Cytotoxicity was determined on in vitro cultured human hOBs. The cells were plated in 96-well plates. Determinations of viable cells were performed using a colorimetric assay with MTT (thiazolyl blue). The assay, based on the conversion of the yellow tetrazolium salt MTT to purple formazan crystals by metabolically active cells The data are expressed as mean Among the bile acids strontium salts prepared for this study, we excluded those less soluble in water (deoxycholate, ursodeoxycholate) and we chose for this study the Sr salt of natural cholic acid (Compound The elemental analysis of C and H and the determination of Sr content by atomic absorption supported the indicated composition of the three compounds (see Two different preparations of hOBs (hOB1 and hOB2) obtained from bone specimens collected as described in Experimental section, were used for these experiments. All samples were characterized for their osteoblastic phenotype by expression of specific markers, including ALP (alkaline phosphatase) activity and Runx2 ( To determine whether the newly synthesized compounds had any effect on these bone forming cells, the viability of these hOBs was examined by the colorimetric MTT assay. Studies were done using 0.l–0.001 hOBs cultured under appropriate conditions followed a proliferation–differentiation sequence that led to mature osteoblasts. In the experiment shown in Subsequently, we determined whether these compounds may affect the formation of mineralized nodules in hOBs cultured in osteogenic medium for 35 In order to evaluate the influence of strontium ranelate on the behavior of osteoclasts, the primary bone-resorbing cells, we treated hOCs with all four compounds. On day 14 of culture, multinucleated TRAP-positive cells expressing the MMP-9 osteoclast-associated antigen were detected, confirming that this cellular phenotype was achieved at the molecular level ( This study describes the synthesis of three strontium-bile acid salts and their potential bioactivity as anti-osteoporosis drugs. To assess if they have the pre-requisites for modulating bone tissue regeneration, these strontium salts Sr(cholate) In addition, considering that complexation with bile acid anions increases the absorption of metal ions, like calcium and iron, we suggest that Sr  E.M. thanks Consorzio Interuniversitario di Ricerca in Chimica dei Metalli nei sistemi Biologici (C.I.R.C.M.S.B.) for a research grant. E.L. is a recipient of a fellowship from the Fondazione Cassa di Risparmio di Cento. This work was supported by Regione Emilia Romagna, Programma di Ricerca Regione Universita’ 2007–2009. English revision of the article was performed by the editorial staff of the Journal of Inorganic Biochemistry.