Fast catastrophic landslides, flowslides, avalanches, lahars and debris flows involve fluidized mixtures of soil and water. To improve safety of human settlements endangered by them it is necessary to predict their occurrence, triggering conditions, path, velocity and depth, and runout distance. Predictions are based on models (mathematical, rheological and numerical). In this paper (i) we introduce a hierarchical set of mathematical models describing solid-pore fluid coupling, (ii) we introduce the concept of dynamical critical state line (DCSL), depending on shear strain velocity, which generalizes the critical state line (CSL) used in Geomechanics to describe residual conditions at failure, (iii) we propose a dilatancy term depending on the distance to the DCSL, (iv) we introduce a viscoplastic law for dilatant cohesive-frictional fluids based on a deviatoric and a volumetric part, and (v) we describe the depth-integrated version of the proposed rheological model, providing all necessary items to be implemented in a numerical model.Fast landslides, avalanches, lahars and debris flows are geophysical, gravity driven flows causing extensive loss of human live and economic damage throughout the world every year. They involve phase changes from solid to fluid at the triggering stage and from fluid to solid when the motion stops. The interaction between solid grains and pore water is of paramount importance. Indeed, the mechanical behaviour of soil–water mixtures does not depend on total stresses, but on effective stresses, which are obtained by subtracting the pore pressure hydrostatic tensor from the total stress tensor. Slope failures can be triggered by different causes: (i) changes of effective stresses induced by changes of load (earthquakes), pore pressures (rain), or changes of geometry (erosion), and (ii) material degradation due to weathering. There exist several alternative classifications of landslides according to their shape, morphology, velocity of propagation, etc. Two interesting types are slides and flows. In the former, deformation is concentrated in a narrow zone, the failure surface. Kinematics can be approximately described as the movement of a rigid mass along the failure surface. This mechanism of failure is associated to concepts such as material softening, strain localization and shear bands. Flows are usually produced in loose metastable deposits, where failure is of diffuse type Concerning mathematical modelling, there is still much work to be done to describe coupling between different phases, and phenomena such as segregation and comminution. Coupling between solid particles and pore fluids has been investigated in Geomechanics since the early work of Biot Rheological models have been developed since the work of Bingham The case of geophysical granular flows involves the additional complexity of the grain sizes, which can range from fractions of mm to m. Rheological tests are also complex to perform, and in many occasions, the researchers use small scale flumes In this paper (i) we introduce a hierarchical set of mathematical models of different complexity describing solid-pore fluid coupling, (ii) we introduce the concept of dynamical critical state line (DCSL), depending on shear strain velocity, which generalizes the critical state line (CSL) used in Geomechanics to describe residual conditions at failure, (iii) we propose a dilatancy term depending on the distance to the DCSL, (iv) we introduce a viscoplastic law for dilatant cohesive-frictional fluids based on a deviatoric and a volumetric part, and (v) we describe the depth-integrated version of the proposed rheological model, providing all necessary items to be implemented in a numerical model. Fluidized geomaterials are mixtures of soil and water with a mechanical behaviour governed by coupling between solid and fluid phases. Indeed, intergranular stresses depend on pore pressure. In the limit case of liquefaction, the intergranular stresses are close to zero, and the soil behaves as a viscous fluid. Much effort has been devoted in the past to understand coupling between soil skeleton and pore water. The first model was proposed by Biot We will assume that the fluidized soil consists of a solid skeleton and a fluid phase, water, which fills completely the voids. The skeleton is made of particles of density The total stress tensor The balance of momentum equation for the mixture can be written as: Concerning the balance of mass of the pore water, we will consider the following volume changes in the mixture: Soil skeleton Deformation of soil grains caused by pore pressure Deformation of pore water caused by pore pressure From here, the mass conservation for the pore fluid can be written as: In above, we have introduced the mixed stiffness of water and solid particles The balance of momentum of the pore fluid is: Balance of mass and momentum of the pore fluid can be combined by substituting the value of The An important case is that of dry soils where the time scale of air pore pressure dissipation is similar to that of propagation of the landslide. In this case, pore pressures of the interstitial air can play a paramount role, and in the limit it is possible to arrive at “dry liquefaction”. The equations can be easily derived from those of (b), assuming there is only one fluid phase, i.e. the air, substituting now density, permeability and volumetric stiffness of the water by those of the air. So far, we have considered coupling between the soil grains and the pore fluid. There are two limit cases where the soil can be approximated as a single-phase material: Flow of dry granular materials with high permeability. If the permeability is high enough so that the consolidation time is much smaller than the time of propagation, the material behaves as “drained”. Flow of slurries with a high water content, where the time of dissipation is much higher than that of propagation. The behaviour can be assumed to be of undrained type. Material behaviour can be approximated using rheological models such as Bingham. In both cases, it is usually assumed that material density does not change. This approach can be justified in the case (i) by the existence of a “critical void ratio”. The analysis of landslides, due to their shape and geometrical properties allow some interesting simplifications. First of all, we will describe “propagation–consolidation” models, where pore pressure dissipation takes place along the normal to the terrain surface, and next, we will describe depth-integrated models, where the three-dimensional problem is transformed into a two-dimensional form. In propagation–consolidation problems, it is assumed that velocities and pore pressures can be decomposed into a propagation and a consolidation component as Eqs. Propagation: Consolidation It is important to note that we have assumed two mechanisms (i) an isochoric propagation, (deviatoric mechanism) and (ii) a volumetric 1D “consolidation” part which accounts for both pore pressure dissipation or generation and dilatancy. This splitting will be done also with the rheological model, where we will introduce a volumetric and a deviatoric part. The former is coupled to the latter, as dilatancy will be made to depend on the shear strain rate. In what follows, we will drop subindexes “0” and “1” referring to propagation and consolidation. Many flow-like catastrophic landslides have average depths which are small in comparison with their length or width. In this case, it is possible to simplify the 3D propagation–consolidation model described above by integrating its equations along the vertical axis. Depth-integrated models have been frequently used in the past to model flow-like landslides. It is worth mentioning the pioneering work of Hutter and coworkers We will use the reference system sketched in The equations of the depth averaged model are obtained integrating along If we limit the expansion to a single Fourier component: Concerning propagation, we obtain (see In above we have introduced the decomposition: The depth-integrated model keeps the volumetric and deviatoric parts described at the end of the preceding Section. So far, we have presented a hierarchical set of models with different degrees of complexity. It is interesting to note that the The problem arises when considering the constitutive/rheological behaviour of the material. There exists today a gap between constitutive models describing solid behaviour up to failure, and rheological models describing the propagation of the fluidized material. It is important, therefore, to advance in developing models for fluidized soils which take into account the behaviour in the solid limit. Concerning solid soils, one fundamental aspect of their behaviour is dilatancy, i.e., the volume change induced by shear deformation. Dilatancy is described as the ratio between the increments of volumetric and shear plastic strains. Soil constitutive models are based on dilatancy laws where dilatancy is expressed in terms of the mobilized stress ratio and the residual stress ratio at Critical State In Classical Soil Mechanics it is usually assumed that residual conditions – defined as a state where the soil is sheared at constant effective stress – takes place at a line on the 3D space (  One important phenomenon which is present in many fast landslides is liquefaction. We illustrate it in Once the soil has liquefied, it behaves in a fluid like manner. Any building or foundation resting on it will sink. In classical geomechanical finite element codes, the computations stop here. We can conclude that stress paths approach the CSL when reaching failure, either contracting (right hand side) or dilating (left hand side). At CSL, the soil flows at constant volume, constant Extending the model beyond failure at much higher strain rates is still a challenge. Rheometers for granular mixtures of grains and water present important limitations, and the available information has to be carefully analyzed. Many rheological models used for landslide propagation and related phenomena assume that soil flows at constant volume, independently of the shear strain rate. This assumption implies that a for a fluidized soil which has failed at an state ( However, fluidized granular materials dilate when the rate of shear strain increases under constant Concerning dilatancy, the rate of volumetric strain will depend on how far the state is from the dynamic CSL, being zero when the path reaches it. The fluidized soil will dilate if its state is below the dynamic CSL and contract when it is over it, which can occur when we decrease the shear strain rate ( We will assume that in the range of interest the CSLs at different shear strain rates are parallel, and that dilatancy depends on the distance to the stable dynamic CSL. The dynamic CSL can be obtained by a translation of the type: It is important to remark that the proposed law is based on qualitative aspects observed on flowing granular materials. The model has still to be contrasted against experimental evidence. However, this simple model could explain the behaviour observed in both constant volume and constant pressure rheometers, where it is observed that in the former – run at constant voids ratio – an increase of the rate of strain causes an increase of pressure, while in the latter case, voids ratio increases. If we assume that the fluid is isotropic, and we want to express the stress as a function of the rate of deformation tensor, it is possible to use the so-called “representation theorems”. Following Malvern Concerning the propagation part, the proposed model is a particular case of To obtain the function   The model includes a strength term which provides a contribution to the stress tensor when It is interesting to note that the model particularizes to a Bingham fluid by choosing. In this work we will use this model within the framework of depth-integrated equations. However, it is interesting to note that the proposed model can be generalized to the general 3D form of Eq. The mathematical model presented in Section The infinite landslide is a simple one-dimensional, steady state model where a fluid flows with constant depth and velocity along an inclined plane of infinite length. In This simple model is valid after failure has been triggered and the fluidized soil flows downhill. The case we will consider is that of diffuse failure affecting the whole mass of soil, but it can be easily generalized to localized failure conditions by assuming a rigid layer on top of the shearing layer. The shear stress varies linearly from zero at the surface to a maximum at the bottom given by Once we have obtained the velocity First of all, we will consider the vertical distribution of shear stress and strength s of the fluidized soil, which have been depicted in We will introduce next the submerged density of soil particles Concerning the strength term The point We will introduce the non-dimensional vertical coordinate ξ in the shear zone as: If we consider the two triangles with a vertex at The momentum correction factor The proposed model has, as particular cases of interest the following: The Herschel–Bulkley fluid, if we assume the fluid is purely cohesive and dilatancy is zero. The dilatant viscoplastic frictional fluid, if we assume that cohesion is zero. It is interesting to note that in this case, and taking Most of existing depth-integrated codes use very simple rheological laws, the main reason being the difficulty of implementing complex models such as the generalized viscoplastic model of Cheng and Ling. One such simple model is the frictional fluid, where the cohesion and all viscous terms are disregarded. We will consider first the vertical distributions of shear stress and strength, which are, respectively: Again, it is not possible to know the distribution of the shear stress along the vertical. In some cases, the fluidized soil flows over a basal surface made of a different material. If the friction angle between both materials This simplified model implements the effect of pore pressure at the basal surface, and we can see from above that the effect of the pore pressure is similar to decreasing the friction angle. Frictional fluid models can be complemented using some sort of additional basal friction taken from channel flows. We can mention here the Chezy–Manning equation where the basal friction is given by: During 2007, the Hong Kong Geotechnical Office organized a benchmarking exercise aiming to assess the accuracy of numerical and constitutive models. The participants were provided a detailed digital terrain elevation map, including the original position of the mobilized mass and the final position of the deposit. We will show 2 of the 12 benchmark tests, which were modelled using the SPH model described in Both examples correspond to the two limit cases described in Section We are aware that in order to perform a full comparison of the proposed model, more data than available will be welcome. However, large catastrophic landslides occurring in nature are not usually monitored, and the available data is scarce, many times not very precise and based on eyewitnesses’ reports. The two cases we will present have been selected because excellent topographical information was provided, which is a key factor in modelling. Indeed, the second case exhibits branching which cannot be captured with low resolution digital terrain models. This example is based on the information found both in the package provided by Hong Kong Geotechnical Office. Frank slide happened in Canada in 1903. It is the event causing a larger number of victims in Canadian history. It consisted of a rock avalanche involving approximately 36 Modellers were provided with (i) a digital terrain model describing the situation before landslide took place, based on historic photographs and maps, and (ii) a full topographical description of the sliding mass. The grid spacing was 20 The model used in the simulation is a depth-integrated SPH code, which has been described in Pastor et al. The analysis is an approximation, as in addition of using a depth-integrated model, inverse segregation and fragmentation happened, which have not be taken into account in the analysis. Concerning the results of the computations: (i) the final position agrees well, (ii) the width and length of the deposit are 1300 and 2000 We provide in In conclusion, the performance of the model is based on: position of deposit and its track, average depth of the deposit and duration of the slide. The second example we will consider is the Tsing Shan debris flow which happened in Hong Kong in on the 14th April 2000. As in the previous case, the analysis based on the information found both in the package provided by Hong Kong Geotechnical Office and the report by King In order to model it, we have used the proposed model, with tan Modelling of fluidized geomaterials is of paramount importance to understand, predict and mitigate the consequences of fast catastrophic landslides and related phenomena. Prediction is based on mathematical, rheological/constitutive and numerical modelling. At the time of writing this paper, there exist difficulties and limitations in the modelling techniques: General mathematical models based on mixtures theory have not been applied still to large-scale problems because of the large number of degrees of freedom involved. In consequence, propagation–consolidation models and the depth-integrated forms derived from them present a reasonable compromise between computational cost and accuracy. Testing of fluidized soils in rheometers present a number of important difficulties. In addition to the problem of not being possible to test particles of large size existing data has to be carefully interpreted to check consistency. This is the case of Bagnold's tests One important aspect of geomaterials behaviour is dilatancy, but so far it has not been implemented in rheological models used for landslide analysis. Based on the limitations mentioned above, we have proposed some ideas and techniques which can improve modelling of fast landslides. First of all, we have presented a general mathematical modelling framework which can be applied both to classical geotechnical problems and to fast landslides. This general model includes an extra dilatancy term, which has been used in the past to describe phenomena such as densification under cyclic loading and densification Once the mathematical model has been described, we propose a rheological model consisting of two parts, (a) a shear or deviatoric component, which is of the same kind usually used to describe fast landslides presently, and (b) a volumetric component, coupled to the deviatoric. We propose a model which in the limit is compatible with classical soil mechanics Critical State Theory. Concerning the shear component, it is a general model which embraces several well known, isochoric rheological models such as Bingham, Herschel-Bulkley and the classical frictional fluids. From this general model we propose a particular form which results on a model similar to Voellmy's. Concerning the volumetric part, we propose a dilatancy law based on a generalization of Critical State. The model can predict (a) the increase in pressure observed in constant volume tests, and (b) the increase of voids ratio observed in constant pressure tests. The authors would like to express their gratitude to the Ministries of Science and Education (Project ANDROS), and Fomento (Project MODELAD) for the economic support provided. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the Geotechnical Engineering Office, Civil Engineering and Development Department of the Government of the Hong Kong SAR in the provision of the digital terrain models for the Hong Kong landslide cases. Mr. Thomas Blanc has been hosted by the Department of Informatics of Universidad Rey Juan Carlos of Madrid, and gratefully acknowledges the support received.