Lithium (Li: atomic number 3), sodium (Na:11), and potassium (K:19) are very reactive, monovalent alkali metals that occupy the Group 1A position on the periodic table. These metals find extensive applications in many industries, both as pure metal as well as compounds. Application in compound forms is significant for all alkali metals, as some of the most important commercial chemicals contain these metals. Lithium is used as a stearate in lubricating greases, as oxide in ceramics and porcelain, as halides in welding fluxes and as salts in medical treatment. Recent applications of lithium metal include batteries and energy storage devices. Aluminum–lithium alloys have found extensive use in aerospace applications. Sodium is primarily used in the synthesis of anti-knock agent for automotive gasoline. Other uses include reductant for zirconium, titanium, and potassium metal production and as a reductant of oils to fatty alcohols for detergent applications. Its compounds, particularly the chloride and hydroxide are important industrial chemicals. Potassium in the form of chloride is mainly used in fertilizers. The primary production method of sodium and lithium is by molten salt electrolysis while potassium is produced using sodium in a metallothermic reduction process. Lithium cell uses a salt mixture of lithium chloride and potassium chloride where as Sodium cell (Downs Cell) uses a mixture of sodium chloride and calcium chloride. The occurrence, metallurgical extraction methods, chemical properties, and prominent applications, including those of the compounds of alkali metals—lithium, sodium, and potassium—have been described. Alkali metals are excellent reductants for other metal compounds, since alkali metals form some of the most stable compounds. Thus, a hybrid process has been outlined where the alkali metal is electrochemically produced and used as a pyrochemical reductant Lithium in nature, is primarily obtained from lithium-bearing pegmatites and brines. The lithium found within the pegmatite formations is in the mineral forms of spodumene, petalite, lepidolite, and amblygonite. These pegmatites are found as veins within or associated with granites and feldspar and are generally the primary sources for extraction of lithium. The mineral, spodumene (Li Flotation is primary used for mineral extraction from lithium ores. In this process, lithium ores are concentrated with respect to lithium oxide from 1–3% Li In the acid cleaning process, the concentrated spodumene ore is placed in a kiln and heated to elevated temperatures between 1075°C and 1100°C. This process changes the naturally occurring alpha-spodumene into beta-spodumene, which can be more readily attacked by the acid. The beta-spodumene is further cooled and ball-milled. This powder is then roasted in a second kiln under an excess of sulfuric acid at a temperature between 200–250°C. The following reaction occurs at this stage: Once this reaction has taken place, the kiln is then leached with water. This yields a lithium sulfate product to be treated with sodium carbonate to convert it into lithium carbonate. Hydrochloric acid can then be used to react with the lithium carbonate to form lithium chloride. In the alkaline cleaning process, either a spodumene or a lepidolite concentrated ore is ground and calcined with a mixture of 3.5 parts limestone to 1 part lithium. This is done at a temperature between 900°C 1000°C. In this process, the kiln is then hot-leached with water and the product is lithium hydroxide, which can be converted to lithium chloride using hydrochloric acid: Lithium chloride is thus the source for electrolytic extraction of lithium. Metallic lithium can be obtained by the electrolysis of a melt, comprising of an equal mixture of lithium chloride and potassium chloride. A schematic diagram of this cell can be seen in Electrolytic lithium is refined by remelting, when the insolubles either float to the surface or sink to the bottom of the melt pot. Potassium is only slightly miscible in lithium. The remelting step produces lithium metal with less than 100 ppm of potassium.  As one of the most abundant minerals on earth, sodium is most commonly derived from natural salts. The important sodium salts are sodium chloride (rock salt), sodium carbonate (soda), sodium sulfate (thenardite), sodium nitrate (Chile salt peter), and sodium borate (borax). These sodium salts are commonly found in seawater, salt lakes, alkaline lakes, and mineral springs. Sodium chloride is the typical starting material for the manufacture and extraction of sodium metal. Deposits of sodium chloride in the United States are also in the form of salt domes and are found in Virginia, West Virginia, Texas, and Louisiana. Since these salts were deposited many years ago by pre-existing seas and lakes, most of the deposits are located underground. Therefore, these salts are typically flushed out of underground mines by solution mining with water in the form of brines. Current commercial practice for manufacturing of metallic sodium is based almost entirely on the reduction of sodium chloride. The most important technique for reducing this salt is by electrolytic reduction using the Downs process. Direct electrolysis of sodium hydroxide by the Castner process produced sodium prior to the advent of the Downs process. Carbothermic reduction of soda ash is also practiced as shown below: Equation In industry today, the most common way of producing metallic sodium is through the use of a Downs cell. A Downs cell is comprised of a large steel vessel that is lined with refractory firebricks and is operated at 590°C. The cell has a large, vertical, central graphite anode descending from the bottom of the cell that is surrounded by cylindrical steel cathodes. This creates an annular electrolysis zone. The greatest single demand for sodium in the world today is for the synthesis of tetraethyllead ( The lead that is not used in the reaction is recycled back into the process. Another major use of sodium is in the reduction of animal and vegetable oils into long-chain fatty alcohols. These alcohols are then used in the production of detergents and soaps. A third major consumer of sodium is the Hunter's process for the reduction of titanium and zirconium halides to their respective metals. The process of reducing these halides with sodium has become more and more popular due to the cost of magnesium (Kroll process) over the cost of sodium. The high thermodynamic stability of sodium chloride with respect to the titanium or zirconium chloride makes it a useful reductant. Metallic sodium also finds many uses in inorganic compounds and solutions such as sodium hydride, sodium amide, and sodium cyanide. Sodium rock salt can also be used for curing fish and meat in the packing and food preparation industry. Minor applications of sodium are found in a heat treating medium, high temperature reactor kettles, fractional condensers for metallic vapors, bus bars, sodium vapor lamps, photocells, modified Aluminum alloys, and the hardening of bearing metals. The most important potassium compound in industry is potassium chloride (KCl). Potassium chloride is also found as potash, which is used as a fertilizer. Potassium is abundant in seawater, as well as in mineral form in the Earth's crust. Seawater contains 380 Potassium chloride (KCl) is the most important potassium source, due to its wide use in fertilizers. Production of potassium by electrolysis, like sodium and lithium is grossly inefficient due to back diffusion of potassium in the salt that causes short-circuiting in the cell and the formation of metal fog. Salt mixtures with halides that are more stable than KCl have not been found, thus a low melting eutectic cannot be employed ( Equation Most of the potassium that is processed goes into fertilizers in the form of potassium chloride. Potassium chloride is also used in the production of other potassium compounds and solutions such as potassium hydroxide. Potash also accounts for a lot of the potassium that is consumed for agricultural purposes. Finally, potassium can also be found in some explosives and as a coloring agent in fireworks. Lithium and sodium are very reactive metals that are produced by electrolytic means. Potassium is produced by sodium reduction. These metals find applications in industry, particularly in the nuclear industry, as a reductant for other metal compounds since the alkali metals form some of the most thermodynamically stable compounds. This fact allows the development of a hybrid process where the electrolytically produced metal can be used Titanium tetrachloride has been used as an example of a metal compound. The equations indicate that lithium is a non-consumable reductant in this process where titanium metal can be produced along with anodically discharged chlorine gas. This type of electrochemical/chemical hybrid reaction schemes is being extensively researched. Some of the requirements for using such a process include insolubility of titanium and titanium chloride in the salt, lower thermodynamic stability of titanium chloride and lack of desire for intermetallic formation. In such a process, the metal compound can be continuously fed into the cell as lithium is being electrolytically generated. Lithium, sodium, and potassium are reactive alkali metals that are produced from their chlorides. Due to the high thermodynamic stability of the chlorides, electrolytic reduction at lower temperatures is commercially used by employing a eutectic salt mixture. Potassium chloride is pyrochemically reduced by sodium, where potassium must be removed constantly from the reaction site to enable the reduction. These alkali metals find extensive applications in industry, mostly in the compound form and as a reducing agent and a coolant in the metallic form. These metals must be handled with care due to their strong affinity for oxygen and moisture.