The inhibition ability of 4,4-dimethyloxazolidine-2-thione (DMT) for mild steel corrosion in a 1M HCl solution at 30°C was studied by means of potentiodynamic polarization, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) technique, and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Quantum chemical calculation based on PM3 method was performed on DMT. The molecule structural parameters, such as the frontier molecular orbital energy HOMO (highest occupied molecular orbital) and LUMO (lowest unoccupied molecular orbital), the charge distribution and the fraction of electrons (ΔN) transfer from inhibitor to mild steel were calculated and discussed. Results showed that DMT performed as good inhibiting effect for the corrosion of mild steel in a 1M HCl solution and inhibition efficiency is higher than 82% at 4×10−3
                     M DMT. Results indicate that the inhibition efficiencies increased with the concentration of DMT and the area containing S atom is most possible site for bonding the mild steel surface by donating electrons to the metal. Adsorption of the inhibitor on the mild steel surface followed Langmuir adsorption isotherm and the value of the free energy of adsorption ΔG
                     ○
                     ads indicated that the adsorption of DMT molecule was a spontaneous process and was typical of chemisorptions.Mild steel is widely used as a constitutional material in many industries due to its good mechanical properties and low cost. The corrosion of mild steel is of fundamental academic and industrial concern that has received a considerable amount of attention In this work, the inhibitory effect of 4,4-dimethyloxazolidine-2-thione (DMT) on mild steel corrosion in 1 Mild steel specimens obtained from the Metal Samples Company were used as the working electrodes throughout the study. The composition (wt.%) of the mild steel was: Fe, 99.21; C, 0.21; Si, 0.38; P, 0.09; S, 0.05; Mn, 0.05; Al, 0.01, and with an exposed area of 4.52 Electrochemical measurements were conducted with a Gamry water jacketed glass cell. The cell contained three electrodes, the working, counter and reference electrodes, comprised of mild steel, a graphite bar and a saturated calomel electrode (SCE), respectively. Measurements were performed using a Gamry Instrument Potentiostat/Galvanostat/ZRA model. The potentiodynamic current–potential curves were recorded by changing the electrode potential automatically from −200 to 200 The quantum chemical calculations were performed using VAMP 10.0 in Material Studio 4.3. PM3 semi-empirical method was employed to obtain the optimized geometry The numerical values of the variation of corrosion current density ( The inhibition efficiency (  The anodic Tafel slope ( The experimental results obtained from EIS measurements of the corrosion of mild steel in the presence and absence of inhibitor at 30 The electrochemical systems can be represented by the simplified CPE equivalent circuit, The fitted values were given in It was found that the To establish the formation of protective layer on the mild steel surface, scanning electron microscopic images were taken. The mild steel surface images after immersion in 1 To understand the corrosion inhibition mechanism, the organic compound’s adsorption behavior on the mild steel surface must be known. The degree of surface coverage ( Calculated free energy (Δ The quantum chemistry calculations were performed with Material Studio 4.3 program using PM3-SCF method basis set to initially optimize the geometry structure of the DMT. Frontier orbital theory is useful in predicting adsorption centers of the inhibitor molecules responsible for the interaction with surface metal atoms  Values of The Mulliken charge distribution of DMT is presented in Based on the above discussion it could be deduced that DMT apart from existing in the cationic form which can interact with mild steel surface by electrostatic attraction may also interact with the mild steel surface using a number of active centers forming a good protective layer on the mild steel surface, thus retarding further corrosion of the metal in hydrochloric acid solution. 4,4-Dimethyloxazolidine-2-thione (DMT) was showed excellent inhibition performance as a mixed-type inhibitor. The addition of DMT to a corrosive solution inhibits both anodic metal dissolution and cathodic proton reduction reactions. The inhibition efficiencies increased with the concentration of DMT. The inhibition efficiencies obtained from polarization measurements data are comparable with those obtained from impedance measurements. The adsorption model obeys the Langmuir adsorption isotherm, and the obtained value of Δ The authors gratefully acknowledge Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia for the support of this project under Grant No. UKM-GUP-BTT-07-25-170.