Interest in underground development is gaining ground in Greece, particularly in Athens, and is driven mainly by the sorely high land prices and the lack of adequate surface space. This paper focuses on the design of an underground Warehousing – Logistics Center (WLC) in the wider metropolitan area of Athens; the center is developed using the room and pillar mining method. The main concept of the paper is that creating an underground space that can host a particular use is not enough, especially in countries attempting their first steps in underground development. The key point is to prove that such underground facilities can be as functional as a respective surface one and at the same time be economically competitive. Based on this, the underground WLC's layout, storage capacity and operational issues were thoroughly examined. The paper provides cost data regarding the construction cost, as well as the development cost. Furthermore, the project was evaluated by means of an investment plan using the NPV and IRR criteria taking into account the selling of the produced aggregates on the market. The results of the analysis not only underline the feasibility of the plan, but also render it a very attractive investment.Subsurface space utilization in urban areas has been gradually gaining ground during the last decades. Among those areas, Kansas City is a pioneer in this field, starting from the early 1960s. Today leasing and developing is in excess of 100 Literature provides many case studies where subsurface facilities were constructed successfully and considered equally efficient compared to surface solutions ( The objective of the present paper is to investigate and evaluate the potential construction of an underground warehousing – logistics center (WLC) in Athens, Greece. The underground WLC is considered to be an alternative solution for the problems that the logistics market currently encounters in the area of Athens. Technically, the construction of an underground space that could possibly host a WLC in Athens is considered to be feasible, using the room and pillar mining method ( The determination of the logistics market, its characteristics and potentials was identified as the first priority. Accordingly, a market research was conducted in order to estimate the current needs of the logistics and warehousing market in Athens. The market research took place among the so-called Third Party Logistics companies (a Third Party Logistics – TPL company or provider is a company that supplies and/or coordinates logistics functions across multiple links in the logistics supply chain), and specifically among those representing approximately 60% of the total TPL market in Greece. The TPL sector is a rather new but quickly growing business sector in Greece. It started approximately 10 years ago, mobilized by the economic development of the country and the release of boarders within European Union countries. The main conclusions of the market research are briefly the following: Approximately 90% of the companies are located in the wider area of Athens. Those companies own 70–75% of the total storage volume of Greece. According to 86% of the TPL companies characterised the current demand of surface land in Athens for construction of new WLC as high or extremely high. When asked to predict the trend for a 10-year horizon 62% responded that the demand would be high or extremely high. Furthermore, from the research it is concluded that the storage facilities of the TPL companies in the wider area of Athens are situated in three main sites: area A (Thriassio Pedio), area B (Schimatari-Oinofyta-Agios Stefanos), and area C (Messogia) ( In general, the TPL market is expected to continue growing in the future as a thriving business. Consequently, the demand for surface land and storage volume is expected to stay in high levels, if not to increase more. According to data from both the conducted research among TPL companies and Due to high demand and lack of surface space available within the urban area, the cost of land appropriate for hosting WLCs in Athens has been tremendously increased during the last few years. Based on the research that was conducted and from data of the Athens, as most of the metropolitan cities, is a highly congested area with a population of almost four million people living and working in less than 500 km It is apparent that the construction of a WLC in Athens faces many complications. The only solution that has been followed until now is the gradual relocation of WLCs in neighbouring municipalities adjacent to Athens. Nevertheless, this relocation not only results in increased cost for all parties involved (seller, buyer and TPL companies), but also decreases the quality of the provided services. The proposed solution is the construction and operation of an underground WLC. Such a center avoids the two most important constraints that the construction of a surface center faces. Firstly, the high cost of surface land, which by the proposed solution is minimised. Secondly, it requires only a small surface area (4000 m Based on the analysis of the research data and the TPL companies’ predictions regarding the future trends of their market in Greece, area C was chosen as the most appropriate site for the construction and operation of the underground WLC. The area stood out as being the most promising for the forthcoming years in terms of both urban and commercial development. The proposed underground facility is located at the foot of Top Evzonas, Mt. Ymittos, 350 m above sea level. The WLC is constructed nearby the current road network, 5.5 km away from Paiania Municipality. Top Evzonas has relatively smooth topography and geologically is located in the Almiropotamos – Attica Unity, one of the four Unities appearing in the area of the Internal Geotectonic Zones of Greece ( The construction of the underground WLC is composed of two phases. During the first phase the underground space is produced by means of mining activity. The site operates as a typical underground limestone mine, and it produces limestone aggregates that are sold on the market. The second phase includes the conversion of the space into a state-of-the-art WLC according to specifications and standards of respective surface centers. The limestone is mined using the room and pillar mining method ( The first step in constructing a WLC is to determine the overall space requirements of the center ( The underground WLC should be equally ergonomic, efficient and functional as any surface logistics center. The necessary modifications include the installation of the utilities networks (i.e. electricity, communications, water supply, drainage, ventilation and lighting) and the creation of the cross-docks (ramps). The ground will be covered by industrial floor. Following fire safety regulations, smoke detectors and sprinklers will be installed. The design also includes optional security systems (TV networks etc.). It is worth mentioning that although no serious problems with water flow are likely to be encountered (the water table is located 150 m below the center's floor), a full waterproofing system was adopted, since a complete and detailed study of the groundwater conditions has not been conducted yet. The system is composed mainly of geomembranes similar to those used in transportation tunnels. The underground WLC will be ready to operate approximately 2 years after the mining operations begin. The underground space is divided into the following areas: the security corridor, the storage area, the receiving and shipping staging area, the cross-docks, the temporary parking area and the common utility area, i.e. offices, restrooms, etc. ( The creation of a security corridor, although it reduces the WLC area by approximately 20%, was adopted in order to have an area completely free of any activity, dedicated to serve as an emergency exit in the case of fire or other accident. The dimensions of the center follow the ‘length over width equals 2’ rule of thumb (rectangular shape), serving appropriately the U-shaped flow of materials ( Every WLC has a storage capacity, typically measured in square or cubic meters, or in storage units. Therefore, an underground WLC has to achieve a satisfactory storage capacity as a function of the total space of the project. According to In order to determine the practical capacity, the A surface center can achieve a theoretical storage area of 38 The total cost for the creation of an underground WLC is divided in two main categories: the cost for the creation of the underground space (mining exploitation) and the cost for the conversion of the underground space into a state-of-the-art underground WLC (development cost). In addition, a relatively small amount of money is required for purchasing the necessary surface land. The calculations for the extraction cost were based on previous studies for underground limestone mining cases similar to the one examined here ( The mining operations are carried out by a contractor allowing for 20% profit. The extracted aggregates are sold at the current market price. Currently, Athens faces a significant problem regarding aggregates supply. The production from open pit quarries cannot meet the demand for aggregates and an alternative solution is being sought. Given the circumstances, the extracted aggregates from the underground mine can be sold at the current market price and provide substantial revenue for the investment. The underground space is leased progressively. An overview of the expenses analysis is presented in The cost estimations are based on thorough investigation of international experience, coming predominantly from underground warehouses in Kansas City, USA and were adapted to the particularities of the Greek market. It is worth noticing that approximately 47% of the conversion cost refers to the expenses for the waterproofing system. These expenses are expected to be reduced during the mining period and after detailed investigation of the underground water conditions take place. On the other hand, the calculations advocate that the expected revenue from the aggregates would cover approximately 55% of the total construction cost. As a result, the net final cost for the construction of the underground WLC is 6 The total construction cost of a surface center of the same theoretical storage capacity in the same area ranges between 180 and 250 €/m The project was evaluated for a 15-year period. The main cash flow parameters are shown in Furthermore, with a view to investigating the project's financial prospects, a sensitivity analysis was carried out taking into consideration two worst-case scenarios that are highly unlikely to occur ( The warehousing – logistics market in Athens is a thriving and quickly expanding business. Nevertheless, the market faces two serious problems that need to be addressed. These problems concern the sorely high land prices and the intensely fragmented land, which results in inadequate plots and hinders the development of new storage facilities. The development of underground WLCs proposed in this paper could be a long-term alternative solution dealing with the above mentioned problems. The feasibility of the proposal depends to a great extent on the land price. Obviously, the higher the land price, the more profitable the plan becomes, and areas with high land prices are primary candidates for the application of the project. The predominantly high land prices in the wider area of Athens result in a very attractive investment plan. Another important element is that in the case of Athens, the creation of the underground space by means of the room and pillar method results in the production of a significant amount of limestone aggregates. These aggregates can be sold on the existing market, thus providing revenues that further enhance the financial prospects of the project. Moreover, it is worth mentioning that a simplified sensitivity analysis proved that even in the worst-case scenarios examined, the proposed plan could be cost-effective. However, the relocation of a surface activity in an underground facility is not an easy task. There are many different issues, such as the height of the facility, the corridor width, the number of shelves, the movement of the forklifts, etc., which are affected by the particular nature of the underground space and that need to be taken into account. The analysis proved that, following the described design principles, it is possible to create an underground WLC having the same features and being equally efficient as a respective surface one. Especially, with regards to the storage capacity, which is a vital characteristic of any WLC, it is proved that the underground facility's storage capacity is equivalent to that of a respective surface one. In addition, owing to the fact that underground space is virtually unlimited, the potential of future expansion is taken for granted, which is a clear and welcome advantage. Finally, the previously described approach revealed a very important issue regarding the promotion of underground development. Particularly in countries lacking experience in it, the promotion should be done on the grounds of an integrated procedure: from the economy to the technical problem and then back to the economy. The authors would like to express their gratitude to Mr S. Andrianopoulos, Scientific Fellow at the National Technical University of Athens (School of Mechanical Engineering, Section of Industrial Management and Operational Research) and Executive Consultant of Planning SA, for offering his experience and advice on logistics and warehousing. They would also like to thank the TPL companies, which kindly participated in the market research.