Many of the metals used in orthopaedic surgical implants are immunologically active and can cause hypersensitivity reactions. Most of these metal hypersensitivity (MHS) reactions are type IV/delayed-type hypersensitivity reactions. The most common form of all metal hypersensitivity reactions is allergic contact dermatitis (ACD) caused by nickel. The purpose of this review is to examine the evidence regarding hypersensitivity to orthopaedic implants and provide current recommendations for evaluating these patients. We report on four case examples of patients where it was determined that metal allergy led to complications related to surgery. The most common symptoms for patients with MHS-associated failures are localized soft tissue reaction including delayed wound healing and/or recurrent wound issues. The best way to avoid postoperative issues is to routinely ask patients prior to surgery if they have any known MHS including problems with cosmetic jewelry. If this is known before surgery, titanium or carbon fiber implants should be used for fracture fixation and arthroplasty implantation choice should be modified based on the specific arthroplasty performed. MHS-associated failures are a diagnosis of exclusion and must be contemplated after judicious workup of localized soft tissue reaction including delayed wound healing and/or recurrent wound issues.Surgical metallic implants have a wide array of therapeutic uses. In orthopaedic surgery, these implants are used in arthroplasty, bone augmentation, and bone fixation including fractures, osteotomies, and fusions (e.g., plates, screws, rods). Many of the metals are immunologically active and cause allergic (hypersensitivity) reactions. The most common form of all metal hypersensitivity is allergic contact dermatitis (ACD) caused by nickel. As such, implant MHS reactions present diagnostic and therapeutic challenges. MHS orthopaedic implant reaction is becoming more important to understand. The number of total joint arthroplasty patients testing positive for MHS has increased exponentially over the last 20 years. Between 10% and 15% of people exhibit cutaneous sensitivity to metal. The most commonly reported failure mechanism for metallic implants has been reported for total joint arthroplasty (TJA). In the United States it is estimated that 8.4% of total knee arthroplasties (TKAs) are revisions, while 10.7% of total hip arthroplasties (THA) are revisions. Hypersensitivity reactions are a function of the adaptive immune system. The Gell and Coomb’s classification types of hypersensitivity reactions are Type I, Type II (antibody-mediated), Type III, and Type IV (cell-mediated, delayed). Type II hypersensitivity reactions occur when immunoglobulin G (IgG) and immunoglobulin M (IgM) antibodies bind to antigens present on cell surfaces. Type III hypersensitivity reactions occur when antibodies bind to antigens present in serum. This leads to the development of an antigen-antibody IgG complex that leads to the activation of the complement system. Type IV hypersensitivity reactions involve T-cells, and unlike the other types do not require antibodies. Common symptoms of MHS reactions include localized pain, swelling, redness, warmth, loosening, draining, itching/burning, and implant instability. After institutional review board approval, we reviewed our institution’s medical records to identify cases in which it was determined that metal allergy led to complications related to surgery. Data was compiled by reviewing relevant clinical notes, operative notes, and radiographic findings stored in our institution’s electronic medical record. All the patients represented in the following case presentations were contacted about our intent to publish these findings and they gave verbal permission. A 53-year-old female presented with a left Schatzker type II tibial plateau fracture Five weeks post-operatively, there was concern for deep infection. The patient stated she had some purulent drainage the previous day with an increase in redness of the wound site. After wound evaluation, it appeared to be localized epidermolysis without stitch abscess. She was instructed to apply a topical antibiotic ointment. Three days later, there was no significant improvement, so she was started on clindamycin 300 mg (mg) for 14 days with dry dressing changes. Ten weeks post-operatively, she complained of aching in her joint line at night but overall denied any new wound problems. She advanced her activity and was instructed to begin weight bearing as tolerated. The patient also began use of a recumbent bike and outpatient physical therapy. Her wound stopped draining and healed uneventfully. She was seen 28 weeks postoperatively, and her wound had been draining for a couple weeks. Other than occasional stiffness in the morning, she had minimal pain/discomfort. There were no radiographic signs of failure or osteomyelitis ( Ten weeks after debridement and deep hardware removal, the patient’s knee pain developed to the point where she had difficulty with stairs and had pain with each step. At the time, WBCs were 7.21 × 10 At 32 weeks post-operatively, the patient reported no pain with a score of 0/10 and no wound issues. The patient stated she felt as if her recovery process was easier this time. Radiographs taken demonstrated that her fracture was continuing to heal ( A 58-year-old male sustained a distal tibia fracture and displaced ipsilateral clavicle fracture after a motorcycle accident. He underwent ORIF of the distal tibia fracture with an anteromedial stainless steel pre-contoured distal tibial locking plate ( At 123 weeks postoperative, he complained of skin changes over his left leg and described them as a nuisance. Coincidently, his dermatologist diagnosed him as having a nickel allergy. He stated he had occasional aching in his left tibia, but no consistent pain. He reported immense itchiness and the skin was described as dry and flaky. Additionally, the area that was involved was directly over his anteromedial tibial plate. He was prescribed a corticosteroid cream that was not effective to his satisfaction. Therefore, he underwent deep hardware removal. At 6 weeks follow-up after deep hardware removal, he was asymptomatic, including the skin changes. He had no pain and was able to walk without an assistive device. Radiographs of the left leg ( A 55-year-old male who was involved in a motor vehicle accident had a right posterior wall with significant comminution and marginal impaction ( Four years after surgery, he presented with right hip pain, up to 7/10 on the Visual Analog Scale (VAS), A 24-year-old female presented with a history of left groin pain for 7 months with no precipitating event. Previously, the patient had undergone conservative treatment (8 weeks of physical therapy, which did help with strengthening but did not help with pain and a steroid injection that helped with pain for a few weeks). The patient had a documented allergy to nickel (however, this was discovered after surgery) and no history of smoking, alcohol, or drug use. The patient had increased femoral anteversion and a cam lesion with retroversion of her acetabulum. One week later, left hip surgical dislocation with greater trochanteric osteotomy and fixation with a 22-modifier was performed. In addition, a left proximal femoral rotational osteotomy, left open femoral head and neck osteoplasty, left labral repair, and acetabuloplasty for the retroversion of the acetabulum and left hip wound vacuum-assisted closure (VAC) application measuring 30 cm Five weeks later the patient was doing physical therapy and using crutches. She had some drainage from her incision that began the previous week. Radiographs of her left hip showed good callus formation at her rotational osteotomy site with no change in her hardware ( Four weeks later, the patient presented with 2/10 pain on the VAS scale and was ambulating with a single crutch. On exam, she had two areas of her incision that were draining serous fluid. There was no cellulitis or erythema. Eight weeks later there was still draining of the postoperative wound, and she had fatigue. It was discussed with her that a CT scan was needed prior to plate removal to see if she needed a titanium plate placed. A nonunion workup and rheumatoid panel were performed for evaluation of her fatigue. A nickel tape was strapped to her right forearm and she was to report back as to what happened after wearing for three days. Three weeks later, the patient underwent deep hardware removal of the left proximal femur with wound VAC application of the left thigh measuring 36 cm Six weeks later the patient’s radiographs showed that she was healing well ( The most common symptoms for patients with MHS-associated failures are those exhibited by the presented cases—localized soft tissue reaction including delayed wound healing and/or recurrent wound issues. They may also have significantly delayed dermatological reactions similar to Case 3. These patients present similar to those with an indolent deep infection. A standard infection work-up should be performed. Furthermore, it should be verified with the patient if there is any history of metal sensitivity. Infection should be meticulously excluded prior to deducing MHS-associated failure. If it becomes necessary for the patient to have surgery for infection or consideration of MHS, deep cultures should be obtained to avoid missing a concomitant infection. We also recommend dermatological testing in patients with a history of autoimmune disorders, or multiple medical allergies due to the presence of a reactive immune system that may increase the risk of MHS. Finally, if a patient that has metallic implants in place with a history of multiple wound issues—or recurrent problems after operative debridement and appropriate infection management—dermatological testing for nickel allergy should be considered. In the setting of fractures, surgeons should be prepared to revise the implants with titanium or carbon fiber implants if bone stabilization is still required. The best way to avoid postoperative issues is to routinely ask patients prior to surgery if they have any known MHS including problems with cosmetic jewelry. If this is known prior to surgery, titanium or carbon fiber implants should be used for fracture fixation and arthroplasty implantation choice should be modified based on the specific arthroplasty performed. It is important to remember that titanium implants still have nickel in them, but it is a minimal amount, and is a more readily available material from implant manufacturers compared to carbon fiber for fracture fixation. For instance, if a THA is being performed, titanium femoral and acetabular components should be used with a ceramic femoral head and polyethylene acetabular liner. Alternatively, one approach could be to use these implant materials for every fracture or arthroplasty patient to minimize the risk of MHS reaction. Hypersensitivity reactions to nickel-containing orthopaedic implants may pose many therapeutic and diagnostic challenges. Hypersensitivity symptoms closely mimic infection and implant failure. As a result, MHS-associated failures are a diagnosis of exclusion and must be contemplated after judicious workup of localized soft tissue reaction including delayed wound healing and/or recurrent wound issues. C. Baumann: Collected the review materials and case study data, interpreted the data and designed the review, wrote and edited the manuscript. B. Crist: Concept idea and supervision of the medical student, analysis of case series patient data, evaluated and edited the manuscript.   No external funding was used in the execution of this study. The authors report no conflicts of interest.