Hydraulic fracturing of rocks has various engineering applications. However, there has been limited research into crack propagation prediction by three dimensional analytical techniques. This paper discusses such a technique for predicting the propagation surface of a pressurized circular crack subjected to various loading conditions. The propagation surfaces predicted from the proposed crack front propagation algorithm align well with published results. The suggested method consumes only a fraction of the time needed for a numerical simulation, and therefore it could be useful in assisting the design of hydraulic fracturing operations.radius or major axis of the elliptical crack (m) median crack increment input for FRANC3D (m) minor axis of the elliptical crack (m) predefined incremental length for the proposed analytical method (m) incremental length used in FRANC3D (m) median stress intensity factor for mode I along the crack front (Pa stress intensity factor for mode I (Pa stress intensity factor for mode II (Pa stress intensity factor for mode III (Pa kinked crack analytical stress intensity factor for mode I (Pa kinked crack analytical stress intensity factor for mode II (Pa kinked crack analytical stress intensity factor for mode III (Pa power input for calculating the incremental length in FRANC3D dip direction (°) dip angle (°) ellipse angle – the direction from the projected dip direction on the crack plane to the major axis of the ellipse (°) crack front angle – from the normal to the crack front towards the positive critical crack front angle (°) difference from the radial vector of the current fictitious plane to the kinked radial line (°) Poisson’s ratio effective normal stress on the surface of the crack (Pa) normal stress on the surface of the crack (Pa) tensile strength (Pa) shear stress along the surface of the crack (Pa) effective shear stress along the surface of the crack (Pa) crack front angle – from the shear angle – clockwise around the normal vector in the positive constant used to calculate the elliptical crack stress intensity factors constant used to calculate the elliptical crack stress intensity factors elliptical integral of the second kind intermediate eccentricity parameter used to calculate the elliptical crack stress intensity factors ratio of the minor to the major axis of the elliptical crack elliptical integral of the first kind linear elastic fracture mechanics It is important to predict the propagation paths of pressurized cracks in hydraulic fracturing operations in order to design and optimize the extraction of resources, such as geothermal energy and unconventional oil and gas. Hydraulic fracturing is the primary and most effective method used to increase productivity in these applications In an industrial setting, a method is needed for the quick initial assessment of the resultant fracture propagation surface according to the local stress conditions Rahman et al. The key advantage of the three dimensional methods is that they allow determination of the way a pre-existing crack re-orientates in the presence of various in-situ compressive stress regimes. In order to design effective hydraulic fracturing operations, it is important to determine this resultant crack propagation surface since the resultant fracture network provides the major permeable pathways for fluid or gas flow. A properly established three dimensional hydraulic fracturing propagation model can assist in the design of the stimulated fracture network to better target the gas zone or geothermal energy resources. Therefore, it is of significant practical importance to develop an efficient and accurate method to predict the three dimensional propagation surfaces resulting from hydraulic fracturing. To assist the development of such a mixed mode propagation method, the primary problem is simplified to a uniformly pressurized circular crack in an infinite medium subjected to uniform far-field stresses. Kassir and Sih In this paper, an analytical approach is developed to approximate the mixed mode propagation of a circular crack, by considering a fictitious equivalent elliptical crack and utilizing the maximum tangential stress criterion In summary, this paper presents an approximate three dimensional analytical method that can solve the crack propagation problem efficiently for an arbitrarily orientated circular internal crack. A planar crack propagation surface and front are assumed to simplify the problem and the maximum tangential stress criterion is used. Consider a circular crack with a radius of This is a mixed-mode problem, so opening and shearing modes are considered together when analyzing the propagation of this circular crack. The shearing mode is produced by unequal remote external compressive stresses. Using spherical coordinates It has been observed that the concept of stress intensity factors, defined above, can predict the propagation of pre-existing macroscopic cracks The stress intensity factors of mode I, II and III for a circular crack can be evaluated using the formulations outlined by Tada et al. The normal unit vector Young and Budynas The shear angle The net normal pressure Since the shear resistance The reason for presenting the normal and shear stresses and shear angle using the normal vector of the arbitrarily orientated plane is to provide direct expressions for the stress intensity factors that make the analytical propagation method easier to apply or extend, as discussed below. The maximum tangential stress criterion, proposed by Erdogan and Sih According to the maximum tangential stress criterion The local stresses at the crack front can be obtained by converting the stresses in Eq. Therefore Using these critical In this paper, the focus is placed on developing an approximate but simple, purely analytical method for the evaluation of stress intensity factors for the discussed problem, which is well defined. If the crack propagation increment is constant around the circumference of the crack, the crack front will not be on the same plane after propagation due to different The stress intensity factors for a planar elliptical fictitious crack can be approximated by the following expressions as outlined in Tada et al. The concept of a fictitious crack is used where the effective normal stress This concept produces a spatial stress tensor comparable to that obtained from finite element analysis. To compare the result of the fictitious crack with that of the kinked crack from FRANC3D; the analytical stress intensity factors based on the fictitious plane (Eq. Note the two definitions for stress intensity factors of the planar fictitious crack and the kinked crack are fundamentally different since the planar fictitious crack does not consider the kink of the propagation surface. To compare the stress tensor of the planar fictitious crack from Eq. The pressure This section presents a comparison study between the published results of Rahman et al. The geometric and mechanical properties of the model analyzed in this study are shown in The FRANC3D software package is designed to simulate crack growth in materials with a complex geometry, loading conditions and crack configuration This crack front is then smoothed by fitting a polynomial curve (with a user defined order that will give the best fit) to these calculated points. However, this propagation method implemented is problematic, since the crack is initially circular and hence the mode I stress intensity factors do not vary significantly. The lack of change in this stress intensity factor produces almost constant extension lengths in FRANC3D. As a consequence, once the crack kinks, the mesh cannot be generated properly in the first or subsequent steps. In addition, in FRANC3D the increment length The stress intensity factors for the pre-existing circular crack of case 3 calculated by FRANC3D and our proposed analytical method (see Eq. The coefficient of determination (R Similarly, the analytical stress intensity factors for the kinked crack in case 3 ( Using a propagation step size of 10% of the initial crack radius The propagation path on the XZ cross section through the middle of the model aligns well with the two dimensional results from the previous study by Rahman et al. For case 2 in Similar to case 3, the propagation profile on XZ cross section closely aligns with the results of the previous two dimensional study For case 1 in The propagation profile on XZ cross section follows the same trend as that of previous analyses by Rahman et al. The higher propagation path for case 1 is because the calculation of the stress intensity factors in the proposed method is based on an elliptical crack rather than on a circular or two dimensional linear crack and this is considered to be more realistic to represent the actual situation. Detailed examinations of case 2 (see In this paper, an efficient three dimensional analytical method using the LEFM theory was developed to solve the propagation problem of an arbitrarily orientated pressurized circular crack under different external compressive stresses. The stepwise solution is derived from the concept of a fictitious crack surface and the maximum tangential stress criterion. The proposed method is efficient and can produce results using a fraction of the time needed for a full finite element or boundary element analysis. However, it is not intended to replace finite element or boundary element analyses, but rather to provide a propagation algorithm that can be used for a quick assessment or in conjunction with these numerical analyses. As demonstrated, the results obtained from the proposed method align closely with published two dimensional studies. As demonstrated in this study, the transformation from the initial crack geometry to the final crack surface is a complex process and generally involves curved propagation surfaces. It is important to be able to predict these curved propagation surfaces to understand the detailed fracture network developed by hydraulically fracturing the reservoir. The proposed analytical method provides an efficient tool to help to address this problem, though an extension to cover interacting propagating cracks is necessary. In addition, experimental validation of the results produced by the proposed method will need to be conducted. The subsequent planar propagated crack front can be defined using all the corresponding crack propagation angles To generate a planar crack propagation front, a predefined constant increment value According to the maximum tangential stress criterion, at the Subsequently, For the convenience of calculating the propagation profile, a local crack plane coordinate system is introduced, where Therefore, the radial coordinates of the crack front after crack propagation can be calculated from the following expression: The radial lengths from the origin to the subsequent propagation front can then be calculated from the following expression: The local vectors of the subsequent crack front after crack propagation can then be calculated as: These coordinates can be transformed to the coordinates in the global system using the following expressions: The normal vector After the crack propagation, the propagation front on the fictitious crack plane can be approximated by an ellipse where the lengths of major and minor axis are calculated using the following expressions: The direction of the major axis of the ellipse, or ellipse angle When calculating the stress intensity factors for an elliptical fictitious planar crack, the angle Thus, the actual angle Similar to the discussions in Since the direction of the major axis of the ellipse may not be aligned with the dip direction of the crack plane, the general form of an ellipse must be used, i.e.: Using the slope Similarly, when the crack angle is equal to zero, i.e. The radial length from the origin (see The cross product of two vectors on the subsequent fictitious crack plane after crack propagation is calculated then converted to the global system. This normal vector of the fictitious crack plane is subsequently used to calculate the dip angle and dip direction of this plane using Eqs. Similar to the process discussed in