A hydrometallurgical procedure has been developed for the separation and recovery of nickel, cobalt and rare earths (RE) from spent Ni–MH batteries. In the process of separation and recovery, the positive and negative electrode materials were merged and leached with 3M H2SO4 at 95°C. In this stage, about 94.8% of rare earths were separated from other metals due to the low solubility of RESO4 at relatively high temperature. Then iron, zinc and manganese (together with the remaining 5.2% rare earths) were almost completely separated from nickel and cobalt by solvent extraction with 20% P204. Rare earths in the organic phase were recovered by stripping with 2M HCl after scrubbing Zn and Mn. Most rare earth sulphates remaining in the leach residue were transformed to RE(OH)3 by treatment with NaOH and then redissolved from the filter cake as RECl3 by using the rare earth strip liquor and additional HCl. Cobalt was easily separated from nickel by solvent extraction with 20% Cyanex 272 and pure cobalt and nickel sulphates were recovered from evaporation of the strip liquor and raffinate respectively. Finally, spherical nickel hydroxide powder was synthesized from the pure nickel sulphate, which is an important starting material for Ni–MH batteries. The overall recovery efficiency for rare earths, cobalt and nickel exceeded 98%.Ni–MH batteries have been applied widely in many fields since they were commercialized in 1990. Their electrodes consist of foamed-nickel or copper plating strip as substrate and nickel hydroxide and AB Many hydrometallurgical processes have been developed to recover metals from spent Ni–MH batteries in recent years. Because the solubilities of rare earth sulphates are low, especially at higher temperature, a large ratio of liquid to solid must be used to ensure a high leach recovery of rare earths, which makes the final nickel concentration low. This leads to large amounts of wastewater and high energy consumption. This work develops a facile and low-cost flowsheet to recover and separate rare earth, nickel and cobalt from the electrode materials of spent Ni–MH batteries. Higher concentrations of H Cylinder shaped Ni–MH batteries, used in this work, were provided by a battery plant. The commercial extractants employed, bis-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (P204) and bis-(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl) phosphinic acid (Cyanex 272) were purchased from Luoyang Zhongda Chemical Co. Ltd and Cytec Industries, respectively. These extractants were utilized without any further purification with kerosene diluents. All other reagents were of analytical reagent grade. The spent Ni–MH batteries were cut to remove the shells. Positive materials, negative alloy powders and foamed-nickel matrixes were taken out. Then, the mixed electrode materials were washed by water to remove alkali electrolytes. The cells weighed an average of 28.9 100 Extraction and stripping tests were carried out in a micro mixer-settler whose effective capacity of mixing chamber and clarifying chamber were 0.64 Most of rare earths existed as sulphates in the leach residue and were thoroughly precipitated as RE(OH) After rare earth and impurity removal and solvent extraction separation of Co and Ni, pure CoSO Spherical nickel hydroxide was prepared by feeding an aqueous solution containing Ni sulphate doped with Cd, Co and Zn sulphates into a 5 The concentrations of metals in the aqueous solutions were measured by atomic absorption spectrophotometer (TAS-990). Those in the organic phase were calculated from the mass balance. The pH was measured with a TOA pH meter type HM-30S. XRD was measured on D/MAX-RB X-ray powder diffractometer and SEM images were obtained using a Hitachi S-450 Scanning Electron Microscope. The specific capacity of the spherical Ni(OH) The rare earths in the spent Ni–MH batteries are mainly light rare earths, such as La, Ce, Pr and Nd. The solubility of rare earth sulphates obviously reduces with rising temperature ( Based on the differences in the solubility characteristics between the sulphates of rare earths and those of cobalt, nickel etc, higher concentrations of H The pH  In order to determine the required number of extraction stages, a McCabe–Thiele equilibrium isotherm was determined for the extraction of manganese by 20% P204 at an equilibrium pH of 2.5 as shown in The small amount of cobalt and nickel co-extracted into the organic phase was easily eliminated through a 3-stage counter-current scrubbing with 0.1 In order to recover the rare earths in the organic phase, Zn and Mn should be first removed by scrubbing. Unlike the rare earths and Fe(III), the impurity Zn and Mn were easily scrubbed and completely removed in a 5-stage counter-current scrubbing operation carried out at an O:A ratio of 10:1 with 0.5 The rare earths loaded in the scrubbed organic phase could be stripped with 2 Because the solubility of rare earth sulphates was neither high nor low at room temperature, direct dissolution of the leach cake with HCl, followed by evaporation of the filtrate would lead to a mixture of RESO It has been known for some time that the separation of nickel and cobalt can be achieved by using organo-phosphorus acids, i.e. D2EHPA (P204), PC-88A (P507) and Cyanex 272 ( In general, when the Co/Ni ratio is around 1/1 and there is much impurity, such as Zn, Mn and Cu, that needs to be removed, P204 is used to remove impurity and separate Ni and Co. But when the Co/Ni ratio is lower than 1/5, too many stages are needed for P204, and P507 is more suitable. When Co/Ni is lower than 1/10, Cyanex 272 can reduce the number of extraction stages greatly and improve the recovery rate. Hence, Cyanex 272 was used to separate cobalt from nickel in this study. In order to determine the number of extraction stages, a McCabe–Thiele equilibrium isotherm was determined ( Cobalt loaded on the organic phase was easily stripped with 1 In order to improve the added value of the recovery products, nickel sulphate was used as a starting material to prepare spherical nickel hydroxide which is the positive active materials of Ni–MH batteries. Elemental analysis showed that the recovered NiSO The preparation reaction for nickel hydroxide is as follows: Because the solubility product ( By reference to many previous research results ( The XRD pattern ( A hydrometallurgical procedure including leaching, solvent extraction, evaporation and crystallization has been performed to recover rare earths, nickel and cobalt from the spent Ni–MH batteries. By using the recovered nickel sulphate as starting material, spherical nickel hydroxide doped with Co, Zn and Cd was prepared with wide size distribution under strict control of the reaction conditions. An overall flowsheet for recovery of Ni, Co and RE and preparation of spherical Ni(OH) This project was supported by the