A model for densification of metallic powders is proposed. It involves viscoplastic constitutive equations based on dislocation density evolution and also accounts for effects of porosity using a pressure-dependent critical density yield criterion. The model was applied to the case of cold compaction of nanocrystalline copper under uniaxial compression conditions. Densification behaviour during powder compaction was simulated using an explicit integration method as applied to the dislocation density evolution and the variation of the relative density of the compact. The model was gauged by comparing the experimental data generated by cylindrical die compaction tests on Cu powder with the simulation results. The model accounts for the grain size and the deformation rate dependence on the densification process. The proposed densification model was implemented into a finite element code. The finite element method was applied to simulating room temperature die compaction of nanocrystalline Cu powder in order to investigate the densification behaviour.Powder forming Successful implementation of the powder forming process requires a detailed understanding of several interacting phenomena, including metal flow, heat transfer, friction and microstructural change. The aim is to better control the process variables, such as temperature, strain rate and pressure, and to optimise the design parameters, e.g. the die shape, lubrication and the initial density of the compact. This can be achieved by combining experimental studies with numerical modelling approaches. Owing to its wide applicability and high computational accuracy the finite element method (FEM) is commonly applied to this type of problems. A number of studies were carried out using various constitutive models that take the density change during powder forming into account Although a large number of constitutive models for powder densification are available, there are few that can take the microstructure of powder particles into account. Incorporating microstructure into a constitutive model is of considerable importance, as it provides a possibility of relating the powder densification response to microstructural characteristics of powder particles. A unified viscoplastic constitutive model motivated by microstructural considerations and involving the dislocation density as an internal variable In this paper, the principles of dislocation density based constitutive modelling In order to investigate the local deformation behaviour, numerical tools based on continuum mechanics, such as the FEM are essential. The present constitutive model—dependent on the viewpoint taken—can be regarded as a micro- or mesoscale one. This microscale constitutive model was implemented in a FEM code that provides a description of the mechanical response at macroscale, thus furnishing a link between the scales. Mechanical behaviour of powder compacts is usually described by constitutive models involving a yield criterion. One general form of the yield criterion used by many investigators in the context of plasticity of porous materials, cf., e.g. It should be noted that some restrictions must be put on the parameters For plasticity of pressure-dependent porous materials, Doraivelu et al. Lee and Kim A later modification of In order to provide an adequate constitutive description of the cold compaction process, the above plasticity model for porous materials was combined with the viscoplasticity model for microstructural evolution in the reference (full density) material For monotonic uniaxial loading, it suffices to use the simplest version of the viscoplastic theory The evolution of the dislocation density with the equivalent (von Mises) plastic strain The viscoplastic model defined in this way implies that the powder particles are plastically isotropic. The parameters In this section, numerical simulation results obtained with the hybrid constitutive model described above are compared with the experimental data on coarse (2.3 For the closed die compaction case under investigation, the uniaxial stress From experimental results on aluminium and iron powders, Kuhn and Ferguson Once strain increments are known, the evolution of the relative density can be calculated using the following mass conservation equation that holds for deformation of a porous material: Here the results of calculations for cold compaction of pure copper are presented. A set of parameters of the viscoplastic model for pure copper was obtained earlier   Although the agreement between the calculated and the experimental densification results is good, the calculated densities are lower than the experimental ones. This can be attributed to the following: firstly, the dislocation mean free path may be smaller than the powder size used in calculating In order to investigate the effect of the deformation rate on densification behaviour, parametric studies were performed. The present model was implemented into the commercial finite element code (ABAQUS) using the user subroutine model (UMAT). A hybrid constitutive model combining features of the plasticity model for porous materials This work was performed with the financial support of the Center for High-Functional Nanoparticulate Materials, Korea.