Fractures of the metacarpals and phalanges are the commonest fractures of the upper limb. They can be incapacitating if not treated appropriately. Hand fractures can be complicated by deformity as a result of inadequate treatment, or stiffness from overzealous treatment, leading to poor results. It is important for the treating surgeon to diagnose and understand the management of these fractures. Immediate mobilization after adequate stabilization is the key to treating hand fractures. A comprehensive review of hand fracture management is outlined in this paper.History: mechanism of injury, occupation, hand dominance Detailed assessment: rotation, function and stability Appropriate radiological investigation: antero-posterior, lateral and splayed lateral views Anatomical reduction and stabilize the fracture: closed reduction or open reduction and internal fixation Soft tissue coverage Early mobilization Failure of conservative treatment Open fractures Malrotated fractures Multiple fractures Intra-articular fractures Joint instability Irreducible fractures Fractures of the metacarpal and phalanges are the commonest fractures of the upper extremity. Young men and elderly women are the most susceptible. It is important for the treating surgeon to diagnose and understand the management of these fractures. Hand fractures can be complicated by deformity from inadequate treatment or stiffness from overzealous treatment, leading to poor results. The general principles of hand fractures are outlined in A thorough patient interview followed by a complete physical and radiological examination is essential in all cases. Occupation, hobbies, hand dominance and the mechanism of injury must be determined. The mechanism of injury will help understand the degree of skeletal and soft tissue damage. The clinician must determine the alignment of the digits on the initial evaluation and also after the fracture reduction. Viewing the relationship of the fingernails with the digits, both in full extension and flexion, evaluates the alignment. Normally the nails are almost parallel. Skeletal alignment is assessed by asking the individual to fully flex their metacarpophalangeal (MCP) and proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joints and normally the fingertips then point towards the scaphoid tuberosity. Active and passive range of movement should be documented and sometimes a local anaesthetic nerve block may be necessary at the MCP joint to evaluate this. A neurovascular and tendon function examination should be performed, with special attention to the digits distal to the injury. Minimal inspection is advised in the case of open wounds. Three adequately exposed radiographs of the hand are required – antero-posterior (AP), lateral and splayed lateral (fan lateral) views ( Hand fractures, if left untreated, may result in deformity. Over-enthusiastic treatment may result in stiffness. Stiffness and deformity can result from poor treatment. Open fractures of the hand are treated in a very similar manner to open fractures elsewhere ( Tuft fractures can be open or closed. Open tuft fractures are usually associated with a disrupted pulp and nail plate. This will require tetanus prophylaxis and debridement, with or without nail bed repair ( Closed tuft fractures are much easier to manage, but can be excruciatingly painful due to compartmentalization of fracture haematoma between septa or under the nail plate. Release of the subungual haematoma with a disposable cautery or hypodermic needle, followed by application of ice and a protective splint, provides comfort. The majority of closed distal phalangeal shaft fractures are stable. Longitudinal fractures take 3–4 weeks to heal and the transverse type may take longer. In most cases, conservative treatment with a splint is sufficient. Comminuted longitudinal fractures tend to displace and Chim et al. Dorsal extensor avulsion fractures of the base of distal phalanx result in ‘mallet finger’, as the distal phalanx is left in a flexed position due to the unopposed action of the flexor digitorum profundus (FDP), giving its typical appearance ( Flexor digitorum profundus avulsion fractures or ‘Jersey finger’ injuries generally require surgical fixation. The aim of surgery is to re-attach the tendon and the fracture fragment. If diagnosed in the first 2 weeks following injury, the ‘pull-out’ or ‘button’ technique can be carried out. Bone anchor sutures have been used to fix these fragments, but extrusion of these anchors has been reported. The volar plate and collateral ligaments can be disrupted by a hyperextension force at the tip of the finger, resulting in dislocation of the DIP joint ( The middle and proximal phalanges share a similar fracture patterns and hence are considered together. The proximal phalanx is the most commonly fractured of all phalanges. Mounts et al. Phalangeal fractures can generally be classified into intra- or extra-articular fractures, simple or comminuted and open or closed injuries. The majority of phalangeal fractures are closed extra-articular injuries. Stable phalangeal fractures can be managed conservatively by ‘buddy-taping’. Surgical fixation is reserved for unstable fractures ( Intra-articular fractures are a difficult group to treat. They have a high incidence of stiffness and long-term complications. The PIP joint is the most commonly involved joint. The fracture can involve the head and may be uni- or bi condylar. Intra-articular fractures of the PIP joint also commonly involve the base of the middle phalanx, either be the dorsal or palmar surface. These fractures require surgical fixation and early mobilization. Hyperextension injury of the PIP joint may cause the volar plate to tear from the middle phalanx, with or without a bony fragment ( A severe volar plate injury could lead to dorsal dislocation of the PIP joint ( Volar dislocation of PIP joint ( These injuries are the most disabling PIP joint injuries and encompass a wide spectrum of injury severity, requiring intervention that ranges from very little to complex reconstructive surgery. Fractures of the metacarpal (MC) can involve the proximal base, shaft, neck or the head. In the thumb metacarpal, the base is commonly fractured, whereas in the rest, the neck and shaft is more usually injured. Fractures of the metacarpal shaft with spiral or long oblique configurations can be unstable, with malrotation and shortening resulting. Surgery is indicated when there is malrotation, shortening greater than 3 mm and/or a dorsal angulation greater than 10° for the index and long finger metacarpals or greater than 20° for the ring and little finger metacarpals respectively. The aim is to restore rotational alignment of these fractures. The presence of fracture in the adjacent ray is a relative indication for surgery. A metacarpal base fracture that is undisplaced and impacted can be managed conservatively. Fracture of the thumb MC is the second most common MC injury after the 5th MC and accounts for almost 25% of all MC fractures. More than 80% of all thumb MC fractures involve the base. These can be divided into four groups – epibasal extra-articular, Bennett's (two-part fracture – These fractures are commonly transverse rather than oblique. The majority of transverse fractures can be managed in a thumb spica cast for 4–6 weeks. Closed reduction and stabilization is only indicated if the angulation is greater than 30°. The aim is to reduce and hold the metacarpal base back onto the undisplaced ulnar volar fragment. Reduction is achieved by longitudinal traction at the tip of the thumb, with abduction and extension of the thumb metacarpal, followed by pronation of the digit to overcome abductor longus and brevis. Once reduced it is best held with a K-wire driven into the trapezium and immobilized in a thumb spica for 4–5 weeks. These fractures are best managed by open reduction and internal fixation. An alternative method of treatment is either static or dynamic traction, which may be used in conjunction with limited internal fixation. Comminuted fractures are extremely difficult to treat. More than 50% of patients in Gedda's Hand physiotherapy is of paramount importance, whether the fracture is treated conservatively or operatively. Stiffness is the commonest and most difficult complication to treat. The other complications are malunion, non-union and arthritis. Each of these complications can more easily be prevented than treated. Hsu et al. Cold intolerance after hand surgery is a well-known complication that develops within a couple of weeks post-injury and generally does not improve with time. Nijhuis et al. Hand fractures are common and are associated with loss of function, affecting everyday activities. Most hand fractures can be managed non-operatively. However, unstable fractures warrant surgical stabilization. Although there is a myriad of surgical options and hardware available, treatment choice is down to the treating surgeon's experience and preference after discussion with the patient. Early mobilization is the key to avoiding stiffness and achieving a better functional outcome. Post-operative care and patient education is as important as the surgery in securing optimal results.