In asking “what is land?”, The articles in this issue respond to fundamental questions of what produces land’s value(s) and how land can be assembled for investment. They show how various discourses, technologies, rules, and ecologies shift land value over time, and also enable land to resist such valuation and investment. In exploring the multiple ontologies of land, we seek to problematize capitalist-centric framings that render land investable. In moving beyond top-down power relations that have often framed scholarship on global land grabbing, we hope to better understand the intersection of often-localized socio-political action with the multi-scalar flows of capital accumulation strategies. Our starting premise is that Our focus on the work that is done to shift land into the realm of value production, rather than on appropriation or “grabbing”, draws attention to instances in which local land users and smallholders are involved in rendering land investable. This approach helps to overcome an analytical over-emphasis on exogenous factors, such as the role of the state, market dynamics, or the law ( A central contribution of this issue, we argue, is the detailed examination presented in each paper of what In what follows, we highlight three themes that emerge across the contributions: the role of legal-institutional assemblages; the inscription of value in land via geospatial techniques; and the question of multiple ontologies of land value. We see these themes as useful starting points for future research on how land is assembled for value appropriation. While recent papers have considered the role of law in the creation of financial or capital value ( The papers in this special issue also show convincingly that the legal-institutional assemblages involved in land valuation operate between and across scales simultaneously, thereby interrogating spatial scale in more nuanced ways than much of the preceding literature on land grabs, which has emphasized the national and global (Cf. LeBillon and Sommerville also work through their notion of “landing capital” spatially, illustrating the ways in which international institutions, such as think tanks and multi-lateral lending banks, work alongside national state governments in order to attract capital. Investments then take shape in distinct spatio-temporal ways. In the extractive sectors, they argue, capital first lands virtually as tropes of mineral discovery encourage speculative investment, and then physically through infrastructure and mineral extraction. Yet many investments in the extractive sector fail to generate financial returns or even resources. In the agricultural sector, large-scale agribusiness ventures have attracted investments at early stages but often fail to maintain investment beyond 5–10 Recent work has brought attention to the “technologies of control” that are deployed by transnational private actors (principally firms) and governments in order to “make local land legible” to investment by disrupting existing modes of authority ( The articles by Nalepa, Short, and Bauer and Fogelman and Bassett each chart the effects of varying power dynamics among key actors, institutions, and technologies that inscribe value in and from land. They show how techniques and technologies, broadly considered, do the work of not only revealing land’s value and of legitimating value claims. In particular, geospatial data stands out for its role in discursively and materially aiding corporations and governments to determine which land could and should be made available for investment. Moreover, the authors show how critical analyses of geospatial data can reveal state-based discursive strategies of land valuation (Nalepa, Short, and Bauer) and the inherent instability of such technologies used to render land investable (Fogelman and Bassett). Nalepa, Bauer, and Short uncover how the central government of Ethiopia’s land bank has been a key technology used for designating areas for investment, converting them from pastoral areas to large-scale agribusiness and/or hydropower dams. By overlaying the geospatial data of Ethiopia’s national land bank with other geographic data, such as surface water occurrence, the authors reveal that land marked for investment is not “marginal” (as per government discourse), but rather abuts surface water that could be used for large-scale irrigation or hydropower. The process of incorporating these lands—almost exclusively in the periphery of the country, far from capital—within circuits of agricultural investment is part of a state-making project that expands state territory within its own boundaries, thereby generating wealth at a national level. In this context, determinations about land’s value are made primarily by the state, rather than foreign actors—a point that echoes LeBillon and Sommerville’s findings that host states steer the “landing” of capital to particular places. Further critiquing the role of geospatial data, Fogelman and Bassett push back against the use of maps as “inscription devices” in rendering land investable. In contrast to In a recent contribution, Drawing on a rural family’s race against time, the state, and corporate mining power in Peru’s Southern Andes, Hirsch reveals land to be “a powerful non-human agent with its own requirements for becoming investable”, and which must itself be politically activated before political-economic processes of value production can take place. For Hirsch, rendering land investable in the Peruvian Andes means fulfilling the requirements of land itself in addition to those of the state; multiple ontologies of land, he argues, need to be rendered commensurable together. Land, in this case, is an ongoing relational project that also participates in economic transactions, and the family of his ethnographic focus are “committed to laboring in multiple worlds and to tactically combining ontological projects as they prime the land for investment”. This co-production of land’s values is also well illustrated in Anthias’s exploration of a multi-ontological assemblage of land as both a (pseudo-)commodity and a sentient non-human actor. Her account revolves around the everyday ontological politics of a Guaraní community located within the political jurisdiction of an officially designated “Native Community Land” ( Focusing on such multiple ontologies of land and its value reveals tangible effects and processes of socio-economic and environmental change, which might otherwise go unnoticed or dismissed (Cf. Finally, a persistent critique of scholarship on contemporary land grabbing has been articulated via the question “what’s new?”: how do large-scale land appropriations of the 21st century differ from earlier imperial and colonial ventures that forced land dispossession (