Arthroscopic reduction and internal fixation (ARIF) of tibial intercondylar eminence fractures is the emerging state-of-the-art. ARIF is recommended for displaced type III fractures and should be considered for all cases of displaced type II fractures. Fractures without displacement after closed reduction require careful evaluation to rule out meniscal entrapment. Subjective results of ARIF are uniformly excellent, despite reports of objective anteroposterior laxity. Early range-of-motion exercises are essential to prevent loss of extension. Repair using nonabsorbable suture fixation, when of adequate strength to allow early range-of-motion, has the advantages of eliminating the risks of comminution of the fracture fragment, posterior neurovascular injury, and need for hardware removal, compared with ARIF using screws.Surgical management of fractures of the tibial plateau is evolving in response to development and application of arthroscopic techniques. Part II of this Current Concepts review of arthroscopic treatment of tibial plateau fractures specifically focuses on fractures of the tibial intercondylar eminence. As with other fractures about the knee joint, treatment was historically limited to immobilization and developed, over time, to include open surgical repair with a goal of achieving anatomic reduction and rigid internal fixation. Now, arthroscopic reduction, internal fixation (ARIF) is emerging as the state-of-the-art method of treatment. The tibia is the major weight-bearing bone of the knee joint. Proximally, the tibia widens to form the medial and lateral condyles. Between the condyles, the intercondylar eminence serves as the point of attachment for portions of the menisci and the anterior and posterior cruciate ligaments. Avulsion fractures of the tibial intercondylar eminence most commonly occur in children and adolescents However, it is sometimes misunderstood that this condition occurs only in the younger population. While less common, tibial intercondylar eminence fractures also occur in adults. A fracture of the tibial intercondylar eminence is a consequence of ACL avulsion at its insertion. As in patients with other fractures about the knee joint, patients with fractures involving the tibial intercondylar eminence present with a painful swollen knee and complain of difficulties in bearing weight. Signs of ACL insufficiency are positive, although pain may make thorough examination of the ligaments difficult. A complete neurologic and vascular examination must be performed. Standard anteroposterior, lateral, and oblique radiographic views are usually diagnostic. Computed tomographic (CT) scanning allows precise definition of the fracture anatomy and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) provides the added benefit of diagnostic imaging of associated meniscal, ligamentous, or chondral pathology. If pulses are abnormal or dislocation is suspected, arteriography must be considered. In addition to the option of ARIF (as discussed later), diagnostic arthroscopy allows direct visualization of the menisci, cruciate ligaments, chondral surfaces, and the articular portion of the fracture site. Meyers and McKeever describe 3 different fracture patterns specific to tibial intercondylar eminence fractures (  Type I fractures are nondisplaced or associated with minimal displacement of the anterior margin; Type II fractures have superior displacement of their anterior aspect with an intact posterior hinge, resembling a bird’s beak; Type III fractures are completely displaced. Type III fractures have been subclassified Type IIIA involves the ACL insertion only; Type IIIB includes the entire intercondylar eminence. Some have labeled comminuted fractures as type IV. Meniscus tears are the injuries most commonly associated with fractures of the tibial intercondylar eminence. The goal of treatment of tibial intercondylar eminence avulsion is anatomic reduction. Theoretically, over-reduction must be avoided to prevent excessive tightening of the ACL and limitation of knee motion. In general, treatment of intercondylar eminence fractures is based on the Meyers and McKeever classification: type I fractures may be immobilized at or near full extension. The treatment of type II fractures is controversial. In all cases, closed reduction may be attempted by aspiration of the hemarthrosis and knee extension or hyperextension (allowing the femoral condyles to reduce the fracture). A lateral radiograph is required to assess the reduction, and a CT scan may be considered if the radiograph is difficult to interpret. In cases of persistent superior displacement of the anterior aspect of the fragment, some authors recommend nonoperative management and cast immobilization. Closed reduction may also be attempted for type III injuries. In cases of persistent displacement, reduction and internal fixation is the standard-of-care. ARIF of ACL avulsions with a retrograde lag screw technique was described in 1991, The patient is placed in a circumferential leg holder with the knee off the end of the table. A tourniquet facilitates visualization, and a fluoroscopy unit (C-arm) may be placed such that the flat (image acquiring) plate is used as an operating table beneath the proximal tibia. Fluoroscopic imaging, however, is not required. In all cases, the calf compartments must be continually palpated to assure that fluid extravasation does not result in compartment syndrome. While intercondylar eminence avulsion fractures are contained injuries, they may be associated with capsular disruption. Standard anterolateral and anteromedial portals are used. Cannulas are required when passing sutures to prevent inadvertent interposition of soft tissue. The technique may be performed using only 2 portals, while an accessory portal, particularly a central, transpatellar tendon portal, may facilitate the technique. Thorough lavage is required to remove hemarthrosis or loose chondral or osteochondral fragments. Treatment of the avulsion fracture is recommended before treatment of associated pathology to prevent iatrogenic fracture displacement. Fibrous tissue or clot must sometimes be removed or debrided from the fracture bed while, again, avoiding iatrogenic displacement of the fragment. A standard probe or double-hooked meniscal retractor (Arthrex, Naples, FL) may be used to retract the anterior horn of the medial (or lateral) meniscus or the transverse meniscal ligament, which is frequently trapped within the fracture site. In some cases, the entrapment may recur unless the fracture is simultaneously reduced. Should this be the case, definitive removal of the entrapped meniscus is performed after the reduction sutures are in place; once the fracture is reduced and fixed, the entrapment will not recur. A 90° suture lasso (Arthrex) is placed percutaneously (or via an accessory portal) through the fibers of the ACL in its midcoronal plane and as close to the bony fragment (distal) as possible. The wire loop within the lasso is secured with an arthroscopic grasper ( Medial and lateral drill holes must next be established to pull the ends of the suture (and ultimately the fragment) down into the fracture bed. A short longitudinal incision is centered over the tibial tubercle; the medial pin will enter the tibia just medial to the tubercle, and the lateral pin will enter just lateral to the tubercle. A cruciate ligament guide with a custom marking hook (Arthrex) is used to place, respectively, two 2.4 mm drill-tipped guide pins (Arthrex) at the medial and the lateral edges of the fracture bed in its midcoronal plane, under direct arthroscopic visualization. Because the risk of growth disturbance due to transepiphyseal drilling has not been completely evaluated, A specially designed, narrow shaft grasper (Arthrex) or a loop of wire is passed up through each drill hole to pull down the respective ends of the reduction suture. Planning is required to select the order of steps based on the pattern of the fracture. The surgeon and an assistant must work as a team because it is necessary, when removing the guide pin, to immediately place the grasper so that the small (2.4-mm) entrance hole for the grasper does not become obscured by soft tissue and difficult to locate. The grasper is so narrow that it is rarely possible to grasp the entire No. 2 multifilament suture, but it is effective in affixing at least some of the filaments, and this proves adequate to secure the respective (medial and lateral) ends of the suture and pull the ends down through the respective (medial and lateral) tunnels. In addition, as the grasper can only slide superiorly or inferiorly within the tibial tunnel, a standard arthroscopic grasper must be placed through one of the portals in order to “hand” the respective ends of the suture to the narrow shafted grasper. Finally, it is challenging to visualize the tip of the grasper owing to its proximity to the fracture fragment and the respective femoral condyles. Because of these technical challenges, a surgical assistant skilled in knee arthroscopy is required. Once the respective ends of the suture have been passed through the tunnels, the fracture is reduced by pulling down on the suture ends while removing any entrapped soft tissue. Treatment of associated intra-articular pathology may be performed before tying the suture, while provisional reduction is held by the assistant. Finally, the suture is tied over the tibial tubercle while an assistant performs a reverse Lachman maneuver. With the use of Fiberwire, only 1 suture is required in most cases ( Postoperative radiographs may suggest a few millimeters of superior displacement of the fracture fragment. This is usually not seen on the arthroscopic view, and so long as the surgeon is certain that the meniscus is not entrapped, this should not be considered a failure of surgical treatment. In the experience of the authors, excellent functional outcome and knee stability result despite this common, subtle radiographic finding. However, the goal of treatment is anatomic reduction. Residual displacement may result in loss of extension, and some recommend excision of the anterior bony portion of the fracture fragment to allow full extension if anatomic reduction is not achieved (D. H. Johnson, personal communication, January 2004). ARIF of ACL avulsion may be performed on an outpatient basis. Crutches are optional and recommended at first, and patients are permitted to bear full weight with the knee locked in a brace in full extension. The brace is unlocked or removed for continuous passive motion, which is prescribed for 6 to 10 hours a day for 3 weeks. Formal physical therapy may be required to achieve the goals of 90° of knee flexion at 2 weeks and full range of motion by 6 weeks. Isometric quadriceps and hamstring and abductor and adductor strengthening with the knee locked in the brace is permitted during the first 6 weeks. After 6 weeks, the brace is discontinued, resisted flexion is permitted through a full range-of-motion, and resisted extension is permitted through a range of 30° to 90°. Terminal resisted extension is not performed until 3 months. The earliest published series describing ARIF of tibial intercondylar eminence avulsion fractures is also the largest. In 1982, McLennan In a 1995 case report, Prince and Moyer In a report of 6 cases of ARIF using multiple sutures followed by early rehabilitation, Matthews and Geissler Falstie-Jensen and Sondergard Petersen Lowe el al. Reynders et al. Senekovic and Veselko Binnet et al. Hunter and Willis ARIF of intercondylar eminence avulsion is recommended for all displaced type III fractures and should be considered in all cases of displaced type II fractures. Fractures without displacement after closed reduction require careful evaluation to rule out meniscal entrapment. Subjective results of ARIF using either cannulated screws or suture are uniformly excellent, despite many reports of objective anteroposterior laxity. Early range-of-motion exercises are essential to prevent loss of extension. Repair using nonabsorbable suture fixation, when of adequate strength to allow early range of motion, has the advantages of eliminating the risks of comminution of the fracture fragment, posterior neurovascular injury, and the need for hardware removal as compared with ARIF using screws.