In situ non-invasive 3D characterization of membrane fouling was achieved using femtosecond near infrared non-linear optical imaging together with a novel crossflow filtration module. Washed fluorophore-labelled yeast suspensions were filtered through Millipore 0.22μm mixed cellulose ester membranes and the fouling layer was imaged at different times throughout the experiment.
                  Based on the 3D femtosecond images, it has been possible to identify fine structural features of the cake and to measure the thickness of the filter cake formed on the microfiltration (MF) membranes. Our findings reveal that low concentration feeds result in the initial formation of a patchy monolayer of cells leading to a multilayered cake, whilst at higher concentrations a multilayer cake forms rapidly. For patchy cakes, the technique offers greater resolution than that which is achievable with the direct observation through membrane technique. Deposited cell aggregates and broken fragments of cells can clearly be imaged. For thick cakes, it has been possible to image up to depths 45μm below the cake surface in the present work.average diameter of a yeast cell (m) flux (l mass of wet yeast cells deposited per unit area of membrane (kg resistance of the filtration cake (m resistance of the membrane (m filtration cake thickness (m) transmembrane pressure (bar or Pa) specific cake resistance (m porosity viscosity of the permeate (Pa density of a wet yeast (kg Crossflow microfiltration (CFMF) is an evolving technology for processing particulate suspensions used in the areas of biotechnology, pharmaceutics, trance-epidermal drug delivery, mineral processing and water and wastewater treatment Although substantial research has been focussed on membrane fouling, there still exists the need for accurate non-invasive methods to characterize fouling during CFMF. This will allow verification of the assumptions which underpin many of the current models. As recently pointed out by Yeo et al. To date at least 8 non-optical and 10 optical techniques have been adopted for in situ non-invasive and quasi non-invasive monitoring of membrane processes including membrane fouling The simplest approach for characterizing the filtration cake is to take clean water permeability's of the system before filtration, after filtration and after chemical cleaning Thus, in order to gain a greater understanding of filtration cakes in terms of their structure, morphology and the sequential events of their development, in situ techniques that enable the cake to be directly visualized are required. The techniques adopted thus far have been elegantly reviewed recently by Chen et al. An alternative ex situ approach that can potentially provide 3D images is conventional confocal scanning laser microscopy (CSLM). This was used by Ferrando et al. Alternatively, the filtration cake can be mechanically or chemically removed from the surface of the fouled membranes and analyzed. Vyas et al. In situ methods are preferable as they allow the cake to be visualized as it begins to form without removing the latter or the membrane from the module. In one of the initial attempts to use optical techniques for in situ measurement of cake thickness, Mackley and Sherman A significant breakthrough in optical visualization was made with the introduction of an approach now known as direct observation through the membrane (DOTM) at the University of New South Wales An alternative approach for characterization of fouling by imaging the deposition on the membrane is to measure the thickness of the filtration cake. In situ approaches for measuring cake thickness include laser based optical methods In this study, mixed cellulose ester MF membranes were fouled by suspensions of washed yeast cells and the filter cake formation has been imaged in situ, in 3D using a two-photon femtosecond near infrared non-linear optical technique. We have named this technique 3DFI (three-dimensional femtosecond imaging) but in discussing some aspect of imaging the full description two-photon femtosecond near infrared non-linear optical imaging (NIR-NLOI) has been interchangeably used. The technique will address the need for high-resolution fouling characterization methods to evaluate filtration models. For patchy or thin cakes of yeast cells up to 45 Near infrared (NIR) non-linear femtosecond laser excitation A great advantage of femtosecond NIR-NLOI systems is the intrinsic axial resolution obtained without a confocal pinhole Additional advantages of NIR-laser scanning microscopy over conventional CLSM A compact crossflow filtration module was designed and integrated onto the TE300 up-right microscope stage (Nikon UK Ltd., Surrey, UK) of the NIR-NLOI system (described below) in the imaging plane of the microscope objective. The module consists of two Perspex plates with the lower plate having a circular recess into which a 1 The membrane module above the area to be imaged must be clean, free from defects and totally transparent. To accommodate this requirement the upper plate has a recessed window into which a 22 The feed channel was formed by cutting a 10 The feed channel was of width 10 A schematic of the entire system has been depicted in In all experiments 47 Fast dried yeast (obtained from Sigma–Aldrich, Cat. no.: YSC2) was suspended in 90 In a previous study, fast dried yeast has been found to be by mass 73.6% yeast cells Non-invasive 3D resolved two/multi-photon images of all samples at various time points during membrane-fouling were generated using a modified BioRad/Zeiss Radiance 2000 MP multi-photon laser scanning system (Zeiss, GmbH, Jena, Germany) detailed in part elsewhere To facilitate 3D resolved volumetric images to be generated, serial optical sections of two-dimensional images in the The experimental procedure for constant TMP filtration of yeast suspensions is outlined below: The novel microfiltration module is integrated into the 3DFI microscope stage and connected to the filtration loop. The system is charged with buffer, the TMP and crossflow velocity for the run are set and the pure water flux at experimental conditions is taken. The buffer reservoir is replaced with the feed reservoir, the permeate valve is closed and the system is run for 2 The feed pump is restarted and when conditions have stabilised, which usually takes less than 15 Step 4 is then repeated for each subsequent time point. The short duration, during which the feed pump is running but there is no filtration, was found not to cause serious erosion of the cake. As the feed pump is stopped, the filtration cake is under zero TMP when the images are acquired. Filtration cakes of yeast cells have been reported to be compressible Whilst measuring in situ the membrane was rarely found to be flat. To accurately determine thicknesses, the serial optical sections (images) were processed using Image J (NIH downloaded from To determine the thickness of the cake or section of the cake imaged using 3DFI, Image J was used. The 3D image was projected to give a profile view. The thickness was then measured using Image J's Measure tool which is calibrated against the total thickness of the 3D image to give measurements in microns. Thicknesses were taken at five random locations within the image and the average quoted. The fractional area covered by yeast was determined using the Analyze Particles tool in Image J. The methodology used is very similar to that used by Kang et al. In some experiments, the cake was dried and weighed to give an estimate of total cake thickness. After the desired filtration time, the membrane and cake were carefully removed from the module. The cake was washed from the membrane onto a pre-weighed Petri dish and place in an oven at 70 Darcy's law was used to calculate the resistance of the filtration cake. Fluorophore labelling of yeast cells is a pre-requisite to the use of the high-resolution non-invasive 3DFI technique. As expected the washed yeast suspension gave higher fluxes at 60 The 3DFI technique developed by us in Oxford provides a unique and powerful approach for examining the spatio-structural development of the filtration cake without removal of the membrane and cake from the system or any pre-treatment of the cake before imaging. The 3D images obtained are of comparable quality and resolution to surface associated SEM. Depending on operational conditions and feed suspensions the cakes formed in MF may be compressible and range from patchy monolayers to thick multilayered. As TMPs in the present study are low, compressibility has not been considered. Extensive in situ imaging of patchy monolayer yeast cakes resulting from operation near the critical flux has been achieved using DOTM systems Patchy monolayer cakes can be formed by operating at low constant TMP with a low concentration. As the cake is thin the structure can be captured in a single top down image. The image of the membrane taken after 15 The evolution of cake thickness, fractional area covered by yeast cells and normalised flux ( Thicker multilayered filtration cakes are commonly encountered during constant TMP MF operation and in the present study these were formed by running the filtration with 0.37 When imaging filtration cakes of yeast cells, the penetration of 3DFI is limited to 45 The species forming the filtration cake will effect the maximum penetration. Previous studies have shown that the system is capable of much higher penetration through other types of specimen. For example, penetration of up to 200 Structural details of the cake are best captured by a montage (individual slices side by side) or three-dimensional reconstruction. In slices 16, 20, 21, 27 and 28, it can be seen that macro voids of the magnitude of a cell exist within the cake. The voids appear in many of the 3DFI images taken. Why these voids remain and are not filled by depositing particles is not entirely clear. A possible explanation is offered by The presence of large voids within the cake is an unexpected feature, which may have implications for future cake filtration models. Models of yeast filtration cakes often begin with the assumption that the cake is a bed of packed spheres. This assumption forms the basis for the Carman–Kozney equation and other more sophisticated models In this study, the use of 3DFI technique is introduced as a non-invasive in situ optical technique for 3D imaging of filtration cakes during CFMF. To acquire high quality images filtration must be stopped during imaging. For the technique to be successful the yeast cells must first be labelled with fluorophores. Labelling the cells with fluorophores was found to have only a minor effect on filtration performance providing excess fluorophores were removed from the suspension. For patchy and thin cakes, the high-resolution 3D images generated by the 3DFI technique are of comparable quality to SEM, and of much higher quality than those produced with conventional non-fluorescence microscopy techniques such as DOTM. They allow features such as debris and cell aggregates to be clearly identified on the membrane. When cakes became thick only the top 45 This work is partially sponsored by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC First Faraday G/RS06974) and the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC PowderJect LINK 43/LKE17445). David Hughes is sponsored by an EPSRC-Yorkshire Water CASE studentship.