Biofouling has been regarded as a great challenge in membrane separation processes, such as reverse osmosis (RO) and forward osmosis (FO). One of the major contributors to biofouling is the extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) produced by bacteria, especially the polysaccharides that form a large part of EPS. This study investigated experimentally the inhibition of polysaccharide fouling by sodium nitroprusside (SNP) in RO and FO using two model polysaccharides, alginate and xanthan. It was hypothesized that NO released from SNP would act as a free radical to decompose polysaccharides and in turn alleviate fouling in membrane separation. Potassium ferricyanide (KFCN), having a similar structure as SNP, was used as a comparison. The results showed that SNP could alleviate polysaccharide fouling and its efficiency was greater than KFCN in reducing polysaccharide fouling of RO, likely due to the NO radical released. The presence of Ca2+ ions in feedwater increased the extent of fouling by both alginate and xanthan, but SNP was able to alleviate the fouling. Alleviation of polysaccharide fouling in FO was better than in RO under comparable operating conditions. SNP could be considered as a polysaccharide fouling alleviating agent.Membrane biofouling, referring to biofilm formation caused by the accumulation or growth of microorganisms on the membrane surface [ Some environmentally benign chemicals have been selected to control biofouling [ The objectives of this study were to examine the effect of SNP on the inhibition of polysaccharide fouling in FO and RO processes. Taking account of the experimental results from our previous research [ Alginate (MW: ∼200 kDa) and xanthan (MW: 1,000–50,000 kDa) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Sodium nitroprusside (SNP) (Sigma-Aldrich) and potassium ferricyanide (KFCN) (Ajax Finechem Pty. Ltd) were selected for use and comparison to control polysaccharide fouling. A commercial forward osmosis (FO) pouch membrane, which was made of cellulose triacetate and cast onto a non-woven backing consisting of polyethylene-coated polyester fibers, was used in both the FO and RO experiments [ Bench-scale cross-flow reverse osmosis (RO) and forward osmosis (FO) systems ( Before the RO or FO tests, the membrane was firstly compacted with deionized (DI) water for 2 h, followed by 2 h stabilization and equilibration using foulant-free electrolyte solution. After stable permeate flux was observed, the polysaccharide foulant was added into the feed. For alleviating polysaccharide fouling, the chemical, SNP or KFCN, was added to mix with the feed containing polysaccharide when the test was initiated. All the experiments lasted for 24 h. As variation exists among different membranes, the normalized flux Calcium ion plays a significant role affecting polysaccharide fouling in RO membrane separation [ Seen from With the addition of SNP in the fouling experiment using alginate and xanthan as the foulants in the absence of Ca Ca In the feed water supplemented with both alginate and alleviating agent, Ca The concentration of SNP was varied to investigate its effect on the inhibition of alginate and xanthan fouling in RO in the presence of Ca  The alleviation of membrane fouling by SNP was more effective at higher hydraulic pressure ( To explore the mechanism of SNP governing the control of alginate and xanthan fouling, KFCN was included for comparison. With the addition of SNP in the fouling experiment using alginate and xanthan as the foulants in the absence of Ca Previous studies have recognized the effect of NO on biofilm dispersal and its depolymerization function for polysaccharides [ The addition of Ca On the other hand, the existence of Ca As compared to KFCN, SNP presented higher efficiency in alleviating alginate fouling in the absence and presence of Ca To verify the role of SNP future investigation should compare SNP and potassium ferrocyanide, which has a similar chemical structure as SNP but not an oxidising agent as potassium ferricyanide.  As can be seen in A direct comparison of polysaccharide fouling alleviation by SNP (0.1 mM) in FO and RO is presented in SNP alleviated alginate and xanthan fouling in both FO and RO processes. Normalized fluxes after 24 h alginate and xanthan fouling in the presence of SNP were much higher in FO than in RO. For example, for alginate and xanthan fouling, SNP alleviation efficiency was 27% and 55% in FO, respectively, compared with those in RO (7.6% and 4.5%, respectively). As discussed above, SNP could induce depolymerization of polysacchride and biofilm dispersal. However, under the hydraulic pressure applied in the RO process, more compact and dense and irreversible macrocomplex networks or gels formed in the presence of Ca Alleviation of polysaccharide (alginate and xanthan) fouling in FO and RO was experimentally investigated using sodium nitroprusside (SNP) and potassium ferricyanide (KFCN). It was found that both SNP and KFCN at a proper dosage can alleviate polysaccharide fouling, likely through the release of NO radical by SNP and oxidation of polysaccharides by KFCN. At the concentration of 0.1 mM, SNP was a better alleviating agent than KFCN based on the flux recovery. The presence of Ca Z. Xie and V. Nagaraj’s studies were supported by