To evaluate the effects of ionizing radiation (IR) on murine preosteoblastic cell differentiation, we directed OCT-1 cells to the osteoblastic lineage by treatment with a combination of β-glycerophosphate (β-GP), ascorbic acid (AA), and dexamethasone (Dex). In vitro mineralization was evaluated based on histochemical staining and quantification of the hydroxyapatite content of the extracellular bone matrix. Expression of mRNA encoding Runx2, transforming growth factor β1 (TGF-β1), osteocalcin (OCN), and p21CDKN1A was analyzed. Exposure to IR reduced the growth rate and diminished cell survival of OCT-1 cells under standard conditions. Notably, calcium content analysis revealed that deposition of mineralized matrix increased significantly under osteogenic conditions after X-ray exposure in a time-dependent manner. In this study, higher radiation doses exert significant overall effects on TGF-β1, OCN, and p21CDKN1A gene expression, suggesting that gene expression following X-ray treatment is affected in a dose-dependent manner. Additionally, we verified that Runx2 was suppressed within 24h after irradiation at 2 and 4Gy. Although further studies are required to verify the molecular mechanism, our observations strongly suggest that treatment with IR markedly alters the differentiation and mineralization process of preosteoblastic cells.During long-term space missions, the health of human space crew is affected by three major factors: ionizing space radiation, progressive loss of bone integrity due to bone demineralization, and adverse psychosocial reactions as a result of prolonged confinement and the “Earth-out-of-view” syndrome ( Bone loss resulting from prolonged microgravity exposure has been the subject of investigation for several years ( Osteoblastic differentiation undergoes an ordered, time-dependent development sequence that leads to the formation of multilayered bone nodules ( The effects of ionizing radiation (IR) on the skeletal system have not been fully defined; however, exposure to IR of different qualities has distinct, detrimental effects on bone microarchitecture in both cancer patients and in astronauts ( A better understanding of the response of bone cells, particularly during differentiation and mineralization, to IR is important to protect astronauts from radiation during space travel as well as to protect patients during radiotherapy ( Very few studies have investigated the molecular mechanisms underlying cellular response to IR following osteogenic induction. In regards to this unique area of research, we evaluated cellular proliferation and mineralization as well as the mRNA expression of the osteoblast specific factors runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2), transforming growth factor β1 (TGF-β1), and osteocalcin (OCN) as well as p21 In this study, we examined alterations in the differentiation and mineralization processes of preosteoblastic cells after exposure to IR. We evaluated cell growth, proliferation, and osteoblastic differentiation based on the mineral content of the ECM. Our studies reveal that IR has no effect on the survival of cells induced towards the osteoblastic lineage through treatment with ascorbic acid (AA), β-Glycerophosphate (β-GP), and dexamethasone (Dex) compared to standard conditions. However, cells that were exposed to IR under osteogenic conditions displayed reduced mineral content of the ECM. We also demonstrate, by β-galactosidase (β-Gal) staining, that a senescent phenotype in OCT-1 cells occurs after exposure to IR in both standard and osteogenic conditions. We used low-passaged cells from the murine calvaria-derived osteoblast-like cell line, OCT-1 (kindly provided by D. Chen, San Antonio, TX) that is capable of differentiating along the osteoblast lineage ( OCT-1 cells were plated at a density of 5 The expression of senescence-associated β-galactosidase (SA-β-gal) was determined by cytochemical staining. OCT-1 cells were seeded at a density of 5 Bone cells were irradiated while actively proliferating. Cells were seeded at a density of 5 Clonogenic survival was determined with a colony forming assay as established by To estimate the amount of mineralized tissue formed in each culture, fixed cultures were stained with the calcium stain, Alizarin red S (ARS) (Sigma–Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany). OCT-1 cells were seeded and cultured for up to 18 days in standard medium and osteogenic medium. The mineralized areas were stained with ARS. Briefly, cells were washed once with PBS and fixed in 70% ethanol for 20 The main characteristic of functional, mature bone cells is their ability to deposit extracellular matrix that mineralizes ( Changes in mRNA expression after exposure to IR were analyzed. The examination of gene expression profiles was performed using a real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) with reverse transcribed RNA. Total cellular RNA was isolated using the RNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s specifications. DNAse treatment was performed on a column using an RNAse free DNAse kit (Qiagen). The integrity of RNA was assessed using the lab-on-chip Bioanalyzer 2100 (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara CA, United States). Only samples with RNA integrity numbers (RIN) higher than eight were used for downstream applications. First strand cDNA synthesis was performed with a total of 500 ng RNA using iScript reverse transcriptase RNAse H+ (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA) containing oligo- (dT) and random hexamer primers according to the manufacturer’s instructions (BioRad) in a final volume of 20 The qRT-PCR was performed using a ready to use cocktail containing 12.5 Quantification of gene expression was based on the Ct value for each sample. Ct values were calculated as an average of triplicate measurements. Relative quantification was performed by measuring the difference in copy numbers between two samples that had been normalized to an endogenous reference gene (housekeeping gene). This procedure does not rely on knowing a given transcript copy number for a standard sample. Instead, changes in gene expression levels of a specified transcript are measured and described in arbitrary units relative to the level of other control transcripts within same sample pool. This method is an efficiency-corrected ΔCt method that uses the relative standard curves and incorporates PCR efficiency ( Each experiment was repeated up to three times with one to six replicates. Standard errors and significance were determined by After initial seeding, long-term cultures of OCT-1 cells proliferated rapidly and reached confluence after 6 days, at which time they demonstrated a polygonal morphology ( Several markers can identify senescent cells in culture and To obtain a better understanding of the mechanisms that underlie the observed decrease in cell growth, we evaluated cell survival of OCT-1 cells after exposure to IR in both standard and osteogenic differentiation conditions at a dose range of up to 12 We evaluated the hydroxyapatite content, and visualized cell calcification of the extracellular bone matrix by using histochemical staining. Cells were stained after exposure to IR ( OCT-1 cells were exposed to 2 and 4 The effects of IR on osteoblast differentiation were evaluated by measuring alterations in the levels of osteoblastic lineage-related mRNA ( Irradiation, as well as exposure to toxic agents such as cancer chemotherapeutics, causes DNA damage and usually inhibit cell proliferation by activating cell cycle checkpoint functions and causing growth arrest at specific cell cycle phases ( In this study, we observed distinct alterations in osteoblastic cell morphology after exposure to 8 Osteoinductive supplementation usually induces preosteoblastic OCT-1 cells to differentiate into bone-matrix secreting mature osteoblasts ( We previously reported that OCT-1 cells display a dose-dependent increase in DNA strand breaks immediately after irradiation, as well as a perturbed cell cycle progression ( Senescent cells display striking changes in the gene expression levels of cell cycle inhibitors and activators ( Various cytokines and growth factors influence bone resorption and formation ( The observed modulation of osteoblastic gene expression suggests that IR induces or delays the osteoblastic differentiation process in the osteoblastic precursor cell line OCT-1 ( In conclusion, in this study we have confirmed that IR interrupts the osteogenic differentiation potential of OCT-1 cells after osteogenic induction. A deeper knowledge of the effects of IR on bone cell differentiation may allow for the development of specific countermeasures against radiation induced bone loss arising from both, radiation therapy and exposure to solar and cosmic radiation.