Drilling and blasting is the predominant rock excavation technique in driving horizontal tunnels. This often results in large overbreak. One of the prime reasons for overbreak is the unacceptable levels of ground vibration generated in blasting. From the literature survey and practical experience, it was found that threshold levels of PPV for overbreak depends on rock properties, namely, rock strengths, P-wave velocity, specific gravity, Poisson’s ratio and rockmass parameters. Determination of threshold level of peak particle velocity (PPV) is crucial for controlling blast-induced overbreak and can be approximated by extrapolating the vibration predictor established from near-field vibration monitoring. This paper reports the experiments carried out in five horizontal tunnels for monitoring near-field ground vibration using accelerometer-based-seismograph planted in roof/sidewalls to establish ground vibration predictors. Blast-induced overbreak for each blast has been measured using a telescopic profiler. The threshold levels of PPV for overbreak have been estimated from the extrapolated vibration predictors to the overbreak zone and also using near field approximation technique. The estimated threshold levels of PPV for overbreak ranged between 590 and 1050mm/s in extrapolation model and 410–890mm/s in near-field HP model. Apart from these, a relationship between the percentage overbreak and rock/rockmass, charge and blast design parameters has been established through multivariate regression analysis of the data pertaining to five investigating sites. The result has been validated for four blasts within reasonable accuracy.Blasting is the most popular means of excavation for underground tunnels despite the rapid developments in the application of mechanical excavators, namely, tunnel boring machines, road headers, continuous miners, etc. Faster driving rates are possible with the recent developments in explosives (emulsion), initiating systems (Nonel, electronic detonator) and drilling (automation) systems. However, longer pulls, associated with high concentration of explosives, often lead to overbreak due to excess ground vibrations. Overbreak can become expensive phenomena in terms of extra grouting and concrete backfilling and may also give rise to additional mucking time. Most of the existing controlled blasting techniques, to reduce the blast-induced overbreak, need extra drilling and are costly. Blasting in horizontal tunnels aims at the following objectives: Achieving longer pulls. Reducing overbreak and rock damage. Optimizing drilling and blasting cost. It is rational to assess blast-induced overbreak in production blasting and control the same by modifying the blast design, which is largely affected by a host of rock, blast design and explosive parameters. Several researchers have attempted to study overbreak/blast-induced rock damage either based on experimental studies or relating some of the above influencing parameters. A brief discussion on the previous works is provided in Section    A method proposed by    Based on the blast damage index the rock may be categorized as given in   The above review clearly brings out that the damage models suggested relate the damage/overbreak with either a single or a couple of influencing factors. It was felt that inclusion of predominant factors of rock, blast design and explosive could lead to a more rational overbreak predictive model. The major contributing parameters identified are given below: Rock parameters: P-wave velocity and Poison’s ratio. Blast design parameters: Confinement and advance factor. Explosive charge parameters: Perimeter specific charge. Thus, experimental blasts have been designed such that the influence of above-mentioned rock, blast design and explosive charge parameters could be studied. The rock/rockmass properties were determined from the field and laboratory investigations. Poisson’s ratio was computed from the measured P-wave and S-wave velocities in the laboratory. Post-blast tunnel cross sectional area was measured using telescopic overbreak measuring rod ( Peak particle velocities and accelerations were monitored as near to the blast face as possible using accelerometer and triaxial geophone based seismographs (Minimate Plus and Minimate 077 of Instantel Inc., Canada). The fixing arrangement of the accelerometer sensors has been shown in Confinement, the ratio of drilling depth to tunnel area, has been measured for every blast, because it has a significant impact on the overbreak. Similarly, Advance factor, i.e. the ratio of advance achieved to drilling depth has also been computed. Laboratory investigations are carried out on the collected rock samples (blocks) from the each experimental site. Mostly core drilling was carried out to take the samples at each site. Apart from this, rock samples were also collected. It was observed that there is no significant difference in the properties of the rock obtained from cores and rock samples while tested in the laboratory. Field investigations have been carried out in five horizontal tunnels through hard metamorphic rocks representing different geotechnical conditions. The blasts investigated are the regular production blasts carried out with burn cut in tunnels referred to as Site-1 through Site-5. The details of the site conditions are given below. Site-1 is a horizontal tunnel of dimension 3.2 Site-2 is a horizontal tunnel of dimension 3 In both the Site-1 and Site-2, the initial openings were created with 5 Site-3, Site-4 and Site-5 were the horizontal openings of a chromite mine driven for different purposes. However, all were horizontal tunnels of dimension 2.5 In all the experimental blasts, the same explosive was used to reduce the variation in explosive properties, however, the charge patterns were varied. Near-field vibrations were monitored to establish ground vibration predictor equation for each site. The predictor equation has been extrapolated up to the overbreak distance to estimate the threshold level of PPV for overbreak. Threshold levels of PPV were also computed using Holmberg–Persson near-field model. The predictor equations and estimated vibration threshold levels for measured overbreak are given in A composite blast-induced rock damage (BIRD) predictive model has been developed for estimation of overbreak from rock parameters, blast design parameters and explosive charge parameters ( For the statistical validation of the model, ‘ For the validation of the model, ‘ The parametric analysis attempts to investigate the reasons for overbreak caused in tunnels using burn cut blasting. Burn cut, in general, becomes successful only when the pattern of drilling is properly implemented, supported by adequate explosive charge design and delay allocation. The general observations from the field investigations pertaining to advance factor reveal that the advance factor is low due to inadequate number of reamer holes, undercharging, inadequacy delay in cut holes and improper stemming causing loss of confinement. The proposed new overbreak model (BIRD) is analyzed for the significance of various embedded parameters. The proposed BIRD model is rewritten as, In the above-established relationship (BIRD Model) it is found that the blast design geometry ( Accuracy of BIRD model was tested with the data of four extra drift rounds kept aside for testing. These data were not included in the development of the model. The results of the validation of BIRD model are given in Blast-induced overbreak has been investigated from the experimental blasts and ground vibration monitoring using the state-of-the-art seismographs. The overbreak measurements have been utilized to establish peak particle velocity thresholds using both near-field and extrapolation techniques. The estimated threshold levels for overbreak is higher in case of extrapolation model (590–1050 An overbreak predictive model has been developed considering the rock parameters (Poisson’s ratio, P-wave velocity), blast design parameters (advance factor and confinement) and an explosive parameter (perimeter specific charge). The composite overbreak model (BIRD) developed is found to be statistically significant for the cases investigated. From the testing of BIRD model with four blast datasets, it has been found the model could predict overbreak within a percentage error of 10 (