A research study has been undertaken to develop the fundamentals of a method for the direct recovery of copper from brass (Cu–30wt.% Zn) scrap based on simultaneous electrolytic dissolution of the scrap at the anode and electrodeposition of copper at the cathode in an acidified sulfate electrolyte. In the present paper, effects of the concentrations of Cu2+ (10–50g/L), Zn2+ (0–40g/L) and free H2SO4 (1–5N) in the electrolyte as well as cathodic current density (50–350A/m2) and bath temperature (30–70°C) have been studied on the macroscopic surface quality of copper deposits defined by their visual morphological characteristics as expressed by an innovative Deposit Morphology Index (DMI). A Central Composite Design of experiments has been used to develop a quadratic model correlating the key operating parameters to the DMI. Statistical analysis of the experimental results showed that the concentration of Cu2+ in the electrolyte and the cathodic current density are the most influential factors on the quality of the deposits. It was also found that these two parameters have statistically significant interaction on each other. A smooth and compact copper deposit could be obtained at high Cu2+ concentrations and high current densities (above 40g/L and 250A/m2, respectively) regardless of the level of other factors. However, when the electrolyte temperature is relatively high (60°C), the optimum condition extends to low current densities (down to 50A/m2) and mid Cu2+ concentrations (30–40g/L).Copper alloys, specially Cu–30 Electrolytic recovery of metal values from alloy scraps is potentially very attractive in sense of economical and environmental considerations. Several processes have been developed using anodic dissolution for the recovery of metals from certain alloy scraps such as Ni-Co alloys and supperalloys ( As regards electrolytic recovery of copper from brass scraps, however, there is almost no information available. Zinc, the main alloying element of brass (about 30 In an attempt aiming at selective reclamation of a commercially acceptable copper product by direct electrowinning from brass scrap, an experimental study was planned and performed. The purpose of the present paper is to identify the key operating parameters that influence the macroscopic surface quality of copper deposits from such process and also to find out the optimum set of conditions for the above mentioned objective characteristic. Effects of the influencing factors on other quality aspects and process measures such as zinc impurity content, current efficiency and specific energy consumption will be presented in a forthcoming paper. The electrowinning experiments were performed using stationary electrolyte in a rectangular cell contained 1 Different examination techniques, such as metallographic inspection or relative density measurement, may be used to characterize the surface goodness of copper deposits as a quality parameter. However, visual inspection is the most immediate, straightforward and economical manner, provided the visual features could be parameterized. In this research, the obtained cathode products were first examined by visual inspection. By setting out an innovative classification system, a Statistical design of experiments (DOE) is a powerful method in materials processing studies. However, it has been rarely used in the electrolytic processes of metals. One noticeable case is a work of The likely influential factors in the process under study are supposed to be: Cu The quality of the deposit is seemingly difficult to incorporate into a model or relation as emphasized by The design matrix representing the experimental conditions for the total 31 experimental runs and the corresponding As seen in the table, non-significant “Lack of Fit” confirms the adequacy of the quadratic model. The lack of fit After discarding the insignificant terms from the quadratic model, a refined model in the form of Eq. Comparison of the regression coefficients in the model confirms that the concentration of Cu Response surface methodology indicates areas in the design space where the process is likely to give desirable responses. A simple mean to find the desired operating condition would be construction and interpretation of contour plots. It is clearly seen from the plots that favorable condition for high surface quality (smooth and compact) deposits, i.e. Under the conditions of the present study, it is realized that it would be possible to produce quality copper deposits despite very high levels (40 Although discussion on the purity of the obtained copper deposits is beyond the scope of this paper, it is worth to mention that maximum zinc concentration in the cathodic copper deposit was less than 200 Direct electrowinning of brass scrap, comprising a concurrent electroleaching–electrodeposition process, has been introduced as a potentially viable method for the selective recovery of copper. It has the advantages of process simplicity, low energy costs and much less environmental pollution as compared to the secondary smelting operations. The present investigation was planned and performed to verify the effects of the likely influential process variables on the surface quality of copper cathodes obtained by direct electrowinning of a 70–30 brass scrap, and to model and optimize the surface quality using a CCD methodology. The main results achieved in the study can be summarized as follow: An inventive Concentration of Cu Effects of the electrolyte temperature and Zn Contour plots obtained from the quadratic model were employed for optimization. It was found that high concentrations of Cu The presence of zinc ions in the electrolyte, even at very high concentrations of about 40