The influence of magnetic forces on (i) the motion of magnetisable particles in a non-magnetisable fluid and (ii) the motion of non-magnetisable particles in a magnetisable fluid was investigated. A non-uniform magnetic field was used to induce a strong magnetic field gradient. The study was conducted at low particle Reynolds numbers allowing independent evaluation of the hydrodynamic forces along the tangential and normal directions, which in turn were used to deduce the strength and variation of the magnetic forces. Two iron spheres placed in a non-magnetisable fluid showed strong mutual attraction in the normal direction, consistent with an inverse distance to the power four law. The velocity of each sphere in the tangential direction prior to aggregation was constant. Upon aggregation, the velocity of the dumbbell in the tangential direction was approximately two times higher. This sudden increase in velocity was attributed to an increase in the magnetisation following aggregation of the two spheres. It was concluded that a dumbbell has a larger concentration of matter along the direction of the magnetic field and hence, with respect to motion in the tangential direction, a higher magnetisation. For the two acrylic spheres in a magnetised fluid the attractive force was found to be negligible, most probably because of the low magnetisation of the paramagnetic salt solution used. The two spheres did migrate towards each other because of the local field gradients that develop in the normal direction. Interestingly, the spheres developed a constant velocity prior to aggregation, which was also maintained after aggregation. Two acrylic spheres glued together also travelled in the tangential direction at the velocity observed for the individual spheres. It was concluded that there was no change in the magnetisation of the fluid following the aggregation of the spheres.Magnetic forces have long been used in mineral processing to separate particles of high magnetic susceptibility from those of little or no magnetic susceptibility. In coal preparation finely ground magnetite particles are used for generating a dense medium because of the efficiency with which the particles can be recovered using a magnetic separator, and hence recycled. Magnetic forces are also used in the field of biotechnology, exploiting the iron content of haemoglobin to recover red blood cells. More recently, specific antigens have been attached to magnetic beads, providing a means for recovering antibodies of high economic value ( Unlike gravitational forces, and even surface forces, magnetic forces are easily controlled by the current supplied to an electromagnet. Hence magnetic forces are readily switched on or off or even ramped. It is surprising therefore that these forces are not used more widely to influence the motion of particles. Clearly, the need for the particles to exhibit magnetic susceptibility represents a major limitation. However, magnetic forces can be used to influence non-magnetic particles present in a fluid that is magnetisable. Hence magnetic forces can offer the potential for controlling the motion of particles in general. This paper is concerned with the hydrodynamic response of particles to magnetic forces. The imposed magnetic force can be investigated and hence interpreted from knowledge of the observed particle motion in a fluid, in particular, the hydrodynamic drag force especially at exceedingly low particle Reynolds numbers. The focus of this paper is on two related problems involving the influence of a magnetic field. These problems involve: (i) magnetisable particles in motion through a non-magnetisable fluid and (ii) non-magnetisable particles in motion through a magnetisable fluid. A ferrofluid is a good example of a magnetisable fluid, consisting of a stable suspension of ferromagnetic particles such as magnetite, in the order of 10 Our motivation for this work is based on the objective of developing a small-scale analytical device for separating relatively fine particles (less than A non-magnetic particle residing in a magnetised fluid experiences a force equal and opposite to the force that would normally act on the volume of the magnetised fluid displaced. A number of workers have sought to introduce a force on non-magnetic particles using a magnetised ferrofluid in order to significantly increase the apparent density of the fluid ( In addition to the usual hydrodynamic interactions that exist when one particle settles past another, attractive and even repulsive forces arise as a result of the magnetisation of a fluid (  The force responsible for the translational velocity, Here The experimental system used in this study is defined by the geometry and axes shown in The magnetic field gradient was created by a pair of mild-steel, square-shaped, poles as shown in Two rectangular cells, made of 0.005 The particle motion was tracked using a Phantom high-speed digital camera (Vision Research Inc.) and analysed by image processing software, Control Version 630. The velocities of the individual particles were obtained from the position-time data extracted from the video images. This motion was used to calculate the hydrodynamic drag force in both the tangential A FH55 Gauss-/Teslameter from Magnet-Physik was used to map the magnetic field between the poles of the magnet. There were two experimental systems examined in this study based on the arrangement shown in While our work was motivated by interests in separating relatively fine particles (radii less than 0.05 Fluids of high viscosity were used in order to ensure the particle Reynolds number remained exceedingly small. For the non-magnetisable fluid, UCON90 (polyalkylene glycol) was used. Considerable care was needed to capture on video the particle motion of interest, as the particles tended to eventually settle out of view. For the magnetisable fluid, an aqueous solution of the paramagnetic salt, manganese chloride  The initial experiments were concerned with the motion of two magnetisable spheres of iron in a non-magnetisable fluid, the aim being to verify the force–distance relationship given by The field gradient produced a movement of both spheres in the tangential direction An understanding of the attractive force between the two spheres is obtained by equating the attractive force with the hydrodynamic drag force produced when two spheres approach each other. The attractive force between the particles can be described as As noted earlier, when the two spheres achieved contact, the velocities of the spheres in the tangential direction doubled almost immediately. Clearly, the hydrodynamic resistance function just prior to contact and following contact should be virtually identical. Indeed, When the two acrylic spheres were located in the magnetisable fluid, both spheres developed a motion in the horizontal   Clearly, on the basis of the symmetry there is no magnetic field gradient, The findings from this study raise some apparent differences between the two systems. Two magnetisable spheres of iron in motion through a non-magnetisable fluid exhibit powerful signs of mutual attraction. This stems from a strong interaction between the local magnetic fields that surround the iron spheres. This local magnetic field is created when the sphere is placed in the external magnetic field. Each sphere behaves alike before its local field interrupts the other. However, when the spheres aggregate, the local field interacts and forms a new local field surrounding the newly formed dumbbell. For the purpose of this analysis of the motion of the iron spheres it is helpful to focus on the force balance in the Hence, the question arises as to why there is a doubling in the velocity of each sphere in the tangential direction. Clearly, following the aggregation, a unique particle geometry, known as the dumbbell, is formed. The dumbbell provides a stronger concentration of matter along the direction of the magnetic field ( For non-magnetisable spheres in motion through a magnetisable fluid the results show no change in the velocity in the tangential direction. The relevant magnetisation, here, is the magnetic dipole moment of the fluid per unit volume of the fluid. There is full continuity in the fluid around the spheres before and after aggregation, and hence no prospect of a change in the magnetization due to the aggregation of the acrylic spheres. Therefore, the magnetic force responsible for driving each sphere in the tangential direction is largely unchanged. The motion of the acrylic sphere simply reacts to the movement of the magnetisable fluid, and hence the external magnetic field is not able to act on the acrylic spheres directly. In other words, the velocity of the aggregate is close in value to the velocities of the spheres prior to aggregation. Finally, we also note that for the non-magnetisable acrylic spheres there was negligible attraction in the normal direction. It is evident from This study shows that the two inverse problems involving (i) the motion of magnetisable particles in a non-magnetisable fluid and (ii) the motion of non-magnetisable particles in a magnetisable fluid have clear differences. Two iron spheres placed in a non-magnetisable fluid showed a significant increase in their velocity along the tangential direction the instant the spheres aggregated. Two acrylic spheres placed in a magnetised fluid also developed a constant velocity which, upon aggregation, was maintained. Two acrylic spheres glued together also travelled at the same velocity as observed prior to aggregation. It is concluded that the magnetisation of the iron spheres increases as a result of the increase in the concentration of matter along the direction of the field. This increase leads to the observed change in velocity. The magnetisation of the fluid remains unchanged by the aggregation of the two acrylic spheres. The iron spheres showed strong mutual attraction in the normal direction, consistent with an inverse distance to the power four law. For the two acrylic spheres in a magnetised fluid the attractive force was found to be negligible, most probably because of the low magnetisation of the paramagnetic salt solution used. The findings described in this study should apply to spherical particles significantly larger and smaller than those used here, assuming the maintenance of the very low particle Reynolds numbers used in this study, and hence the absence of significant inertial forces. The financial support of Australian Research Council for this project is greatly appreciated.