Biodegradation behavior and kinetics of ethylthionocarbamate under nitrate, sulfate and ferric reducing conditions by mixed cultures enriched from the anaerobic digester sludge was investigated. The results showed that ethylthionocarbamate could be degraded independently by the mixed cultures coupled to nitrate, sulfate, and ferric reduction, and meanwhile, nitrite, sulfide, and ferrous were accumulated as a result of nitrate, sulfate and ferric reduction, respectively. Ferric was a more favorable terminal electron acceptor compared to nitrate and sulfate. The order of the electron acceptors with decreasing biodegradation rates of the ethylthionocarbamate was: ferric>nitrate>sulfate, and the corresponding maximum biodegradation rate was 7.240, 6.267, and 4.602mg/(L·d), respectively. The anaerobic biodegradation of ethylthionocarbamate under various electron acceptor conditions can be accurately described by first order exponential decay kinetics.Ethylthionocarbamate has been widely used as flotation reagent in sulfide mineral processing for many decades ( Many compounds have been shown to be degraded by microorganisms using various electron acceptors. With few exceptions, all BTEX compounds ( To develop anaerobic bioremediation technologies, systematic studies are required for understanding the biodegradation of ethylthionocarbamate under anaerobic conditions. The aim of this study was to investigate the biodegradation of ethylthionocarbamate under various electron acceptor reducing conditions in the presence of mixed cultures enriched from the anaerobic digester sludge of a typical sewage treatment plant. And the utility of biodegradation kinetics process is also illustrated. The anaerobic digested sludge used as inoculum for the present research was obtained from the anaerobic digester of Ezhou Sewage Treatment Plant. The electron acceptors used were nitrate (2.55 The enriched bacteria was transferred into 500 A pH meter (ORZ0N818, USA) was employed for measuring pH values. Ethylthionocarbamate concentration was analyzed using a UV–vis spectrophotometer (Shimadzu, Japan). Ferrous and ferric iron were analyzed by the 1,10-phenanthroline method at a wavelength of 510 From Under these terminal electron acceptor conditions, the order of the electron acceptors with decreasing biodegradation rate of ethylthionocarbamate was: ferric The variation of concentration of sulfate and sulfide, nitrate and nitrite, ferric and ferrous concentrations is shown in As can be seen from As shown in Given that there was no cell growth, the theoretical stoichiometric equations for anaerobic degradation of ethylthionocarbamate to carbon dioxide with nitrate, sulfate and ferric as the terminal electron acceptors were as follows: Based on Eqs. (  Based on the Eq. However, it could be observed that under sulfate reducing and ferric reducing condition, the measured mass ratio was slightly lower than the theoretical mass ratios, and the relationships between the measured and theoretical ratio for was 92.60% and 90.78%, respectively. The reason for which may be that ethylthionocarbamate was not completely transformed to carbon dioxide during the whole degradations. Furthermore, another possible reason in part is that during this experiment the anaerobic oxidation of ethylthionocarbamate was also coupled to cultures growth and converted into cell materials. The first order exponential decay equation was employed to compare the biodegradation of ethylthionocarbamate under various electron acceptor conditions and can be expressed as follows:  The enriched bacteria were capable of biodegrading ethylthionocarbamate without a lag phase under nitrate, sulfate and ferric reducing conditions, and their biodegradation processes fitted well with the first order exponential decay kinetics equation. Ferric was a more favorable terminal electron acceptor compared to nitrate and sulfate. The order of the electron acceptors with decreasing biodegradation rate of ethylthionocarbamate was ferric The authors are grateful to the financial supports of