Modified lime-based pellets have been developed as potential regenerable high-temperature CO2 sorbents using calcium aluminate cement binders to enhance pellet strength. A mechanical pelletizer was used for granulation of the powdered materials, namely quick lime and hydrated lime, produced from Graymont limestone with the addition of spray water. The CO2 carrying capacity of both the pellet sorbents and the parent limestone was tested in a thermogravimetric analyzer (TGA) at 800°C with repeated calcination/carbonation cycles. It was found that the CO2 carrying capacity of the pelletized sorbent was higher than that of the parent limestone, and the stability over multiple cycles was improved when cement was added to the pellets. The attrition resistance of these pellets was examined using a bubbling fluidized bed (50mm ID). The particle size distribution (PSD) of both the calcined pellets and limestone was determined before and after 2h attrition tests which were performed using air as the fluidizing gas at room temperature and at 800°C. The results of attrition tests showed that after fluidization for 2h, particle size distribution changed such that the average particle diameter (d50) of the sample always decreased, but for the pellet sorbents, high-temperature fluidization did not result in significantly more pronounced attrition.Currently, one-third of all anthropogenic CO Unfortunately, low CO Lime-based calcium looping cycles (CaLC), which utilize reversible carbonation and calcination reactions (Eq. Naturally occurring limestones (mostly calcitic) have so far been the subject of intensive research in calcium looping, given their wide availability and low cost. However, natural sorbents rapidly lose their CO To overcome these drawbacks the use of pelletized sorbents is instead proposed. Here, a mechanical pelletizer was used in the process for pelletization of both fresh and/or reactivated sorbent. Calcium aluminate cement was used as a binder for the pelletization process, as this material has shown appropriate properties in previous binder screening studies Quick lime (CaO, QL) and hydrated lime (Ca(OH) As noted above, two types of pellets were prepared: (i) 100% CaO (QL1 and QL2) or Ca(OH) The pellets were prepared in batch mode using a mechanical pelletizer (Glatt GmbH). The powdered material (∼300 After pelletization, the pellets were sieved and the size fraction of 0.425–2 The external morphologies of the air-dried pellets were examined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a Hitachi S3400 microscope with 20 A Mettler-Toledo TGA/SDTA851e/LF/1100C TGA was used for the repeated calcination/carbonation cycles. The sample typically weighing ∼30 The main goal of the attrition tests was to determine the attrition resistance of the produced pellets. The attrition experiment was carried out in a 316L stainless steel atmospheric bubbling fluidized-bed (BFB) reactor of 50 The pellets (0.425–1 According to Vaux Since it is reasonable to assume that the most significant attrition occurs in the initial calcination/carbonation cycles When the attrition test was finished, the bed inventory was carefully removed from the bed by vacuum with a 10 The typical morphology of prepared pellets is represented in Typical results for CO Pellets prepared without a cement binder, e.g. Ca(OH) It is interesting to note that in the TGA tests the pellet’s particle size had limited impact on the carrying capacity, as shown in It is arguable whether constant gas velocity (  It should be noted that the chemical and thermal stresses occurring in the pellets during repeated calcination/carbonation cycles can be an important cause of sorbent attrition. However, because air was the fluidizing gas in this study, and the attrition tests were performed isothermally, only mechanical related attrition (e.g. fragmentation and abrasion caused by inter-particle or wall-particle collisions) is mainly involved.  QL2-Ca100, HL-Ca90C10 and Graymont limestone were tested with larger fluidization numbers ( When the samples were fluidized, the pellet/particle size (diameter) was reduced and to study this effect, the equivalent average diameter, d There is further evidence indicating that serious attrition occurred for limestone particles; thus in The modified lime-based pellet sorbents for high-temperature CO The authors would like to thank Mr. Rose Kennedy of Graymont Limestone Inc. for supplying quick lime and hydrated lime samples used in this work.