The size distribution of the broken top coal blocks is an important factor, affecting the recovery ratio and the efficiency of drawing top coal in longwall top coal caving (LTCC) mining panel. The standard deviation of top coal block size (δ
                     t) is one of the main parameters to reflect the size distribution of top coal. To find the effect of δ
                     t on the caving mechanism, this study simulates experiments with 9 different δ
                     t by using discrete element software PFC. The δ
                     t is divided into two stages: uniform distribution stage (UDS) whose δ
                     t is less than 0.1 (Schemes 1–5), and nonuniform distribution stage (NDS) whose δ
                     t is more than 0.1 (Schemes 6–9). This research mainly investigates the variation of recovery ratio, drawing body shape, boundary of top coal, and contact force between particles in the two stages, respectively. The results showed that with the increasing δ
                     t, the recovery ratio of the panel increases first and then decreases in UDS. It is the largest in Scheme 3, which mainly increases the drawing volume at the side of starting drawing end. However, the recovery ratio decreases first and then increases quickly in NDS, and it is the largest in Scheme 9, where the drawing volume at the side of finishing drawing end are relatively higher. In UDS, the major size of top coal is basically medium, while in NDS, the size varies from medium to small, and then to large, with a distinct difference in shape and volume of the drawing body. When the major size of top coal is medium and small, the cross-section width of the initial boundary of top coal at each height is relatively small. Conversely, when the top coal size is large, the initial boundary of top coal has a larger opening range, the rotating angle of lower boundary is relatively small in the normal drawing stage, which is conducive to the development of drawing body and reduces the residual top coal, and the maximum particle velocity and the particles movement angle are both larger. This study lays a foundation for the prediction of recovery ratio, and suggests that the uniform top coal is more manageable and has a larger recovery ratio.Longwall top coal caving (LTCC) mining is an efficient method to extract thick and ultra-thick coal seams. As shown in The LTCC is successfully employed in many complex coal seam conditions, such as steep coal seam, inclined coal seam, ultra-thick coal seam, and multiple coal seams. The corresponding high-performance equipment has also seen great developments In summary, the size distribution of top coal blocks can be comprehensively reflected by the average size of top coal and the standard deviation of top coal size. There are few studies on the effect of standard deviation of top coal size on the caving mechanism in LTCC. In this paper, the authors designed nine drawing experiments using PFC with the same average size of top coal but with different standard deviations of top coal size. To clear the effect of dispersion degree of top coal blocks on the caving mechanism, the authors investigated the recovery ratio, the drawing body, the boundary of top coal and the force chain between top coal blocks. The results provide a basis for designing the schemes of hard top coal broken in LTCC panel, and for predicting the recovery ratio based on the size distribution of top coal.  Round particles are used to simulate the top coal and immediate roof (gangue) blocks, and the linear contact model is employed for both ball-ball and ball-facet contacts in PFC. The dip angle of the panel is set as 0°. The drawing experiments utilize the control variate method; that is, the average size of top coal ( The size of this model is 30 m × 18 m, and the length of each shield opening (SO) is 1.5 m. Furthermore, the cutting height of the panel is 2.5 m, the thickness of top coal is 7.5 m, thus, the cutting-caving ratio is 1:3, and the thickness of gangue is 8.0 m. There is a total of 20 shields in this model, numbered 1–20 from left to right. To eliminate the effect of the wall on the drawing process of top coal, the range of Shields 1–4 (called the starting drawing end, abbreviated as SDE) and that of Shields 17–20 (called the finishing drawing end, abbreviated as FDE) are not arranged to open the SOs; in turn, the top coal particles will flow through the SOs 5–16, referred to as the drawing area. The colorful thin layers in the top coal in When the model is established, the particles are subjected only to gravity, with a gravitational acceleration of 9.81 m/s Based on the field measurement data from several mines, it can be found that the size of drawn-out top coal blocks is almost ranging in 0–0.4 m. And according to Wang et al. Eqs. The cumulative mass percent curve ( To clearly illustrate the size distribution of top coal, the partial models of five schemes are presented in This research adopts the principle of seeing the first gangue particle and then closing the SO in the drawing process Eq.  Eq. To analyze the effect of In this study, the authors named the drawing process of Shield 5 to be the initial drawing stage, and that of Shields 6–16 to be the normal drawing stage. When As shown in  To compare with the difference between maximum and minimum As shown in The authors also considered the BTC in S8 and S9, as shown in Taking the BTC 13 in S8 as an example, to better describe the rotating degree of BTC towards FDE, the rotating angle In summary, the shape of BTC has great effects on In the above research, the To study the distribution of contact force and particle velocity at different distances from the center of SO, the authors selected 1.5, 3.0 and 4.5 m as the object. In general, this research mainly investigates the effect of single factor Due to the different coal quality, seam depth, fracture development and the mining-induced stress in LTCC panels, the size distribution of broken top coal blocks is significantly different, leading to the particle velocity and particle movement range being different directly in the drawing process, and finally the When The The With a deceasing distance from the particle position to the SO, the maximum particles velocity increases, while the maximum contact force between particles decreases. When the major size of top coal is larger, the maximum particles velocity and the particles movement angle are larger, leading to a larger The research results are of significance to guide the size distribution of top coal in the LTCC panel. Meanwhile, it lays a foundation for establishing the prediction model of recovery ratio, which can improve the measurement efficiency and reduce the personnel workload. This work was supported by the