A new method and simple, yet accurate, equations for determining the tenacity of particle attachment and the particle size limit in flotation were developed by applying the force analysis of the gravity–capillarity coupling phenomena controlling the bubble–particle stability and detachment. Approximate solutions to the Young–Laplace equation were used to develop simple equations for the tenacity of attachment of particles with diameter up to 20 mm. Simple equations for the maximum size of floatable particles were derived as explicit functions of the particle contact angle, the surface tension, the particle density and the mean centrifugal acceleration of turbulent eddies. For the typical particle size and contact angle encountered in flotation, the analysis showed that the bubble size has little effect on the tenacity of particle attachment. The prediction for the largest size of floatable particles is compared with the experimental data and signifies influence of turbulence on the particle detachment.Particle size is an important parameter in flotation and has been the focus of the flotation research for decades. Flotation recovery of both fine and coarse particles is usually remarkably low, leading to the “elephant” shape of the recovery versus particle size curves. Coarse particles badly float mostly because the bubble–particle aggregates are not strong enough to prevent the particle detachment from the bubble surface caused by the particle weight and turbulence eddies during the rise of the aggregates in the pulp phase to the froth phase and then to the froth launder. Efficiency of the bubble–particle stability depends on the particle size, particle hydrophobicity and external detaching forces. Even in the flotation of fine particles, the bubble–particle detachment can significantly influence the kinetics of flotation taking place in mechanical cells by intensive turbulent agitation Unlike the collision and attachment interactions between bubbles and particles, the detachment interaction is not satisfactorily quantified yet. We do not have any satisfactory theory on the bubble–particle stability/detachment, which can explicitly describe the detachment phenomena with the whole range of the particle size although the fundamentals of the bubble–particle stability/detachment were formulated in the early days of flotation In the seventies and eighties, In In general, the height, It can be observed that since the height of the meniscus is a complicated function of the particle radius (see the highly nonlinear Step 1: Neglect the Step 2: Calculate the dimensionless horizontal ( Step 3: Use the tabulated data (or the approximate expressions) to find the corresponding vertical ( Step 4: Insert the obtained value of Step 5: Return to Step 2 and repeat the calculation until the desired accuracy is achieved. This numerical technique has been successfully used for determining the upper particle size limit of flotation for many years. However, in many cases, The results reported in this paper are obtained based on the outcomes of a recent paper For simplicity, we commence with the analysis of forces on a spherical particle attached to a significantly large bubble so that the local bubble–particle geometry can be approximated to the geometry of the attachment of a sphere to an initially planar gas–liquid interface. The geometry of this system is depicted in One of the most important forces is the The second force, which supports the particle attachment to the interface, is the The third force, which also stabilises the particle attachment to the gas–liquid interface, is the The other relevant force on the particle is the In summary, we identify four (static) forces on the particle attached to an initially planar surface, namely, the capillary force, the buoyancy of the particle volume immersed in the liquid, the hydrostatic pressure force and the particle weight. Equilibrium is obtained if Principally, this equation can be solved for the maximum size of floatable particles if the position of the three-phase contact on the particle with the maximum size is known. However, this usually leads to an equation similar to It can be observed that the left-hand side of It is also worth noting that the right-hand side of The stable attachment of particles to the gas–liquid interface depends strongly on the hydrophobic nature of the particles: The more hydrophobic the surface of the particle, the more stably it attaches to the interface. This influence now can be examined by analysing The typical dependence of the adhesive force described As can be seen from To determine the tenacity of the particle–meniscus contact, the equilibrium condition of forces on the particle attached to the gas–liquid interface described by Note that although the maximum adhesive force can be approached from both sides of the adhesive force versus Now, the maximum size of floatable particles can be found from Since in the minerals flotation we have Δ The analysis described in the preceding sections is based on the assumption that the bubble size is significantly (infinitely) large and has no influence on the particle detachment. The influence of the bubble size is now examined. The geometry of the particle attachment to the bubble is schematically shown in In the actual flotation, we have The tenacity of the bubble–particle contact can be determined by inserting Since and It should be noted that for simplicity, the above described analysis is carried out with the assumption of the spherical shape of the bubbles. The same results, as given by Comparison between the theory developed in this paper and the experimental data The mean centrifugal acceleration of turbulent eddies The local maximum values of the turbulent energy dissipation rate are many times higher than the mean dissipation rate (i.e., about 10–30 times in agitation tanks) As can be seen, the maximum size of floatable particles predicted by The relatively high values of The stability of particles attached to the gas–liquid interface and its possible detachment were analysed based on the force balance. The simple, yet accurate equations for the maximum size of floatable particle were approximately obtained from the highly nonlinear equations describing the gravity–capillarity coupling phenomena controlling the bubble–particle detachment. The simplified equations were obtained for the tenacity of attachment of particles using the approximate solutions to the Young–Laplace equation. The bubble size has little effect on the tenacity of particle attachment and the upper limit of the particle size. Simple equations for the maximum size of floatable particles were derived as explicit functions of the particle contact angle, the surface tension, the particle density and the mean centrifugal acceleration of the turbulent eddies and were compared with the experimental data. The mean centrifugal acceleration of turbulent eddies is a controlling parameter of the upper size limit of particles to be recovered by flotation in the mechanical cells. It is anticipated that the obtained results can be used for interpreting the flotation results of coarse particles and for modelling the bubble–particle detachment efficiency. The author gratefully acknowledges the Australian Research Council for financial support through a Discovery grant (DP0211085) and Graeme J. Jameson for fruitful discussions.