Objective
                  To assess variables that could be related to outcomes in fractures of the tibial pilon treated by open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF).
               
                  Design
                  Retrospective.
               
                  Setting
                  University Hospital.
               
                  Patients
                  A total 92 fractures of the tibial pilon treated by ORIF in a 5-year period. The minimum follow-up was 1year (mean: 3.3 years; range: 1–5).
               
                  Intervention
                  ORIF with LCP-LISS plate.
               
                  Primary outcome measurements
                  Age, sex, side, type of fracture, energy of the injury, provisional external fixation (EF), time until ORIF, stages of treatment (one or two), surgical approach, type of bone fixation, quality of reduction, bone graft, hardware removal, associated fractures (fibula and others), functional results (AOFAS scale), rates of infection, skin necrosis, flap coverage, non-union, and early posttraumatic ankle osteoarthritis (AOA).
               
                  Results
                  According to AOFAS scale 30.5% of results were excellent, 46.7% good, 13.1% fair and 9.7% poor. Overall, the rate of infection was 13.04%, The rate of non-union was 10.86%. The rate of skin necrosis was 7.6% and the rate of flap coverage was 13.04%. The rate of early posttraumatic AOA was 13.04%. Type 43C3 fractures of the AO classification had a higher rate of skin necrosis and flap coverage. Open fractures were related to a higher prevalence of nonunion and flap coverage. The use of a bone graft was associated with a higher rate of nonunion and poor results. Infection was related to a higher prevalence of fair and poor results. EF was associated with a higher need for flap coverage. A suboptimal anatomic reduction was related to a higher rate of fair and poor results. The anteromedial approach was associated with a higher prevalence of skin necrosis and early posttraumatic AOA than the anterolateral approach. The use of an medial plate was related to a higher rate of nonunion than the use of a lateral plate.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The anteromedial approach was associated with a higher rate of skin necrosis and posttraumatic AOA than the anterolateral approach. Medial plating had a higher prevalence of nonunion than lateral plating.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  IV (case series).Pilon fractures are serious injuries affecting the articular surface of the distal tibia. Sometimes they are due to high-energy trauma with an axial load, whereas in other patients, they tend to be the result of low-energy trauma due to a rotational mechanism. To achieve good function, we must restore the articular surface through optimal anatomic reduction and a stable fixation. The aim of this study was to evaluate which variables could be related to functional results and complications after ORIF of tibial pilon fractures. We analyzed 94 patients with tibial pilon fractures treated by ORIF between January 2011 and December 2015 in one University Hospital. The minimum follow-up was 1 The trauma energy was defined as high (traffic accidents, falls from heights) or low (domestic accidents, accidental injuries). In all cases, a preoperative CT scan was performed to define the degree of joint and metaphyseal involvement. ORIF was performed in one stage (<48 All the fractures were classified according to the AO system reported by Muller. We performed an anteromedial, anterolateral or percutaneous approach, depending on the type of fracture and the state of the skin. As for ORIF, we divided patient groups into those who had bone fixation with a single medial plate, a single anterolateral plate, two plates or cannulated screws. The model of the plates was in all cases the locking compression pale – less invasive stabilization system (LCP-LISS). Fibula was also fixed with LCP-LISS plates (six holes) by means of a direct lateral approach at the same time of external fixation. The goal was to maintain the length of the tibioperoneal complex and the normal rotation of the fibula. The length in days of conversion of external fixation to ORIF was 6.7 Quality of reduction was defined as optimal or suboptimal in terms of the existence of an articular step-off of <2 To address potential sources of bias we defined all variables in a clear way. The study size was the number of patients treated (94) minus two that were lost to follow-up (92 overall). We recorded complications affecting the soft tissues (necrosis of the skin, superficial or deep infection and the requirement for flap coverage due to failure of direct closure), and complications affecting the bone (nonunion and early posttraumatic AOA). Early posttraumatic AOA was evaluated by means of a modification of the Kellgren-Lawrence scale ( Function was assessed according to the American Orthopedic Foot and Ankle Society (AOFAS) scale, although we know that this is heavily weighted in the scoring. We carried out a statistical analysis of qualitative data (Chi-squared test, Fisher’s exact test, Mann-Whitney A total of 92 fractures of the tibial pilon treated by ORIF in a 5-year period were analyzed. The mean follow-up was 3.3 years (range, 1–5 years). Among the soft-tissue complications, we found 12 infections (13.04%) (4 superficial [4.34%] and 8 deep [8.69%]), 7 skin necroses (7.6%) and 12 flaps for skin coverage (13.04%) in 8 open and 4 closed fractures. Within these 12, there were 1 infected non-union, 1 injury of the posterior tibial artery and 2 patients with skin necrosis requiring closure by flap (this topic is the subject of another study). Among the bone complications we found 10 nonunions (10.86%) (3 were infected non-unions [3.25%]) and 12 patients with early posttraumatic AOA (13.04%) (in 5 of whom [5.43%] ankle arthrodesis was performed later, with satisfactory results in terms of pain remission) ( Other complications included 1 compartment syndrome, 2 complex regional syndromes, 1 sural nerve injury, 1 neuroapraxia of the deep peroneal nerve and 2 injuries of the posterior tibial artery (1 during the approach and 1 during the placement of the EF). No lower limb amputations were required in this series. Twenty-three hardware removals (HRs) (25%) were performed at an average of 1.2 years after ORIF. Implant removal was carried out because of pain. We observed a statistically significant correlation between skin necrosis and the anteromedial approach (p No correlation was found between presentation of a postoperative infection and the rest of the parameters analyzed. There was a statistically significant correlation between EF and flap coverage (p Open fractures showed a higher rate of nonunion (p A statistically significant correlation between the anteromedial approach and early posttraumatic AOA was found. There was no significant correlation between early posttraumatic AOA and the other variables studied. The AOFAS scale was more likely to show a poor (<70 points) or fair (70–80 points) result in patients who had superficial or deep infection (p Pilon fractures account for 1% of all fractures. In our study we had 13.04% infections, 7.6% skin necroses, 13.04% flaps for skin coverage, 10.86% nonunions and 13.04% early posttraumatic AOA. We found a statistically significant correlation between skin necrosis and the anteromedial approach. We also observed a significant statistical correlation between skin necrosis and 43C3 fractures. We encountered a statistically significant correlation between EF and flap coverage. Open fractures had a higher rate of flap coverage and a higher rate of nonunion. Anteromedial plates had a higher prevalence of nonunion than anterolateral plates. Patients who required a bone graft during ORIF had a higher rate of nonunion than those who did not require a bone graft. A statistically significant correlation between the anteromedial approach and early posttraumatic AOA was observed. The AOFAS scale was more likely to show a poor (<70 points) or fair (70–80 points) result in patients who had infection, in patients with more complex fractures, in patients with suboptimal reduction, in those who needed a bone graft during ORIF and in those who needed HR. The primary limitations of our study are that it is retrospective and that several surgeons were involved in the treatment of fractures. We did not analyze other variables that could influence the results, which could be associated with a poorer prognosis or a longer duration of surgery. Such variables include glucose concentration in the postoperative period, the use of negative pressure for the healing of the soft-tissues and the presence or absence of bleeding blisters on arrival to the emergency room. The quality of anatomic reduction is the most important factor in the treatment of these fractures. Anatomic reduction of the tibial articular surface correlates with better functional outcomes The literature discusses which approach must be used, given the poor condition of the skin of the distal tibia. There are a number of approaches; however, the fracture pattern frequently determines the approach to be used. More complex fractures (43C3) have poorer functional outcomes (AOFAS), We observed that open fractures had a higher rate of nonunion. The need for a flap after ORIF occurs in those fractures with poor skin condition or major skin defects. There is controversy regarding the time to flap coverage. Allegrand et al. pointed out that flap coverage must be performed in less than 7 days. From the 7th day, soft complications might appear, especially infection. In some fractures, ORIF of the fibula is not required. In our study, we performed both one-stage surgery (ORIF in <48 Sirkin et al. achieved good results in open and closed fractures. Boraiah et al. achieved very good results using an algorithm with an individualized treatment according to each patient. They found a rate of healing of 88.13%, 3% with deep infection and 5% with superficial infection. Deivaraju et al. Regarding infection, Ren et al. reported that the risk factors for infection are postoperative glucose concentration >125 The role of bone graft during ORIF is not clear in the literature. We found a higher rate of nonunion and a higher prevalence of fair and poor results in fractures requiring bone grafts. Maybe not the grafting for the procedure but rather the fracture pattern was responsible for the high non-union rate (10.86%) and poor results (9.7%) in this series. Use of negative pressure has been associated with improved rates of soft-tissue healing after surgery.8,25 We did not analyze this parameter. Regarding the generalisability (external validity) of the study results, we can make some recommendations to improve the surgical treatment of tibial pilon fractures: The anteromedial approach related to a higher rate of skin necrosis and posttraumatic AOA than the anterolateral approach. Medial plating was associated with a greater rate of nonunion than lateral plating. To get good and excellent results (AOFAS), an anatomic reduction is compulsory. As for the prognosis, 43C3 fractures were related to a higher rate of skin necrosis and flap coverage. Open fractures had a higher prevalence of nonunion and required more flaps. Patients requiring bone grafting during ORIF had more nonunions and a higher rate of fair or poor results (AOFAS). Infected fractures and patients requiring HR showed a higher rate of fair or poor results (AOFAS). The use of an EF in the emergency room was associated with a greater need for flap coverage. Again, maybe not the use of an EF but rather the fracture pattern was responsible for the high need for flap coverage (13.04%) in this series. In conclusion, the anteromedial approach was associated with a higher rate of skin necrosis and early posttraumatic AOA than the anterolateral approach. Open medial plating had a higher prevalence of nonunion than open lateral plating. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.