Developing CO2 capture and use of technologies to reduce anthropogenic emissions can be part of the solution against climate change. The purpose of this study is to develop a novel method to synthesize CaCO3 and trimethyl borate solution by utilizing and capturing carbon dioxide in a high pressure reactor. Dissolution of ulexite has been investigated to determine the effect of important working parameters by using Taguchi method. The parameters and their ranges were given as follows: reaction temperature, 80-120 °C; pressure, 10-30 bar; solid-to-liquid ratio, 5/100-20/100 g/mL; particle size, -106 + 75 μm-212 + 154 μm; stirring speed, 500-750 rpm; reaction time, 20-60 min. The findings of this research were given as follows: (1) the optimum operational conditions were found to be reaction temperature 120 °C, pressure 30 bar, solid to liquid ratio 0.05 g/ml, stirring speed 750 rpm, reaction time 60 min, particle size -154 + 106 μm, (2) 92.94 %of B2O3 was taken into solution under optimum condition (2) the sequestration capacity of CO2 was found to be 188 kg per ton ulexite (3) characterization of products by FTIR, SEM, XRD and ICP-OES confirmed that trimethyl borate and CaCO3 were synthesized. The utilization of CO2 in this process could sequester a considerably amount of CO2, therefore it can be contribute to decrease CO2 emission that causes greenhouse effect.Carbon dioxide (CO The opportunity of capturing carbon dioxide as secondary solid or liquid products that have commercial value is also attractive. Mineral carbonation has been comprehensively investigated recently because it is more effective sequesters of CO In this context, CO The aim of this investigation is to develop a new alternative process method to produce trimethyl borate using ulexite mineral and CO The ulexite ore used in this study was obtained from Bigadiç, Balıkesir, Turkey. The ore was separated from impurities. After removing the impurities, it was crushed and ground followed by sieving different particle size between 75 μm and 212 μm for dissolution experiments. The chemical analysis of ulexite ore was determined with ICP-OES (Perkin elmer-optima 8000) given in Optimization experiments were performed in a high temperature-pressure controlled in a stainless steel reactor (BUCHİ reactor) having jacket for cooling, equipped with a mechanical stirrer for mixing. Firstly, a given amount of ulexite and methanol were placed into the reactor. After, the temperature of the reactor content was reached the desired value, CO Flowsheet of the experimental procedure was given in When the industrial and economic conditions are concerned, it is very important approach to apply the experimental design methods in order to perform the experiments in the most efficient way and interpret the results correctly. Therefore, there are several experimental methods were investigated such as Taguchi methods, orthogonal central composite design, Factorial design and etc. In this regard, Taguchi Experimental Design method has emerged as a successful method in order to solve optimization problems. Thanks to this method, the number of experiments can be reduced significantly. The Taguchi method is not only an experimental design technique but also an extremely useful technique for high quality system design [ In this research, experimental plan according to L18 orthogonal array was given in The performance statistic is the most important to determine the optimum criteria. There are several performance statistics, but the most useful of them are the larger the better, the smaller the better and the nominal the best [ Larger is better Here, n is the number of experiments and Y The X-Ray diffraction analysis was utilized to determine the mineralogical structure of ulexite ore. The analysis was performed at ambient temperature using Rigaku Ultimate-IV using Cu-X ray tube in the range of diffraction angle from 0 ºto 80º (40 kV/30 mA). The result was given in The FTIR analysis of the ulexite ore was investigated by a Perkinelmer FTIR spectroscopy in the band range of 4000-450 cm Thermal decomposition of ulexite mineral was performed with a TA Instruments,Q600 DTA/TG device. The analysis was carried out at a constant flow rate of 100 ml/min in a nitrogen atmosphere and a heating rate of 5 °C/min in the temperature range of 30-900 °C. According to the analysis given in Variance (ANOVA) analysis was performed to see the effect of parameters such as stirring speed, reaction temperature, reaction time, pressure, solid / liquid ratio and particle size on dissolution process. The analyses of collected datas were performed by using statistica computer software programme. The variance analysis of experiment is given in The F values calculated for all factors were compared with the F value from tables at 95% confidence level. From the table, F is found to be F (1,24) = 4.26 and F (2.24) = 3.40. In this case, the reaction temperature, pressure and solid liquid ratio are more effective parameters compared to the other parameters [ The influence of parameters on the performance characteristics was given When the experimental plan given in The final products are analyzed with XRD, FTIR, SEM, TGA and ICP-OES to investigate morphology, purity and functional groups of molecules. XRD analysis of the solid sample obtaining under optimum experimental conditions was performed (in The FTIR analysis of the solid sample was investigated in the band range of 4000-450 cm Surface morphology of synthetic calcium carbonate was investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (ZEISS) operated at 20 kv accelarating voltage. SEM-EDS analysis was also performed to detect the elements of the solid sample. The image of the calcium carbonate crystal and SEM EDS was presented in The purity of CaCO The purity of the CaCO Meanwhile, SEM-EDS analysis also shows that the purity of CaCO3 product (which is composed of 40.7 wt % Ca, 10.8 wt% C and 48.5 wt% O) exceeds %99 [ The liquid product obtained from optimum reaction conditions was distillated to form trimethyl borate. The solution taken from reactor was placed in distillation flask equipped with vigereux column. The flask was kept at a certain temperature in an oil bath. While the boiling points of trimethyl borate and methanol are 68 °C and 64.7 °C respectively, they can form a positive azeotrope at a lower temperature of about 54.6 °C. To identify TMB-methanol azeotrope obtained product from distillation was characterized with FTIR. The FTIR spectrum of trimethyl borate-metanol azeotrope was given in Obtaining liquid product after distillation was analyzed ICP-OES to determine the elements (B Carbon dioxide gas was used as acidifier in the esterification reaction of ulexite with methanol. The calcium ion in the ore structure reacts with CO In investigations related to trimethyl borate production, bor oxide, boric acid, tincal and colemanite have been utilized as boron sources. The reaction between tincal and methanol in the presence of CO The reaction takes place in two steps. The first step is the reaction between ulexite and CO The second step is the reaction between boric acid and methanol. As given in the reaction equations, while the CO The CO On the basis of the mineral carbonation process and traditional trimethyl production process, the investment costs were calculated. The cost of materials used to produce 1 ton of trimethyl borate is given in In this study, a novel process was developed to utilize carbon dioxide in the production of trimethyl borate and calcium carbonate by the reaction between methanol and ulexite in a pressurized reactor. CO  The authors reported no declarations of interest. This work was supported by