The aim of the present work was to analyze the influence of the setting reaction on the injectability of tricalcium phosphate (TCP) pastes. Even if the injection was performed early after mixing powder and liquid, powder reactivity was shown to play a significant role in the injectability of TCP pastes. Significant differences were observed between the injection behavior of non-hardening β-TCP pastes and that of self-hardening α-TCP pastes. The differences were more marked at low liquid-to-powder ratios, using fine powders and injecting through thin needles. α-TCP was, in general, less injectable than β-TCP and required higher injection loads. Moreover, clogging was identified as a mechanism hindering or even preventing injectability, different and clearly distinguishable from the filter-pressing phenomenon. α-TCP pastes presented transient clogging episodes, which were not observed in β-TCP pastes with equivalent particle size distribution. Different parameters affecting powder reactivity were also shown to affect paste injectability. Thus, whereas powder calcination resulted in an increased injectability due to lower particle reactivity, the addition of setting accelerants, such as hydroxyapatite nanoparticles, tended to reduce the injectability of the TCP pastes, especially if adjoined simultaneously with a Na2HPO4 solution. Although, as a general trend, faster-setting pastes were less injectable, some exceptions to this rule were found. For example, whereas in the absence of setting accelerants fine TCP powders were more injectable than the coarse ones, in spite of their shorter setting times, this trend was inverted when setting accelerants were added, and coarse powders were more injectable than the fine ones.Minimally invasive surgery techniques offer many benefits for the patient over traditional surgeries, such as fewer associated injuries, quicker recovery time and less pain. Moreover, shorter hospital stays are needed, often allowing outpatient treatments that result in reductions in health costs In addition to the direct application as bone grafting materials, recent developments have raised the possibility of using CPC in combination with different low-temperature processing techniques to obtain pre-set scaffolds In spite of many contributions over the last decade Alpha tricalcium phosphate (α-Ca In order to identify the most important parameters controlling the injectability of CPC, some authors focused their attention on less reactive calcium phosphate pastes The aim of the present work was to analyze the influence of the setting reaction on the injectability of tricalcium phosphate (TCP) pastes. During the study, α-TCP was tested as self-setting cementitious material, whereas β-TCP was employed as a control material to discern the effect of the advancement of the setting reaction on injectability. Moreover, the role of different additives commonly used to accelerate the setting of α-TCP-based cements A stoichiometric mixture of calcium carbonate (CaCO Since the milling process has been shown to affect the reactivity of the powders The PSD of both F and C powders was analyzed by laser diffraction (LS 13 320 Beckman Coulter) and the specific surface area (SSA) was determined by nitrogen adsorption according to the Brunnauer–Emmet–Teller (BET) method (ASAP 2020 Micromeritics). The phase composition of the different powders was assessed by high resolution X-ray diffraction (XRD; PANalytical, X’Pert PRO Alpha-1). The X-ray powder diffraction measurements were obtained by scanning in Bragg–Brentano geometry using Cu The experiments were performed according to two factorial designs. The first one aimed to elucidate whether a different behavior in terms of injectability was observed when comparing α-TCP and β-TCP polymorphs. A 2 α-TCP fine (α-TCP/F) and coarse (α-TCP/C), as well as β-TCP fine (β-TCP/F) and coarse (β-TCP/C) were used as solid phases. In some cases, pHA nanoparticles (2 The PL was determined according to standard ASTM D-4318-00 Setting times were assessed with a Gillmore needle testing set according to standard ASTM C266-99 An extrusion test was performed, as described in Ref. In addition to the quantification of the percentage injectability, the yield load and the injection load were obtained from the extrusion curves (load–plunger run), where the plunger run was considered as the percentage displacement of the syringe plunger with respect to its initial position. In some specific cases, the injection was started after different post-mixing times of 2.5, 5, 60 or 240 The phase composition of α-TCP/C and β-TCP/C pastes prepared at an L/P ratio of 0.35 The effect of the incorporation of pHA and/or Na The effect of the incorporation of pHA and/or Na The factorial designs were analyzed in terms of the main effects of the independent variables and their interactions using the Minitab 15 software (Minitab Inc.). Results are reported as mean The volumetric PSD of the coarse and fine powders of the two TCP polymorphs are presented in In the first set of experiments, the injection behavior of as-milled α-TCP and β-TCP pastes was studied, varying the powder granularity (F vs. C) and L/P ratio (0.35 vs. 0.45 The average values and standard deviations of the yield load, injection load and injectability obtained for the different pastes, together with the setting times, are summarized in Although β-TCP was chosen as a model for a non-setting or non-curing ceramic paste, in fact, as shown in In order to assess whether this partial reaction of the β-TCP powders could be attributed to an amorphization produced during milling and, more importantly, to clarify to what extent this could affect the injectability of the pastes, the behavior of as-milled and calcined powders was compared. As shown in The effect of the internal needle diameter on the injectability of uncalcined α-TCP and β-TCP pastes with different granularities is shown in The second set of experiments aimed to determine the effect of the incorporation of setting accelerants on the injectability of TCP pastes. The separate and combined effects of the Na As expected, the most significant effect on the setting time was the type of polymorph. The setting time measured with Gillmore needles was significantly lower in α-TCP than in the β-TCP pastes ( Looking at the injectability, the addition of pHA nanoparticles was the most significant parameter ( The influence of the different parameters on the yield load was similar to that described for injectability. Although the independent incorporation of pHA or Na These trends are illustrated in The dynamic viscosity of the α-TCP/F pastes with the independent or simultaneous incorporation of the two additives is shown in Finally, the effect of the accelerants on the hardening kinetics of CPC is illustrated in One of the objectives of the present work was to determine the influence of the setting reaction on the injectability of calcium phosphate pastes. α-TCP and β-TCP polymorphs were selected as a model, since they have different solubilities. In fact, α-TCP is known to have a self-setting ability through its hydrolysis at room or body temperature to a CDHA (see Eq. (1)), and for this reason it is used as a reactant in CPC. In contrast, β-TCP, which is less soluble, does not present this self-curing capacity. Moreover, other parameters affecting the kinetics of the setting reaction in CPC were considered, such as the calcination of the powder or the addition of accelerant agents in the cement formulations. Even if, as a matter of fact, the injection of the paste is supposed to take place immediately after mixing the liquid and the powder phases of the cement, the present authors were interested in evaluating the influence of the incipient setting reaction on the injectability of the pastes. Since one of the factors that most influence the injectability is the particle size, the first step was to obtain similar PSD for both TCP polymorphs to be able to compare them. Although β-TCP with the same PSD could be obtained by heat treatment of α-TCP, it was preferred to use the same method (i.e., sintering followed by milling) to obtain the two polymorphs, since milling is known to alter the reactivity of the powders. This also allowed evaluation of the effect of calcination on both α-TCP and β-TCP powders. To obtain similar PSD, SSA and particle morphologies ( Surprisingly, the PL was the same irrespective of the polymorph, PSD or incorporation of the additives that reduced the setting time, as shown in In this study, the injectability was characterized by monitoring the load needed for the paste to be extruded through a given aperture, at constant injection velocity up to a maximum load of a 100 In a comparison of the injection behavior of α-TCP and β-TCP polymorphs using 2 These differences were more pronounced when the pastes were injected using cannulas with smaller apertures, such as 0.84 Although β-TCP was used as control and considered a priori as a non-self-setting material, an apparent setting was, in fact, found according to the Gillmore needles method ( CPC should set within minutes after implantation. This allows fast grafting surgery, without extravasation risk. Although the cement hardening was studied only for the α-TCP/C, it is know that, in the range studied, the PSD does not significantly affect the final compressive strength of the cement, and it is only relevant for the hardening rate, being faster in the case of fine powders These two different mechanisms are also probably behind the uneven effect of the two additives on the injectability of the pastes. The reduction in injectability produced by pHA was higher than that of Na In order to analyze possible correlations between the injection properties of the TCP pastes and their setting times, injectability and injection loads are represented in Powder reactivity was shown to play a significant role in the injectability of TCP pastes. Even if the injection was performed after very short times, significant differences were observed between the injection behavior of the non-hardening β-TCP pastes and self-hardening α-TCP pastes, α-TCP being less injectable than β-TCP and requiring higher injection loads. Moreover, the parameters affecting powder reactivity were shown also to affect paste injectability. Thus, whereas powder calcination resulted in increased injectability, the addition of setting accelerants tended to reduce the injectability of the TCP pastes. The authors acknowledge the financial support of the Certain figures in this article, particularly Figs. 1–9, are difficult to interpret in black and white. The full colour images can be found in the on-line version, at