In the present study, a dewatering sieve waste (TSW) of Etibor Kırka Borax company (Turkey) was employed in different amounts in order to develop an experimental terracotta floor tile body composition in combination with a feldspathic waste provided from a local sanitaryware plant and a ball clay. Several formulations were prepared and shaped by dry pressing under laboratory conditions. The obtained samples were fired at selected peak temperatures (1050, 1100 and 1150°C) to establish their optimum firing temperatures. Some technological properties of the resultant products, namely linear firing shrinkage, water absorption and breaking strength were determined as a function of increasing TSW content in place of the sanitaryware waste at these temperatures. The phase content of the starting raw materials and that of the fired compositions was determined by XRD. The relevant polished surfaces of selected fired samples were also examined using SEM. According to the results, increased presence of TSW compared to the standard mixture of clay and the sanitaryware waste, as a co-fluxing material, in the experimental terracotta body considerably accelerated the vitrification process. The overall results indicated a prospect for using the TSW as a raw material in mixtures with both clay and sanitaryware waste for the production of a terracotta floor tile body.Both manufacturers and customers in traditional ceramic industry like any other industrial activity require high quality products with low cost. Environmental protection and energy saving are also considered to be important matters. Therefore, in addition to finding alternative raw materials, recycling wastes as a possible replacement has gained considerable interest within last years. Turkey holds 63% of the total boron reserves of the world with 640 million tonnes. Boron ores in Turkey are colemanite, ulexite and tincal. Etibor Kırka Borax Company is the biggest borax producer in Turkey. This plant consists of concentration and crystallization units and produces 800,000 Borates are valued constituents of the glass-making batch, offering both process and product advantages. They have also been key ingredients in the ceramic industries, such as cordierite ceramics, glass ceramics and frits. In such applications borates reduce the melting point of the glass and act as an important glass builder. The present study was achieved in order to obtain an experimental terracotta floor tile body with improved physico-mechanical properties and lower production cost using TSW in various amounts. A particular consideration was given to the phase and microstructural evolution of the experimented formulations upon firing at different temperatures and its correlation with the physico-mechanical properties. The TSW sample was collected from the upper part of the dewatering sieve of dissolution units of Etibor Kırka Borax Company. Prior to use it in several formulations, a representative lot of 5 Representative terracotta floor tile formulations were prepared by progressive incorporation of TSW in place of sanitaryware in different amounts ( The physico-mechanical properties of the representative samples were measured in accordance with the standard procedures. DTA-TG curves for TSW are presented in The results of the evaluated physico-mechanical properties, namely, firing shrinkage, water absorption, and breaking strength are presented in It is known that bulk density or porosity is a property with a strong influence on mechanical strength of traditional ceramic bodies. With reference to   From the SEM investigation of the B40 formulation fired at the same temperature, the extent of vitrification with increasing amount of TSW can be easily observed ( The values of the chromatic coordinates of the studied formulations with increasing peak temperature are given in In view of the pre-industrial findings, the progressive inclusion of TSW waste as a substitution of the sanitaryware waste on the physico-mechanical properties and microstructural development of several experimental terracotta floor tile formulations fired at different peak temperatures was reported. It was found that the addition of TSW improved the vitrification at all the firing temperatures involved. Although the highest bending strength and the lowest water adsorption (436 Based on the XRD data, mullite was found to be the main crystalline phase formed during firing. Although there does not appear to be any considerable differences detected between the TSW containing formulations in terms of crystalline phase content, a gradual increase in the amount of amorphous phase is noticeable in parallel with both the increase in the amount of TSW incorporation and peak firing temperature. To sum up, a potential seems to be present for the utilisation of TSW in combination with a sanitaryware waste and a ball clay in order to obtain low porosity, dense terracotta floor tiles. In addition, valuable use of these waste materials in such a possible commercial application, with all the positive effects both on the processing, such as the possibility of lowering the firing temperature to save energy, and the improved technological properties of the product can be mentioned as added advantages. An in-depth study is, however, needed on the industrial scale in order to establish the technical and economic feasibility of the study. Furthermore, however the TSW is in solid form and is not classified as a hazardous waste; it would still need to be disposed of in a specific site or controlled landfill. Disposal of the waste at a controlled landfill is costly. For that reason the use of this waste in terracotta formulations a possible alternative to the disposal is attractive. The benefit of this usage is that it is an economically viable method for the recycling of TSW that might otherwise have little or no value.