Open distal radial fractures are an uncommon mode of injury in the upper limb compared to closed radial fractures. Good management is very important especially due to the diverse complications that can arise and the multi functional role of the wrist in every day activities. No literature to date has in detail investigated the epidemiology and outcome of such fractures in a large series of patients. This aims of this were to investigate the incidence of open distal radial fractures, the types of patients, nature of injury leading to them, severity of injury, and outcome in complications with emphasis on infection rates. This information should give greater understanding about them, which may influence their management and predict outcome or complications. Medical records for all open distal radial fractures from an inpatient, outpatient scenario as well as operative reports and x-rays were all studied during a consecutive 12 year period (1988–2000). Basic demographic data on 132 patients and full data on 65 patients was collated prospectively. The remaining data was collected retrospectively from medical records. We are aware that prospective data is of more statistical significance than that from retrospective sources, especially as it is less susceptible to the types of bias apparent in retrospective studies. The data is continuously updated and allows the possibility for long term follow-up of large numbers of patients if required. Population data for both males and females was obtained for our catchment area in Lothian (except W Lothian) and for different age groups to calculate the age–sex incidence of such fractures. The 132 patients forming the total study population were followed up for an average of 17.2 weeks (range 1–155 weeks). The duration of follow up for 4 patients is unknown, although the presence of complications occurring post-injury have been recorded. These patients were excluded from determining the average and range of follow up and comprised of: 2 patients which had moved outwith from the area and 2 patients, for which the review duration was unknown. 2 further patients had died soon after 2 weeks post- injury, so their data was not used for outcome analysis but for demographic data. The epidemiological data was therefore analysed and outcome deduced for the 132 patients. Although the long term complications from these injuries is unknown. The fractures were classified using both the Gustilo classification Outcome was determined by recording the frequency of complications post-injury and surgery. Non-union was defined as the fractured bones failing to unite by 5 months. Mal-unions were defined as either an angle of greater than 10° dorsal angulation, an angle of greater than 15° volar angulation or more than 3 mm of radial shortening, or any combination of these. Pin site infections (PTI) were also recorded and classified as minor and major. A major PTI is one which resulted in change in the means of stabilisation of the fracture. All the patients discharged had either regained full range of wrist movement or were happy with their injury outcome and able to lead a normal functioning lifestyle. The data was analysed where required using a paired student t-test, whereby the level of significance was taken to be 0.05. The 132 patients comprised of 34 males and 98 females, with an average age of 51 years (range 17–97 years). For every 100,000 population per annum during this 12 year period (1988–2000) in our catchment area of 516197 patients, the incidence of open distal radial fractures is 26 adults (13 males and 37 females during this time) with a f:m ratio of approximately 3:1. The age–sex incidence is represented in The injury mechanism was classified as: fall from height (83 patients), fall greater than 3 feet (24), sport (1), RTA pedestrian (6), RTA vehicle (14) and other injuries (4). The sport injury was from cycling and the other injuries included crush injuries (3) and an attack by a jaguar (1). The frequency of injuries recorded from January till December was recorded with also a distribution of patients with falls as a cause of their injury during these months as shown in According to the Gustilo classification, there were 103 of type 1 (78.0%), 24 type 2 (18.2%) and 5 type 3 (3.8%) injuries. Type 3 can be further subdivided into type 3a (4 patients), type 3b (1) and type 3c (0). The fractures according to the AO classification revealed type A (61 patients), type B (4), and type C (5). An x-ray for 1 patient was unclassified, and for 9 patients, data is unknown. Further sub-classifications are shown in There were 52 diaphyseal comminution fractures and the distribution with age of patients is represented in The severity of injury and the fracture type occurring for our patients has been represented by The wounds associated with the fracture were located either overlying the ulna (97 patients) side, radius (14) or both (1). Data for 20 patients here could not be established. Open distal radial fractures were the only injury in 93 of our patients. The remaining patients experienced ulna shaft fractures (23 patients), dislocation of 1st metacarpal phalangeal joint (1), ankle fracture (1), scaphoid fractures (3), proximal humeral fractures (2), and radial head fractures (1) or closed fracture of opposite wrist (8). On arrival at hospital, 109 patients following injury were administered intravenous prophylaxis antibiotics, and of the remainder 21 received no antibiotics, and 2 only post operatively. The patients also underwent some form of fixation initially to stabilise the fracture which included 93 patients receiving external fixation, 14 patients with internal fixation, 3 patients with both internal and external fixation, 20 patients with Plaster of Paris, 1 patient with manipulation and data is unknown for 1 of our patients. Some of the 93 external fixations were supplemented with plating (4 patients), and K wires (10). The 14 internal fixations were supplemented with plating (13), and screws (1). Complications following injury were recorded and included tendon rupture- extensor pollicis longus (1 patient), ulna nerve injury (4), carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) (17), reflex sympathetic dystrophy (RSD) (6), and compartment syndrome (CS) (1). We recorded 6 superficial wound infections. One patient had a mild superficial infection with no discharge and was successfully overcome by erythromycin. The other infections were all treated successfully with cephalosporins or erythromycin in cases of penicillin sensitivity. The pathology report for one of these patients confirms the presence of methicillin-resistant S aureus. Five of these patients were treated via external fixation and the remaining via Plaster of Paris. There was only 1 case of deep infection. This patient was initially subjected to plating and bone grafts to stabilise fracture but failed so a revised bone graft and a buttress plate was used. Consequently he had a deep infection after his last operation which was treated by high dose benzyl penicillin and flucloxacillin. Split skin grafts were required for 14 of our patients with varying injury severity- 7 patients type 1, 5 type 2, 1 type 3a, and 1 type 3b. There were 13 PTI recorded, with 2 of them classified as major. In one of these, all 4 pins were infected, the external fixation had to be removed and a cast applied to stabilise the fracture. In another, the external fixation was also removed early, but both of these cases were treated with antibiotics. The patient x-rays on follow-up revealed 50 fracture mal-unions but only 4 non-unions. The non-unions comprised of 1 of the patients showing union by 6 months, 2 had required arthrodesis, and 1 patient had been recognised to have a non-union but was asymptomatic. The mal-unions occurring and age of patients has been shown in the following Literature searches revealed the paucity of information on the epidemiology and outcome from open distal radial fractures. To our knowledge only a single published study From our results we find that open distal radial fractures are relatively uncommon. The overall incidence is more common in females than males and the age-sex prevalence relationship shows that such fractures have a significantly increasing incidence from the age of 40 years in females. This is seen 40 years later in males from the age of 80 years. The relationship was also reported by McQueen and Jupiter A study by Rozental et al The frequency of falls and months of occurrence revealed that they were increasingly common during the winter months with peak number of falls in January and a fall during the summer of months. Jacobsen et al Our results have shown a notable number of complications post-injury. 42.4% of our patients experienced some complication which is lower than that reported by Rozental et al Open diaphyseal comminution fractures of the distal radius were found in 52 patients (39.4%). They occur more commonly as you get older with a peak about 60–69 years. They may be also common due to increase in incidence of osteoporosis especially in post-menopausal women as the bones become more brittle with this condition. However Feik et al McQueen and Jupiter We recorded only 6 superficial infections (4.5%) from open distal radial fractures and just a single deep infection (0.76%). In addition there were 13 PTI (9.8%). We can see that they are quite rare especially deep infection. A study by Jones We recorded 50 mal-unions (57.9%) and just 4 non-unions (3.0%). We find that mal-unions are a common complication as shown by the large frequency in such injuries but non-unions are rare. Rozental et al After mal-unions CTS symptoms were the most common complication recorded for 17 patients (12.9%) post injury, but are still relatively rare. Heim et al Open distal radial fracture were the only injury in 93 of our patients (70.5%). The commonest other injuries occurring were ulna shaft fractures (23 patients – 17.4%), and closed fracture of opposite wrist (8 patients- 6.1%). Rozental et al This study however has some limitations. Although basic demographic data on 132 patients and full data on 65 patients was collated prospectively, the remaining data was collected retrospectively from medical records. Prospective data is of more statistical significance than that from retrospective sources, especially as it is less susceptible to the types of bias apparent in retrospective studies. Also, data was missing for some of the patients (as recorded) e.g. some X-rays were not located. 2 patients had died soon following their injuries so their data was used for demographic data and not outcome analysis. A larger population size may be required to show a clear relationship between the fracture type and different injury severities, which could not be established due to the small frequency of high severity injuries (e.g. Gustilo 3c). Open fractures of the distal radius are relatively rare. They have a higher incidence in females than males over 50 years. They occur mainly from low energy injuries e.g. falls especially during the winter months, with peak in January. They commonly result in post-operative complications (42.4%) with respect to their closed counterparts (26%). Mal-unions are most common with increasing age occurring with highest frequency 70–79 age interval. Wound infections are rare especially deep infection and occur more commonly in those treated with external fixation. We also find that diaphyseal comminution fractures are common especially in the 60–69 years age interval and occur more frequently in open fractures than their closed counterparts.