In coal flotation, particles of different components of the coal such as maceral groups and mineral matter and their associations have different hydrophobicities and therefore different flotation responses. By using a new coal grain analysis method for characterising individual grains, more detailed flotation performance analysis and modelling approaches have been developed. The method involves the use of microscopic imaging techniques to obtain estimates of size, compositional and density information on individual grains of fine coal. The density and composition partitioning of coal processed through different flotation systems provides an avenue to pinpoint the actual cause of poor process performance so that corrective action may be initiated.
                  The information on grain size, density and composition is being used as input data to develop more detailed flotation process models to provide better predictions of process performance for both mechanical and column flotation devices. A number of approaches may be taken to flotation modelling such as the probability approach and the kinetic model approach or a combination of the two. In the work reported here, a simple probability approach has been taken, which will be further refined in due course. The use of grain data to map the responses of different types of coal grains through various fine coal cleaning processes provided a more advanced diagnostic capability for fine coal cleaning circuits. This enabled flotation performance curves analogous to partition curves for density separators to be produced for flotation devices.Coal flotation is based on differences in the surface chemical characteristics of the components of the feed coal. Coal is a heterogeneous material composed of a variety of organic and inorganic constituents whose surface properties and therefore flotation response vary widely. Even the different organic components (macerals) of coal may respond differently to flotation ( Knowledge of the components and characteristics of the feed to a flotation circuit and the partitioning of these components to the product and tailings streams is a critical step in improving process efficiency. Hence quantitative information on individual grains is required. This information may now be obtained using the MACE™ 300, a semi-automated light microscopy tool developed to extend the capabilities of coal petrographic analysis. This capability was developed to characterise fine coal for coking, combustion and gasification. It was then recognised that it could be used to characterise flotation performance. The system output is the area and composition information (vitrinite, inertinite and mineral abundances) on individual grains. The maceral liptinite was absent from this coal because of its high rank. This information is used to estimate the volume and density of each grain and therefore their masses. With this information, fine coal cleaning processes can be analysed in terms of liberation, washability and flotation response to pinpoint problems and potential areas for process improvements. The grain data is being used to map the responses of different types of coal grains to flotation operating conditions and hence provide a diagnostic capability for fine coal circuits. The partitioning of the coal grains to product or tailings on the basis of petrographic/maceral composition can be assessed. The partitioning of grains on the basis of density and size can also be tracked in an analogous fashion to washability analysis on a dense medium cyclone. The information can also be used as input data for advanced flotation models for improved prediction and optimisation of coal flotation circuit and plant performance. This characterisation method also shows significant potential for fine coal washability analysis, thus reducing the use of organic solvents for float/sink analysis of fine coal. Plant sampling was conducted around a single stage flotation circuit at a Bowen Basin (Australia) coal preparation plant, yielding samples of flotation feed, concentrate and tailings. The coal was of a relatively high rank with mean random vitrinite reflectance of 1.3%. Sub-samples were extracted for ash and size analysis. The remaining samples were sized at 0.500, 0.250, 0.125, 0.063 and 0.038 Microscopic analyses were conducted on polished grain-mounts of each of the size fractions using an oil immersion lens fitted to a reflected-light microscope. Microscope images were captured using the MACE™ 300 system for coal petrography ( The area of each grain; its maximum and minimum dimensions; and the abundances of vitrinite, inertinite, dark minerals and bright minerals in each grain were determined. An estimate of the volume of each grain was made from its area measurement. (The area of each grain was converted to an equivalent circle of the same area and the volume of the sphere determined.) The density of each grain was estimated from the abundances of its maceral and mineral constituents in the grains. Grain density was used to determine the mass of each grain. For this study a relatively simple estimation of density was made by assuming that the vitrinite and inertinite macerals had a density of 1.3 The imaging techniques to characterise the coal samples provided extensive data on composition (maceral and mineral abundances), density and size of the grains in samples of flotation feed, concentrate and tailings. It was therefore possible to map the maceral and density partitioning of the coal samples processed through the flotation system. The compositional information of grains were classified into six classes consisting of liberated (single component) and non-liberated (composite) grains. Single component grains comprising more than 95% of a single phase were classed as pure vitrinite (Vit), inertinite, (Inert) and minerals (Min). Other grains were classified as composites. The composite grains were subdivided based on their maceral/mineral associations as being vitrinite-rich composites (VitRich), inertinite-rich composites (InertRich) or mineral-rich composites (MinRich). This classification method was adopted because a large proportion of grains in the feed sample (approximately 41% by mass) occurred as composites rather than liberated macerals or minerals (which constituted approximately 59% of the sample). The summary information of grains for the feed, product and tailings samples of the 0.250 After data reconciliation via material balance techniques, the partitioning of these grain classes in the feed between the flotation product and tailings in the flotation process was determined. The component recovery data have also been presented as a function of particle size in The imaging techniques provide estimates of coal grain composition, density and mass abundances. When samples of flotation feed, product and tailings are characterised, it is possible to map the grain type partitioning and the density partitioning of the coal samples processed through the flotation system in a manner analogous to the partition curves used extensively in the analysis of density based separators such as dense medium cyclones. The partition curves have been generated for the +0.500 The complexity of association of components plays a crucial role in the partitioning of the coal between the product and tailings. Relative density is being used here as a convenient indicator of the mineral composition of grains. However it should be borne in mind that flotation amenability of coal is not a simple function of density, but depends on many factors of which surface properties and particle size are the most important. Nevertheless, it is now feasible to generate partition curves to quantify flotation separation efficiency without too much difficulty and expense. The figure shows a set of partition curves for six size fractions and that for the combined size fractions. Although factors such as A set of partition curve could also be generated for the grain types that are comprised of the various maceral and mineral components. A number of approaches may be taken to flotation modelling, two of which are the probability approach and the kinetic models approach and a third approach is a combination of these. In this work, only the probability approach was used but the basic concepts of the kinetic model approach is discussed here for completeness. The basic kinetic model draws on direct analogy with chemical reaction kinetics. The simple rate equation for a semi-batch flotation process is given by It is recognised that coal particles in a flotation pulp possess a range of rate constants dependent on floatability. This may be taken into account in the flotation kinetic model as The most advanced kinetic models currently utilise only a two-component system with high and low flotation rate constants In the probability approach to flotation modelling, the probability Mathematical models can be defined for each of the probability elements and hence the flotation process as a whole. These models require inputs of particle size, particle density and floatability information which has been lacking due to the difficulty and cost of acquiring this data until now. A combination of probability and kinetics approaches may also be used. Once the probability of particle capture by an air bubble A preliminary model based on the probability concept as described above was applied to the partition data. The equations were identified in The probability of the particle–bubble encounter resulting in attachment was described using the following relationship: The probability of the bubble–particle aggregate staying intact without disruption is estimated by Proportion of particles following the water into the froth was modelled by For this modelling exercise, grains in the density range of 1.25–1.45 are designated as clean coal, those within the density of 1.45–1.60 are designated as semi-clean coal, those within 1.60–2.00 are designated as bony coal and those with density greater than 2.00 are designated as stone (mineral). The relative density range for bony coal used here is similar to that defined by The model predictions satisfactorily describe the experimental data. This is a first pass model which will undergo further refinements, including combining the probability approach applying detailed knowledge of the flotation sub-processes with the kinetic approach and taking into account cell hydrodynamics. Moving to this next level of complexity requires the availability of a number of data sets for flotation tests performed under varying conditions. New microscopic imaging techniques have provided grain data that has enabled the partitioning of the coal grains to product or tailings to be studied in greater detail than ever before possible. Size, composition and density information on individual grains of flotation feed, product and tailings was used to map their partitioning in the coal flotation system. The mapping technique is analogous to the partition curves used extensively in the analysis of density based separators. The behaviour of each of the macerals, minerals and their associations as composite grains could be used to pinpoint the root cause of problems and identify potential solutions. In the samples studied, pure grains of inertinite and composites containing inertinite were found to have lower flotation response than pure grains of vitrinite and vitrinite-rich grains for the flotation circuit investigated. The grain size, density and partition data have been used as input data initially for a simple flotation model which provided satisfactory description of experimental data, with a wide scope for developing more sophisticated models. This basic model will be further refined and other approaches investigated, including combining the probability approach applying the detailed knowledge of the flotation sub-processes with the kinetic approach. This new tool is being used for flotation process analysis and optimisation, as well as modelling and predicting of coal flotation outcomes and for diagnostic studies when unexpected flotation response is obtained. This approach provides an innovative pathway for coal flotation process analysis and optimisation, as well as prediction of flotation outcomes and requires further studies and development. The financial support provided by the Australian Coal Association Research Program (ACARP) and CSIRO and permission to publish the information is gratefully acknowledged.