In the growth of InGaN/GaN multi-quantum well (MQW) heterostructures by metal organic chemical vapor deposition, V-defects attached to threading dislocations have been observed and investigated. Energy-dispersive X-ray analysis and conventional transmission electron microscopy studies were carried out in order to determine the In composition and investigate the behavior of the dislocations. The V-defects are limited by {101¯1} lattice planes, they are attached to threading dislocations and may start at the third quantum well. The associated dislocation runs up into the overgrown GaN layer. Some (a+c) dislocations were shown to decompose inside the multi-quantum well, giving rise to a misfit segment in the c-plane and a V-shape defect.The outstandingly rapid progress in the field of III–V nitride semiconductor materials is due to their great importance for optoelectronic devices, particularly for short wavelengths, high power and high temperature electronic devices In this work, we analyze the behavior of the threading dislocations attached to the V-defect apex in an InGaN/GaN MQWs heterostructure. Different threading dislocation behaviors have been observed in this heteroepitaxial system. Besides the most well-known V-defect attached to a threading dislocation with the dislocation running up to the free surface of the overgrown GaN, we have observed the decomposition of a ( The chemical composition in the heterostructure has been analyzed using energy-dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX) in a scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM). conventional transmission electron microscopy (CTEM) and the application of Conventional light emitting diode structure, p-GaN/MQW/n-GaN was grown on Cross-sectional specimens were prepared by mechanical grinding and dimpling down to below 10 μm. For electron transparency, ion milling was carried out at 5 kV with the specimen kept at the LN2 temperature in order to minimize the irradiation defects. The compositional analysis was carried out in a VG HB601 UX Field Emission Gun-Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy, FEG-STEM, operating at 100 kV, equipped with a EDX spectrometer (Oxford Instrument) and the CTEM characterization on a JEOL 2000-FX operating at 200 kV. This EDX technique uses a small probe size (0.8 nm) which gives high spatial X-ray resolution. The 0.8 nm probe has a current of 500 pA allowing the acquisition of maps, linescans, and point analyses to be obtained by the use of the windowless Si(Li) detector, which has a large (0.2 sr) solid angle. X-ray acquisition was carried out using the EDAX Genesis 4000 system. Analysis was carried out with a convergence angle of 11 mrad; dwell time for maps is 200 ms and 4000 ms for linescans. Previous reports have shown that, when V-shape defects in III-N materials are related to threading dislocations, they initiate at the threading dislocations, always extending along the growth direction in the InGaN heterostructure. It has also been shown that the V-defects start at the onset of the first quantum well The bright field STEM image of  It has been reported that the threading dislocations associated with this kind of defects can have different characters, with increased nucleation possibility when the dislocation has a In summary, we have reported the formation of V-shape defects in InGaN/GaN heterostructures. These defects are attached to threading dislocations exhibiting various behaviors through the MQW system. They can be attached to a threading dislocation, which runs up to the free surface of the overgrown GaN. This has also been observed in our heterostructures. The V-defects may start in another quantum well than the first one as has been previously reported (the second and third wells in this work). In the MQWs, ( The authors would like to acknowledge financial support from EPSRC for many aspects of this programme of work. AMS acknowledges the support of “Ministerio de Educacion, Cultura y Deporte”, Spain under the postdoctoral grant EX2002-0807. PR and PS acknowledge the support of the EU under contract number HPRN-CT-1999-00040.