Various unipolar DC pulse waveforms were selected to find the factors for controlling of the anodized titanium surface morphology. The current density, frequency and duty were ranged from 50 mA/cm2 to 750 mA/cm2, from 100 Hz to 400 Hz and from 10% to 50%, respectively. Increase of duty from 10% to 50% at 100 Hz in 0.1 M KOH provides larger pores — from 0.13 μm to 0.19 μm in average for 50 mA/cm2 and 0.15 μm to 0.24 μm for 750 mA/cm2. On the other hand increase of frequency from 100 Hz to 400 Hz at 50% duty provides smaller pores — from 0.19 μm to 0.17 μm for 50 mA/cm2 and 0.24 μm to 0.17 μm for 750 mA/cm2. Both duty and frequency are important factors to control the anodized titanium surface morphology.Anodic oxidation process has been used to make a protective layer on valve metals. Micro-arc oxidation (MAO) is an advanced anodic oxidation process. In comparison with conventional anodic oxidation, the specimen is exposed to high voltage during this process. Such high voltage results in dielectric breakdown and micro-arc discharges. This process works as thermal treatment and makes porous morphology Surface chemistry and surface roughness are important factors to bear biocompatible surfaces which gives rise to good adhesion of the osteoblast on implant surface successfully. There are numerous studies on controlling the surface chemistry for MAO process by changing of electrolyte composition Mirror like well polished commercially available pure Ti (CP-Ti, Grade 3) disk was used as substrate. The disks were cleaned ultrasonically in acetone, methanol, and de-ionized water. The electrolyte was prepared by dissolving 0.1 M KOH in de-ionized water. It was maintained by 10 °C with a circulation bath. MAO of the specimen was carried out in an aqueous electrolyte by applying a pulsed DC waveform to the specimen. All of the experiments were conducted in galvanostat mode until the potential reaches specific operation voltage − Micro-arc oxidation is an extended anodic oxidation. When this process is conducted in galvanostatic mode, the potential of the working electrode is increased because of oxide thickening. The breakdown voltage depends on the electrolyte condition — composition, concentration, and temperature. At initial stage, the breakdown is observed as the numerous tiny sparkles. The discharge feature changes several pronounced arcs as the progress of the process. These arcs change oxide surface to crater like shape pores. If the electrolytic condition is fixed, the configuration of the pores changes with cut-off potential It is the most plausible idea that the larger duty of unipolar DC pulse waveform makes the larger size of pores. Han et al. reports this phenomenon in 100 Hz unipolar DC pulse waveform It is found in all cases that higher duties bear larger pores. The concept of the previous report that longer pulse width makes larger pores is confirmed. Higher current density also makes larger pores due to its higher input energy. Increase of duty from 10% to 50% at 100 Hz provides larger pores — from 0.13 μm to 0.19 μm in average for 50 mA/cm On the other hand it is possible that the micro-arc oxidized surface in higher frequency may have smaller pores in comparison with that in lower frequency at the same duty because the active pulse width in higher frequency is smaller than that in lower frequency at the same duty. The restriction of the duty in unipolar DC pulse waveform during micro-arc oxidation in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte controlled the pore size. Increase of duty from 10% to 50% at 100 Hz produced larger pores — from 0.13 μm to 0.19 μm in average for 50 mA/cm This work was supported by a grant (code#: 06K1501-01620) from the Center for Nanostructured Materials Technology under the 21st Century Frontier R&D Program of the Ministry of Science and Technology, Korea.