Porous media in extraction and especially pertraction are often suspected to add unnecessary diffusive resistance and considerably slow down extraction kinetics. This work presents a miniaturized pertraction device and simulation of diffusive and reactive solute transport. Kinetics are experimentally observed and numerically fitted. Reaction rates – or solute transfer rates – are estimated via this fit on a numerical basis. The work shows that the diffusive resistance created by a porous medium is prevalent only at low distribution coefficients. At high distribution coefficients as is the case of quasi all industrial processes, the porous membrane does not interfere with overall kinetics. Instead, the diffusive resistance is shared between feed and extraction phases, and interface transfer, depending on the value of transfer rate. Overall, this work can be generalized as enabling the measurement of solute transfer rates at the liquid-liquid interface, a key parameter in pertraction and membrane separation which is difficult to measure using classic methods of extraction.Membranes and porous materials are key elements in many industrial fields [ Essential properties or specifications of such membranes include – besides chemical compatibility with the used solvents, acids, rectifiers and adjuvants are: Sufficient membrane thickness, High porosity, Small pore diameter, Pore tortuosity, Considering pores larger than solute size, geometrical considerations lead to the effective diffusivity in porous media [ Here, Thus the major incertitude concerning use of membranes besides all of their advantages is the importance of diffusive resistance they engender during solute transport from the aqueous to the organic phase. It is considered that after phase transfer, solute within extraction aggregates accumulates next to the interface and inside the membrane due to the reduced diffusion coefficient, Microfluidics is an advantageous way of implementing assays for membrane-based extraction, whether for gas-liquid [ The microfluidic chips used in this study are optimized for metal ion extraction, viz. Lanthanide ions: PMMA is used as bulk material (10 mm extruded PMMA sheet) which is chemically compatible with nitric acid and most organic solvents. PMMA sheets are surface-milled, then microfluidic channels are milled with a rectangular section of 0.4 mm × 0.4 mm. The contact section is 171 mm long. The micro/macrofluidic interface is provided by stainless steel cylinders connected to the microfluidic chip on one side and to PTFE tubing on the other side (0.65 mm inner diameter). Two PMMA sheets are screwed together, microfluidic channels facing. The inserted PTFE membrane is hydrophobic with a thickness of 30 μm, pore size of 20 nm and porosity of 55% (Commercially available from Cobetter filtration, China). It acts as capillary separation between the microfluidic channels ( Furthermore, the channel used for aqueous media is connected to a pressure regulated nitrogen reservoir used to generate a slight over-pressure ensuring stability of the organic-aqueous interface. A silicon sealant is applied around the membrane filling the gap between the two PMMA sheets induced by membrane thickness. The sealant gas-tights the device and avoids leakage of organic solvent from the membrane toward the outside of the chipset, but it does not come into contact with neither of the two phases. Assays are organized in the following way: sample phases are charged into gas-tight 5 mL Hamilton glass syringes equipped with PTFE plunger. Syringes are loaded onto a syringe pump (NE1000, New Era Pump Systems) and connected to the PTFE tubing. An over-pressure is applied to the aqueous channel via the output sample septum vial, so as to stabilize the liquid-liquid interface: the nitrogen reservoir is connected via PTFE tubing into the vial gas phase. The aqueous sample is then introduced into the aqueous channel, there contained by the hydrophobic membrane. Then, the organic sample is introduced into the organic channel. Here, the oleophilic membrane soaks up with organic sample. Once this is complete, both syringes are perfused at constant and equal flow rates, though various values were studied in order to acquire kinetics data. The equivalent of two times the combined channel and output tubing volumes is perfused to ensure that dynamic equilibrium of the system is reached. Then, the extraction sample is rerouted to a clean sample vial and 600 μL of sample is collected for off-line ICP-AES analysis (Spectro Arcos, Ametek). The overall test bench (syringe pump + tubing + microfluidic + sample vials) is contained in a climate chamber (IPP750plus, Memmert) precise in temperature to 1 K and constant to 0.1 K. It should be noted that ethanol-cleaned microfluidic chips with a new membrane were used for each new set of feed and extraction phases. To validate and prove usefulness of microfluidic membrane integration and associated modelling we choose the problem of rare earth element extraction from a mixture of trivalent ions. The selected model system is an aqueous solution consisting of 100 ppm each of La(NO Validation of microfluidic membrane extraction results was performed by comparison to results obtained by batch extraction experiments. Typically, a sample tube is filled with equal volumes of each phase, followed by a 1 h planetary agitation at controlled temperature. Both organic and aqueous phases are then allowed to decant and are separated for ICP analysis. The model for solute transport is based on a simple Fick diffusion model, represented here by its first law of diffusion for solute flux ϕ (Equation The chemical force is expressed as a gradient of chemical potential. Therefore, explicit calculations of effective flux require to express molar concentration in osmotic concentration (formerly called osmolarity). The corrections for activity between aqueous and organic phase need to be taken into account when considering a given process. In present conditions, the osmotic concentration correction is smaller than 10% [ Initial conditions are The developed simulation uses a finite difference method to calculate the ion concentration profile throughout the domain [ The three diffusion volume coefficients, one for each sub-domains,    Temperature dependence of diffusivity is given by the Einstein-Stokes theorem, The concentration profile for each channel and the membrane is linearized: a constant and a linear profile in both liquid channels, and a linear profile in the membrane. This allows estimation of linear gradient widths, Overall, the calculated concentration profiles can be approximated by linear gradients to refer to the classical model of liquid-liquid pertraction [ This is a way of calculating respective contributions to diffusive resistances and obtain an estimation of the major barrier throughout the extraction process. Classically [ The transfer flux can as well be expressed for the overall system: With the calculated concentration profiles, it is possible to determine the thickness of the organic and aqueous diffusion layers on each side of the membrane, as well as the local transfer coefficients From above equations, the total transfer resistance as written from the aqueous side reference, Please note that the whole mathematical formalism can as well be written with the organic phase as reference, which yields the same results up to a factor Dependence of extraction kinetics on pH at 19 °C is shown in However, the driving force in the non-equilibrium systems is the chemical potential difference of the electrolyte between the initial location of the ion in water phase and the final location in the organic solvent phase [ When a neutral saturated metal complex forming in the organic phase has been considered as the conjunction of driving forces and quenching mechanisms, the large difference between metal complexation free energy and the global extraction free energy can be identified as a combination of bulk “entropic” electrostatic terms and other minor terms [ It is also noticed that at higher pH, higher mass (smaller ionic radii) lanthanides are more extracted ( It should also be noted that when pH changes, the solution's ionic strength also changes. TODGA however belongs to the class of solvating extractants: their efficiency is not linked to a cation exchange [ These known trends are all found in results presented in A comparison of the data acquired both using our microfluidic device and in batch samples is presented in Distribution coefficients kd used in the simulations were determined from the experiments and are reported in Moreover, on The fitted simulation curves for 19 °C using parameter k A resistance chart according to the later equation is proposed in Detailed results are given in A second tendency can be observed regarding the influence of interface transfer. For low The final point regards the membrane resistance, which is mostly important for low distribution coefficients. Then, the concentration gradient in the adjacent organic phase is low, and the membrane accumulates extraction aggregates. This point is further illustrated in In this work, a microfluidic device based on pertraction principles was presented, studied and validated using an industrially relevant model case in hydrometallurgy (ca. the role of pH in rare earth extraction, using TODGA as an extracting molecule). The device not only reproduces, within measurement error bars, batch experiments used as benchmark, It also gave kinetics pieces of information. At 19 °C, extraction and kinetics dependence on pH was examined. For pH 2.3, two different temperatures were analysed. A simple diffusion-reaction model was proposed and diffusive resistances of the four barriers, i.e. feed channel, interface, porous medium and extraction channel, were evaluated. The methodical analysis of these diffusive resistances given by the developed model shows that the presence of the thin membrane does not perturb the equilibrium nor does it significantly increase the time of experiment. Hence it makes the determination of process selectivity by membrane-based pertraction microfluidics an easier and more deployable approach than those based on circulating alternating oil and water droplets [ It should be noted that these conclusions are just as valid for desextraction, since the important parameter governing diffusive resistance in different domains is the relative level of chemical potential. For desextraction, chemical potentials are interverted and so is diffusive resistance. Again, for high Another outcome is that when designing pertraction microfluidic devices, an important design rule should be to reduce channel depth in order to speed up bulk diffusion, or to implement additional convection methods. Furthermore, some research is needed to regulate or speed up interface transfer through e.g. ultrasound [ Finally, the feasibility to implement on-line analytical devices (FTIR) on milli-fluidic chip has been successfully demonstrated [ Research leading to these results received funding from the None. All authors would like to thank Helmuth Möhwald for helpful scientific discussions and counselling, as well as Sandrine Dourdain and Stéphane Pellet-Rostaing (both CEA/DRF/ICSM) for help in CP's initial training in batch extraction, guidance of JR, definition of model system and consortium meeting discussions. JT, CP and JCG would like to thank Frédéric Né, Nicolas Verplanck, François Boizot and Manuel Alessio at CEA/DRT/LETI for help with microfluidics manufacturing. The in-depth and detailed report of one reviewer is also acknowledged.