This work uses a dual-site Langmuir adsorption model to describe supercritical carbon dioxide (scCO2) adsorption in coal up to 20MPa and 253K. The isosteric heat of adsorption for scCO2 in coal is calculated analytically by considering both the real gas behavior and the adsorbed phase, which are ignored in the classic Clausius-Clapeyron approximation. It was found that the proposed model can not only reasonably interpret observed test phenomena but also has the intrinsic ability to extrapolate adsorption isotherms under different temperatures beyond test data. The crossovers of the observed adsorption isotherms under different temperatures can be simply attributed to the pressure-volume-temperature (PVT) behavior of the bulk gas during the adsorption process. Both the temperature dependence and adsorption uptake dependence of isosteric heat of adsorption are revealed; the higher the temperature and the adsorption uptake, the lower the isosteric heat of adsorption. The ideal gas law overestimates the isosteric heat of adsorption for scCO2 in coal. The application of the dual-site Langmuir model allows for estimating the CO2 storage capacity of deep unmineable coal seams, modeling CO2 transport behavior via differentiating the true ratio between bulk phase and adsorbed phase, and investigating the true thermodynamic characteristics of CO2 in coal under high pressures.Because of global warming and climate change concerns, global efforts have been made to decrease the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere It is well known that the affinity of carbon dioxide in coal is higher than methane, and the amount of carbon dioxide adsorbed in coal is always higher than methane at the same pressure. In order to evaluate the carbon dioxide storage potential of unmineable coal seams, the first step is to evaluate the adsorption capacity of carbon dioxide in coal via isothermal sorption tests. However, because of the heterogenous properties of coal, scCO As a crucial evaluation index for the thermodynamic process in physical adsorption tests, the isosteric heat of adsorption for scCO To tentatively solve the above-mentioned issues, this work first uses a dual-site Langmuir model to describe scCO Coal swelling is a pronounced phenomenon associated with CO Based on the assumption that coal swelling is induced by the CO If the absorbed and adsorbed phase can be weighted by a parameter, α, and Eq. For a pure gas and solid sorption system, the excess adsorbed amount (n Considering the accepted assumption that the density of the adsorbed phase can be treated as an unknown constant If the observed adsorption isotherms (Gibbs excess adsorption isotherms) are obtained through isothermal adsorption tests, Eq. Based on the Clausius–Clapeyron relationship In order to obtain Using the dual-site Langmuir adsorption model, absolute adsorption isotherms can be obtained from the excess adsorption isotherms. The isosteric heat of adsorption can then be calculated considering the real gas behavior and the contribution of the adsorbed phase, neither are considered in the classic Clausius-Clapeyron approximation. High pressure (over 7.4 The observed adsorption isotherms under different temperatures are fitted simultaneously using Eq. Once all the fitting parameters are obtained from fitting the observed adsorption isotherms using Eq.  For both coals, there are consistent crossovers of the observed adsorption isotherms under different temperatures after the observed adsorption content reached the maximum value. After the crossover, the observed adsorption content at higher temperatures is greater than at low temperatures under the same pressure. However, the temperature-dependent property of adsorption uptake under different temperatures can be shown via the absolute adsorption uptake, where the higher the temperature the lower the adsorption uptake. The abnormal crossover phenomenon of the observed adsorption isotherms appears because the pressure is used as the independent variable, instead of the density of scCO For geological storage of carbon dioxide in subsurfaces such as unminable coal seams and shale formations, one of the crucial issues is to estimate the storage capacity of carbon dioxide under real geological conditions. With increasing depth, both in-situ reservoir pressure and geothermal effect become pronounced, and there will be a phase change of carbon dioxide from subcritical status to supercritical status. Thus, carbon dioxide storage capacity must take high pressure and high temperature conditions into consideration. However, it is impractical to measure all isotherms under different temperatures. Therefore, finding an adsorption model capable to predict higher temperature adsorption isotherms using lower temperature data pique researchers’ interests. Predicting isotherms under different temperatures are possible using the proposed model because the temperature dependency of adsorption isotherms are only exhibited through the Langmuir constant (K In order to validate the prediction ability of the proposed model, the Chinese coal sample is taken as an example to show the confidence of the predicted adsorption isotherms. First, only three adsorption isotherms from the four isotherms are fitted using the proposed method. Then, the predicted adsorption isotherms are compared with the test data to see the difference.  After carbon dioxide becomes scCO Carbon dioxide storage in deep unminable coal seams and deep shale formations are two promising geological sites for onshore carbon sequestration. Since the adsorption phase of carbon dioxide in coal is one of the main components of the total carbon dioxide gas-in-place in the subsurface, the accurate prediction of adsorption carbon dioxide in coal is crucial. With the increasing reservoir depth, high pressure and high temperature geological situations have to be considered. Such geological conditions result in the change of carbon dioxide from subcritical phase to supercritical phase, and an optimized model is needed to analyze such behavior. The proposed dual-site Langmuir model can describe both the observed adsorption and the absolute adsorption of sub- and super-critical carbon dioxide in coal. In order to accurately assess the storage capacity of scCO This work uses a dual-site Langmuir adsorption model to describe high pressure carbon dioxide adsorption in coal by considering both the adsorbed and absorbed phases. Then, the isosteric heat of adsorption are calculated analytically by considering both the real gas behavior and the adsorbed gas phase. Last, the published data for high pressure carbon dioxide adsorption in coal are utilized to verify the proposed model. Modeling results reveal the proposed model can not only reasonably address observed test phenomena but also has the intrinsic ability to extrapolate adsorption isotherms under different temperatures beyond test data. It was found that the crossovers of the observed adsorption isotherms under different temperatures can be simply attributed to the pressure-volume-temperature (PVT) behavior of the bulk gas during the adsorption process. Both the temperature dependence and absolute adsorption uptake dependence of the isosteric heat of adsorption are readily investigated for scCO The proposed adsorption model lays the foundation for accurately estimating the storage capacity of carbon dioxide, differentiating the true ratio between the adsorbed phase and bulk phases and developing gas transport models that consider the adsorbed phase effect. The thermodynamic analysis is useful for interpreting temperature related phenomena associated with carbon dioxide adsorption in coal as well as shale gas reservoirs. Financial assistance for this work was provided by the