Nonunion of proximal humerus fractures is rare but presents unique challenges. This chapter will discuss the incidence, risk factors, radiographic findings, treatment options, and sequelae of proximal humerus nonunions in the setting of nonoperatively and operatively treated proximal humerus fractures.Proximal humerus fractures represent 5% of all fractures and are commonly treated by orthopedic surgeons ( Despite advances in evaluation and treatment of proximal humerus fractures, a select subset of patients will go on to a nonunion. While this complication is rare, it presents unique challenges to the treating surgeon. Most patients with proximal humerus fractures are elderly and have medical comorbidities that complicate treatment and diminish healing ability. This chapter will discuss the incidence, risk factors, radiographic findings, treatment options, and sequelae of proximal humerus nonunions in the setting of nonoperatively and operatively treated proximal humerus fractures. The incidence of nonoperatively treated proximal humeral nonunion has traditionally been low. In a series of more than 1000 proximal humerus fractures, the overall incidence of nonunion was remarkably low, at 1.1% ( Patient-related risk factors that increase the risk of proximal humerus nonunion include smoking, noncompliance, overall medical illness, and malnutrition. One study demonstrated that smokers were 5.5 times more likely to develop nonunion as compared to nonsmokers ( Long bone nonunions are generally diagnosed with failure of bony union by 6–9 months. Proximal humerus fractures generally heal more rapidly, given their abundant blood supply and metaphyseal nature. Therefore, further workup should be considered for fractures not uniting by 3–4 months after injury ( Physical examination should begin with a general assessment of patients and their overall physical fitness and nutritional status. Focused physical examination on the injured shoulder will assess range of motion, strength, and the neurovascular status. One can often, with careful physical exam, sense if the shoulder moves as a unit or if movement is occurring through the fracture site. Attention should be paid to axillary nerve function, as axillary nerve injury can be seen in even modestly displaced proximal humerus fractures. If there is concern about possible nerve injury, an electromyographic (EMG) evaluation should be completed. Radiographic examination is critical in the evaluation of proximal humerus nonunion. Considerable proximal humeral bone loss is common with long-standing nonunions ( The diagnosis of proximal humerus nonunion can generally be made 3–4 months after the fracture was sustained. Careful assessment of any interval healing is important as this may indicate pending union. In the absence of interval healing, and duration from injury of 3–6 months, the diagnosis of nonunion can be made. Proximal humeral nonunion is a painful, disabling problem that results in loss of independence for some elderly patients. Nonoperative management is typically reserved for those patients who are too unhealthy for surgical treatment. In reasonable surgical candidates, the diagnosis of nonunion and the subsequent surgical management should not be delayed given the risk of prolonged stiffness and bone loss associated with neglected proximal humerus nonunions. Surgical treatment options for proximal humerus nonunion include ORIF and arthroplasty. Surgical decision making is dependent on several factors. The bony architecture of the proximal humerus, especially as visualized on CT scan, can dictate treatment options. In cases of preserved bone stock, typically in younger, healthier patients, open reduction and internal fixation can be considered. If substantial proximal bone loss is noted (most commonly calcar bone loss and severe cavitation of the humeral head and/or tuberosity resorption or severe degenerative changes at the GH joint), arthroplasty will likely be the treatment of choice. The position and the healing of the tuberosities, if fractured initially, should be carefully assessed during surgical planning. While the greater tuberosity heals quite reliably, it is often in a malunited position. In some instances, the greater tuberosity can heal in a minimally displaced position to the humeral head or to the shaft. In other cases, the tuberosity can heal in a malreduced position with significant retraction superiorly and posteriorly. ORIF may be considered if radiographic evaluation demonstrates minimal displacement of the tuberosity in relation to the head fragment. Reverse total shoulder arthroplasty (rTSA) should be considered with a malpositioned greater tuberosity as rotator cuff function is likely compromised. Tuberosity osteotomy, mobilization, and fixation are technically challenging and have been fraught with poor outcomes in the literature ( Open reduction and internal fixation of proximal humerus nonunions should be considered for patients with preserved proximal bony architecture and minimal glenohumeral degenerative joint disease. Surgical planning begins with careful analysis of factors predisposing to nonunion with nonoperative management, including both medical and anatomical factors. Medical comorbidities should be optimized. Patient should be encouraged to quit smoking, and referral to smoking cessation clinics should be offered as well as performing serial nicotine serum testing. Anti-inflammatory medication use should be carefully assessed as these drugs have been implicated in slow bone healing. This includes nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories as well as more powerful antirheumatologic and antirejection medications. The factors that contributed to the initial nonunion could potentially lead to treatment failure when addressing the nonunion with ORIF. In addition to medical concerns, anatomical factors should be assessed using CT scan. Hypertrophic nonunion may indicate that there is excessive motion but preserved biology at the fracture line. In these cases, endosteal strut allografting with proximal fibular allograft may provide additional mechanical support ( Historically, blade plates were used successfully, with or without bone grafting, to treat proximal humeral nonunions. The vast majority of these were surgical neck nonunions ( A deltopectoral approach is favored given the possibility of further surgery in these high-risk patients. This allows an extensile approach and may facilitate conversion or later revision to arthroplasty if necessary. Careful assessment of the fracture fragments should be completed, which may be complicated by the distorted anatomy of the proximal humerus and the abundant scarring that may be present. Several landmarks may assist in the identification of the fracture fragments. Locating the biceps tendon and bicipital groove allows identification of the greater tuberosity laterally, the lesser tuberosity medially, and by following the biceps into the joint, the rotator interval. In most cases of ORIF for proximal humeral nonunion, the greater and lesser tuberosity will be united to the head, and acceptable position entrance into the joint is not necessary. Once the nonunion site is identified, any callus should be debrided to expose a bleeding bone surface. Traction sutures placed in the subscapularis, supraspinatus, and infraspinatus allow indirect control of the humeral head, aiding in correction of varus/valgus malposition and version. Once control of the head is gained and the nonunion site exposed, the fracture can be reduced. Varus deformity is the most common pattern seen in nonunions, and attempts should be made to reduce any varus deformity through the greater tuberosity and lesser tuberosity traction sutures. A Cobb elevator or tamp can be placed through the fracture site to assist in bringing the humeral head out of varus. This should be done gently to avoid further damage as the humeral head is likely already slightly cavitated. The shaft should be reduced to the head/tuberosity segment. Once the reduction is complete, the degree of medial bone loss can be carefully evaluated. Medial calcar support is critical and can be assessed by direct visualization as well as with intraoperative fluoroscopic imaging. Once reduction is obtained, placement of a large Steinmann pin from the shaft into the humeral head allows provisional fixation. This pin can be used to provisionally support the tuberosity traction sutures by wrapping the sutures around the pin after placement. The reduction should be carefully assessed and scrutinized on AP and Valpeau lateral views to ensure that there is no varus malalignment of the humeral head (which is extremely common). If persistent varus malalignment is encountered, a valgus osteotomy may be considered to reduce the fracture into further valgus alignment ( Next, a proximal humerus locking plate should be applied in accordance with the specific anatomic design of the plate. Generally, this is placed just posterior to the bicipital groove. Given the abnormal anatomy of the proximal humerus in the setting of nonunion, the plate should be applied not as a reduction tool, but after the reduction has been obtained and verified. Contouring of the plate may be necessary to avoid inadvertently generating a varus alignment with application. Fixation is at the discretion of the surgeon, however, given the osteopenia that may be present in these patients, locking fixation is recommended. Several studies have documented unacceptably high rates of intra-articular screw penetration ( Autologous bone grafting should be considered, not only to aid in healing of the fracture site, but also as a medial buttress if there is substantial medial calcar bone loss. This can help to prevent varus angulation. It is the author's preference to utilize iliac crest autograft, although fibular allograft is a common alternative graft choice. The ipsilateral iliac crest can be prepped and draped and bone graft, either tricortical (if structural graft is needed) or cancellous only, can be harvested. This can be added prior to provisional reduction, or voids can be filled with bone graft following reduction and plate fixation. In many cases of oligotrophic or atrophic nonunion, this can improve both the mechanical and biological properties of the construct. If cancellous graft is used, it can be packed around the plate and screws once provisional plate fixation has been obtained. If structural bone grafting is utilized, timing of application is important. It is the author's preference to obtain an acceptable reduction of the fracture prior to application of the structural graft. Medial support on native bone is assessed visually and fluoroscopically. If medial support of the fracture is inadequate, the fracture site can be opened and the graft (structural iliac crest autograft, fibular allograft, etc.) can be placed with fluoroscopic assistance. The fracture can then be re-reduced and fixation can be placed, ensuring accurate placement of the graft as well as the ability to obtain an adequate reduction. Given the limited healing potential of these patients, and the high risk of postoperative complications (especially mechanical failure in the setting of poor proximal bone stock), postoperative rehabilitation should focus on healing rather than immediate range of motion. It has been demonstrated that severe stiffness is uncommon in the elderly, even in the setting of 6 weeks of postoperative immobilization ( While ORIF is a reliable option for many patients with proximal humeral nonunions, those with substantial cavitation of the humeral head, medial calcar bone loss, or extreme malunion of the tuberosities may have a better outcome with arthroplasty. Options for shoulder arthroplasty include unconstrained shoulder arthroplasty (hemiarthroplasty (HA) or total shoulder arthroplasty (TSA)), or constrained total shoulder arthroplasty (reverse total shoulder arthroplasty (rTSA)). Before the introduction and widespread use of the reverse total shoulder arthroplasty, unconstrained arthroplasty was the treatment of choice for most proximal humeral nonunions, especially in cases of surgical neck nonunions. In cases of preserved tuberosity position, this could be completed by “skewering” the proximal humeral segment with the arthroplasty, without disrupting the position or healing of the tuberosities. In these cases, results were reasonable ( The vast majority of patients with nonunited proximal humerus fractures that require unconstrained arthroplasty are treated with hemiarthroplasty. The exception would be patients with preexisting osteoarthritis, in which total shoulder arthroplasty is indicated. Hemiarthroplasty (or TSA) is performed through a deltopectoral approach. All subacromial adhesions should be released, and the plane between the subscapularis and conjoined tendon should be developed, to allow palpation and protection of the axillary nerve. Preoperative planning guides intraoperative management of the proximal humeral fragment and tuberosities. In cases where the tuberosities have healed in an acceptable position, or in isolated surgical neck fractures that go on to nonunion, treatment of the proximal segment as a “unit” is advantageous. The subscapularis is taken down via a subscapularis peel, tenotomy, or “wafer” osteotomy, depending on surgeon preference and experience. This allows access to the humeral head, which can be cut in the standard manner or osteotomized and removed via the rotator interval, allowing more room to maneuver the proximal fragment as it is not united to the shaft. The proximal segment is left as a unit (sometimes referred to as a “donut”), which is skewered with the stem to align it to the shaft. The advantage of this approach is that the lesser tuberosity, metaphysis, and greater tuberosity are one unit, facilitating repair. In cases of tuberosity malunion, osteotomy of the proximal metaphysis should be considered. Several studies have documented a significantly higher rate of tuberosity resorption or nonunion when this approach is taken ( Height of the prosthesis can be established based on the preoperative contralateral radiographic examination or by measurements from the pectoralis major insertion, because the top of the humeral head is typically 5.6 rTSA has provided a new tool in the treatment of proximal humeral nonunions. It allows the opportunity to provide a functional shoulder in the setting of tuberosity reabsorption, tuberosity malunion with subsequent rotator cuff dysfunction, small/comminuted tuberosity fragments, and subscapularis insufficiency as function is not dependent on tuberosity union. Two recent studies have documented good outcomes with rTSA in the setting of nonunion of the proximal humerus, with improved range of motion, pain scores, and patient satisfaction. This is in spite of a high risk of complications (20% and 27% of patients)—predominantly instability and infection ( Operative technique mirrors that of hemiarthroplasty. In most cases, the tuberosity will be healed to the humeral head, which is not united to the shaft, thus requiring osteotomy from the head and reattachment to the shaft. As opposed to hemiarthroplasty, however, anatomic tuberosity healing is not necessary to gain acceptable function. Although tuberosity healing is not required for overhead motion with a rTSA, meticulous repair is still recommended to improve internal and external rotation and avoid a hornblower's deformity. No studies have specifically documented the rate of tuberosity healing in nonunion of the proximal humerus. Previous studies have demonstrated a higher rate of union of tuberosities in patients who undergo rTSA as compared with hemiarthroplasty in the setting of acute trauma ( Stem design and fixation are dependent on surgeon preference. Glenosphere sizing and rehabilitation considerations are critical as instability after rTSA is a devastating complication. Increasing glenosphere size may provide increased stability. Postoperative immobilization may also decrease the incidence of instability. This should be guided by intraoperative assessment of stability with the final construct. Nonunions after operative fixation of the proximal humerus, while quite uncommon, are challenging to manage. There have been a number of studies documenting the outcomes of locked plating of proximal humerus fractures. In addition to screw penetration and avascular necrosis (AVN), which are frequent complications, nonunion has been documented in varying numbers. One large series of patients (74 patients) followed by Osterhaff et al., documented a 1.3% rate of nonunion, with calcar comminution standing out as a risk factor for development of nonunion ( Similar to nonoperatively managed proximal humerus fractures, several risk factors predispose patients to nonunion of operatively treated fractures. Patient-related factors, including smoking and medical comorbidities, contribute to the development of nonunion. Fracture characteristics and fixation quality are also important factors. As previously discussed, medial calcar support is critically important to avoid varus collapse in patients treated with ORIF with locking plates, percutaneously placed pins and screws, and proximal humerus intramedullary nails. Inadequate fixation through the number, length, or improper insertion of locking screws can also contribute to failure. Overly aggressive postoperative rehabilitation or patient noncompliance with postoperative rehabilitation restrictions is often an underestimated risk factor. In contrast to nonoperatively managed proximal humerus fractures, fractures that fail after ORIF often fail catastrophically with screw pullout and severe bony destruction ( The presentation of proximal humerus nonunion in patients with operatively treated fractures can vary depending on the circumstances of the nonunion. Serial radiographic and physical examination may demonstrate slow progression of motion and pain relief as well as minimal fracture bridging and subtle signs of fixation failure. In these patients, pending nonunion should be considered and surveillance should be continued. Loosening or fracture of percutaneously placed screws/pins or screws from proximal humeral plates are warning signs of a pending nonunion ( Critical portions of the physical examination include careful assessment of the soft-tissue envelope and neurovascular status of the shoulder. Axillary nerve function should be carefully assessed. Rotator cuff function should be carefully evaluated—particularly, subscapularis function and external rotation. A complete external rotation (ER) lag can be an ominous sign for future ER function with revision surgery. In addition, a careful history as well as physical examination for possible signs of low-grade infection is crucial. Low-grade fevers, chills, night sweats, erythema, induration, drainage from incisions, and/or need for oral antibiotics after the initial operative procedure should raise suspicion of postoperative infection, especially in patients presenting for a second opinion. If infection is suspected, serum inflammatory markers and joint aspiration may aid in diagnosis. Fluid aspirated for culture should be maintained for 14 days to ensure adequate culture of Radiographic examination should also be completed. Severe surface destruction on the humeral side (AVN, nonunited head split fractures, intra-articular step-offs) and the glenoid side (secondary to inadvertent intra-articular screw placement or arthritis) should be carefully assessed. Depending on when the patient with the postsurgical nonunion presents, collapse of the humeral head and joint destruction is certainly possible. In these situations, arthroplasty is recommended. In addition, the bone stock of the humeral head, tuberosity fragments, and humeral shaft should be scrutinized. In the setting of previous fixation, revision ORIF should only be considered when there is adequate bone stock to reconstruct, and patient factors are favorable for healing (young, nonsmoker, etc.). CT scans are helpful in further assessing position of fixation, bone stock, and arthritic changes. The majority of patients with nonunion following surgical treatment of proximal humerus fractures will benefit from operative treatment. Patients with severe medical comorbidities, minimal symptoms, or low functional status may be managed nonoperatively. Most patients, however, will have significant pain and disability secondary to nonunion and often hardware failure. In contrast to patients initially treated nonoperatively, patients who are initially treated with ORIF may present with delayed union making it necessary to maintain a longer observation period. In settings of catastrophic hardware failure or clear lack of progression of healing at 6–9 months postoperatively, intervention can be considered. Whereas ORIF is often the treatment of choice for patients initially managed nonoperatively, patients with previous operations are most reliably treated with arthroplasty. This is due to the frequency with which one encounters significant proximal humeral bone loss, tuberosity resorption, rotator cuff disease, and articular surface destruction. In some cases, there is adequate proximal humeral bone stock to allow revision ORIF. In cases where the plate construct is still intact, there is minimal bone loss, a nonhealed fracture line is present, and the patient presents with pain, revision ORIF with bone graft may be indicated ( As stated above, patients who have nonunion following surgical treatment of proximal humerus fractures will require shoulder arthroplasty. Options include unconstrained shoulder arthroplasty and rTSA. Unconstrained shoulder arthroplasty relies on adequate tuberosity bone stock and a functioning rotator cuff. Hemiarthroplasty or total shoulder arthroplasty can be considered depending on glenoid-sided articular changes. More commonly, tuberosity resorption, rotator cuff insufficiency, and/or subscapularis deficiency necessitate constrained shoulder arthroplasty (rTSA). This is especially true in light of the fact that most patients presenting with a nonunion after ORIF have more than one point of failure (surgical neck nonunion with plate failure and pull-off/resorption/or malunion of the tuberosity). Rarely are the tuberosities in good enough condition to expect good healing and function with humeral head replacement (HHR). One of the larger series examining operative treatment of nonunions demonstrated only 38% excellent or satisfactory results in patients who had undergone previous ORIF ( Planning for revision ORIF of proximal humerus fracture should begin with careful assessment of reasons for initial hardware failure. Specific measures should be taken to avoid repeating previous mistakes. Attempts should be made to address any modifiable risk factors. In smokers, consideration should be given to delaying surgery or considering arthroplasty, given the profound impact of smoking on fracture union. Serum testing for nicotine prior to surgical treatment can be used as a motivator for patients to quit smoking. In cases of atrophic or oligotrophic nonunion, consideration of iliac crest bone graft for additional biologic stimulus is recommended ( Careful consideration regarding the possibility of infection is essential in the revision setting. Preoperative aspiration and serologic studies may provide some indication of the likelihood of infection. While intraoperative frozen sections have been utilized to guide decision making in hip and knee arthroplasty, the value of these in modern shoulder surgery is currently unclear ( Indications for unconstrained shoulder arthroplasty are rare in the setting of ORIF failure due to nonunion. As the hardware fails, there is generally severe destruction of the proximal humeral bone. The ideal patient for unconstrained shoulder arthroplasty is either a low-demand patient with low functional expectations for the shoulder, or the young patient with maintained proximal humeral bone stock despite the nonunion. This will typically take the form of hemiarthroplasty, although if glenoid changes are present, consideration can be given to total shoulder arthroplasty. This may be seen with previous ORIF in which protruding screws have damaged the articular surface of the glenoid. While previous studies have shown limited indications for total shoulder arthroplasty, a role exists in the setting of glenoid changes. In one series of unconstrained shoulder arthroplasty after proximal humeral fracture, there were 80% hemiarthroplasties and only 20% TSAs ( The surgical procedure for arthroplasty following previous surgical treatment mirrors that described in the previous section. Additional time and attention, however, will be required for the development of surgical planes. One further consideration is to complete all soft-tissue releases in these patients before removing proximal humeral hardware. In the case of surgical neck nonunion and greater tuberosity (GT) malunion, mobilization of the GT can be exceedingly challenging and at high risk for postoperative failure. Following completion of soft-tissue releases, the hardware can be removed. Intraoperative cultures should be sent in all revision cases, and frozen section analysis as a decision-making tool should be considered. rTSA has provided a new tool in the treatment of proximal humeral nonunions, especially as a salvage option for the failed ORIF. Many of these patients will have severely compromised tuberosity bone stock and rotator cuff dysfunction, making rTSA the best option. The surgical technique mirrors that previously described. Critical portions of the procedure include redevelopment of surgical planes, tuberosity isolation, hardware removal, and tuberosity repair. As previously discussed, healing of the tuberosity fragment to the shaft or the implant will decrease the incidence of a postoperative ER lag. Glenosphere sizing and rehabilitation should be guided by intraoperative assessment of motion and stability. Case series of rTSA have documented high rates of instability after nonunion. Attention should be paid to malunited or fragmented tuberosity pieces that have healed posteriorly in the shoulder as they may predispose the implant to impinge and cause the implant to lever out anteriorly ( Because of the rare nature of proximal humeral nonunions, there is little literature focusing on the treatment of this entity. Healy et al. described a series of 25 patients who were treated for nonunion. The majority of these patients had at least one significant medical illness, and all patients were quite disabled by their nonunion. They evaluated four groups of patients. Those with continued nonoperative management or humeral nails did poorly. Those undergoing hemiarthroplasty had pain relief, but poor functional outcomes. The group treated with ORIF with tension band fixation had the best overall outcomes. In total, only 48% had good results; however, rTSA had not been utilized yet for this problem ( The most recent study to examine the treatment of proximal humeral nonunions with ORIF investigated 18 patients who had undergone ORIF with modern locked plating and fibular strut grafting. They reported more encouraging results, with 94% union rates and significantly improved function and pain relief. The average American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons score in their cohort improved from 40 to 81, and the average pain score increased from 6.7 to 1.5. The average forward elevation of the cohort was 115°, and the average ER was 37°. These results demonstrate significant improvements with modern ORIF techniques compared to historical data ( Several series have documented adequate results with arthroplasty for nonunion of the proximal humerus. Early series demonstrated pain relief in the majority of patients treated with arthroplasty. Function, however, was less predictable ( Recently, the experience of several groups with rTSA for the treatment of nonoperatively treated proximal humerus nonunions has been documented. Martinez et al. described 18 patients who were treated with rTSA for nonunion ( Ongoing controversy remains about optimal management of proximal humerus fractures. While patients historically have had reliable union rates with nonoperative management, nonunion or malunion in this setting can cause significant disability and pain. Locking plate technology has provided a substantial benefit in terms of strength and reliability of fixation of these fractures, especially in osteopenic bone. Early experience with these locking plates demonstrated unacceptably high rates of complications, even for acute fractures. These failure mechanisms are another justification for carefully selecting declared nonunions for ORIF. Further investigation into the role of biological supplementation (BMP-2, autogenous bone grafting, etc.) and future research evaluating the best graft choices will be areas of continued interest. In addition to advances in open reduction and internal fixation of nonunions of the proximal humerus, the rTSA has proved invaluable in restoring function and providing pain relief in this patient population. rTSA, however, continues to be a “work-in-progress” in terms of developing a full understanding of biomechanical considerations, failure mechanisms, and optimizing implant choices for patient variables. The increased greater tuberosity healing, increased forward elevation, and reliable pain relief reported in the literature provide adequate evidence that rTSA is a promising treatment option and further investigation and development are warranted.