The equilibrium and kinetics for the adsorption of gold onto activated carbon from acidic thiourea solutions have been studied. The equilibrium gold loading decreases with increasing thiourea concentration, pH and temperature. The gold loading is not affected by small amounts of Fe2+ or Fe3+, but is greatly lowered by Cu2+ presumably through competitive adsorption. The rate of gold adsorption at the initial stage, in terms of the decrease of gold concentration in solution, can well be described with first-order kinetics. The rate increases with increased initial gold concentration, agitation and temperature, but is not greatly affected by thiourea concentration or the presence of Fe2+. Ag+ and Cu2+ ions significantly reduce the rate since they strongly compete for the surface sites. A high concentration of Fe3+ (5 g/L) also substantially reduces the rate, probably due to a change in solution chemistry. Gold is normally adsorbed on activated carbon as the gold thiourea complex. However, partial decomposition of the complex to metallic gold has been observed under certain conditions. The surface of the activated carbon loaded with gold has been studied using SEM, EDS and XPS techniques.For over a hundred years, the extraction of gold from ores has been based on the traditional cyanidation method. Despite its great success, there has been increasing pressure from the public against the use of cyanide as a lixiviant due to its high toxicity. In addition, the cyanide leach is restricted to alkaline solutions to avoid the formation of volatile HCN. However, in order to treat some refractory ores, such as sulphide ores, it is often necessary to preoxidise them in a pressure oxidation or bacterial oxidation step, both yielding an acid solution. The solution must then be neutralised if cyanide is to be used to leach the gold. Under these circumstances, an acid thiourea leach may be preferred in process terms. Thiourea (SC(NH The gold thiourea complex used in this study was synthesized as the perchlorate salt (Autu The activated coconut-shell carbon, G210 AS, obtained from the French company, Pica, was dried at 100 °C for 2 h and kept in a desiccator under vacuum. A fine powder (size −45 μm) of this carbon was used in the equilibrium tests, whereas granular carbon (size range −2.80 to +2.36 mm) was chosen for the kinetic studies. Synthetic solutions of the gold thiourea complex containing free thiourea and sulphuric acid were used for the adsorption experiments. The equilibrium tests were carried out in 250 mL conical flasks placed in a shaking bath with the temperature controlled at 25±1 °C, or other values as noted in the text. Before the carbon powder was added to the conical flasks, the solutions were deaerated with high-purity argon. The conical flasks were then sealed with rubber stoppers and shaken for 72 h. The initial concentrations of gold and carbon were varied to cover a range of gold concentrations at the equilibrium. After the test, the gold-loaded carbon was separated from the solution by filtration, dried at room temperature and stored in a desiccator under vacuum for surface analysis, using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The concentration of gold remaining in the solutions was determined by AAS using the procedure described by The kinetic experiments were conducted in a 200-mL glass cell with a water jacket as the means of temperature control. The solution was degassed with high-purity argon prior to each test and maintained under that atmosphere during the measurements. Throughout the experiment, the solution was stirred by an overhead rotating Teflon disc (diameter 48 mm). To follow the change in gold concentration in the solutions, samples were taken at specified times, usually for the first hour only. The gold-loaded carbon particles were treated in the same way as the carbon powder for surface analysis. For solid/liquid adsorption processes, two isothermal expressions are well known. One is the Langmuir isotherm   It should be noted that, in The isotherms for the adsorption of Autu Some metal ions, which may be present in the leach solution from a gold plant, may influence the equilibrium of Autu High concentrations of Fe At elevated temperatures, the Autu Yet, conflicting results are found in the literature. As already mentioned above, the decomposition of Autu All the samples of the gold-loaded carbon powder were examined under SEM after the equilibrium tests. Some typical backscattered electron (BSE) images are shown in Both the dark and bright grains shown in the SEM images were analysed with EDS, and the resulting spectra are presented in Further information about the oxidation states of the adsorbed species on the carbon surface was obtained from XPS measurements. Some results of these studies are presented for two typical samples: Sample 1 and Sample 2 having SEM images similar to pictures A and B, respectively, in The XPS spectrum for gold in Sample 1 fits a doublet (Au 4f The spectrum of gold in Sample 2 It is therefore concluded that gold is adsorbed onto the activated carbon in the form of Au(I)–tu complex under usual conditions. However, when the carbon surface is approaching full coverage the adsorbed Au–tu complex may break down to form metallic gold, particularly at low tu concentration, high pH and high temperature. This leads to gold loadings significantly higher than those expected from normal isotherms. In the study of the kinetics of a heterogeneous process like the adsorption of gold onto activated carbon, at least two other factors need to be considered in addition to temperature and concentration: the volume of the solution and the surface area of the carbon. The latter is related to the mass of the carbon and the sizes of the particles and the pores. Because the surface area is not equally accessible, the kinetics are also dependent on the surface coverage. These conditions are generally difficult to control and reproduce and, therefore, it is rarely easy to compare kinetic data found in the literature. In this work, only the initial stage of the adsorption was studied so that the effect of surface coverage was minimised. The kinetic measurements were conducted using the same amount of carbon (0.5 g) and the same volume of solution (200 mL). Under the experimental conditions investigated, it was found that the change in solution gold concentration during the first hour of adsorption approximates first-order kinetics, as demonstrated in If all the sites on the carbon surface were equal, Unlike the case of equilibrium loading, tu, over a concentration range of 0.001–0.1 M, does not seem to significantly affect the initial adsorption rate The effect of various metal ions likely to be found in real leach solutions has been investigated and the results are shown in The addition of 100 mg/L Ag The effect of temperature was investigated with Decomposition of the adsorbed Autu  The adsorption of gold onto activated carbon from acidic thiourea solutions follows the Langmuir isotherm over a wide range of gold concentrations. The equilibrium gold loading decreases with increasing tu concentration, pH and temperature. The presence of Fe In the initial stage, the rate of gold adsorption approximates first-order kinetics and is controlled by the diffusion of Autu Usually, gold is adsorbed on activated carbon in the form of Autu