A new approach has been developed for describing the classification that arises at the diaphragm in multi-chamber ball mills. Fourteen industrial scale cement mills have been sampled in this study and after mass balancing, model fits of the equipment were done. Successive mill product predictions for the sampled conditions were achieved, and requirements to build up an optimization capable model are discussed.Cement production is an energy intensive process. It consumes 2% of the global primary energy and 5% of the total global industrial energy ( A typical cement grinding circuit consists of a multi-chamber ball mill usually operating in closed circuit with an air separator. Although high pressure grinding rolls (HPGR) are getting popular as a pre-grinding system of the ball mills and some new technology equipment are finding application, multi-chamber ball mills are the most widely used size reduction equipment in this process. The milling operation is affected by several factors. These are diameter, length, rotational speed and liner configuration of the mill, type, shape, amount and size distribution of the grinding media, arrangement and configuration of the internal and discharge diaphragms, dam rings, grindability and particle size distribution of the feed material and air flow rate ( All diaphragms have slotted plates at the front (first chamber side) and some designs may also have partially or fully slotted plates at the rear side (second chamber side). A mid-screen, a wire screen or perforated plate, is attached at the center of the diaphragm. A double wall diaphragm with scoops oriented towards the central section of the diaphragm is seen in Material that is ground in the first chamber of the multi-chamber ball mill is introduced to the slotted plates of the diaphragm and passes through by the force applied by the flow and the balls. If the material is fine enough to pass through the slots to the rooms inside the diaphragm, it is transferred to the central section with the help of the scoops. Material enters the second grinding chamber by passing through the openings at the end of the scoops. Some of the fine material present in the rooms inside the diaphragm is directly transferred to the second chamber through the slots at the rear side of the diaphragm. Operation of a diaphragm is affected by several factors which are listed in the literature as shape, position and slot height of the apertures, free surface area and material transport mechanism ( There are two main types of intermediate diaphragms: Plain Diaphragms Double Wall Diaphragms Plain diaphragms only separate the grinding chambers and avoid passage of oversize particles. This type of diaphragms does not have a direct effect on the residence time of the material in the first chamber, but longer residence times in the second chamber, due to small ball sizes, hinders the material flow in the first chamber ( Special design diaphragms which differ in structure from the conventional design are also manufactured. Besides the material transfer controlled diaphragms, Combidan® ( Discharge end constrictions, which are widely used in mineral processing systems, can be resembled to the intermediate diaphragms in principle. In this study, intermediate or discharge diaphragms are accepted to be the discharge end constriction of the preceding grinding chamber in multi-chamber mills. Discharge diameter in overflow discharge mills, grates in autogeneous, semi-autogeneous and grate discharge mills operating either dry or wet, provide selectivity in discharged material from (or material hold-up in) the mills, and has been drawing wide interest from researchers for many years. There are numerous studies on the factors affecting material hold-up in laboratory scale mills with dry solids. These studies indicated that hold-up in the mill is linearly related to the feed rate and media load in open-ended mills ( For wet laboratory scale mills, All researchers cited above working on wet laboratory scale mills have agreed that hold-up increases with increasing flow rate. In a pilot scale grate discharge mill, There are investigations approaching the problem with different considerations in wet pilot scale mills. There are pioneering studies on industrial scale autogeneous and grate discharge mills. All of these valuable studies are very important guidelines for investigating the effects of discharge mechanisms on material hold-up and discharged material. However, these studies that have been carried out in relatively small scale mills need to be validated with industrial scale data as has been done by Earlier studies of the authors ( Fourteen cement grinding circuits operating in Turkey were sampled in this study. All the circuits sampled have the same flowsheet given in Samples from the air slides were taken by cutting the whole cross-section of the flow with a suitable sampler and material on the belt conveyors were stripped out in different lengths depending on the particle size distributions and flow rates. Inside mill sampling was performed by digging 40–50 Size distribution of all samples was determined by combining dry sieving and laser diffraction size analysis down to 1.8 Using the size distributions obtained from the sampling studies and the measured fresh feed tonnage, mass balance around the circuit was performed to calculate the flow rates of the streams. For all surveys, the measured size distributions were very close to adjusted values showing that sampling studies were performed successfully. A typical comparison of them is given in Size distributions of inside mill samples taken from front (1st chamber) and rear sides (2nd chamber) of the diaphragms are given in It was assumed that the material at the front and rear sides of the diaphragm represents the feed and the fine product of a classifier, respectively. Any size classification can be represented with a partition curve formed by the equation. Fraction of feed reporting to the fine product (Actual partition) Percentage of size “ Percentage of size “ Fine product flow rate Feed flow rate. The general shape of a partition curve and cut size of the classifier can be approximated from the curve which may be called sieve fraction ratio (SFR). The partition curve should have an asymptote at 1 in fine sizes, when there is no by-pass. There will be a coefficient, Since it is not possible to take sample from the coarse product of this “classifier”, the coarse product size distribution and flow rate was calculated using the algorithm given in The classification which occurs at the diaphragm was mathematically expressed using the partition curve model developed by Whiten ( Material that is actually classified, (1—By-pass) Sharpness parameter of the reduced efficiency curve Fish-hook parameter of the reduced efficiency curve A parameter which preserves the definition of Normalized particle size ( Particle size Corrected cut size. At steady state condition, fine product flow rate is equal to the flow rate through the mill which was determined from circuit mass balance. Using the feed and fine product size distributions and the fines flow rate, simulation studies were carried out using the partition curve model, for calculating the unknown flow rates and coarse product size distribution. During these studies, the initial value of A comparison of simulated partition curves and SFR values is shown in Finally, using the balanced data, model parameters for each diaphragm were calculated. The model parameter Every model parameter set of the diaphragms was tested at its mill that was modeled according to In the perfect mixing model, knowing the size distributions of feed and product, and the appearance function of the material, rate over discharge parameter ( A full model of a multi-chamber cement mill should contain all the design variables which have influence on the operation. Little can be found in the literature on modeling the multi-chamber ball mills used in the cement industry and hardly any of these studies consider the effects of mill internals on the circuit performance. However, it is well known that diaphragms have a serious effect on the residence time of the particles, resulting in changes in milling performance. Although SAG and grate discharge mills have some similarities with cement mills, as they operate in wet system, using the derived equations for the classification at the mill discharges does not seem to be possible. The studies done by  It was observed that classification at the diaphragm is extremely sensitive to the mill feed rate. As feed rate to the mill increases, the top size of the material that passes to the next grinding chamber increases ( Another point of the study, the real cause of a change in the system in a full scale industrial circuit was hard to determine and noisy data obtained from industrial scale mills points the necessity of a more detailed study with pilot scale experiment set-up. To develop a full scale multi-chamber cement mill model, reliable models of the mill internals are required. To obtain a mathematical model of diaphragms, variation of the material passage through the mid-screen with flow rate through the mill should be sorted out. Then, a model structure which combines two efficiency curves describing the whole classification at the diaphragm seems to be reasonable. At the present, the diaphragms can be successfully modeled with reference to their existing condition during the sampling process, or within a narrow range of capacity differences. The developed approach cannot be used for design or comprehensive optimization purposes. This is mainly due to the complexity of investigating a change in a single operational parameter in industrial scale circuits. Since the number of established suppliers to the sector is limited, the design variables are always in a narrow range, which makes it harder to investigate the effect of design variables on the circuit performance. Therefore, to develop a comprehensive diaphragm model, it appears to be essential to build up a pilot scale test rig in which all the required operational and design variables can be investigated. Results obtained from the test rig could be scaled-up to define the classification action at the diaphragms at sampled circuits. Funds provided by Hacettepe University and Tubitak are acknowledged. The authors would also like to thank Namık A. Aydoğan, Serkan Dikmen, A. Seyfi Erdem, Ömürden Genç for their great effort in sampling and experimental studies.