Background
                  Fractures of the proximal ulna are rare and usually managed surgically. Strong fixation of the harware is essential to obtain good outcomes. We report our experience with pre-contoured locking plate fixation of complex olecranon fractures and present a critical appraisal of the outcomes.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  Pre-contoured locking plates provide good outcomes, but their clinical tolerance may be limited in some instances.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  From September 2009 to December 2011, 28 patients were managed using a pre-contoured locking compression plate (LCP®). Among them, 6 were excluded because of missing data, which left 22 patients (11 males and 11 females) with a mean age of 55.7 years, including 12 who were employed. The fracture was on the dominant side in 11 patients. According to the Mayo Clinic classification, 15 fractures were type II and 7 type III. In addition to the ulnar fracture, a radial head fracture was present in 9 patients and a coronoid process fracture in 5 patients. Functional recovery was assessed using the Broberg-Morrey score and Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS). Radiographs were obtained to evaluate the quality of fracture reduction and fracture healing, as well as to look for ossifications and osteoarthritis.
               
                  Results
                  Mean follow-up was 20 months. Flexion was 131°, extension loss was 9.5°, pronation was 79°, and supination was 80.5°. The mean Broberg-Morrey score was 96.7 and the mean MEPS score 96.6. Fracture healing occurred in all patients, within a mean of 10.6 weeks. Evidence of early osteoarthritis was found in 6 patients, ossifications in 3 patients, and synostosis in 1 patient. An infection was successfully treated with lavage and antibiotic therapy in 1 patient. The fixation hardware was removed in 6 patients. No prognostic factors were identified.
               
                  Discussion-conclusion
                  Our hypothesis was confirmed. The outcomes are encouraging and comparable to those reported in the literature. The critical issue is the limited clinical tolerance of the plate with a high rate of posterior impingement requiring plate removal (27%). Rigorous technique is essential during plate implantation.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level IV, retrospective study.Olecranon fractures account for 5% of all fractures and 10% of elbow fractures The treatment goals are to obtain anatomic reduction that remains stable over time, bone healing, and functional recovery. The fixation method should be chosen to meet these goals by ensuring stable and strong fixation. Plate fixation may produce the best outcomes The objective of this study was to assess the outcomes of complex olecranon fractures treated using a pre-contoured locking plate, based on a retrospective case-series of 22 patients. Our working hypothesis was that the pre-contoured locking plate provides good outcomes, with stable results over time, but may be associated with limited clinical tolerance. From September 2009 to December 2011, 28 patients with complex olecranon fractures were managed using a pre-contoured locking plate. During the same period, 75 patients with simple olecranon fractures were treated with pinning and tension band wiring. Of the 28 patients with complex fractures, 6 were excluded because of missing data. We therefore studied 22 patients, 11 males and 11 females with a mean age of 55.7 years (range, 18–88 years; median, 59.5 years). Among them, 12 were still employed (including 3 manual labourers) and 10 were retired. The fracture was on the dominant side in 11 patients. There were no compound fractures, neuro-vascular complications, or compartment syndromes. According to the Mayo Clinic classification We used a pre-contoured 3.5 Post-operative immobilisation was used routinely. In 10 (45.5%) patients, a splint with the elbow by the side was chosen, to ensure pain relief and to improve patient comfort. The remaining 12 (54.5%) patients wore a long-arm cast. Mean duration of immobilisation was 3 weeks (range, 2–4 weeks). The immobilisation method was chosen based on the intra-operative evaluation of bone quality and on whether the radial head or coronoid process was fractured, which consistently led to long-arm casting. Rehabilitation was started as soon as the immobilisation device was removed and consisted in free active-passive self-rehabilitation as allowed by the pain. The splint with the elbow by the side allowed immediate immobilisation and was worn only between rehabilitation sessions. The procedure was performed by a senior surgeon (university professor and hospital physician) in 12 (54.5%) cases and by a junior surgeon (resident or clinical fellow) in 10 (45.5%) cases. Mean time from injury to surgery was 1.4 day (range, 1–8 days). Functional recovery was assessed using the Broberg-Morrey score Antero-posterior and lateral radiographs were obtained. Looking for an articular-surface step-off, using a cut-off of 2 Between-group comparisons of qualitative variables relied on Fisher's test. For quantitative variables, we used the Mann-Whitney test when the two groups of variables were independent and the Wilcoxon test when the two groups of variables were paired. To compare more than two groups of independent quantitative variables, we chose the Kruskal-Wallis test. Values of All 22 patients were re-evaluated, after a mean follow-up of 20 months (range, 12–40 months; median, 19 months). Mean flexion was 131° (range, 110°–140°; median, 130°) and mean loss of extension was 9.5° (range, 0°–50°; median, 7.5°), producing a mean motion arc of 121.5°. Mean pronation was 79° (range, 10°–90°; median, 80°) and mean supination was 80.5° (range, 40°–90°; median, 80°) yielding a mean motion arc of 159.5°. The mean Broberg-Morrey score Fracture healing was obtained in all patients, after a mean of 10.6 weeks (range, 6–20 weeks) ( We recorded 6 complications, including complex regional pain syndrome in 2 patients and spontaneous exteriorisation of the pins through the skin in 2 patients. In 1 patient (#1), early scar dehiscence was believed to indicate infection and was managed by surgical revision on day 14 for lavage and debridement. The bacteriological samples were positive for The fixation material was removed in 6 (27%) patients, after a mean of 15.3 months. The reason for removal was mechanical dysfunction caused by the material in 5 patients (including 2 with prominence of the tip of the olecranon and 1 with distal prominence of the plate) and a pressure sore in 1 patient. Removal of the material was not associated with any complications. The functional scores showed no statistically significant differences according to fracture type, reduction quality, or concomitant lesions. At re-evaluation, function was not significantly different when assessed using the Broberg-Morrey score or the MEPS. The treatment of complex olecranon fractures seeks to achieve several objectives: anatomic and stable reduction, bone healing, functional recovery, and restoration of the extensor mechanism. The olecranon has a wide margin of tolerance, as 50% of the joint surface can be removed without altering elbow stability, provided the coronoid process and humeral trochlea are intact The mechanical properties of locking plates are related to the angle stability of the screws, which improves the strength of the fixation Our results are comparable to those reported previously with locking plates The anatomic shape of locking plates facilitates their positioning and allows them to serve as reduction templates, thus theoretically ensuring perfect reduction. This point should be viewed with circumspection, however The proportion of patients who required removal of the material was high in our study (27%) but similar to that reported previously with this plate. Siebenlist et al. Clearly, our study has several limitations. We used a retrospective design, and the number of patients is fairly small, despite being among the largest reported to date. Follow-up is short but seems sufficient to evaluate the radiological results and clinical tolerance of the plate. We had no control group, but few treatment options are available for the complex fractures that were the focus of our study. The outcomes were good in terms of both motion range and functional scores, and the encouraging radiological findings underline the effectiveness of the technique. Complex fractures of the olecranon are challenging. Stable and strong internal fixation is essential to allow early mobilisation, which ensures high-quality functional recovery. Our results are comparable to those reported previously. The good radiological outcomes highlight the usefulness of the anatomic plate contouring for the treatment of these complex fractures, provided optimal plate positioning is achieved. Indeed, the clinical tolerance of these plates in the strictly posterior position is limited. Our working hypothesis was confirmed. Careful attention must be directed to plate positioning during surgery and to clinical follow-up. Matthieu Ehlinger and Philippe Adam: educational consultants for Synthes. Lucas Niglis, François Bonnomet, Antonio Di Marco, David Brinkert, and Benoit Schenck: these authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article. François Bonnomet: educational consultant for Zimmer.