A population balance model based on a detailed literature review is used to describe coagulation and flocculation kinetics as well as the time evolution of aggregate size distribution in a turbulent shear flow simultaneously with the breakage and restructuring of aggregates. The fractal nature and permeability of the aggregates and their evolution with time are also part of the model. Restructuring is absent in coagulation with soluble salts, but is present in flocculation caused by large polyelectrolyte molecules; in the latter, aggregates never reach a steady-state size, but a size that decreases gradually through particle and polymer rearrangement. The model is tested against available experimental data for monodisperse polystyrene particles coagulated with hydrated aluminium sulphate at different shear rates, and precipitated calcium carbonate flocculated with a cationic polyelectrolyte of very high molecular weight at different flocculant dosages. The numerical solution of the model requires adjusting three parameters, i.e, maximum collision efficiency (α
                     max), critical force needed for the breakage of the aggregates (B) and rate of aggregate restructuring (γ), which are obtained from minimising the difference between experimental data and model predictions. The model studied for the two very different systems shows excellent agreement with experimental flocculation kinetics and a reasonably good fit for aggregate size distributions. The model is most sensitive to the fragmentation rate through parameter B, somewhat less to the collision efficiency through parameter α
                     max and little to γ. When the aggregates undergo restructuring, properties such as permeability, breakage rate and collision rate change considerably over time. When the aggregates are permeable, the collision frequency is significantly smaller than when they are impervious.The separation of small particles from a liquid medium can be very complex and difficult to control; the issue is of great importance, because it is a fundamental stage in many industrial applications, for instance, in mining, extracting oil, cellulose and paper production, water purification, wastewater treatment and industrial food preparation. Particularly in mining, the shortage of water strongly encourages recovering and recycling water from large thickeners. In recent times, this separation operation is as central as flotation, as thickeners cannot cope against increasing volumes of material, increasing amounts of fines in the feed ore to the plants and more saline waters; in some cases, the direct processing of seawater is involved. Sometimes, limitations in the thickeners force the drastic decision to stop plants from operating. For efficient separation, it is necessary to promote the aggregation of particles to form larger structures that can settle by gravitational effects [see for instance Refs. The PBE used here is that of Hounslow et al. The overall collision frequency between two particles in the The collision efficiency ( The breakage of aggregates is mainly caused by hydrodynamic stress experienced in the aggregates. The fragmentation rate ( The breakage distribution function ( Particle flocs suffer restructuring during flocculation by aggregation, fragmentation, elongation and compaction Here, the model was tested against the experimental data of Flesch et al. The PBE of the model (Eq. To solve Eq. Eq.  Results in Flocculation kinetics induced by high-molecular-weight polymers or surfactants are far different from the kinetics reported by Flesch et al.  The restructuring can be evaluated in terms of the fractal dimension of the aggregates, which is obtained from Eq. 15. For the data reported by Flesch et al. To appreciate the model to its full potential, we compared the experimental time evolution of the aggregate size distribution with predictions from the model, given that a good prediction of the flocculation kinetics in Next, we present several predictions from the present model that we can not compare with experimental data, because these are not available; however, the different predicted behaviours reveal important aspects of the aggregates, depending on their flocculation characteristics.  The permeability of aggregates depends on both porosity and characteristic pore length When restructuring is absent, as in the case studied by Flesch et al. Finally, We described the coagulation and flocculation kinetics and the time evolution of the aggregate size distribution in turbulent shear flow simultaneously with the breakage and restructuring of aggregates using a population balance model. The fractal nature and permeability of the aggregates and its evolution with time were also included. The model was tested against previously published experimental data, showing excellent agreement with experimental flocculation kinetics and reasonably good agreement with the aggregate size distribution in cases with and without restructuring. The numerical solution of the model required the adjustment of three parameters: maximum collision efficiency ( R.I.J. thanks CONICYT-Chile for a graduate student fellowship, a research internship at the Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, The University of Melbourne, Australia, and