Purpose
                  The purpose of this study was to determine the effect of coracoclavicular (CC) fixation on biomechanical stability in type IIB distal clavicle fractures fixed with plate and screws.
               
                  Methods
                  Twelve fresh-frozen matched cadaveric specimens were used to create type IIB distal clavicle fractures. Dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) scans ensured similar bone quality. Group 1 (6 specimens) was stabilized with a superior precontoured distal clavicle locking plate and supplemental suture anchor CC fixation. Group 2 (6 specimens) followed the same construct without CC fixation. Each specimen was cyclically loaded in the coronal plane at 40 to 80 N for 17,500 cycles. Load-to-failure testing was performed on the specimens that did not fail cyclic loading. Outcome measures included mode of failure and the number of cycles or load required to create 10 mm of displacement in the construct.
               
                  Results
                  All specimens (12 of 12) completed cyclic testing without failure and underwent load-to-failure testing. Group 1 specimens failed at a mean of 808.5 N (range, 635.4 to 952.3 N), whereas group 2 specimens failed at a mean of 401.3 N (range, 283.6 to 656.0 N) (P = .005). Group 1 specimens failed by anchor pullout without coracoid fracture (4 of 6) and distal clavicle fracture fragment fragmentation (1 of 6); one specimen did not fail at the maximal load the materials testing machine was capable of exerting (1,000 N). Group 2 specimens failed by distal clavicle fracture fragment fragmentation (3 of 6) and acromioclavicular (AC) joint displacement (1 of 6); 2 specimens did not fail at the maximal load of the materials testing machine.
               
                  Conclusions
                  During cyclic loading, type IIB distal clavicle fractures with and without CC fixation remain stable. CC fixation adds stability to type IIB distal clavicle fractures fixed with plate and screws when loaded to failure.
               
                  Clinical Relevance
                  CC fixation for distal clavicle fractures is a useful adjunct to plate-and-screw fixation to augment stability of the fracture.Type II distal clavicle fractures account for 10% to 30% of all clavicle fractures Surgical treatment of type IIB fractures is an area of controversy. Older plate designs made it difficult and often impossible to obtain adequate fixation because the distal fragment is small and often comminuted, allowing for limited fixation with screws. There are several case series of patients with distal clavicle fractures that were stabilized with modern locking T-plates and suture anchors or looped suture for CC augmentation. Twelve fresh-frozen human shoulder specimens from 6 cadavers were used to create type IIB distal clavicle fractures. The cadavers were all male, with a mean age of 61 years (range, 43 to 71 years) and were free of pathologic processes of the shoulder according to patient history and gross anatomy. Specimens were stored in a freezer at −20°C. Individual specimens were thawed overnight at room temperature in preparation for dissection and testing. Dissections were performed on the specimens to expose the scapula and clavicle, with care to preserve the AC joint and coracoacromial and CC ligaments. All other soft tissue was removed. A clavicle and scapula specimen from each cadaver was included in both group 1 and group 2 to ensure similar bone quality. Also, dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) scans were obtained to confirm the bone quality of the 2 groups. Each cadaveric right and left specimens were randomly assigned to each group by coin toss. Type IIB noncomminuted distal clavicle fractures were created with a sagittal saw in a consistent manner. Osteotomies were performed using a sagittal saw beginning approximately 1.5 cm medial to the superolateral border of the clavicle and extending 45° inferomedially to exit between the conoid and trapezoid ligaments. Subsequently, the conoid ligament medial to the osteotomy was transected, leaving the trapezoid intact to simulate a typical Neer type IIB distal clavicle injury. Specimens in both groups were stabilized with a superior 2.3-mm precontoured distal clavicle locking plate and screws (Acumed clavicle plate system, Acumed, Hillsboro, OR). Three 3.5-mm screws were used in the proximal fragment and 5 2.3-mm screws were used in the distal fragment. Group 1 had CC fixation added with a single threaded metal anchor (3.5 mm minor and 5.5 mm outer diameter) placed in the base of the coracoid and a high-strength polyethylene suture No. 5 to connect the anchor to the clavicle plate (Acumed Acu-Sinch Repair System, Acumed). Only the near cortex of the coracoid was opened with a 3.5-mm drill for anchor insertion. The suture was passed through a 2.8-mm drill hole in the clavicle and through a nonlocking slot in the clavicle plate. Each suture strand was passed through a metal suture retainer designed to fit into the nonlocking slots of the plate ( Custom mounting fixtures were used to secure the scapula and clavicle ( Statistical analysis to compare the difference in the number of cycles, load, stiffness, and deformation between the 2 groups was carried out with a paired The average DEXA value for group 1 was 0.579 g/cm The stiffness, maximal force, and deformation of the load-to-failure results for each specimen can be seen in There were several different modes of failure noted ( Most distal clavicle fractures are managed nonoperatively because most are not displaced. The large majority of Neer type I and III fractures heal with only a brief period of immobilization. However, type II fractures are frequently displaced and have higher rates of nonunion as noted in Neer's Several fixation techniques have been described in the literature, including transacromial Kirschner wires, The advent of precontoured plates for the distal clavicle allows increased purchase in the distal fragment, improved rigid fixation options without the potential need to violate the AC joint, and a second procedure. Many of these benefits were shown in a retrospective study comparing hook plates to superior locked plates; more peri-implant fractures, hardware failures, and hardware removal were seen in patients treated with hook plates. Several small retrospective studies have looked at the treatment of distal clavicle fractures treated with locking plates with and without CC augmentation. Kalamaras et al. This study shows that fixation with a precontoured distal clavicle plate-and-screw construct alone is sufficient to withstand the moderate forces (40 to 80 N) expected to be seen from 1 week of simulated rehabilitation. This, however, may be inadequate to withstand the forces seen during accelerated rehabilitation protocols or from recurrent trauma such as a fall. The addition of CC fixation increased the strength of the construct by more than 100% in this study. In fact, the CC fixation in group 1 specimens was consistently stronger than native CC ligaments that failed at around 600 N in other studies. The number of screws needed to obtain adequate fixation in distal clavicle fractures is not known. The locking plate constructs used in this study offer smaller diameter locking screws angled in variable planes in the distal 1-centimeter portion of the plate to increase purchase in the bone. All specimens were fixed with only 5 2.3-mm locking screws in the distal fragment. Depending on the amount of comminution in the distal fragment, it may not be possible to obtain fixation with 5 screws. We believe that CC fixation is very important in these situations. Failure after fixation of type IIB clavicle fractures by screw pullout from the distal fragment is a major clinical concern. Revision surgery for this complication is difficult given the comminution in the distal fragment and further violation of the bone by screw pullout. We did not observe screw pullout from the distal fragment in any of the specimens fixed with CC fixation. These data suggest that CC fixation with 5 locking screws in the distal fragment provides adequate fixation, with failure usually by anchor pullout from the coracoid, but more research is needed to confirm this suggestion. Coracoid fractures did not occur as a result of anchor pullout in this study. This is a very relevant finding. Maintenance of coracoid integrity is important for potential revision procedures. Also, fixation methods for a broken coracoid are challenging and often lead to complications and nonunion. This device may cause a coracoid fracture if placed improperly: eccentrically, distally, or bicortically. The fact that the device penetrates only one cortex in the coracoid should help prevent fractures. In our experience we have seen failures during the postoperative period of type IIB distal clavicle fractures fixed with superiorly placed locking plate and screws without CC fixation at the AC joint. This situation can arise when the remaining trapezoid ligament is incompetent (Neer type V fracture pattern) as a result of the original accident, repeated trauma, or iatrogenic injury during exposure of the fracture. This difficult clinical situation could possibly be addressed with augmenting plate fixation with the CC fixation used in this study. There are limitations to this study. It is a cadaver study that may not recreate the exact physiology and kinematics in postoperative patients. There were 3 specimens (1 of 6 in group 1 and 2 of 6 in group 2) that did not fail at the materials testing machine's maximal load. A possible explanation for this may be variable osteologic features of the distal clavicle with variable cortical thickness in the areas of CC ligament origins. It is possible that minor variations in screw orientation during fixation account for variability in the strength of fixation. We thought that 1,000 N, the maximal load the materials testing machine was capable of exerting, would have been sufficient because other studies showed that the maximal load to failure of the native CC ligaments is around 700 N. During cyclic loading, type IIB distal clavicle fractures with and without CC fixation remain stable. CC fixation adds stability to type IIB distal clavicle fractures fixed with plate and screws when loaded to failure.