An investigation was undertaken to determine the applicability of the random pore model with intraparticle diffusion for the determination of the reaction kinetics for the combustion of chars particles derived from coals rich in minerals and inertinites. The char particles which were pyrolysed at 900°C consisted of a dense carbon-containing fraction originating from the inert macerals (mainly inertinites), a high concentration of minerals and carbominerites, pores generated by the devolatilisation of the reactive macerals and cracks as a result of the presence of minerals. Combustion experimentation was carried out with a thermogravimetric analyser using 1mm particles with 20% (mole) oxygen in nitrogen at 287.5kPa and low temperatures (450–600°C) and with high gas flow rates. The random pore model with intraparticle diffusion (pores and cracks) was solved numerically according to a method consisting of a step-wise regression procedure. This was achieved by using carbon conversion and reduced time relationships to calculate the structural parameter and the initial Thiele modulus followed by determination of an initial lumped reaction rate and validation with conversion versus real time results. The model is characterised by a decreasing Thiele modulus (increasing porosity) occurring during the reaction period which gives rise to a transition to a chemically controlled reaction system. It was found that the initial overall reaction rate was controlled by intraparticle diffusion with an increasing influence with increasing temperature.concentration of reacting gas (moles m particle surface gas concentration (moles m dimensionless concentration effective diffusivity (m initial value of dimensionless diffusivity reaction rate constant, ( total pore length per unit volume (m molecular weight of carbon (g universal gas constant (kJ initial particle radius (m) radius of particle (m) reaction rate (m initial reaction rate at surface, initial lumped reaction rate at surface initial surface area (m temperature (°C or K) time (s) time for 90% carbon conversion fractional ash content of char, fractional conversion of carbon. overall fractional conversion of carbon. tortuosity dimensionless core radius, voidage initial voidage initial Thiele modulus, structural parameter, dimensionless time, density of carbon (g m Brunauer, Emmett and Teller Isotherm partial differential equation algorithm (MATLAB) The combustion properties of mineral- and inertinite rich coal feedstocks (typical South African coals) needs to be investigated in detail for modelling the reaction kinetics as a result of the presence of somewhat complex chars/mineral structures The structures of chars (morphology) have been examined and a number of classifications have been published which are summarized by Cloke and Lester The effect of coal and char properties on the reaction kinetics for combustion and gasification has received attention The intrinsic kinetics for combustion based on the power rate law (dependence on oxygen concentration) has been examined extensively and used successfully over a wide range of temperatures. Hurt and Calo An investigation was undertaken to determine the overall reaction kinetics, based on the fundamental concepts (intraparticle diffusion) of the random pore model The properties of the coal and char particles used are described in great detail in a publication by Everson et al. The TGA used was a Berggbau–Forshung GMBH7 model supplied by Deutsche Montan Technologie (DMT), Germany and is described by Everson et al. Experimental results from reactions with carbon dioxide/nitrogen mixtures (chemical reaction controlled) with identical char/mineral particles were used for the evaluation of the structural parameter included in the random pore model with intraparticle diffusion. This is part of the procedure proposed for evaluating the parameters in the model (Section The random pore model initially proposed by Bhatia and Perlmutter The equations for consumption of gas inside the particle (intraparticle diffusion and reaction) are The following important characterising parameters appear in these equations: The dependence of the normalised effective diffusion coefficient The effective diffusivity depends on the tortuosity ( In this investigation diffusion in pores (in porous fraction due to reactive macerals) and fine cracks The normalised porosity The set of equations describing the model given above were solved successfully using an advanced MATLAB® programme for solving non-linear partial differential equations (PDEPE), which consisted of determining the concentration profiles of oxygen and carbon at different radial positions in the particle, and finally the overall carbon conversion at different time intervals. An important feature of the model is the inclusion of a variable porosity dependent on the ash content (Eq. The validity of Eq. This programme together with a procedure described below for estimation of the unknown parameters was used for determining the validity of the model at different carbon conversion levels. The procedure developed for the estimation of the three unknown parameters ( The structural parameter was estimated from separate experiments with carbon dioxide/nitrogen mixtures based on the assumption that this parameter is independent of the reacting gas Results from this calculation for an identical char are shown in The initial Thiele modulus ( The lumped initial reaction rate ( In order to calculate the kinetic parameters (rate constants and activation energy) and diffusion coefficients included in the Thiele moduli and lumped reaction rates accurate measurements of the relevant physical properties of the reactive carbonaceous fraction (surface area, porosity, density) would be required. This is complicated as a result of the existence of a large fraction of minerals and carbominerites dispersed randomly throughout the char/mineral particles, the properties of which would be included in any measurement using convention methods (e.g. BET adsorption, Mercury intrusion). Thus, the random pore model with intraparticle diffusion consisting of three regressed parameters (two of which are dimensionless) was found to be applicable. These parameters being the structural parameter, initial Thiele Modulus and an initial lumped reaction rate. The random pore model with intraparticle diffusion was solved successfully with an advanced numerical algorithm and a new procedure for the determination of the associated parameters was developed. This procedure consisted of a step-wise calculation consisting of three separate regression procedures involving the determination of each unknown sequentially. The structural parameter (step 1) was determined from experiments under conditions favoring chemical reaction control, such as reaction with carbon dioxide, and carbon conversion versus reduced time relationships. The initial Thiele modulus was also calculated from plots of carbon conversion versus reduced time parameters (combustion experiments) with a known structural parameter from step 1. Finally the initial lumped reaction rate was determined from carbon conversion and real time relationships using a known structural parameter and initial Thiele modulus from steps 1 and 2. It was found that the random pore model with intraparticle diffusion with three characteristic parameters (structural parameter, initial Thiele modulus and a lumped reaction rate) can be used to model the combustion reaction kinetics of char particles, with pores and cracks derived from mineral- and inertinite rich coals. The model showed that intraparticle diffusion was rate controlling at the onset of combustion at temperatures as low as 450