Introduction
                  Kyphoplasty has proved effective for durable correction of traumatic vertebral deformity following Magerl A fracture, but subsequent behavior of the adjacent discs is unclear. The objective of the present study was to analyze evolution according to severity of initial kyphosis and quality of fracture reduction.
               
                  Material and method
                  A single-center prospective study included cases of single compression fracture of the thoracolumbar hinge managed by Kyphon Balloon Kyphoplasty with polymethylmethacrylate bone cement. Radiology focused on traumatic vertebral kyphosis (VK), disc angulation (DA) and disc height index (DHI) in the adjacent discs. Linear regression assessed the correlation between superior disc height index (SupDHI) and postoperative VK on the one hand and correction gain on the other, using the Student t test for matched pairs and Pearson correlation coefficient.
               
                  Results
                  Fifty-two young patients were included, with mean follow-up of 18.6 months. VK fell from 13.9° preoperatively to 8.2° at last follow-up. DHI found significant superior disc subsidence (P
                     =0.0001) and non-significant inferior disc subsidence (P
                     =0.116). DA showed significantly reduced superior disc lordosis (P
                     =4*10−5). SupDHI correlated with VK correction (r
                     =0.32). Preoperative VK did not correlate with radiologic degeneration of the adjacent discs.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Correction of traumatic vertebral deformity avoids subsidence and loss of mechanical function in the superior adjacent disc. The underlying disc compensates for residual deformity. Balloon kyphoplasty is useful in compression fracture, providing significant reduction of traumatic vertebral deformity while conserving free and healthy adjacent discs.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  IV.Inspired by vertebroplasty as described by Galibert and Deramond in 1984 Benefit is proven with respect to lasting reduction of traumatic vertebral kyphosis The present single-center prospective study of 52 patients managed by balloon kyphoplasty for Magerl A fracture A total of 168 patients underwent kyphoplasty. Nineteen were lost to follow-up and 5 died. Fifty-two patients (16 females, 36 males) met the inclusion criteria (below). Mean age at surgery was 44.8 years (range, 19–72 years) and mean follow-up 18.6 months (range, 11–35 months). The mean quantity of cement injected was 7.4 The single-center prospective study was conducted between January 2008 and May 2011. Patients were included if undergoing kyphoplasty (Kyphon Balloon Kyphoplasty–Medtronic Sofamor Danek, Memphis, TN, USA) for single Magerl A compression fracture of the thoracolumbar hinge (T11-L2). Exclusion criteria comprised posterior arc lesion, multi-level degenerative discopathy, primary neurologic deficit, A.3.3 lesion with excessive comminution or inter-fragment distance (score Surgery, performed between days 0 and 6 post-trauma, consisted in vertebral deformity reduction by positioning on the surgery table, application of balloons, and vertebral body reinforcement by cement injection Patients were raised on Dl and discharged following D2. Radiography was performed preoperatively and postoperatively at D45, M3, M6, M12 and last follow-up. Lateral spinal radiologic analysis using SpineView™ software Disc height indices (SupDHI and InfDHI) were calculated from these values Postoperative CT screened for presence and location of cement leakage (paravertebral, discal, intra-canal). SPSS KV was significantly diminished ( Between D1 and last follow-up, there was no significant change in SupDA. SupDHI differed significantly between D1 and M3, but not between M3 and last follow-up ( DHI showed subsidence of the superior disc ( DA values showed compensatory changes in the two discs between postoperative assessment and D1, which was significantly greater in the superior than the inferior disc ( At last follow-up ( KV at D1 differed significantly from preoperative and M3 measurements. No further significant changes occurred after M3 ( The correlation coefficient test showed strong correlations between SupDHI, postoperative VK and VK gain ( There were 9 cases of cement leakage: 4 in the superior disc, 2 in the inferior disc, 2 anterolateral and 1 in the canal. Cement leakage was not associated with reduced DHI. One case of superior disc leakage led to cement discitis and disc subsidence (SupDHI 69.45%) with onset of kyphosis ( Disc degeneration implicates biological, infectious and mechanical factors Loriaut et al. Loss of disc height and the ability to recover lordosis indicate morphologic reorganization related to invagination in the vertebral body, rather than degeneration Kyphoplasty allows post-traumatic disc assessment by 3-dimensional reduction The present study found a significant and lasting mean 5.7° correction of vertebral kyphosis at last follow-up, in agreement with the literature. Gain was 8° for Maestretti et al. In the present study, there was no significant change in VK after M3. There was significant loss of superior disc height as of M3 ( Analysis of InfDHI found no significant inferior disc subsidence between trauma and last follow-up ( Only 1 of the 6 patients with discal cement leakage showed degeneration; no conclusion can be drawn as to the consequences of cement leakage. Moreover, this case was associated with secondary VK loss related to insufficient cement filling (4 Primary traumatic vertebral kyphosis, unlike correction defect, has no influence on disc degeneration. All compression fractures (contraindications aside Insufficient intraoperative correction is predictive of superior disc subsidence. In such cases, it is preferable to associate fusion of the overlying level, conserving inferior disc compensatory capacity. There is no agreement on the optimal technique for this: single segment via Wiltse's approach Balloon kyphoplasty is a reliable treatment for compression fracture of the thoracolumbar hinge, providing lasting reduction while leaving healthy adjacent discs free. This confirms the necessity of vertebral reduction, to avoid subsidence and loss of mechanical function in the superior disc. It is mainly the underlying disc that compensates for residual deformity. Preoperative study of the inferior disc is necessary, as treatment may need to be modified in case of pre-existing lesions. The authors declare that they have no competing interest.