Mechanical activation of materials has emerged as a promising alternative to conventional thermally activated processes. The present work deals with the attrition of titanium powders to produce Ti–TiO2 composite powders by reactive milling (RM). The phase transformation/new phases formed during the course of milling have been characterized by sophisticated techniques such as X-ray diffraction (XRD), electron spectroscopy for chemical analysis (ESCA) and differential thermal analysis (DTA). The microhardness measurements showed progressive increase in hardness with increasing milling time.Mechanical alloying (MA) was developed by J.S. Benjamin at INCO Alloys International in the late 1960s As of late mechanical alloying has been looked upon as one of the new methods of material synthesis and has gained much attention. As a result of this, MA can be used to initiate oxidation/reduction type of reactions, virtually turning a ball mill or an attritor into a chemical reactor During MA/RM, repeated fracturing and rewelding of powder particles occurs due to ball-powder-ball and ball-powder-container collisions. This process leads to the following major effects: (i) decrease in powder particle size and consequent increase in their reaction surface area. (ii) generation of atomically clean surfaces. (iii) increase in defect density level of powders providing short-circuit diffusion paths. (iv) increase in temperature of the powder at certain location due to large amount of plastic deformation of the particles. All these effects account for high chemical reactivity of powder under attrition, leading to chemical reaction between the neighbouring particles of different composition or reaction of the powder with the atmosphere of the vial. Conventional methods of producing fine dispersion of a dispersoid in a metal/alloy matrix include milling, internal oxidation, selective reduction of mixed oxides, etc. The present work deals with the development of Ti–TiO Titanium powder of 99.9% purity and <20 μm particle size was subjected to high-energy attrition milling using a stainless steel vial of 200 cm Highly surface-sensitive analytical technique electron spectroscopy for chemical analysis (ESCA) has been used to see the changes occurring on surface of the powder particles during the course of reactive milling. A Vacuum Generators ESCALAB MKII Spectrometer equipped with twin (aluminum and magnesium) X-ray source was used for recording of X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra. The anode of Mg source used in the present study was operated at 10 kV×10 mA and the vacuum in the analysis chamber was maintained better than 5×10 Powder samples were also examined for their thermal behavior using Seiko Instruments model SSC 5100 TG/DTA 32 Thermal Analysis System. The powder samples were subjected to differential thermal analysis (DTA) and thermogravimetric (TG) studies in air in the temperature range of 293–1373 K at a heating rate of 288 K per minute. High-purity alpha alumina powder was used as the reference. Finally, the microhardness measurements on milled samples were carried out using the microhardness attachment of the EPITYPE-2 microscope of Carl Zeiss make at 20 g load. At least three indentations were taken on each sample and the average hardness was calculated.  With progressive milling, there is pronounced broadening of diffraction peaks, attributed to reasons like decrease in particle size and phase transformation from Ti to TiO The XPS survey scans for powder samples milled for 24, 36 and 48 h are given in As per above discussion, XRD and ESCA studies clearly show the formation of TiO According to Hauffe The mechanism of oxidation of titanium may be briefly summarized in following steps: (i) the passage of oxygen to the metal-oxide interface through an essentially non-protective scale. (ii) the solution of oxygen in the metal phase leading to nucleation and growth of oxide on and just beneath the surface. (iii) the intermittent exfoliation of thin sections of the metal surface under the influence of stresses developed by the nucleation and solution processes. The exfoliation of oxide film generates fresh titanium surfaces. These freshly exposed titanium surfaces are already in activated state because of plastic deformation due to milling and hence the further oxidation gets preponed. This is confirmed by the thermal analysis data given in The energy released due to oxidation (expressed in terms of area under the exothermic peak) is also found to decrease with increasing milling time (−477.8 μV s/mg for pure Ti, −2837 μV s/mg for 36 h MA sample as per The TG plots for pure Ti as well as milled powders are given in The multiple TG plots The microhardness measurement on powder samples show rise in hardness value with increasing milling time as shown in From the above studies, it can be said that attrition of pure titanium powder in normal atmosphere of air can lead to formation of TiO The authors thank the Research Centre of Indian Petrochemicals Corporation Limited (IPCL), Baroda and M/S TCR Advanced Engineering Pvt. Ltd., Baroda for providing the necessary facilities for materials characterization.