The excellent inherent floatability of talc and molybdenite makes them very difficult to be separated in the flotation process. To conquer the problem, for the first time, an attempt was made to separate molybdenite and talc by calcining the ores under the air condition before flotation separation. Micro-flotation test results showed that the natural floatability of molybdenite vanished after thermal pretreatment at above 400 °C. In contrast, for that of talc, it barely changes. A satisfying flotation separation effect of molybdenite and talc in either mixed minerals or molybdenite-talc bulk concentrate was achieved through the thermal pretreatment method. The results of Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy analysis indicated that the surface of molybdenite underwent dramatical oxidation after thermal treatment at 400 °C. The formation of MoO3 and reduction in sulfur content on the surface of molybdenite were proposed to result in the poor floatability of molybdenite after thermal treatment.Froth flotation, a physico-chemical separation method by utilization of difference surface hydrophilic/hydrophobic properties between different minerals, is one of the most widely used industrial processes for beneficiation of valuable minerals from ore deposits [ Molybdenite (MoS In sulfide ore flotation process, depressants, such as carboxymethyl cellulose [ In addition to using depressant, surface oxidation is an alternative to depress the sulfide minerals [ Hence, in this research, we attempt to realize selective oxidation of molybdenite through a facile thermal pretreatment method for the first time. Micro-flotation tests were carried out to evaluate the effect of thermal pretreatment method on flotation separation of molybdenite and talc. Moreover, surface characterizations on talc and molybdenite were conducted to understand the mechanism of thermal pretreatment method. The molybdenite and talc mineral samples were obtained from luanchuan, Henan province, china and Longsheng, Guangxi Province, china, respectively. The two mineral samples were hand-picked, crushed to −1 mm and then ground into powders by a mechanical powder machine. For molybdenite sample, the particles with size of -74 μm + 38 μm were collected by vibrating screen for flotation tests. While, for talc sample, particle sized of −74 μm was collected for flotation tests. X-ray diffraction spectra shown Laboratory-scaled thermal pretreatment on the ore samples was conducted in a tube furnace. Typically, 3 g of the ore sample was heated under pre-determined temperature in air atmosphere by the tube furnace. The residence time for each sample in tube furnace was 30 min. After naturally cooling to room temperature, the treated samples were immediately applied for flotation tests. All micro-flotation tests were performed on a mechanical agitation flotation machine (Type: XFG). Commercially obtained Methyl Isobutyl Carbinol (MIBC, 99 % purity) was applied as frother in all flotation tests. Kerosene (98 % purity) and Potassium Butyl Xanthate (PBX, 98 % purity) were applied as collector. Ultrapure water produced by reverse osmosis was used in all the experiments. In each test, 35 mL water and 2 g of the as-prepared ore samples were successively added in the cell (maximum volume: 40 mL) under agitation to form a uniform ore pulp. 0.1 mol/L sodium hydroxide (NaOH) solution or 0.1 mol/L dilute hydrochloric (HCl) acid solution was added to adjust pH value of the pulp to 6. After agitation for 5 min, designed amount of collector was added in the pulp. After 3 min of conditioning, certain amount of frother was added in the cell followed by 1 min of conditioning. The floated froth product in the cell was manually collected for 3 min. For single minerals flotation, the recovery was calculated according to the weight distributions between the froth products and un-floated tailings. For that of mixed mineral, it can be calculated according to the molybdenum grade of concentrates and feeds. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were performed on an ultrahigh vacuum electron spectrometer (K-Alpha 1063, Thermo Fisher, UK). Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) spectra were recorded on an infrared spectrometer (UV-2350, Shimadzu, Japan) from 4000 cm Micro-flotation tests of single mineral were carried to evaluate the effect of thermal pretreatment on the flotation behavior of talc and molybdenite. In industry, kerosene and xanthate are usually employed as the collector for molybdenite, and kerosene is commonly used as collector for talc [    Overall, the single minerals flotation results show that the significant difference between the floatability of talc and molybdenite after thermal treatment. Thus, it implies that the possibly of flotation separation of molybdenite and talc can be achieved after thermal treatment and the optimum thermal pretreatment temperature should be equal or greater than 400 °C. According to the findings on the single minerals, micro-flotation tests on artificially mixed minerals were carried out on molybdenite and talc mixed at same-size ratio to verify the effect of thermal treatment method. Mixed minerals used in each mixed flotation test were prepared by homogeneous mixing 1 g talc minerals and 1 g molybdenite minerals. In thermal treatment process, the mixed minerals were treated as a mixture. In the tests, kerosene (40 mg/L) and MIBC (40 mg/L) were used as collector and frother, respectively, and the flotation results are shown in Besides, additional flotation tests were performed to evaluate the effect of thermal treatment method on separation of molybdenite and talc in bulk concentrates. The bulk concentrate was derived from the above concentrate of artificially mixed minerals floatation test (without thermal treatment). The concentrate was thermally heated at 450 °C in the air atmosphere. The result is present in As seen in FTIR spectra of molybdenite thermally treated at different temperatures are shown in  To further investigate the mechanism of thermal treatment process, XPS analysis was employed to detect variation of the surface chemical states of the talc and molybdenite. The High-resolution XPS spectra of the molybdenite thermally treated at different temperatures are presented in  In the same way, XPS analysis were also conducted on talc before and after thermal treatment at the temperature of 400 °C and the results are presented in Combining the FTIR and XPS analysis results, in summary, it is indicated that molybdenite’s surface is partially oxidized in the thermal treatment process and the oxidation product is the MoO This research presents the effect of thermal pretreatment on the flotation behavior of molybdenite and talc with excellent natural floatability. The floatability of molybdenite was dramatically decreased after thermal treatment. In the single mineral flotation process, the recovery of molybdenite was less than 3% after thermally pretreated under 400 °C. While, on contrast, the floatability of talc changed barely after thermal treatment. As a result, satisfying flotation separation effects of molybdenite and talc in artificially mixed ores or in the bulk concentrates were obtained by application of thermal pretreatment at 400 °C. The results of FTIR and XPS analysis on molybdenite before and after thermal treatment illustrated that the surface of molybdenite was dramatically oxidized at 400 °C. The formation of MoO  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was financially supported by the