Introduction
                  Numerous studies reported dentin bridge formation after pulp capping with tricalcium silicates. By contrast, pulp capping with resins leads to pulp toxicity and inflammation. Hybrid materials made up of tricalcium silicates and resins have also been developed to be used in direct pulp capping. This work was designed to study the consequences of adding resins to tricalcium silicates by investigating TheraCal (BISCO, Lançon De Provence, France) and Biodentine (Septodont, Saint Maur des Fosses, France) interactions with the dental pulp.
               
                  Methods
                  Media conditioned with the biomaterials were used to analyze pulp fibroblast proliferation using the MTT (3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) test and proinflammatory cytokine interleukin 8 (IL-8) secretion using the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The effects of conditioned media on dentin sialoprotein (DSP) and nestin expression by dental pulp stem cells (DPSCs) were investigated by immunofluorescence. The materials' interactions with the vital pulp were investigated using the entire tooth culture model.
               
                  Results
                  TheraCal-conditioned media significantly decreased pulp fibroblast proliferation, whereas no effect was observed with Biodentine. When DPSCs were cultured with Biodentine-conditioned media, immunofluorescence showed an increased expression of DSP and nestin. This expression was lower with TheraCal, which significantly induced proinflammatory IL-8 release both in cultured fibroblasts and entire tooth cultures. This IL-8 secretion increase was not observed with Biodentine. Entire tooth culture histology showed a higher mineralization with Biodentine, whereas significant tissue disorganization was observed with TheraCal.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Within the limits of these preclinical results, resin-containing TheraCal cannot be recommended for direct pulp capping.