The low potential hydrophobic state of pyrite in amyl xanthate (PAX) flotation with nitrogen is of particular interest with regard to the N2TEC flotation technology currently being used for the recovery of auriferous pyrite at Newmont’s Lone Tree Plant in Nevada. Initially, the N2TEC system had been found to operate satisfactorily, but cyanide in the flotation mill water appeared to be responsible for a loss in pyrite recovery. This supposition was confirmed with laboratory experiments, and a program was initiated to study flotation chemistry variables by electrochemically controlled contact angle measurements. Experimental results show that activation of pyrite in such cyanide solutions can be achieved more effectively with lead than with copper. Subsequently, based on these fundamental studies, significant improvement at the Lone Tree Plant was achieved by lead activation, in which case the recovery increased to expected levels.
                  The effect of activator is particularly significant not only with respect to pyrite depression by residual cyanide, but also with respect to collector (PAX) consumption and the initial state of the pyrite surface. Experimental results show the importance of the pyrite surface state and the rather interesting features of the activation process.Newmont Mining Corporation has used the patented N In the N The conventional theory of xanthate flotation of pyrite considers xanthate adsorption an electrochemical process that involves the formation of the xanthate dimer (dixanthogen) ( These early studies suggested that the reduction of pyrite surface compounds in a nitrogen atmosphere may have created a “clean”, low polarity pyrite surface, which perhaps facilitated PAX adsorption and thus account for the low potential, low pH hydrophobic pyrite surface state ( In all experimental work, Milli-Q deionized water with a resistivity of 18 The pyrite electrodes used were prepared as previously described ( For each test where a nitrogen atmosphere was required, the electrolyte was purged with nitrogen for at least 2 As described in earlier work ( A EG&G PAR 173 Potentiostat/Galvanostat programmed with an IBM PC-XT computer, with Model 250 Electrochemical Analysis System software, was used to control the potential of the pyrite electrode at room temperature (22 A high-speed video camera was used to measure bubble attachment time. The procedure involved releasing a small bubble from the tip of a capillary glass tube next to the pyrite surface. The video camera is used to record the release of the bubble, contact against the mineral surface and bubble attachment. The bubble attachment process is then reviewed in slow motion and the bubble attachment time determined within 1–2 Cyclic voltammetry experiments were conducted in a three-compartment electrochemical cell as described in earlier work ( A V6 Scientific 220I XL Electron Spectrometer with a monochromatized Al Mid-infrared spectra were recorded using a Biorad-Digilab FTS-6000 FTIR spectrometer, with a wide band MCT liquid-nitrogen cooled detector. The optical system included a high-intensity ceramic source and a germanium coated KBr beam splitter. Dried air was used to purge the system, prior to spectra being recorded. Two infrared spectroscopy techniques were used. A potassium bromide transmission (KBr) spectrum was taken of a prepared lead xanthate compound. The transmission spectrum was the result of 512 co-added scans ratioed against 512 co-added background scans, at a resolution of 4 Bench-scale flotation tests were carried out under nitrogen on an auriferous pyrite ore from Lone Tree, Nevada (head assay: 2.64 As discussed briefly in the introduction, earlier studies have concluded that a “clean” pyrite surface, available for PAX adsorption, is created by the reduction of pyrite surface compounds in nitrogen. In these early studies ( Earlier studies ( The beneficial effect of lead nitrate as activator for this type of system was also seen in bubble attachment time measurements ( Bench-scale flotation tests in nitrogen also supported the beneficial effect of lead activation on auriferous pyrite recovery ( As mentioned earlier, shortly after the Lone Tree N Since cyanide serves as a well-known depressant for pyrite ( It is well-known that the cyanide anion does not readily complex with lead at moderate concentrations ( The use of lead nitrate as an activator in the presence of significant concentrations of cyanide was found to be quite effective at sustaining the hydrophobic pyrite surface state. Electrochemically controlled contact angle measurement results revealed that the hydrophobic pyrite surface state at low potentials in the presence of cyanide, was dependent on both the lead nitrate concentration as well as the PAX concentration ( The sensitivity of the pyrite surface state to activator concentration is revealed in  In addition to lead activation, copper activation was also considered as a potential measure for overcoming pyrite depression by cyanide. Further electrochemically controlled contact angle measurement experiments were carried out utilizing flotation mill water, to confirm that cyanide indeed was responsible for the loss in pyrite hydrophobicity, and that the use of lead nitrate as activator would alleviate this problem. The results revealed that for untreated pyrite (no activator addition) with 1 Cyclic voltammetry experiments were initiated to further characterize the interaction of lead with pyrite. Results from cyclic voltammograms carried out subsequent to lead treatment at −0.5 After PAX addition the small anodic peak at about −0.5 XPS surface analysis was carried out for untreated pyrite and lead-treated pyrite, in the absence and presence of PAX. As reported previously ( When XPS surface analysis was carried out for pyrite conditioned in a solution containing lead nitrate and PAX under reducing conditions, lead was detected at the pyrite surface (peaks at 138 and 143 FTIR spectroscopy was utilized to confirm the presence of a lead-amyl xanthate species at the pyrite surface under reducing conditions. In On the basis of this study, the following conclusions can be made regarding lead activation during N The low potential, low pH hydrophobic pyrite surface state can be achieved at substantially reduced PAX concentrations for pyrite activated with lead. The low potential hydrophobic pyrite surface state can be created at both low pH (4.7) and high pH (9.2) for lead-treated pyrite. Bubble attachment kinetics for lead-treated pyrite improved considerably compared to untreated pyrite. A modest concentration of cyanide can lead to pyrite depression. However, a hydrophobic pyrite surface state can be sustained in the presence of even relatively high concentrations of cyanide with lead activation. FTIR external reflection spectroscopy confirms the presence of a lead-amyl xanthate species at the pyrite surface under reducing conditions in nitrogen. The authors would like to recognize the support given by Newmont Mining Corporation and the National Science Foundation as well as the contributions of X. Zhu, D.G. Kotlyar and J.C. Gathje to this research project.