The recovery of metals from waste is profitable not only from an economic but also from an ecological point of view. The natural resources of metals (especially platinum group metals – PGM) are limited, while the amount of waste containing the desired metals is still growing. The purpose of the work is the use of quaternary phosphonium salts, i.e. Cyphos IL 101 (trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium chloride), Cyphos IL 102 (trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium bromide) and Cyphos IL 104 (trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)phosphinate), for the separation of palladium(II), platinum(IV), rhodium(III) and ruthenium(III) from their multi-component model mixtures of composition based on real solutions after leaching of PGM-containing wastes (e.g. automobile catalytic converters). Though, Pd(II) could not be separated from Pt(IV) by one-stage extraction, separation of Pd(II) from Pt(IV) was possible by stripping with 0.1 M thiourea in 0.5 M HCl. The extraction of Rh(III) from the four-component solution practically did not occur (Rh(III) stayed in raffinate), therefore Pt(IV) and Pd(II) could be selectively separated from Rh(III). As a result of the work, a separation procedure of successful separatation of Pd(II), Pt(IV), Ru(III) Rh(III) from four-component solutions has been developed based on two stages of extraction with ionic liquid solution (trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium chloride) and two stages of stripping.Such platinum group metals (PGM) as palladium(II), platinum(IV), rhodium(III) and ruthenium(III) have many applications which increase demand for them and, as a consequence, rises their prices (e.g. 698 $/oz of Pd in 2016 to 894 $/oz in 2018, or 785 $/oz of Rh in 2016 to 2340 $/oz in 2018 Liquid-liquid extraction by contacting two liquid phases: aqueous solution of metal ions and organic solution of an extractant is proposed by many researchers as an efficient technique to separate valuable metal ions from solutions after leaching of metal ions from spent catalysts. Among various leaching agents, such as sulfuric acid, aqua regia (3:1 HCl:HNO Selective separation of PGM ions from chloride solutions with liquid-liquid extraction involves some steps of extraction and stripping and employs various commercial, well-known extractants (e.g. Alamine 300 Also, successful separation of Pt(IV) and Pd(II) by liquid–liquid extraction with Alamine 300 can be achieved employing selective stripping agents, i.e. NaSCN for selective stripping of Pt(IV), and thiourea in HCl for Pd(II) Selective extraction-stripping procedure for separation of Au(III), Pt(IV) and Pd(II) from their model mixture was developed by Wei et al. Some attempts to recover selectively PGMs from mixtures of various metals (mostly from model solutions) were made and their summary is presented in Selective separation of Ir(IV), Ru(III) and Rh(III) from chloride solutions was carried out using Alamine 336 in kerosene with TBP as a modifier of the organic phases Also, some attempts of our research group were focused on extraction of Pd(II) Facing huge demand for PGM (resulting from continuous technological development) and lack of available sources of these metals in Europe, PGM are considered strategic or critical metals. Therefore, the development of efficient recycling of raw materials (so called “re-raw materials”) and products containing critical materials becomes very important chain link in European circular economy focused on a sustainable, low carbon, resource efficient and competitive economy Model one-component solutions were prepared by dissolving in HCl the required amounts of PtCl The organic solutions were prepared by dissolving the required amount of quaternary phosphonium salts (Cyphos IL): trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium chloride (Cyphos IL 101), trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium bromide (Cyphos IL 102) or trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium The atomic absorption spectrometer (AAS – ContrAA 300, Analitik Jena) was used for the measurement of metal ion concentrations in aqueous samples at the following wavelengths: 244.8, 266.0, 349.9, 343.5 nm for Pd(II), Pt(IV), Ru(III) and Rh(III), respectively. FT-IR analyses of the organic phases before extraction, after stripping with 1 M HNO Extraction was performed in glass separatory funnels at 21 ± 2 °C for 20 or 60 min. The feed solution containing mixture of Pt(IV), Pd(II), Ru(III) and Rh(III) in HCl was mechanically shaken with organic phase (volume ratio A/O = 1 or 2) and then allowed to stand for phase separation. Distribution ratio ( Extraction efficiency was defined as percentage extraction ( Stripping of Pt(IV), Pd(II), Ru(III) and Rh(III) from the loaded organic phases was carried out for 20 min with various solutions (A/O = 1): 0.1 M thiourea in 0.5 M HCl and 0.5 M NH   Each experiment was carried out three times and the error did not exceed 5%. Organic and aqueous phases were contacted for 20 or 60 min to check if the equilibrium after 20 min is reached. The effect of contact time of the four-component aqueous phase and 5 · 10 Time of extraction longer than 20 min did not affect changes in the extraction system, therefore further extractions were proceeded for 20 min. Regardless of the used IL solution (see also To determine the number of stages required for quantitative extraction of PGM ions, the extraction isotherms (based on the data for one-component solutions from our previous works It is visible that only one stage is enough to extract Pd(II) or Pt(IV), and two stages are necessary to extract Ru(III). Thus, to confirm the theoretical considerations, two-stage PGM extraction from four-component mixture of Pd(II), Pt(IV), Ru(III) and Rh(III) with IL 101, IL 102 or IL 104 was carried out at A/O = 2. The concentration of metal ions in the aqueous solutions before and after extraction with Cyphos IL 101 and the results of extraction efficiency of PGM are presented in  It is important to emphasize that percentage extraction after the second stage (E II), presented in The changes in the extraction efficiency of PGM (shown in Pt(IV), Rh(III) and Ru(III) in aqueous chloride solutions form octahedral complexes with a coordination number of 6, while palladium complexes at +2 oxidation state are planar (coordination number 4). The following order taking into account size or density of the charge of chlorocomplexes reflects also the ability of PGM chlorocomplexes to be extracted by anion exchangers, known also as basic extractants, e.g. tertiary amines, Aliquat 336 Chlorocomplexes of PGM with low charge density (e.g. [ Influence of IL 101 concentration in the organic phase on Pt(IV), Pd(II), Ru(III) and Rh(III) extraction was investigated and the results are shown in Regardless of the concentration of IL in the organic phase, Pt(IV) and Pd(II) were quantitatively co-extracted, while the efficiency of Ru(III) extraction increased with the increasing concentration of IL in the organic phase. At the same time Rh(III) still remained in the raffinate. This means that selection of an appropriate IL content in the organic phase gives opportunity to separate Pd(II) and Pt(IV) from Ru(III) and Rh(III). To make the separation process more favorable from the practical point of view, i.e. taking into account smaller amount of the organic phase used and concentration of the extracted metal ions, a double volume of the aqueous phase to the organic one was used. The results of extraction with IL 101 for A/O = 2 are presented in As at A/O = 2 extraction efficiency decreased compared to A/O = 1, particularly with small content of IL, the extraction of PGM was carried out in two stages. The extraction efficiency of Pd(II), Pt(IV) or Ru(III) in all cases increased with the increasing concentration of IL in the organic phase, while Rh(III) extraction was poor and did not depend on the concentration of the extractant used. Also at A/O = 2 (likewise at A/O = 1) Rh(III) remained in the raffinate, and could be separated effectively from Pd(II), Pt(IV) and partly from Ru(III). Comparison of separation factors of Pd(II) extraction in one stage over other PGM ions at A/O equal to 1 or 2 is shown in It must be emphasized that though Pd(II) and Pt(IV) were extracted together and were not separated from each other, they were concentrated in the organic phase due to a double excess of the aqueous phase. Further separation of Pd(II), Pt(IV) and Ru(III) was proposed to be realized by means of two stages of stripping. Stripping of PGM ions from the loaded organic phases was carried out in two stages (A/O = 1) with different stripping solutions: 0.1 M thiourea in 0.5 M HCl, 0.5 M NH The results of the first and second stage of stripping are shown in The results shown in The organic phases after second stage of extraction ( First stage of stripping from the organic phase loaded with smaller amount of PGM ions (after the second stage of extraction) resulted in efficient removal of Pd(II) (more than 70%) and stripping of almost half amount of Ru(III). It means that the content of the remaining Pd(II) and Ru(III) was equal to 0.02 · 10 Cyphos IL 101 (trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium chloride) was chosen as the best extractant for separation of PGM ions due to high extraction efficiency of Pt(IV) and Pd(II) (above 95%) and easy regeneration of the organic phase with hydrochloric acid. The loaded organic phases containing IL 101 after two stages of stripping were regenerated with deionized water and 5 M HCl and were applied again for extraction. FT-IR spectra of the organic phase containing Cyphos IL 101 were analyzed to confirm that after stripping and regeneration IL 101 did not change the structure (see Comparison of the spectra in A new peak at 1338 cm Comparison of the results of extraction with fresh and regenerated IL 101 are shown in Rh(III) was extracted neither with fresh nor with regenerated IL phase, while extraction of Ru(III) did not exceed 25%. The extraction efficiency of Pt(IV) with regenerated organic phase decreased twice in comparison to extraction of Pt(IV) with fresh organic phase, while the extraction efficiency of Pd(II) with regenerated organic phase decreased fourfold. Nevertheless, more than 90% of Pd(II) and Pt(IV) was extracted by the regenerated organic phase after two-stage extraction. It means that totally in two stages of extraction the regenerated IL phase was able to transfer 99 and 92% of Pd(II) and Pt(IV), respectively. A method of separation of PGM from a four-component mixture by means of a two-stage extraction with Cyphos IL 101 as an extractant and two-stage stripping has been proposed. Trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium chloride was chosen for the research due to the high extraction efficiency of Pt(IV) and Pd(II) and easy regeneration of the organic phase with HCl. The method of separation of Ru(III), Rh(III), Pt(IV) and Pd(II) from their mixture is illustrated in The mixture of Ru(III), Rh(III), Pt(IV) and Pd(II) in HCl entered the first stage of extraction with trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium chloride. After this step Pt(IV) and Pd(II) and small amount of Ru(III) were extracted by the organic phase ( Quaternary phosphonium salts, especially trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium chloride, can be successfully used as PGM extractants from the four-component chloride solutions in extraction and stripping systems. Pd(II), Pt(IV), Rh(III) and Ru(III) can be effectively separated by means of two stages of extraction with trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium chloride and two stages of stripping with various aqueous solutions. Though Pd(II) cannot be separated from Pt(IV) by one-stage extraction, separation of Pd(II) from Pt(IV) is possible by stripping with 0.1 M thiourea in 0.5 M HCl. The extraction of Rh(III) from the four-component solution practically does not occur (Rh(III) stays in raffinate), therefore Pt(IV) and Pd(II) can be selectively separated from Rh(III). The aqueous phases containing separated PGM can be further treated to obtain final required products. The results of separation according to the proposed procedure are promising and will be further examined also for real leaching solutions containing PGM ions. This work was supported by the grant of the (See After transformation of the mass balance equation (See (See