In previous studies we have described structural and functional changes in rat bone tissue caused by 3,3′,4,4′,5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB126). Some of the effects caused by PCB126 resemble those found in vitamin C-deficient rats, as well as those found in rats with a high dietary intake of vitamin A. The present investigation was designed to determine if these PCB126-induced changes could be inhibited by addition of vitamin C to the drinking water and if they could be evoked by vitamin A administration. Five groups of female rats were used in this study, which lasted for 12 weeks. Three of the groups were exposed to PCB126 (total dose 320 μg/kg, bw), either alone or in combination with vitamin C added to the drinking water (1 and 10 g/l, respectively). One group was given feed with increased level of vitamin A (600 000 U/kg pellet) and the fifth group served as controls. Using peripheral quantitative computed tomography (pQCT), it was found that PCB126 increased trabecular density and cortical thickness, but reduced the trabecular area. Furthermore, maximum torque and stiffness of the humerus during torsional testing and serum osteocalcin levels were reduced by PCB126. Of the PCB126 induced effects observed, addition of vitamin C only inhibited the reduction of serum osteocalcin. Like PCB126 vitamin A supplementation increased the inorganic content and the bone density and also reduced the trabecular area and polar moment of inertia but did not increase the cortical thickness or reduce maximum torque, stiffness or serum osteocalcin level. Apparently, the effects induced by PCB126 are not mediated either via decreased vitamin C level or increased vitamin A level.From results published during the last decade it has become obvious that the skeleton is a target organ for a number of persistent organic pollutants ( Bone tissue is a composite material consisting of collagen fibers and hydroxyapatite crystals. The strength of bone tissue is determined by a number of factors, such as bone mass, the ratio between the organic (mainly collagen) and inorganic components (mainly calcium phosphate, i.e. hydroxyapatite crystals) of the bone, the molecular structure and the gross architecture of the bone tissue. The collagen fibers contribute to the bone strength by their resistance against pulling forces, while hydroxyapatite crystals contribute by resistance against compression. Bone tissue is replaced constantly throughout life by a process termed remodeling. Several factors can affect this process, including the formation, the resorption as well as the turnover rate of the bone tissue. All these factors contribute, therefore, to the development of structural and functional characteristics of the bone tissue. Examples of factors affecting bone remodeling are age, body weight, exercise, genetic predisposition, endocrine disorders, tobacco use, drugs and nutrients, such as calcium, vitamin A and C. Both deficiency and excess of vitamin A induce negative effects on bone tissue. As early as 1941 it was shown that vitamin A deficiency in dogs resulted in an increased cortical thickness and decreased marrow cavity of the long bones ( Both hypo- ( Furthermore, exposure to the environmental pollutant lindane (γ-hexachlorocyclohexane) reduced the vitamin C levels in rat adrenals and in rat testis ( Our own studies have shown structural and functional changes in rat bone tissue as a result of exposure to the common environmental pollutant 3,3′, 4,4′,5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB126) ( Eighty female Sprague–Dawley rats, 3 months of age, obtained from Möllegaards breeding Centre (Skensved, Denmark) were used in this experiment. They were allowed to acclimatize for a minimum of 23 days prior to use. The rats were housed in a room maintained at 21±1°C (relative humidity 50±5%), using a 12-h light:dark cycle, with the light cycle beginning at 06:00. The rats were kept in groups of five animals in polycarbonate cages with hardwood chips as bedding and had free access to water and commercial pellet diet (Lactamin R36, Stockholm, Sweden) during the acclimatizing period. The rats were divided into five groups: C, P, PL, and PH, all with 15 individuals and A with 20 individuals. From the beginning of the experiment all rats had free access to deionized water or vitamin C-drinking solutions (see below). The rats of groups C, P, PL and PH had free access to a commercial diet (Lactamin R36, Sweden; with a vitamin A concentration of 7500 I.U. vitamin A/kg) and the rats of the remaining group (A) were given (ad libitum) the same feed supplemented with vitamin A (600 000 I.U. vitamin A/kg, AnalyCen, Lidköping, Sweden). 3,3′,4,4′,5-pentachlorobiphenyl (PCB126) purchased from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories (Andover, MA, USA) was dissolved in corn oil (Sigma, St Louis, MO, USA). The rats of groups P, PL and PH were injected intraperitoneally with the PCB-solution (64 μg/kg body weight) at day 0, 13, 24, 35 and 61 (total dose 320 μg/kg). The rats of group C (control) and A (vitamin A-supplemented) were injected with the corresponding volume of vehicle (0.4 ml/kg body weight). The rats of groups PL and PH had free access to vitamin C solutions instead of water. The vitamin C solution for the rats of group PL (PCB126+low dose of vitamin C) contained 1g ascorbic acid/l deionized water and that for the rats of group PH (PCB126+high dose of vitamin C) contained 10 g ascorbic acid/l deionized water. In order to avoid degradation of ascorbic acid the drinking solutions were made fresh every second day. The consumption of the vitamin C solutions was monitored on two different occasions, about 2 months apart. The results showed that the average daily consumption of vitamin C was 74 mg/kg bw for the rats of group PL and 490 mg/kg bw for the rats of group PH. At 6 months of age the rats were killed by exsanguination from the abdominal aorta under Eqvitesin anesthesia (chloral hydrate 182 mg/kg, pentobarbital 41.7 mg/kg). After centrifugation of the collected blood 200 μl serum was immediately mixed with 1800 μl 5% metaphosphoric acid (HPO The humeri were dissected and cleaned and the total length (defined as the distance from the upper edge of the humeral head to the medial epicondyle) and waist (defined as the diameter of the narrowest part of the humeri) were measured using an electronic sliding caliper to the nearest 0.01 mm ( A few hours before the pQCT analysis (Stratec XCT 960A, software version 5.20; Noland Stratec Medizintechnik, Pforzheim, Germany) the humeri were completely thawed at room temperature. The bones were placed horizontally inside a glass tube and scanned using voxel size E (0.148 mm). The humeral epiphysis was scanned 5 mm from the proximal end of the bone. This area was chosen because the growth plate is approximately 3 mm from the proximal end of the humerus and, consequently, the area scanned corresponds approximately to the section of the humeral epiphysis rich in trabecular bone. The scan line was adjusted using the scout view of the pQCT system. For analysis peel mode 2, contour mode 1, threshold 0.660/cm and inner threshold 0.700/cm were used. The total cross-sectional area (Tot A, mm The humeral diaphysis was scanned at midshaft just distally to the deltoid tuberosity ( To evaluate the reproducibility of the pQCT measurements the coefficient of variation (S.D./mean) was calculated from ten repeated measurements with a single sample repositioning before each measurement. A few hours before the biomechanical analysis the humeri were completely thawed at room temperature. The soft tissues were carefully removed prior to the mechanical testing. Both bone ends were placed in purpose-made aluminum potting fixtures with a height of 10 mm each. The fixtures were then filled with plastic padding (Plastic Padding Elastic, Sweden), so that the bone ends became immovably embedded, leaving the remaining section of the humeri between the fixtures free for testing. A custom jig was used to ensure correct alignment of the bone axis along the loading axis of the testing machine. All specimens were tested to failure in torsion at room temperature on an electromechanical testing machine (Avalon Technologies, Rochester, MN, USA) at a rate of 4°/s, with no axial load during the testing ( Values for angulation and torque were collected 50 times per second until failure using software provided with the testing machine (Testware II). The collected data were stored as data files that included the variables time, angulation and torque. Based on the data collected, maximum torque, torsion at failure (angulation at failure) and torsional stiffness were calculated. The torsional rigidity was calculated by using the angulation and torque data to define a slope, from which the tangent of the maximal slope for each sample was used to define the torsional stiffness. Serum osteocalcin was measured by a radioimmuno-assay using a commercially available kit (Immutopics International, San Clemente, CA, USA). All samples were analyzed within the same assay and the intra-assay coefficient of variation was 2.3%. The serum vitamin C analysis described by The data recorded were evaluated by one-way ANOVA followed by post-hoc Fisher's PLSD. Differences were considered significant when PCB126 exposure, but not increased dietary levels of vitamin A attenuated the rate of body weight gain ( All PCB126-exposed rats exhibited an increased liver somatic index (LSI, liver weight/body weight, %) compared to controls ( Serum osteocalcin concentration was significantly reduced in rats exposed to either PCB126 alone or in combination with a low dose of vitamin C ( PCB exposure induced a decrease in length, waist, and water content of the rat humerus ( The coefficient of variation (CV, %) for the different pQCT measurements ranged from 0.50 to 4.9%. All PCB126-exposed rats, and those given vitamin A-supplemented feed, exhibited a reduction in both cross-sectional area and trabecular area of the humeral epiphysis ( Compared to controls, both the total cross-sectional area and the cortical area of the humerus were smaller in all PCB126-exposed rats and those given vitamin A-supplemented feed ( Compared to controls the polar moment of inertia was significantly lower (24-32 per cent) in all three groups exposed to PCB126. In the animals given vitamin A-supplemented feed the polar moment of inertia was reduced by about 17% compared to controls ( The maximum torque to failure was significantly lower in all PCB126-exposed groups compared to controls ( This study has demonstrated pronounced effects of the environmental pollutant PCB126 on rat humerus. Major findings included increased densities in trabecular and cortical bone and cortical thickness, but reduced bone length, reduced maximum torque and stiffness and changes in the ratios between cortical, trabecular and total cross sectional areas. PCB126 exposure also reduced serum osteocalcin levels. An unexpected effect of PCB126 exposure was the 3-fold increase in serum vitamin C level. During the past only limited attention has been paid to study effects of xenobiotics on synthesis of vitamin C. The addition of vitamin C to the drinking water of our PCB126 exposed rats did not cause any further increase in serum vitamin C levels. Apparently the vitamin C status is very similar in all groups of PCB126 exposed rats. Therefore, it is not surprising to find that effects of PCB126 is more or less the same both in the presence and the absence of vitamin C supplementation. In a few cases, however, the statistical analysis revealed significant differences between rats exposed to PCB126 alone and those exposed to PCB126 in combination with vitamin C. In general these differences are fairly small and probably significant only from a statistical point of view. Like PCB126 vitamin A supplementation increased the inorganic content and the bone density and also reduced the trabecular area and polar moment of inertia, but did not increase the cortical thickness or reduce maximum torque, stiffness or serum osteocalcin level. Apparently the effects induced by PCB126 are not mediated via either decreased vitamin C level or increased vitamin A level. In accordance with previous results ( The changes in dimensions of cortical bone are likely due to a stimulation of endosteal bone formation, expressed as a decreased marrow area and an inhibition of periosteal bone formation, expressed as a decreased waist. The fact that PCB126 exposure also caused an increased cortical thickness implies that the stimulatory effect on the endosteal side is greater than the inhibitory effect on the periosteal side of the bone. From experimental studies in rats PTH-injections are known to stimulate endosteal bone formation ( The most important task for a long bone like the humerus is to provide support for the limb. It is important, therefore, to measure to what extent the mechanical properties of the bone might be altered by the qualitative and quantitative changes that might occur due to disease, or following exposure to skeleto-toxic agents. The mechanical strength is determined by a combination of the qualitative characteristics of the bone tissue and the quantitative amount of bone and its distribution around the neutral axis. Reduced mechanical strength is, therefore, due to either an altered composition of the bone tissue and/or changes in the geometry of the bone. The so-called polar moment of inertia is determined by the total cross sectional area and the distribution of bone tissue around the neutral axis. In the present study the polar moment of inertia was reduced by 24–32% in the groups exposed to PCB126, mainly due to a reduced outer diameter of the waist. The significant reduction in diaphyseal waist diameter almost entirely explains the observed reduction in mechanical strength seen in the three groups of animals exposed to PCB126. Altered material properties, therefore, seem to be less important as explanations for the reduced mechanical strength. The PCB126-induced reduction of torsional stiffness cannot, however, readily be explained by changes in the dimensions of the cortical bone. Organic components of the bone are important determinants of torsional stiffness, and in our previous study ( Osteocalcin is a calcium-binding protein that is produced almost exclusively by osteoblasts. The osteocalcin expression requires vitamin C, which is an essential cofactor for osteoblast differentiation both in vivo and in vitro ( PCB126-exposure lowered serum osteocalcin concentration. In a study of knockout osteocalcin-deficient mice, osteocalcin was shown to be a determinant of bone formation. The mutant mice exhibited greater cortical thickness and higher density compared to wild-type littermates ( It is apparent that vitamin C is involved in the biotransformation and detoxification of numerous xenobiotics (for a review see Consequently, in one recent study on male rats it was demonstrated that vitamin C administration markedly attenuated the effects of DDT and lindane on lipid peroxidation, SOD (superoxide dismutase activity) and humoral immune suppression ( Every antioxidant, including vitamin A and C, is in fact a redox (reduction–oxidation) agent, protecting against free radicals under certain conditions and promoting free radical generation under others. High levels (above physiological levels) of these vitamins may perturb key physiological processes. Thus, some recent studies have revealed prooxidant effects of both vitamin A and C under certain circumstances ( In conclusion, only some of the PCB126-induced effects observed could be mimicked by vitamin A and only the reduction of serum osteocalcin was prevented by vitamin C. This effect of vitamin C is, however, weak and has to be confirmed before clear conclusions can be drawn. Neither increased vitamin A levels nor reduced vitamin C levels can, therefore, explain the effects of PCB126 on bone tissue described in this study. The possibility that changes in plasma concentration of PTH has contributed, at least partly, to the effects observed requires further investigation. The present study has received financial support from the Royal Swedish Academy of Science, Uppsala University Scholarships Office, Inga Britt and Arne Lundbergs Stiftelse and the Swedish-Danish Foundation for Culture.