The chamber geometry is one of the key factors that influences the performance of a cone crusher. The design of the chamber geometry should take product quality and crushing efficiency into account. In this paper the kinematics of rock material in a crushing chamber, as interparticle breakage occurs, has been analyzed and the chamber division is achieved. Based on the chamber division and a population balance model, the method for chamber geometry design is presented. Combining the empirical model for predicting particle shape with the size distribution model, a flakiness prediction model is proposed. With the size reduction model and flakiness prediction model as constraints, an optimization of the crushing chamber is achieved. Finally, the validity of the crushing chamber optimization model has been verified by an appropriate prototype test.Cone crushers are widely used in the mining and aggregates industry to crush blasted rock material. The chamber geometry is one of the key factors that influences the cone crusher performance, measured by productivity, particle size and particle shape of the product. Previous research in this area ( Most previous research has focused on modeling of the relationships between the key parameters, and only a few have been about improving the models, combining the models and optimization with the models. As the chamber geometry is crucial for the performance of a cone crusher, the method for crushing chamber optimization under multiple constraints will be useful for improving its performance. The purpose of chamber geometry optimization is to design the geometry of the concave chamber surfaces given that the key parameters, including rotational speed The two main crushing parts of cone crusher are the mantle and the concave. The axis of the mantle intersects the axis of the crushing chamber at point While the rock particle is falling in the crushing chamber, the movement can be expressed by Eq. As shown in Subsequently, the particle is pushed against the concave surface and reaches the closed side at Repeating the steps above, the whole trace of the particle in the crushing chamber can be calculated. In this paper, Based on the theory of interparticle breakage, when such breakage occurs in the crushing chamber, rock materials are crushed only once, in a single crushing zone. Accordingly, the study described above not only traces the movement of rock materials but also reveal how to divide the crushing chamber into crushing zones. Obviously, each turning point of the trace is on the boundary between two crushing zones. In the cross section of the crushing chamber, the outline of each crushing zone is a quadrangle. Using the formalism described above, the three sides of the quadrangle can be defined. The next step is to define the fourth side, which is to design the curve of concave surface in each crushing zone. As the closed side setting (CSS) should be given by the user of crusher, the design should be started in the discharge gate of the crushing room. However, in the course of the design of the concave surface there are two key factors that should be taken into account. Firstly, based on the theory of population balance, while the crusher is operating, the mass of rock materials in one crushing zone must be equal to that in the next crushing zone so that materials do not get jammed in the crushing chamber. Secondly, the nip angle of each crushing zone should be less than the given nip angle so that materials do not slide along the mantle. In the Chinese Standard, the nip angle of the crushing chamber should be less than 27° ( As the cone crusher can only work on the premise of no jamming, the minimum standard deviation of the mass of material in each crushing zone is taken as the objective of the crushing chamber geometry optimization. As shown in Eq. The second factor is taken as the boundary constraint in the crushing chamber geometry optimization. As shown in Eq. The crushing process in each crushing zone has been presented by As the entire process of crushing is modeled as a series of successive crushing events, the size distribution of the final product can be calculated using Eq. The values of Generally the product flakiness is tested according to  Based on this empirical model and the size reduction model, the percentage of flaky particles in the final product can be calculated, as shown in Eq. In Eq. Based on this method for crushing chamber geometry optimization, taking the size reduction model and flakiness prediction model as constraints, a crushing chamber optimization model is achieved. As shown in Eq. The objective of the crushing chamber optimization is to produce the minimum standard deviation of the mass of discharge materials of each crushing zone as shown in Eq. To ensure that the optimization would succeed and the outcome would be useful, there should be boundary constraints on the design variables as shown in Eq. In this work a PYB900 cone crusher (made in China) is taken as an example. The structural and working parameters of PYB900 are taken as the initial input for the crushing chamber optimization. The outcome of the optimization, including these parameters and the crushing chamber geometry, and the corresponding performance prediction, are shown in To verify the validity of the cone crusher chamber optimization model, we cooperated with the Shanghai Jianshe Luqiao Machinery Co., Ltd to redesign the PYB900 cone crusher in accordance with the outcome of the optimization. The corresponding prototype has been made. It has been working in a quarry in Huzhou China. The performance of the prototype has been tested, as shown in In this paper, in which we have studied rock material in a crushing chamber, the motion of the material has been traced and the method for dividing crushing chamber into crushing zones is presented. Based on the chamber division and population balance model, the method for the design of the chamber geometry is presented. Combining the empirical model for predicting particle shape with the size distribution model, a flakiness prediction model is proposed. Using the size reduction model and flakiness prediction model as constraints, the crushing chamber design optimization is achieved. All this work will be useful for future cone crusher optimization strategies. With the cooperation of cone crusher manufacturer, the PYB900 cone crusher has been redesigned in accordance with the outcome of the optimization procedure. The corresponding prototype has been working in a quarry in Huzhou China. The validity and reliability of the crushing chamber optimization have been verified with the prototype test.