The influence of pyrite pre-oxidation in alkaline solutions on gold recovery by cyanidation from Twin Creek refractory gold ore in which pyrite was identified as the major sulfide mineral has been investigated with the aid of electrochemical measurements, leaching experiments, and direct analysis of reaction products for selected residues. It was found that gold recovery by cyanidation in bottle roll experiments mainly depended on the extent of pyrite pre-oxidation. The rate of pyrite oxidation in alkaline solutions measured by electrochemical measurements, including chronoamperometry and linear sweep voltammetry, increased with an increase in pH, potential, and temperature. All alkaline reagents used for the electrochemical measurements, NaOH, NH4OH, Na2CO3 and Ca(OH)2, showed a similar effect on pyrite oxidation kinetics. However, the results of alkaline pre-oxidation for pyrite of the Twin Creek refractory gold ore suggested that NaOH and Na2CO3/Ca(OH)2 were superior to Ca(OH)2. Without pre-oxidation, cyanide leachable gold was found to be only 20% which could be increased to 70% under appropriate pre-oxidation conditions. At the same time, cyanide consumption decreased from 2.5kg/t ore to 1.5kg/t ore.
                  Selected residues after pre-oxidation and cyanidation were examined by X-ray diffraction. Backscattered electron images of pyrite particles in these residues were taken. The reaction products at the surface of pyrite particles were found to be iron-, silicon-, and calcium-bearing compounds with variable amounts of sulfur as determined by X-ray energy dispersion analysis. Additionally, some mineral fines, such as aluminum and/or potassium-bearing minerals, were found to be present at the partially oxidized pyrite surface.With depletion of the oxidized free-milling gold reserves close to the earth’s surface, most of the important new deposits being mined today do not respond to direct cyanidation. It is found that the gold is very finely disseminated and encapsulated in host matrices that are inert and/or impermeable to the cyanide solution. In this case, it is necessary to first break down the host matrices and then it is possible to leach the liberated gold. In many cases, the host matrices are sulfide minerals, which exhibit a strong association with finely disseminated gold particles in many ore bodies. Of these sulfides, pyrite is one of the most important minerals. Therefore, a knowledge of pyrite leaching behavior is very important for the development of improved technology for the treatment of refractory gold ores. The electrochemistry of pyrite and the kinetics of pyrite oxidation in different systems have been extensively studied. The anodic dissolution behavior of pyrite has been investigated by various techniques ( For pressure oxidation in alkaline solutions, the rate of pyrite oxidation was found to be surface-reaction controlled ( The kinetics of pyrite oxidation in alkaline solutions have been found to be affected by the nature of the reagents used to control the pH of the systems. Among the reagents, sodium carbonate/bicarbonate was claimed to be particularly effective in enhancing pyrite decomposition in aerated solutions (  Upon review of the literature, the kinetics and products of pyrite decomposition in alkaline solutions under oxidative conditions are dependent on many variables, such as oxidation potential, temperature, solution composition, whether the system is open to the atmosphere, etc. ( Besides the aforementioned phenomena, other issues have also been considered: (1) whether elemental sulfur is involved as an intermediate during formation of sulfate; and (2) which component of pyrite is preferentially oxidized ( Pyrite is a semiconductor and known to support electrochemical reactions. Therefore, some electrochemical measurement techniques can be utilized to determine the rate of anodic pyrite oxidation. In this respect, it was decided to do a systematic electrochemical research on the kinetics of pyrite oxidation in alkaline solutions in order to provide supporting information for the alkaline pre-oxidation experiments. The electrochemical techniques used in the current research included chronoamperometry and linear sweep voltammetry. The rate of anodic pyrite oxidation in alkaline solutions under certain conditions and the influence of important factors on the rate were determined by electrochemical measurements. The experimental methods and results are presented in the following sections. A natural massive specimen of pyrite of unknown source was provided by Newmont Mining Corporation. The massive pyrite specimen was cut into a parallelepiped with dimensions of 14 Before each experiment, the pyrite electrode was ground with silicon carbide papers (800 and 2400 mesh) successively, rinsed with ethanol and deionized water, respectively. The electrode was immediately put into the test solution in an electrochemical cell. During the experiment, the solution was open to the atmosphere. The volume of the test solution was 250 A typical three-electrode system was employed for these measurements. The pyrite electrode was used as the working electrode, a graphite rod was used as the counter electrode, and the SCE was used as the reference electrode. Potential measurements between the working electrode and the reference electrode were made through a Luggin capillary. The current densities for anodic pyrite oxidation or decomposition were obtained with an EG&G Princeton Applied Research, Potential-Galvanostat (Model 273). The current density determined by chronoamperometry for pyrite oxidation under specific conditions in this paper is the average of anodic current densities within a certain experimental time, for example, after 5 However, it is expected that the products from anodic pyrite oxidation vary, for example, ferrous ion or ferric ion and elemental sulfur or sulfate etc., depending on experimental conditions. Because of the different reactions that can occur, the In order to investigate the reaction characteristics for anodic pyrite oxidation, it is necessary to examine many different variables, including stirring speed. The influence of magnetically stirring speed on the anodic current density for pyrite oxidation was examined at potential 0.258 Examination of the influence of the oxidation potential on the rate of pyrite oxidation was made by chronoamperometry at the potentials of 0.258 The effect of pH on the rate of pyrite oxidation using different alkaline reagents for adjustment of the solution pH was measured by different electrochemical measurements. The results determined by chronoamperometry are shown in Plots of the logarithm of anodic current density vs. pH for pyrite oxidation at potentials of 0.258 It can be noted from review of the literature that the kinetics of pyrite oxidation in alkaline solutions are dependent not only upon pH, potential and whether the system is open to the atmosphere, but also upon the solution composition or reagents used to adjust the solution pH ( These results suggest that the rate of pyrite oxidation under different conditions is independent of the alkaline reagents used under the conditions studied. However, it should be pointed out that, in the current research, the anodic current densities for pyrite decomposition as determined by these electrochemical measurements only represent the initial rates of pyrite oxidation. The effect of these alkaline reagents needs to be further examined by actual pre-oxidation tests. Especially, the oxidation rate may be affected by the reaction products formed at the pyrite surface with different alkaline reagents in actual pre-oxidation systems. The effect of temperature on the anodic current density for pyrite oxidation was examined by chronoamperometry in NaOH and Na Additionally, the influence of pH on the kinetics of alkaline pyrite oxidation at elevated temperatures of 45 In the current research, all solutions were open to the atmosphere. In most fundamental studies by other authors, the systems generally were isolated from the atmosphere by purging with an inert gas. In order to identify the difference for alkaline pyrite oxidation kinetics under these different conditions, the influence of N A refractory sulfidic-carbonaceous ore from Newmont’s Twin Creek Mine (a representative for one of refractory gold ore) was used for pre-oxidation and gold leaching tests. The received sample was crushed to minus 10-mesh and split into 500-g charges. Prior to each test, the crushed sample was wet-fine ground in two stage grinding mills. Particle size distribution analysis indicated that the particle size of the ground sample was 100% minus 45 A sample of 250 The Twin Creek ore is highly refractory due to both gold locking in pyrite matrix and preg-robbing activity. The mineral constituents of the ore were identified and determined by semiquantitative XRD analysis, which indicated that the ore is comprised of 6% pyrite, 2% anatase, 25% muscovite/illite and about 67% quartz. Fire assay and chemical analysis of the head sample are given in To find maximum gold recovery after complete sulfide oxidation, a series of hot nitric acid pretreatment tests were performed on the fine-ground samples and followed by cyanide/CIL. After the nitric acid pretreatment, the sulfide oxidation was over 99.2%. Even with this high sulfide oxidation, gold recoveries by cyanide/CIL only ranged from 78.2% to 83.7%. Results suggested that even with the oxidation pretreatment, the maximum achievable gold recovery would only be about 80% due to the preg-robbing activity of the ore sample. An alkaline cyanide/CIL test was performed directly on the fine-ground samples without pre-oxidation at ambient temperature with 20  Results of alkaline pre-oxidation with selected alkaline reagents and gold leaching by cyanidation/CIL are listed in The results in The influence of lime addition during fine grinding on the extent of sulfide oxidation and gold extraction was examined. Test results, shown in It can be noted that the results of Tests 11 and 12 indicate that an excess of lime addition reduces sulfide oxidation as well as gold extraction. Further research is required to explain the phenomenon. The encapsulation of the sulfide particle in Tests 11 and 12 residues was observed by X-ray energy dispersion spectroscopy. The cyanide/CIL gold extractions from the residues after the alkaline pre-oxidation tests are illustrated in The reaction products of selected residues after alkaline pre-oxidation and cyanidation from Tests 4, 10, and 12 were examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD). Also, backscattered electron (BSE) images of the pyrite particles in these residues were taken. Finally, reaction products and/or coatings at the surface of pyrite particles were analyzed by X-ray energy dispersion (EDS) spectroscopy. Quantitative treatment of the XRD spectra was accomplished by Rietveld analysis and whole pattern fitting methods. The Rietveld analysis refined the crystal structures (lattice parameters, etc.) of the minerals using the powder diffraction data, beginning with close approximation from previous results. The whole pattern fitting adjusted mineral percentages until a best fit occurred between a calculated spectrum and the chemical analysis. The results determined by the quantitative analysis are presented in The pyrite particles and the reaction products at the surface of pyrite particles after the alkaline pre-oxidation and cyanidation were examined in these three residue samples by BSE images and EDS spectroscopy. Based on the fact that gold extraction mainly depends on the extent of sulfides or pyrite oxidation, it appears that the product layers at pyrite surface are porous under the conditions studied. However, the results from Test 6 with the addition of lime (Ca(OH) In this investigation, the kinetics of anodic pyrite oxidation in alkaline solutions was studied by electrochemical measurements, including chronoamperometry and linear sweep voltammetry. Based on these electrochemical measurements, some experiments were designed for alkaline pre-oxidation of Twin Creek refractory gold ore in which the major sulfide mineral was pyrite. Gold extraction from the pre-oxidized auriferous pyrite ore was accomplished by cyanidation. From the electrochemical measurements, it was found that the rate of anodic pyrite oxidation increased with an increase in oxidation potential, pH, and temperature. However, when temperature was above 45 The results of alkaline pre-oxidation and gold leaching by cyanidation suggested that the alkaline pre-oxidation was an effective treatment for the refractory gold ore. Gold extraction after pre-oxidation under appropriate conditions increased from 20% of direct cyanide leaching to 70.0%. Cyanide consumption decreased from 2.5 Additionally, the residues at the surface of pyrite particles after alkaline pre-oxidation and cyanidation examined with selected samples were by XRD, BSE images, and EDS spectroscopy. It was observed that an iron-, silicon-, and calcium-bearing compound, with variable amounts of sulfur, commonly surrounded pyrite grains. Mineral fines also were found in the product layer including arsenic, aluminum, and/or potassium-bearing minerals. At the same time, it was revealed that when the lime addition was 10