Continuous self-baking electrodes, i.e. Söderberg electrodes, are commonly employed in the industrial smelting of ores in submerged arc furnaces. These electrodes are formed from electrode paste that is baked during operation into solid carbonaceous and ultimately graphite electrodes. Coal tar pitch (CTP) is used as a binder in the electrode paste. In order to ensure the production of quality electrode paste, CTP is analysed for softening point (SP), coking value (CV), as well as toluene- (TI) and quinoline insoluble (QI) contents, together with proximate analysis for the determination of fixed carbon, volatile, ash and moisture contents. Ultimate analyses for the determination of carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, sulphur and oxygen contents are also performed. However, the TI and QI content analyses are time consuming and harmful solvents are used. In this paper it was proven that multi-linear regression (MLR) analysis can be used to derive equations to calculate TI and QI from other parameters, i.e. SP, CV, as well as proximate and ultimate analyses. Root mean square error differences between MLR calculated TI and QI contents for 12 CTP samples sourced from suppliers throughout the world were found to be approximately 0.36 and 0.32, respectively. Although it is not foreseen that calculation of these two parameters will replace experimental determinations, the MLR equations determined in this study can be used by CTP producers and consumers as proxies for TI and QI. This will reduce the use of harmful solvents and the frequency required to conduct time consuming experimental determinations for TI and QI.Söderberg electrodes, i.e. continuous self-baking electrodes, are commonly employed in submerged arc furnaces (SAFs) to conduct electrical energy from a transformer(s) to the smelting zone inside the furnace. These electrodes are formed from electrode paste that is baked during operation into solid carbonaceous and ultimately graphite electrodes ( The quality of electrode paste is extremely important to ensure proper Söderberg electrodes. Therefore the quality of the CTPs used as binders in the paste also needs to be controlled and verified. The main properties of CTP that have been reported in literature include parameters such as softening point (SP), coking value (CV), as well as toluene- (TI) and quinoline insoluble (QI) contents ( Recently Certain characteristics of CTPs are relatively easily measured, such as the SP, CV, as well as the proximate and ultimate analyses. However, the TI and QI content determinations are more time consuming and harmful solvents, i.e. toluene and quinoline, are used. As previously stated, quantification of the TI and QI contents of CTP is critical to ensure the optimal quality of the Söderberg electrode paste that is produced from it, as well as the Söderberg electrodes that are ultimately formed. It would therefore be very useful if TI and QI contents could be predicted or calculated, without doing the actual chemical analyses. In this paper it is proven how multi-linear regression (MLR) analysis can be used to this effect, by using the data presented in The 12 CTP samples presented in Regression analysis is a statistical method that is normally used to establish relationships amongst variables. Normal linear regression is usually denoted by constants or known parameters (β), an independent variable (x) and a dependent variable (y). The technique is applied in predicting and establishing how an independent variable (x) is related to the dependable variable (y) by fitting a linear equation to the data. Multi-linear regression (MLR) is characterised by more than one independent variable (x). In MLR the relationship between the depend variable (y) and independent variable (x) is denoted by the equation: In this study MLR equations were determined for each of the dependant variables TI and QI (y in Eq. The relationship between the number of independent variables included in the optimum solution during the MLR analysis for all possible independent variable combinations for calculating the TI content of the CTPs are indicated in From the above-mentioned determination of the MLR equation with the optimum combination of independent variables, the actual MLR equation could be obtained. This MLR equation for calculating TI for CTPs was found to be: By making use of Eq. Similar to the procedures described in Using the above-mentioned equation (Eq. The data ( Notwithstanding the above-mentioned data limitations, TI and QI contents could be calculated relatively accurately ( In this paper it was proven that MLR can be used to calculate TI and QI contents for CTP used in Söderberg electrode paste manufacturing, from other parameters, i.e. SP, CV, proximate and ultimate analyses. The MLR equations calculated for the prediction of TI and QI (Eqs. The authors would like to thank GrafTech South Africa for the use of their facilities for the determination of the physical properties of the CTP samples. The various suppliers of CTP are also thanked.