The aim of the study was to determine whether thermosonication extends the shelf life of ayran, an acidic milk drink. The effect of thermosonication at different temperatures (60, 70 and 80°C) and times (1, 3 and 5min) on the physicochemical and microbiological characteristics, and sensorial properties of ayran during storage were investigated. According to the results, thermosonication applied at 60°C decreased lower the bacteria counts, although the Streptococcus thermophilus and Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus counts decreased as the temperature and time increased. The yeast and mold levels in samples treated with thermosonication were <1logCFUmL−1 during storage period. The ayran samples had non-Newtonian behavior, and the consistency coefficients of the thermosonicated samples were significantly higher than that of the heat-treated samples. Regarding serum separation, the most effective thermosonication treatment was applied at 70°C for 3min. The sensory properties of the thermosonicated samples were better than the thermal-treated samples after storage.Thermal processes are the most common methods for preserving food products; however, demand for new techniques that have a lower negative effect on the nutritional value of the product is increasing; therefore, overall food quality increases Interest in fermented dairy products has increased due to their nutritional quality and attractiveness Ayran is an unstable fermented product, and the quality tends to deteriorate due to sedimentation and the development of acidity during storage Serum separation in ayran could be prevented by using stabilizers Ultrasound has many dairy process applications such as microbial inactivation The effects of thermosonication on the physicochemical, microbiological, and rheological properties such as viscosity, flow behavior index, and consistency coefficient have not been reported in detail. The aim of the present study was to investigate the effect of ultrasound on the physicochemical (serum separation, viscosity, pH and color), microbiological (yeast, mold and lactic acid bacteria) and rheological properties (viscosity, flow behavior index and consistency coefficient) of ayran and compare the effects with those of samples prepared with the thermal treatment. The cow milk used to produce the ayran samples was supplied by the Agriculture Faculty of Atatürk University in Erzurum, Turkey. The direct vat set yoghurt starter culture ( The amounts of the total solid matter The cow milk sample (12.01% total solids, 3.88% fat, 3.10% protein, 0.16% titratable acidity and pH of 6.71) was standardized to a 1.8% fat ratio of raw milk by using water. The milk was pasteurized at 90 The thermosonication treatment was performed at different temperatures (60, 70 and 80 Serial dilutions were prepared with sterile 0.1% buffered peptone water. Appropriate dilutions were poured and plated in duplicate. To count The viscosity (mPa The samples were stored in measuring cylinders of 100 The color values of the fresh ayran samples ( The ayran samples were assessed organoleptically at 1 and 30 Data obtained from the ayran samples were statistically evaluated using analysis of variance (ANOVA), and the differences among the means were compared with Duncan’s multiple range tests (SPSS 15.0, SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). A significance level of 0.05 was used. The microbiological properties of the ayran samples treated with thermosonication during storage at 4 As can be seen in Yeast and molds are microorganisms that play an important role in food spoilage. They cause very important problems in fermented dairy products due to the organisms’ growth capability at lower pH values. The incidence of yeast and mold is a common and recurrent problem during storage. The yeast and mold levels in the samples that underwent thermosonication at 60, 70 and 80 These results indicated that thermosonication applied at 60 Acidity affects the storage stability and quality of ayran. The titratable acidity and the pH values in ayran samples during storage are shown in The pH values of the ayran samples decreased as the storage period progressed. As expected, the highest decrease rate in pH was determined in the control sample and the samples treated with thermosonication at 60 Viscosity and flow behavior for fermented milk technology are commercially important and play an important role in the shelf life As shown in The apparent viscosity of the samples has an inverse relationship with the increased time and temperature of the ultrasonic treatment. The ayran samples had non-Newtonian flow behavior, as shown in However, the consistency coefficients of the thermosonicated ayran samples were significantly higher than those of the heat-treated ayran samples. That is, the consistency coefficient was adversely affected by the heat treatment. It can be concluded that the thermosonication process can be used as an alternative to heat treatment because of the positive effect on the viscosity and the consistency coefficient (see While ayran is stored, serum separation occurs due to sedimentation of large particles and casein proteins at the bottom due to aggregation It was thought that the positive effects in ayran in terms of serum separation are related to ultrasonic homogenization. Acoustic intensive shockwaves in the liquid can cause homogenization because of the collapse near the surface of the phase boundary heterogenic layers of liquids during thermosonication The Thermosonication, within the range of the experimental conditions of the study, caused a slight change in the Changes in the sensory properties of the ayran samples were tabulated before and after storage, and are shown in Thermosonication can be used as an alternative process to heat treatment because of the positive effect on the viscosity and consistency coefficient of ayran. In other words, the thermosonication treatment increased the viscosity and consistency coefficient while decreasing the serum separation. However, thermosonication had a similar effect on the yeast and mold counts compared with heat treatment even at the lowest thermosonication treatment (60