The kinetics of iron(II) oxidation by SO2/O2 has been studied at 80°C as a means of generating Fe(III) and H2SO4 for subsequent leaching reactions. It is shown that both Fe(III) and S(IV) species are involved in the initial step of the oxidation. The rate of Fe(II) oxidation can be expressed by the following equation: r=k
                     obs[Fe(III)][S(IV)]/f
                     obs([H+]) for 0–0.02 M Fe(III) at the optimum SO2/O2 ratio, where f
                     obs([H+]) is a function of pH. At 80°C, the optimum gas composition of SO2 is around 2% SO2 and both Fe(II) and SO2 were oxidised with the Fe(III)/H2SO4 ratio of about 2. At a SO2/O2 ratio above 9% SO2 and pH 1, dithionate was detected, and the proportion of dithionate to sulphate increased with higher SO2/O2 ratio. A radical chain reaction mechanism is proposed, involving a slow rate of formation of the ferric sulphite complex FeSO3
                     +and decomposition to produce the sulphite radical SO3
                     ⋅−. This is followed by a fast reaction with O2 to form the peroxo-monosulphate radical SO5
                     ⋅−, which is responsible for the autoxidation of Fe(II). The form of the derived rate expression and the predicted ratio of Fe(III)/H2SO4 from the proposed mechanism essentially agree with the experimental results.Sulphur dioxide is a well-known reductant that has been widely used in industries. However, when combined with excess oxygen over a particular range of compositions in the presence of certain transition metals, it exhibits a stronger oxidising power than oxygen alone. Much of the previous work in this area has focused on the transition metal catalysed autoxidation of sulphur dioxide and emphasizes the autoxidation of sulphite or bisulphite in the atmosphere This study focuses on understanding the mechanism of SO Experiments were carried out in a multi-neck, 0.5-l glass reactor that was placed in a thermostatic water bath controlled at ±0.5°C. The reactor was charged with 500 ml of accurately prepared ferrous sulphate solution, and heated to the preset temperature with constant stirring. The run was started by the introduction of a predetermined gas mixture through a gas disperser, into the reactor. The solution pH was kept constant with automatic titration, and the potential The concentration of the peroxy intermediates formed in the solution was estimated on samples without prior treatment using standard ammonium Fe(II) sulphate to reduce the intermediate. Remaining ferrous ion was titrated against standard K The stoichiometry of Fe(II) oxidation with SO In this work, it was found that an initial concentration of Fe(III) was another essential requirement and hence, the generation of Fe(III) was responsible for the initial curved kinetics. In the absence of either Fe(II) or Fe(III), no oxidation of SO   The effect of temperature on the oxidation rate was studied over the range 40–95°C. However, while the oxidation rate increased with temperature up to 80°C, it then decreased with a further increase in temperature. This is attributed to the decrease in the solubility of the gas mixture at higher temperatures. The key points from the kinetic results in this work and previous studies can be summarised by the following. (a)The presence of Fe(III) is essential for the fast oxidation of Fe(II) with SO (b)Both Fe(III) and S(IV) species determine the rate of Fe(II) oxidation, with the HSO (c)The ratio SO (d)An increase in pH leads to an increased oxidation rate. (e)If the SO (f)The activation energy is 22 kJ/mol, which is a low value, typical of free radical reactions. The above results with SO The effect of the oxidation rate with respect to Fe(III) concentration and the partial pressure of SO In this study, solution Eh was also monitored for the iron catalysed SO For the iron(III)-catalysed oxidation of SO In order to establish the optimum solution potential using SO Clearly, in this acidic iron catalysed SO As shown in The effect of Fe(III) concentration on the optimum solution Eh was measured by the same procedures as described above. The results showed that the maximum Eh increases linearly with increasing Fe(III) concentration up to 0.03 M Fe(III), and was then independent of Fe(III). This corresponds to the range of Fe(III) concentration in which the rate is first order in Fe(III), and suggests that the initial reaction involving a complex with Fe(III) and HSO Dithionate has been identified as a reaction product when using higher SO In summary, the figures indicate the following. (1) At the lower optimum ratios of SO (2) Both sulphate and dithionate were detected in solutions when using a SO (3) Sulphate production increased linearly with increasing pH up to 3. Above pH 3, the decreased rate is likely to be caused by Fe(OH) (4) The ratio of Fe(III) to H At the higher SO Three types of mechanism for the transition metal catalysed autoxidation of S(IV) in aqueous solution have been proposed in literature: (a) inner-sphere electron transfer mechanism In this work, the kinetic features suggest an initial complex formation and a decomposition step, followed by the formation of a peroxo-monosulphate species (SO From If the steady-state approximation is applied to the intermediates SO On the basis of the proposed mechanism, the general rate expression for Fe(II) oxidation is derived by introducing the above relationships The total rate of sulphuric acid and dithionate production is expressed by To verify the mechanism, the experimental data and observations were re-evaluated to ensure that the mechanism can be rationalised.  At the optimum SO The derived rate law has the form similar to the observed rate expression At the start of oxidation, the initial step has a strong demand for Fe(III) to initiate the radical chain reaction. The presence of a trace amount of Fe(III) is inevitable, or else, it is produced by the oxidation between Fe(II) and oxygen. However, insufficient Fe(III) at the initial stage results in slow supply of sulphite radical SO The effect of pH on the oxidation rate is complex due to the involvement of the ferric sulphite complex FeSO   These changes in FeSO From the proposed mechanism, 1 mol of SO In the presence of an appreciable amount of Fe(II) or S(IV), HSO As excessive free S(IV) species in the solution increases, the competing The presence of about 0.02 M Fe(III) is an essential requirement for effective initiation of the autoxidation process of iron-catalysed SO The derived rate law of Fe(II) oxidation, which essentially agrees with the measured data, is The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from Murdoch University and from the A.J. Parker Cooperative Research Centre for Hydrometallurgy. We thank Dr. W. van Bronswijk for his assistance in using the Raman spectrometer, and Dr. E. Krause for his comments and discussions on this paper.