To study food disruption and bolus formation, a simulator of mastication (AM2) was developed to mimic masticatory behaviour and allow collection of a bolus at any stage in the masticatory sequence. Here we set out to validate the AM2 by comparing boluses obtained in vitro and in vivo.
                  Boluses were obtained from the AM2 and 30 young dentate subjects chewing peanuts and carrots. Median particle sizes (d
                     50) of the boluses were extracted from image analysis results. The number of cycles was set at the mean in vivo value. The force range was chosen to match in vitro and in vivo values.
                  The AM2 proved reliable; no significant difference between repetitions was observed. The in vitro and in vivo boluses displayed the same d
                     50 values for each food. In vitro and in vivo boluses obtained at different times during the chewing process were also similar.The main purpose of mastication is to turn food into a bolus fit for swallowing ( To help overcome these problems, machines designed to mimic mastication have been proposed. They can provide information that is unobtainable by human experimentation (e.g., from non-cooperating subjects or on bolus textures that impede swallowing). The populations concerned are large and the impact of poor mastication on general health is significant and underestimated ( Most of these machines do not, however, allow collection of a complete food bolus after an action simulating the mechanical process occurring inside the human mouth ( The purpose of the AM2 was to simulate the main action of a mammal’s mastication, by which the final food bolus is made. One important variable that describes the bolus just before swallowing is its median particle size ( In this study, particle size Two foods with different textures were employed as test foods: peanuts and carrots. Their water contents were approximately 9% and 87% respectively. Portions were five nuts (3.5  The masticatory chamber of the AM2 is a cylindrical cavity cut out of a rectangular-sided steel block. The two ends of the cylindrical chamber are formed by a fixed “maxillary disk” on one side, and a moving “mandibular disk” on the other, to simulate the dental arch ( In human mastication, the main variables allowing adaptation to food texture are: force generated by the mastication muscles, number of cycles (number of bites) and duration of the mastication sequence (from the time the food is put into the mouth to when it is swallowed) ( The subjects took part in three sessions 1 A pilot study was carried out to evaluate the role of each of the variables that could be controlled during a chewing sequence in the AM2. The results indicated that two main variables, namely number of cycles (tooth strokes) and range of masticatory force could strongly modify the The boluses collected after expectoration or from the AM2 were rinsed through a 100 Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS software (version 11.5 for Windows, 2005; SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). All the analyses of variance (ANOVA) described below were carried out using a general linear model procedure with median particle size ( For the For the The particle size distributions of boluses obtained in humans ( The mean number of cycles (±SD) leading to a natural swallow was 26  A pilot study with the A possible cumulated effect of temperature and artificial saliva was tested for peanuts and carrots by comparing the The reliability of the AM2 was also assessed on the 10 repetitions made for each food and each number of cycles. No difference was found between repetitions [ Food bolus mass recovered at swallowing time by the AM2 was 87% and 68% respectively for peanuts and carrots. In The There are, however, other food bolus characteristics that may explain the time chosen for deglutition. Collection of data involving not only granularity but also rheological properties of the food bolus will be required to gain a better understanding of the link between physiological properties and final The Several future developments may be considered. The present validation was performed with reference to mastication in young healthy subjects. It needs to be extended to cover other subjects with deficient mastication such as full denture wearers, aged subjects, ill or disabled subjects, and young children. We also note that the comparisons between This study was supported by the Institut Français pour la Nutrition “Prix jeune chercheur Bernard Beaufrère 2006” and by the Conseil Régional d’Auvergne. We thank R. Ryan, F. Gallardo and B. Reynaud for their help in drafting.