The influence of grinding media, process water ions (calcium and thiosulfate) and pulp oxidation on flotability of sulfides nickel ores was investigated. Bench scale flotation experiments were carried out with Enonkoski ore using ethyl xanthate as collector. The results showed that the galvanic effect of mill iron controls the separation selectivity of pentlandite from pyrrhotite. Calcium and thiosulfate ions activated the flotation of sulfides with xanthate after using a steel mill for grinding. The ions improved also the selectivity of nickel separation. After grinding in ceramic mill, the ions depressed sulfide flotation but increased the selectivity of nickel flotation in the presence of a collector. Pulp oxidation improved both the flotability of sulfides and the selectivity of nickel flotation with both grinding methods.Flotation of sulfide nickel ores is usually carried out at alkaline pH in order to separate pentlandite selectively from iron sulfides. Alkaline pulp depresses efficiently pyrrhotite and pyrite. There are problems that are typical of nickel ores. For example, flotability of pentlandite is strongly dependent on particle size. Nickel recovery remains often low in coarse and particularly, in fine size fractions. A reasonable explanation for the low recoveries is the formation of iron hydroxide coatings on pentlandite particles It is also known that using steel mill in grinding tends to reduce pulp potential and impairs the adsorption of thiol collectors on sulfide minerals. As a consequence, high xanthate dosages are often needed for acceptable nickel recoveries. This usually means that also pyrrhotite starts to float and that the selectivity of separation is reduced. The quality of process water is also an essential factor in flotation. Process water always contains various ions like Ca The ore sample for the study was obtained from Enonkoski nickel mine as drill cores. The test material was prepared by combining samples from different parts of the deposit by hand picking. The material was first crushed with jaw and roll crushers, then split into 500-g batches using a Jones-type sample divider and a spinning riffler. The split samples were then packed and stored for flotation tests. The composition of the ore samples is given in The mill used in grinding for the first set of experiments was a standard laboratory ball mill with steel lining and steel grinding media. For the second set of experiment, the ore samples were ground in a ceramic mill with ceramic balls. The fineness of grinding was aimed to be 80% less than 63 μm. Wet grinding was used, and the pulp density was 55.5% Flotation tests were performed with an Outokumpu laboratory flotation machine using a 2-l glass cell. All the tests were carried out at pH 9. Pulp pH was measured with a (Radiometer) PHM 82 Standard pH meter. The pH controller was a TTT 80 end-point titrator set combined with magnetic valves. The redox potential of the pulp was measured with and a combination Pt–Ag/AgCl electrode (3 M KCl) right after grinding and recorded on chart during the tests together with the pH. Pulp level in the cell was kept constant by a level controller based on siphon principle. The oscillations around the set-point level were in the range of 3%. The initial pulp density was 24%. The scheme of the experimental set-up is shown in Ion exchanged water was used in all the tests. Potassium ethyl xanthate (KEX) was used as collector. Industrial grade KEX was purified by dissolving it in absolute alcohol followed by recrystallization. The xanthate solutions were prepared right before the tests to prevent the xanthate decomposition. Polypropylene glycol (Aerofroth 65) was used as frother. CaCl Samples of 500-g ore were ground and washed with ion exchanged water from the mill into flotation cell. The pH was adjusted to 9 and Ca The first part of the study was carried out using steel mill in grinding In the absence of a collector, the flotation of the sulfides was negligible in the beginning of the test. After about 4 min of flotation, however, the collectorless flotability of nickel and copper sulfides increased strongly. In addition, iron recovery increased but the final iron recovery remained very low (<10%) without a collector. It is obvious that during grinding, small iron particles from the steel mill were attached on sulfide particles and the iron particles protected anodically the sulfide particles from oxidation. So in the beginning of the tests, only the iron particles were oxidized. After about 4 min, most of the iron was oxidized from the sulfide surfaces and sulfide particles started to oxidize making them sulfur rich, non-polar, and therefore more hydrophobic Ethyl xanthate increased the recovery of nickel and copper sulfides especially in the beginning of the tests. The high xanthate concentrations improved both nickel recovery and the selectivity of separation as shown in In a test that was carried out using xanthate 25 g/t, the redox potential of pulp was exceptionally high (−329 mV) after transferring the feed to the cell. As a consequence, nickel and copper recoveries were high in the beginning of the test compared with the other tests in the series. When the test was repeated so that the redox potential before flotation was at the ordinary level (−420 mV), the flotability of nickel and copper sulfides was decreased as shown in The tests showed that the flotability of pentlandite depends both on xanthate dosage and oxidation of particles. Moreover, the galvanic interaction between the attached iron particles and sulfide particles played an important role by controlling the selectivity of separation in nickel flotation. The flotability of sulfides was not studied in various size fractions due to the small sample amounts of the froth products, but it seems that the same variables may also control essentially the flotability of fine pentlandite particles. After the preliminary tests, the effect of calcium and thiosulfate ions on flotation of sulfides was investigated. On the basis of the results, it was decided to use ethyl xanthate 25–75 g/t in the following test series. At first, the effect of calcium ion was studied. The amounts of the ions were the same as in the work of As can be seen, even the low concentration of calcium ions improved nickel and copper recoveries especially in the beginning of flotation. It seems that calcium activated more strongly nickel than copper, but this may be a consequence of the different metal contents in the feed. The activation effect decreased after about 4 min at the same time when the inherent hydrophobicity of sulfides started to increase. This suggests that the activation mechanism is related to the galvanic interaction of the attached iron particles. From the recovery curves, it can be concluded that the liberation of nickel sulfides was not complete and this must have affected nickel recoveries. Increasing the calcium concentration (750 mg/l) improved the activation effect for both nickel and copper sulfides, and particularly copper recovery was high at the end of the test. Calcium ions activated also iron sulfides (pyrrhotite) but to a lesser extent compared with nickel and copper sulfides. This resulted in high selectivity in nickel flotation, especially in the beginning of the tests as shown in The concentration of thiosulfate ions was 170 and 340 mg/l. The pulp potentials in the tests were between −431 and −468 mV before flotation. After the tests, the potentials were between −12 and +12 mV. The testing procedure was the same as was used with calcium. The effect of thiosulfate ions on nickel and copper recoveries is presented in In addition, thiosulfate ions increased nickel and copper recoveries but the activating effect was not so strong as with calcium in the beginning of the tests. It is to be taken into consideration that the thiosulfate ion concentrations were lower compared with the calcium ion concentrations and this will at least partly explain the different recoveries. However, there seems to be differences between the effect of calcium and thiosulfate ions. The activating effect of calcium decreased at the end of the tests but the activating effect of thiosulfate lasted longer. In a test where calcium was added together with thiosulfate, both nickel and copper recoveries increased in the beginning of the test. The selectivity of nickel separation in the tests is illustrated in As the results show, grinding in steel mill had a strong effect on the flotability of sulfides in the previous tests. Therefore, the second series of tests was carried out to study the influence of non-ferrous mill on the flotability of sulfides using ceramic mill and ceramic balls for grinding. The grinding fineness was aimed to be the same as with the steel mill. Experiments were carried out using 0 and 25 g/t potassium ethyl xanthate. The amounts of the ions were the same as when using steel mill in grinding, 350 mg/l Ca Grinding in ceramic mill improved the flotability of sulfides, particularly in the beginning of the tests, and the low xanthate concentration of 25 g/t resulted in as high metal recoveries as the highest xanthate dosage (150 g/t) after grinding in steel mill. In the absence of a collector, nickel recovery was low compared with the recovery after steel mill grinding but it may be that the degree of liberation of nickel sulfides was lower after grinding in ceramic mill. Copper recovery was very high even without xanthate addition. Good flotability of sulfides was clearly a consequence of increased oxidation of sulfide surfaces and improved xanthate adsorption in the absence of mill iron. In contrast with the results after grinding in steel mill, the effect of calcium and thiosulfate ions was now depressing. In the presence of a collector, the ions depressed specially the pentlandite and pyrrhotite. In the absence of a collector the ions decreased clearly the nickel flotation, and the flotability of pyrrhotite was very low with or without the ions. Copper recoveries were very high, almost independent of collector and ion concentrations. The selectivity of flotation is presented in Effect of various factors on flotation of sulfide nickel ores was investigated using bench scale testing. The results showed that with nickel ores, sulfide flotation is strongly affected by process variables such as grinding media, water quality and oxidation. After using steel mill in grinding, nickel was floated selectively with xanthate in the beginning of flotation but gradually, also pyrrhotite started to float decreasing the selectivity of separation. This was concluded to be a consequence of the galvanic interaction between small iron particles from the steel mill and sulfide particles. The iron particles obviously reduced redox potential on pyrrhotite particles impairing xanthate adsorption. During flotation, however, the iron was oxidized and the flotability of pyrrhotite was increased. The addition of calcium and thiosulfate ions improved the flotability of sulfides and the selectivity of nickel flotation in the presence of mill iron. The selectivity of separation was high particularly in the beginning of flotation. Grinding in ceramic mill improved the adsorption of xanthate on sulfides and the recoveries were high even at low xanthate concentration. However, the selectivity of nickel flotation was lower compared with the tests wherein steel mill was used for grinding. In the absence of mill iron, calcium and thiosulfate ions weakened the flotability of sulfides but increased the selectivity of nickel separation. As the results show, flotation of nickel ores is contributed by several factors including flotation reagents and process variables and the role of grinding media, quality of process water and oxidation should not be ignored when optimizing a sulfide nickel ore processing circuit.