The mining industry often uses shotcrete for ground stabilization. However, cracking within shotcrete is commonly observed, which delays production schedules and increases maintenance costs. A possible crack reduction method is using expansive shotcrete mixture consisting of calcium sulfoaluminate cement (CSA), ordinary Portland cement (OPC), and calcium sulfate (CS) to reduce shrinkage. Furthermore, fibers can be added to the mixture to restrain expansion and impede cracking. The objective of this paper is to study the effects of nylon fiber, glass fiber, and steel fiber on an expansive shotcrete mixture that can better resist cracking. In this study, parameters such as density, water absorption, volume of permeable voids, unconfined compressive strength (UCS), splitting tensile strength (STS), and volume change of fiber-added expansive mixtures were determined at different time periods (i.e. the strengths on the 28th day, and the volume changes on the 1st, 7th, 14th, 21st, and 28th days). The results show that addition of fibers can improve mixture durability, in the form of decreased water absorption and reduced permeable pore space content. Moreover, the expansion of the CSA-OPC-CS mixture was restrained up to 50% by glass fiber, up to 43% by nylon fiber, and up to 28% by steel fiber. The results show that the STS was improved by 57% with glass fiber addition, 43% with steel fiber addition, and 38% with nylon fiber addition. The UCS was also increased by 31% after steel fiber addition, 26% after nylon fiber addition, and 16% after glass fiber addition. These results suggest that fiber additions to the expansive shotcrete mixtures can improve durability and strengths while controlling expansion.Shotcrete or sprayed concrete, a cement-based mixture projected pneumatically in high velocities ( Although shotcrete is widely and frequently used, cracking in shotcrete construction is a common issue, resulting in structural failures, falling rocks, increasing maintenance costs, and delaying production schedule ( To reduce cracking, shrinkage-compensating shotcrete mixtures are used at underground mines ( Despite the fact that there are many expansive cement or shotcrete mixture products on the market, the compositions and ingredients of these commercial products are usually confidential information or trade secrets. This limits the development and optimization of shrinkage-compensating shotcrete mixtures. To address this problem, expansive mixtures with known compositions and different ingredients should be studied. The authors had previously combined commonly used binder components such as CSA (calcium sulfoaluminate cement), OPC, and CS in systematic ratios to create shrinkage-compensating shotcrete mixtures, where the expansion ratios of the mixtures at different CSA-OPC-CS ratios were identified ( In addition to the shrinkage-compensation, restraint (e.g. rebar, and fibers) could be introduced into the expansive mixtures to generate self-compressive stresses in mixture and self-tensile stresses in restraint ( Different types of fibers (i.e. nylon, glass, and steel) are often added to shotcrete mixtures for various applications. For example, In this study, for the first time, an investigation was initiated on the effects of fibers as a restraint on the expansive CSA-OPC-CS shotcrete mixtures. The influences of fibers on volume change, UCS, and STS (splitting tensile strength) were also evaluated. This research provides essential information on strength and volume change of fiber restrained expansive CSA-OPC-CS mixtures, in comparison with common OPC mixture. Relationships between different types of fibers and the strengths/volume changes are also established for future research. The materials used for the shotcrete mixtures include CSA, type GU (general use) OPC, CS in the form of granular gypsum, fine aggregates, tap water, nylon fiber, glass fiber, and steel fiber. The fine aggregates were in a saturated surface dried (SSD) condition and had an oven-dry relative density of 1578 kg/m  The shotcrete mixture design proportions are summarized in The mixtures were prepared according to the The density, water absorption, and volume of permeable voids were determined following the test methods described in The UCSs of the samples were evaluated using The STSs were determined by Volume changes of the samples were measured using a digital caliper on the cylindrical samples used for the 28th day STS tests. The procedure for the volume determinations was in the form of length measurements and diameter measurements described in  The water absorption and the volume of permeable pore space listed in The volume changes of CSA-OPC-CS mixtures (Mix1, Mix1-N, Mix1-G, and Mix1-S) over time, along with a pure OPC mixture for reference (Ref), are shown in The expansion of fiber added mixtures (Mix1-N, Mix1-G, and Mix1-S) in comparison to fiber free mixture (Mix1) after 7 d, 14 d, 21 d and 28 d, or the restraint ratio was calculated using the following equation (Eq. In Although the restraining effects of fibers varied with time, The 28th day UCS and STS of the samples are presented in As shown in The UCS of the Mix1 improved the most when steel fiber was added, followed by nylon fiber and then glass fiber. The UCS of the steel fiber reinforced mixture was higher than that of the nylon fiber reinforced mixture by 3.9%, and it outperformed the glass fiber reinforced mixture by 12.8%. These greater increases in UCS may be explained by the fact that steel fiber has a less restraining effect than nylon fiber and glass fiber, as seen in Tensile strength is an important indicator for shotcrete used as ground support systems in mines ( Although OPC mixtures (Ref) had a higher STS than that of fiberless CSA-OPC-CS mixture (Mix1), fiber additions to Mix1 increased the STS at levels higher than that of the OPC mixture. As seen in Although all three types of fibers improved the STS (as shown in The impacts of increasing the aggregate-to-cementitious-materials ( As shown in This paper examined the effects of fiber additions (nylon, glass, and steel) in expansive shotcrete mixtures consisting of CSA, OPC, and CS. Based on the experiments performed in this study, the following conclusions are drawn: Additions of fibers to expansive CSA-OPC-CS shotcrete mixture decreased water absorption and volume of permeable pore space, which indirectly reflected the permeability. The reduced permeability would decrease expansion and thus improve the durability of the mixture. Fiber additions to expansive CSA-OPC-CS shotcrete mixture restrained expansion. Glass fiber, nylon fiber, and steel fiber effectively restrained the expansion by 50%, 42.9%, and 27.9%, respectively. The restraining effect of fiber depended on fiber size, i.e. smaller fiber size allowed more contact area and improved the restraining effect. The 28th day UCS of expansive shotcrete mixtures was increased when fibers were added. Steel fiber addition improved the UCS the most, showing a 30.7% increase in comparison with the fiberless sample. Nylon fiber and glass fiber additions increased the UCS by 25.7% and 15.8%, respectively. The increase in UCS arose from fiber mitigating and bridging the fractures. However, the UCS improvement was reduced when more expansion was restrained, due to high compressive stresses being generated in the mixture. Fiber additions to expansive shotcrete mixtures increased the 28th day STS. For the expansive CSA-OPC-CS mixtures, glass fiber showed the most STS improvement at 57.1% over the fiberless mixture, followed by steel fiber at 42.9% and then nylon fiber at 38.1%. The improvement in STS stemmed from both fibers bridging fractures to provide extra support and restraining expansion to generate compressive stresses. Fiber additions to expansive CSA-OPC-CS mixture improved STS more than UCS. This may be due to the self-stresses generated when expansion was restrained. The restrained expansion introduced extra compressive stresses into the mixture, which indirectly mitigated UCS improvement and further increased STS. Expansive shotcrete mixture consisting of CSA, OPC, and CS can be created to compensate shrinkage. However, the UCS and STS of such mixture are lower than those of the ordinary mixture consisting of solely OPC. Therefore, fiber additions are recommended for the expansive mixture to enhance the strength. Increasing the aggregate-to-cementitious materials ratio ( The results suggested that fiber additions to expansive shotcrete mixture consisting of CSA, OPC, and CS improved durability and strengths while controlling expansion. Moreover, each fiber type had a different effect on UCS, STS, and volume change. These fibers reinforced expansive mixtures provide possible alternative options for mitigating shotcrete crack, which reduce cost and time spent on crack repair. The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. The authors would like to thank the University of Alberta for providing laboratory equipment, Dr. Chichi Liu for reviewing the paper, and Rizaldy Mariano for guiding laboratory usage. Continued financial support from The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at