Estimation of physical and mechanical properties of rocks plays crucial role in designing of mining and civil engineering projects. Determination of these properties using direct methods i.e., laboratory determination is very expensive and time consuming in most cases despite having the high accuracy. Moreover, preparing core samples to perform direct tests is extremely difficult and needs double precision. For this reason, indirect and non-destructive methods can be utilized as suitable alternatives to determine rock properties. In this paper, the relationships between the different physico-mechanical properties of intact rocks with P-wave velocity have been investigated. For this purpose, rock samples of schist, phyllite, and sandstone were firstly collected from drilling operation in Marivan Azad dam site of Iran. Then, different physio-mechanical properties of core samples including uniaxial compressive strength, modulus of elasticity, porosity, Poisson's ratio, slake durability index, density, water absorption and P-wave velocity were determined in dry and saturated conditions in the laboratory. Based on the statistical analysis, linear, logarithmic, polynomial, exponential and power equations between the above parameters and P-wave velocity were investigated. An equation with very high determination coefficient (R2) was proposed as best equation to determine each of the above properties based on the P-wave velocity index. To validate the proposed empirical equations, obtained results were compared with the measured data which was not incorporated in equations development. Finally, comparison from the obtained results showed that physical and mechanical properties of rock have higher correlation with the P-wave velocity in saturated and dry conditions, respectively.Physical and mechanical characteristics of intact rocks are very significant parameters in the construction of mining, civil and petroleum engineering projects that deal with rocks i.e., tunnels, deep trenches, underground mines, caverns and structures, rock slopes, foundations on rock, dams and etc. Specifically, strength properties are very important for rock classifications and developing the rock failure criteria. For this reason, accurate determination of rock properties is essential for successful construction of the above-mentioned structures for providing the required optimum performance of the project in terms of time, cost and safety. Generally, there are two approaches for assessing physico-mechanical properties of rocks including direct and indirect methods. Direct methods are implemented both in the laboratory and field (in-situ condition). These methods are very precise and provide the extremely reliable results. However, the precise implementation of these methods involves considerable time, cost and expertise especially in the laboratory tests implementation. On the other hand, preparing the rock samples with regular sizes to ideally perform of the laboratory tests based on the standard procedures and suggested methods is somewhat difficult particularly in weak and strongly jointed rocks. Moreover, performing direct methods to determine all of the Physico-mechanical properties of rocks involves the expensive laboratory equipment. Furthermore, the accuracy of these methods considerably depends on the man-made errors, equipment calibration and interior factors ( Seismic techniques, which are known as the nondestructive geophysical methods, are commonly utilized by engineers to rock properties detection in various fields such as rock mechanics and geotechnics. Primary wave velocity or P-wave velocity (V In recent years, statistical methods such as simple and multiple regression techniques was commonly utilized by many investigators to establish the prognostic models between P-wave velocity and physico-mechanical properties of rocks. Nevertheless, the correlations of P-wave velocity with all of the possible important rock properties were not simultaneously taken into account in each of the above investigations. Furthermore, there are some deficiencies in determining the rock characteristics and investigating their correlations with P-wave velocity index in the saturated condition. Moreover, there are few empirical equations in this regard for schist, phyllite and sandstone rocks. As the construction of mining, civil and rock engineering projects around the world and particularly in Iran commonly involved with these rock formations in most cases, determination of their properties and developing the indirect models in this field is very necessary. Considering the shortages in recognizing the behavior of these rock types and existence the above-mentioned limitations of direct approaches, an attempt was made in this study to conduct the statistically analysis to determine the correlation of rock's physico-mechanical properties with P-wave velocity index. For this purpose, the correlations of uniaxial compressive strength (UCS), modulus of elasticity (E), porosity (n), Poisson's ratio (PR), slake durability index (I In geotechnical and geo-engineering operation, rock characterization using the ultrasonic-based indirect methods has been widely used for many years. In particular, the P-wave velocity index was vastly applied to estimate the physical and mechanical characteristics of different rocks by many investigators. In one of their researches it is proved that there is an important correlation between physical and mechanical characteristics of rocks with the P-wave velocity. Due to easy performing, low cost and high precision of indirect methods especially the P-wave velocity index, several researchers were provided various empirical relations between this index and physico-mechanical properties of different rock types ( Considering to the above referred works, it is concluded that the relations between rock properties and P-wave velocity is examined to a limited extent in the saturated condition. Also, there weren't specific studies upon the schistose rocks such as schist emphasizing this point that many of the rock engineering projects have been constructed inside/upon these rock types. Moreover, correlations of all possible important rock properties with P-wave velocity were not simultaneously taken into account in each of the prior investigations. Furthermore, there are few equations in this regard for schist, phyllite and sandstone rocks. Given that the considerable encounter with these rock formations (schist, phyllite and sandstone rocks) during the construction of mining, civil and rock engineering projects around the world and particularly in Iran, determination of their properties is very necessary. According to these facts, it can be claimed that the main novelty of this study is taking into account the rock samples in both dry and saturated condition in which the rock projects deal in practice. In addition, it is obvious that the coring operation in schist rocks and preparing stable specimens are practically very difficult. Indeed, preparing the core specimens in schist rocks takes a lot of time, requires maximum possible accuracy and losing the core specimen is not an option as this will require fresh drilling and specimen preparation. The above limitation is the cause of restriction in the correlation studies between the schist properties and P-wave velocity index which have been relatively covered in this research. In this article, an attempt was made to correlate the physico-mechanical properties of rocks with P-wave velocity index. To do that, Azad dam site bed rocks was considered as the case study to conduct this research. This dam was located between the Sanandaj and Marivan cities at Kurdistan province in the west of Iran. More precisely, Azad dam site is situated 40 Km away from the west of Sanandaj towards the Marivan. In fact, this dam is located at 46° 32′ 57″ eastern longitude and 35°19′ 59″ northern latitude ( A total of 70 core specimens were collected from different exploration coring operations that were performed in the site study. These core specimens were prepared in the cylindrical shape with NX-size (54 mm diameter) and a length of 110–115 mm (a length to diameter ratio of 2.5) according to the From all of the collected 70 core specimens, 50 valid laboratory tests with acceptable results were performed. The results of the rest 20 tests were not credible due to loosing the some samples during the simultaneously testing in dry and saturated conditions upon a sample. Therefore, 50 valid datasets were achieved in total to conduct statistical analysis and the rests were discarded from the database analysis. In these tests, main physico-mechanical properties including UCS, E, n, PR, I The important mechanical properties of rock specimens i.e., UCS, E and PR in dry and saturated conditions were determined according to the standards suggested by the Besides the mechanical properties, main physical properties of specimens including density (in dry and saturated conditions), porosity, water absorption and slake durability index, were determined on the basis of the The slake durability index (I The P-wave velocity (V Considering the mentioned laboratory tests in the previous sub-sections, a total of 50 valid datasets were prepared in order to perform the sensitivity analyses. List of the measured parameters and their corresponding units and symbols along with the dataset characteristics are given in Having the sufficient relevant datasets, statistical analyses have been conducted in this section in order to study the inherent correlations between the physical and mechanical properties of rock and the P-wave velocity index. On this basis, five different relations including linear, logarithmic, quadratic polynomial, power and exponential types were developed between the dry and saturated V Multiple regression (MR) technique is a common branch of the statistical regression analysis in which the output variable(s) can be estimated in the form of a predictive equation on the basis of corresponding input (independent) variables. Indeed, determining the inherent relations of the output (dependent) variable(s) with the input (independent) variable(s) is possible by this method. The MR approach was broadly utilized in the geosciences fields especially in mining, rock engineering and rock mechanics by many investigators ( For evaluations and verification of the proposed equations in this research, the obtained results were compared with the results of the available equations ( In order for further evaluation, the proposed equations are also validated based on the four measured data in the Azad dam laboratory which were not incorporated in the equation's development. The measured data of physico-mechanical properties related to four rock samples along with the corresponding predicted amounts from the proposed equations in this research are shown in Considering the above two comparison/validation approaches, it can be concluded that these proposed empirical equations would be the relatively valid tools in predicting the rock pysico-mechanical properties with tolerable estimation capabilities. Therefore, they can be used in practical projects with similar rock types and geological conditions considering the required level of accuracy. However, the equations with lower accuracy can be suggested for the cases that the lower level of accuracy is satisfied. In the current study, five parameters including density (ρ), modulus of elasticity (E), uniaxial compressive strength (UCS), Poisson ratio (PR) and P-wave velocity (V Compressional wave velocity technique was used in this study to determine the rock properties including dry and saturated uniaxial compressive strength, dry and saturated modulus of elasticity, dry and saturated density, dry and saturated Poisson's ratio, porosity, slake durability index and water absorption. For this purpose, Marivan Azad dam site was used as a case study to provide rock core samples. In the next step, dry and saturated P-wave velocity and the above-mentioned parameters of prepared rock samples were determined in the laboratory. Then, based on the statistical analysis, several empirical relations were presented in the linear, logarithmic, polynomial, exponential and power conditions between P-wave velocity and aforementioned physico-mechanical properties of rock samples. According to determination coefficient (R The authors are interested to express his genuine gratitude to the Azad dam project teams for their cooperation in data preparation.