Spherical balls are the dominant grinding media used in ball mills. However, balls which are initially spherical, wear into non-spherical fragments. The proportion of worn, non-spherical balls in the charge of a mill fed with 50mm balls is dominant in ball sizes less than 30mm. Their effects on mill performance in terms of material breakage are not yet established.
                  The variations of specific rate of breakage with single size feed and fractional filling U, were studied for the two media shapes (spherical and worn balls). Higher breakage rates were noted with spherical media than worn balls but the differences narrow with decreasing feed size and increasing material fractional filling, U.Spherical balls are the dominant media shape used in the tumbling mills. However spherical balls wear into non-spherical fragments as a result of breakage due to impact and different wearing mechanisms inside the mill. Thus at any one time a mill charge is a mixture ranging from larger spherical balls to worn irregular fragments ( It would be expected that increased surface contact by polygonal balls and flat chips (compared to only point contact that is made by spherical media) ideally should promote increased grinding by attrition. On the other hand, worn balls may pack closely thus reducing the void space available for material to be ground. The larger surface area per unit mass of polygonal (worn) media may also result in more effective support of the media by the ore, leading to reduced media–media forces in the grinding zones. This work focuses on investigating the impact of worn balls on milling kinetics and assesses whether the effect of worn balls on mill performance requires any action to maintain maximum mill productivity. In the study, two media shapes are considered: spherical and worn balls. Experiments were conducted using a 0.54 Perfectly spherical balls in various size ranges were used to conduct experiments. The worn media were obtained from an industrial dry ball mill used by ESKOM (South Africa power utility) to produce pulverized fuel following an experiment done to characterise ball size and shape distribution ( Material properties such as coefficient of friction, size and shape affect media packing ( The results presented in The variation of specific rate of breakage with feed sizes shown in It is understood that larger particles undergo impact breakage when impacted by balls with sufficient kinetic energy. As particles get smaller, they become difficult to break by impact hence breakage rates decrease with decreasing particle size. Considering the two media charges, worn balls have surface, linear and point contacts while spheres have only point contact. This might lead one to expect increased breakage by abrasion for worn balls. On the other hand, the use of test screens in sizing the media might be the factor accounting for higher breakage rate for spherical media with coarse feed. For the same screen size class, the non-spherical (worn) media constituted heavier balls as relatively bigger balls could easily reorient and pass through the screen aperture. To maintain an equal total mass and the same screens mass fractions, 1489 worn balls were used compared to 1758 spherical balls. The increased spherical balls number results in more ball-to-ball and ball to liner collisions for spherical balls than worn balls, which results in higher catastrophic breakage by impact for larger particle sizes. While the trend observed shown faster breakage rate with spherical media, The variations in specific rates of breakage,  Spherical balls have slightly higher rates of breakage than worn balls. For normal operating material fractional filling (0.8 However considering that worn balls in industrial mill charge constitute about 15–40% and that only marginal differences in breakage rate was observed, the effect of the presence of worn balls inside the mill charge is negligibly small. Thus, the benefit that can be obtained does not justify the cost of their removal from mills. The authors acknowledge the financial support from Eskom without which this work would not have been possible.