The concept of a g-function is frequently used to simplify the simulation of a ground heat exchanger composed of several boreholes. The technique is suitable for modelling long-term thermal interactions, although it suffers from a lack of accuracy in the short term. Alternatively, models based on the theory of thermal resistances and capacities provide a more accurate solution for the short term but at the cost of a long solution time that prevents an efficient iterative use. In this work, an artificial neural network designed to rapidly and accurately construct the short-term g-function of a ground heat exchanger is presented. To assemble a large training set, 15 000 simulations are performed with an accurate thermal resistance and capacity model. The boundary conditions used to solve the model allow direct construction of the short-term g-function for the outlet fluid temperature. A multilayer perceptron architecture is proposed in conjunction with a methodology designed to reduce training time and increase the accuracy of the neural network. The output of the resulting network is compared with numerical and experimental data sets. The construction of a short-term g-function by an artificial neural network is 10 000 times faster and achieved in a few milliseconds. A source code combining efficiently a short- and long-term g-function is published with the paper.neurons weight [–] specific heat volumetric heat capacity distance between a pipe and the borehole center incremental incremental heat load function short-term transfer function evaluated at the borehole outlet [–] long-term transfer function for an excitation of 1 W/m [–] long-term transfer function for an excitation of 1 °C [–] boundary [–] borehole length thermal conductivity mass flow rate domain [–] activation function [–] normalized heat flux heat flux heating power thermal resistance radius density time temperature circulation flow rate in a pipe neuron’s bias [–] neuron’s input [–] neuron’s output [–] borehole fluid grout pipe material soil inner inlet outer outlet initial condition Ground-coupled heat pump (GCHP) systems are increasingly attracting research attention given the significant energy savings they allow for space heating and cooling. This interest has resulted in the development of several models that simulate the thermal response of ground heat exchangers (GHE). These models are now routinely used for the interpretation of thermal response tests, the design of GCHP systems, and the forecast of their performances and energy consumption. To simplify the simulation of a GHE composed of several boreholes, the concept of g-function Among the advanced simulation models, lumped element models (LEM) based on the theory of thermal resistances and capacities have been characterized by important developments over the last years. Indeed, LEMs now accurately simulate the thermal response of a single GHE with various geometries such as a single and double U-Bent The use of artificial neural networks (ANNs) to rapidly forecast the behavior of heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) systems gained popularity in engineering and can deal with a large variety of thermal problems The transfer functions produced by a LEM are smooth and regular, and consequently they are well suited to an approximation by an ANN In this work, the transient 2.5D LEM described in The geometry and thermal properties of the single U-Bent model used are shown in In order to construct an Eskilson-type g-function, the mainstream approach consists of initially computing the temperature responses around a single borehole with a boundary condition corresponding to a continuous heat load of 1 Watt per meter of borehole. Subsequently, the responses are combined linearly to assemble the g-function of the complete field. Finally, the superposition principle allows convolving the g-function with an incremental heat load function to obtain the borehole wall temperature relative to time The same strategy is used here with a LEM to construct a short-term transfer function. The LEM is however used with a set of boundary conditions that are selected to create a constant step input of 1 The approach uses a zero initial temperature (for inhomogeneous initial temperature or groundwater flow see The approach described previously yields directly a dimensionless transfer function of the outlet temperature ( We emphasize the fact that the transfer function obtained significantly differs from a classical Eskilson-type g-function. Specifically, a classical g-function yields the transfer function of the mean borehole wall temperature and is obtained by using a boundary condition corresponding to a unit heating power emitted by a line-source. Although the technique used in this work significantly differs from the mainstream approach, it exhibits the following advantages: avoid any erroneous assumption on the distribution of the heat flux along the borehole wall; allow direct integration of the borehole geometry, thermal properties, and fluid vertical advection without assuming a thermal steady-state in the borehole; and produce directly a g-function for the EWT that is useful in simulating a GCHP system. A few transfer functions Simulation of the outlet fluid temperature is achieved by convolution of  Convolution of Eskilson long-term transfer function with an incremental heat load function provides only the borehole wall temperature The transfer function The combination of short- and long-term g-functions is shown in The universal approximation theorem An artificial neuron is a computing unit that is inspired by the biological neuron observed in the human brain. Information is fed to the artificial neuron through input variables ( In our study, we selected the hyperbolic tangent function given by Eq. Typically, several artificial neurons are connected together and organized into layers. The most common network architecture for function approximation is the feed-forward multi-layer perceptron (MLP). The latter contains an input layer, one or several hidden layers, and an output layer as shown in To identify the architecture of the ANN, we tested a network with one to three hidden layers. We also varied the number neurons per layer in steps of 25 neurons between 25 and 200 neurons and checked the mean square error during the training process. Our goal was to maintain the total number of neurons to the minimum possible extent while obtaining a network with good approximation and generalization properties. We finally selected a network architecture that consists of two hidden layers with 100 neurons per hidden layer. The architecture aids in ensuring that the ANN is as compact as possible, thereby avoiding the vanishing gradient problem observed with a deeper network while exhibiting sufficient degrees of freedom to accurately approximate the transfer function With the response model described in Section To solve more rapidly the LEM and obtain the transfer function Our preliminary tests rapidly indicated the need to include large training sets to improve ANN generalization and avoid over-fitting. Given the small simulation time step used and size of the database, memory requirements and training times became rapidly impractical. We subsequently reduced the dimension of the data set by sampling each transfer function based on a geometric progression We first used the sampled g-functions Although we observed that it is difficult to accurately capture the initial flat plateau corresponding to long residence times, we decided to test a few transformations on  It should also be noted that following the typical practice in artificial intelligence, the target values were scaled and reduced to fit the [−1 The training phase of an ANN consists of modifying the values of the current weights We compared the performances of the training process for the original transfer function In We must emphasize that these accuracies are valid only with input parameters lying within the limits listed in The ANNs approximate the transfer function The LEM used to assemble the training database was numerically and experimentally validated over several data sets at the time of its initial publication In this section, the temperatures simulated by the LEM and by the ANN are compared to the experimental measurements made during a thermal response test (TRT). The TRT includes a heating phase of 72 h followed by a recovery phase of 25 h. The temperature at the inlet and outlet of the borehole and the heating power are measured every 30 s during the TRT. Therefore, more than 23 000 temperature data points were recorded during the test. The initial ground temperature was established by a continuous circulation test to 8.48 The To understand the approximation process of the ANN and evaluate the manner in which the inputs are treated by each layer, we analyzed the network by first recognizing that the expectation is zero for each It should be noted that the ANN generates the short-term response for 85 A source code allowing efficient construction of the complete g-function as that shown in In this work, a thermal resistance and capacity model emulating a single U-Bent ground heat exchanger was used to perform 15 000 simulations. The boundary conditions used to solve the model allowed direct construction of a large collection of short-term g-functions that were subsequently used to successfully train two artificial neural networks. An MLP containing two hidden layers was presented in conjunction with a methodology designed to accelerate the training phase and increase the accuracy of the network’s output. The results indicated that approximation of a short-term g-function was achieved in a few milliseconds on a standard computer and led to an accuracy comprised between a few thousandths to a few hundredths of degrees Celsius with respect to numerical and experimental data sets. The solution time is 10 000 times faster than the original model, and this contribution will aid in speeding up the interpretation of thermal response tests or design of GCHP systems with optimization-based methods. The weights and biases of the best artificial neural network obtained are available in the public domain through the publication of a source code that directly combines short- and long-term g-functions. It is noted that the artificial neural network model developed in the study directly yields the transfer function of the entering water temperature on the source side of a ground-coupled heat pump, which is a significant advantage over Eskilson-type g-function that yields only the mean fluid temperature in the borehole. The authors wish to thank the six anonymous referees who reviewed this work and provided helpful and constructive comments and suggestions. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 