TOPS 99, an equivalent to di-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid has been employed for the solvent extraction and separation of a mixture of rare-earths (four light rare-earths (LREs) La, Ce, Pr, Nd, and seven heavy rare-earths (HREs) like Tb, Dy, Y, Ho, Er, Yb and Lu) into some fractions from phosphoric acid solutions. From the acid and extractant effects, 0.1 and 1M TOPS 99 were suitable for the separation of a mixture of REs into three concentrates at 3M acid, which is similar to wet phosphoric acid solutions (WPA). McCabe–Thiele extraction isotherm predicts the separation of Yb+Lu at an aqueous-to-organic (A/O) phase ratio of 2 in three stages using 0.1M TOPS 99. Counter-current batch extraction simulation (CCES) of Yb and Lu at an A/O of 2 resulted in a raffinate containing 3.6mg/L of Yb+Lu, corresponding to an extraction efficiency of 91.9%, whereas other five HREs loss was about 6.7%. Stripping of Yb and Lu as per the predictions of McCabe–Thiele plot from loaded organic (LO) was selected at O/A phase ratio of 3 with 4M HCl and counter-current stripping simulation studies resulted 100% stripping efficiency. From the Yb+Lu raffinate, remaining five HREs were extracted about 94.4% with 1M TOPS 99 at an A/O ratio of 3 in three stages. The LRE (Pr and Nd) co extraction is 9.8%. Quantitative stripping of HREs from LO is achieved with 7M HCl at an O/A ratio of 3 in two stages. Finally, a process flowsheet was presented for the separation of rare-earths into three groups, two HRE fractions (Yb+Lu and Tb, Dy, Ho, Y, Er) and one LRE fraction from 3M phosphoric acid.Commercially available rare earth materials have been used as additives to steels or alloys, ceramics as crucibles, lasers for surgical applications, household batteries and nuclear technologies ( The major sources for rare-earths (REs) are the classical ores such as monazite, xenotime, and bastnasite. Rock phosphate is used for the production of fertilizer-grade phosphoric acid. It also contains minor quantities of rare-earth elements hence it is considered as secondary source for rare-earth elements. Phosphate rocks generally contain ~ As far as the literature is concerned, much work has been done on the extraction of rare-earths using organophosphorus extractants like di-(2-ethylhexyl)-phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) and 2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester (PC 88A) from mineral acid media ( The separation of La and Ce with PC 88A from nitrate media was performed ( In the present work, an attempt has been made to process a mixture of eleven REs into some fractions from phosphoric acid solutions. Systematic solvent extraction studies were performed by using TOPS 99 from H TOPS 99 (Talcher Organic Phosphorus Solvent), an equivalent of di-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid of purity > All rare-earth oxides (> An inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES, IRIS Intrepid II XDL, Thermo Jarrel Ash) was used to determine the concentrations of rare-earth ions in the aqueous solutions. A Jeio-Tech temperature controlled shaking water bath was used for equilibrium experiments. Equal volumes (10 Effect of variation of H The effect of phosphoric acid concentration (0.5–5 Using 0.7 The effect of acid concentration on percent extraction of a mixture of REs with 1 Based on the above discussed studies it is concluded that mutual separation among the adjacent REs is not possible. REs which are not close to each other are conveniently separated in few numbers of steps. From the results of acid and extractant effect on percent extraction of a mixture of REs with TOPS 99, 0.1 Commonly associated impurities present in wet phosphoric acid along with REEs are Fe, Al, Ca, and Mg. Experiments were carried out with a mixture of REEs (each 25 To study the possibility of increasing the Lu To confirm the extraction isotherm prediction data, a three stage CCES test for Lu Stripping studies were carried out using different concentrations of HCl (1–7 The extraction isotherm was obtained by contacting Lu Single stage stripping of loaded organic phase (LO) of HREs was carried out with stripping reagents like HCl of different concentrations (1–7 Solvent extraction of a mixture of REs from phosphoric acid medium has been investigated using TOPS 99 with different concentrations. From the acid and extractant effect on the extraction of a mixture of REs, 0.1 The authors express their sincere thanks to Dr. J. S. Yadav, Director IICT, Hyderabad for his constant encouragement and permission to publish this work. This work was carried out under financial support from