A systematic review was conducted of primary intervention of proximal humeral fracture, which is a common injury with significant morbidity. Keywords of proximal humeral fracture were entered into PubMed and Embase databases. Two evaluators reviewed abstracts from 1985 to 2004 for inclusion and exclusion criteria yielding 66 articles. These articles were evaluated independently for outcomes and quality of evidence using the Structured Effectiveness Quality Evaluation Scale and Sackett's Levels of Evidence. Patient characteristics and outcomes were recorded. The 66 studies included 2155 patients grouped by fracture types according to the Neer classification system. Studies differed by intervention, methods, outcome measures and results. Quality scores averaged 15/48; only 2 articles included randomized groups. Current studies typically lack randomization, comparators, and independent evaluation, with a resultant inability to produce clinical conclusions. Further research comparing primary treatment methods in a properly designed and controlled fashion is required, ideally using randomized controlled trials.Proximal humeral fractures (PHFs) are common and account for 10% of all fractures, Kocher is credited with the first fracture classification system in 1896. To assess the scientific evidence of current treatment methods, a systematic review is conducted in a structured manner, including a review of the methodology and outcomes of each study. The use of consistent inclusion criteria, standard evaluation forms, and multiple raters minimized the potential for reviewer bias. A literature search of bibliographic databases with limitations of English language and human subjects using key words “proximal humeral fracture” was conducted. The databases utilized were the PubMed database that produced 415 articles, of which 112 were not English, as well as the OVID Embase database. Two independent evaluators analyzed abstracts and titles to identify articles that dealt with the treatment of proximal humeral fractures and met the study inclusion criteria. All articles selected by the evaluators were obtained and were included for systematic review if the following criteria were met: Type of study: Sackett levels 1-4 (randomized control trials, prospective trials, retrospective trials, and case series); Type of fracture: fractures of the surgical neck or proximal to the surgical neck; Primary treatment; Articles published between 1985 and 2004; Skeletally mature patients. A publication was excluded from the systematic review if it had any of the following criteria: Secondary treatments – revision surgery; Treatment of skeletally immature individuals; Sackett level 5 articles (expert opinion, biomechanical, and individual case studies); Non-English articles; Review articles. One hundred and thirty articles meeting the inclusion criteria on the basis of title and abstract were reviewed, and evaluation of the entire text identified 64 other papers that did not meet study criteria. The remaining 66 studies were independently assessed by 2 evaluators according to methods established in similar work. The patients were categorized according to treatment modality, including nonoperative treatment, percutaneous fixation, ORIF with subgroups of intramedullary, plating, and miscellaneous fixation and HHR. Patients were further divided according to fracture types of 2, 3, 4, and combined groups of 2- and 3- or 3- and 4-part fractures. The 16 publications that did not distinguish between 2-, 3-, and 4-part fractures were excluded from outcome analysis. The outcome measures chosen ranged from any combination of range of motion (ROM) values, strength in various planes of motion, radiological analysis, or subsequent complications, as well as ASES (American Shoulder and Elbow Surgery), Constant-Murley, Hawkins, HSS (Hospital for Special Surgery), Neer, UCLA (University of California-Los Angeles), VAS (Visual Analog Scale) scoring systems, and self-report disability measures. When the reported outcome measures were comparable, a weighted average of the results for each treatment subset was conducted. This enabled a comparison of Neer scores, pain, ROM, and complications, as these outcome measures were most consistently used. The other outcome measures listed above were used less frequently; therefore, comparisons between publications using these measures were not possible. ROM values were considered indicative of a difference in treatment if a variation of 10° or more existed. Meta-analysis of the data collected during the systematic review was not possible for this review for the following reasons. First, the available studies in each fracture type subgroup used consistently different tools of outcome measurement. Second, the patient characteristics lacked homogeneity, and adjustment of the outcomes of each study for confounding variables, such as age, was not possible, as the statistical effect of the variable has not been determined. The systematic review included a total of 66 publications encompassing 2653 patients who entered the studies and 2155 patients who completed follow-up. The average age of the patients included was 62.8 years, with 70% of these fractures occurring due to a fall from a standing height. The type of fracture with the highest average age was the 2-part fracture group at 69.4 years old, with 83% occurring as a result of a fall from an upright position. The lowest average age was 62.2 years old for the 3- and 4-part fracture group, with only 57% occurring due to a fall from a standing height. The dominant hand was involved in 48% of the fractures, and 82% of the patients entered in the included studies completed the follow-up period. During the follow-up period, 11.6% of the patients died ( Nonoperative intervention included sling immobilization for 1-2 weeks followed by physiotherapy, The ORIF group was further categorized into the subgroups of percutaneous treatment, plating fixation, intramedullary fixation, and miscellaneous fixation. Percutaneous treatment groups did not always specify whether the percutaneous devices were subcutaneous or transcutaneous at the conclusion of surgery. The use of smooth percutaneous K wires alone, Multiple types of plate fixation have been used for ORIF. Reported techniques include T plating alone, The different plating options available also allows for the intra-operative selection of a specific fixation method. For example, in the following reports, the intra-operative decision was made between impaction with tension-band fixation or a T plate, A variety of intramedullary devices used alone or in conjunction with supplemental forms of fixation have been reported. Treatments include the use of 2 intramedullary K wires with a wire tension band passed through holes in the proximal end of K wires followed by a sling, The miscellaneous group was created for the treatment group of ORIF not involving an intramedullary device or plate for fixation. Tension band wiring techniques included the use of 2 wires followed by an abduction device, as required, Arthroplasty was the final treatment option examined. A variety of prosthesis types have been used, including cemented Neer I, While the results of each fracture group is discussed in detail in the following paragraphs, the number of patients in each treatment subset of each fracture type are examined in Each fracture group was discussed individually to discriminate the unique characteristics of their treatment and outcomes where the outcome measures are comparable ( Two publications with level 3 evidence All publications of the 270 patients with 2- and 3-part fractures were defined as level 4 studies The number of reported patients with a 3-part fracture was relatively small (n=101), and all literature was of low quality (level 4) evidence. Fourteen of the 15 papers that reported on outcomes following treatment of 3- or 4-part fractures were considered level 4 evidence Intramedullary techniques included 3-5 Zifko nailing® elastic wires, with the addition of cerclage wiring and screws where appropriate followed by a Gilchrist® dressing, One-hundred and seventy-seven patients with 3- or 4-part fractures were treated with an HHR. These included a cemented Fenlin, Biomet, or Neer II, Eight level 4 publications describing the treatment of 4-part fractures were identified. The literature search identified 2 small randomized controlled trials that were considered level 2 evidence. In the first publication, The quality of the evidence currently present in literature was evaluated according to the SEQES This study indicates that there is a wide variation in recommended treatments for fractures of the proximal humerus. The quality of the evidence is low and does not support any specific treatment choice. The treatment of a patient with a proximal humeral fracture represents a challenge to the orthopaedic surgeon for a number of reasons. Accurate assessment of fracture type can be difficult, as imaging assessment is imprecise. Publications included in this systematic review have methodological shortcomings in the areas of statistical analysis, comparison groups, randomization, and independent evaluation. Only 2 randomized trials were identified, and both compared nonoperative treatment to operative techniques that are considered mechanically inferior by today's standards. Outcome measures used were numerous and included general health surveys, disease and joint specific surveys, and clinical measures including ROM and strength. The reliability of measures and the lack of uniform outcome measures further complicate attempts to conduct a statistical analysis of the literature. To facilitate an evidence-based decision-making process, literature meta-analyses and systematic reviews are increasingly being utilized for an overview of our current understanding of optimal treatment methods. In this review, outcome measurement variability prevents meaningful statistical analyses and a meta-analysis was not possible. This systematic review does provide a better understanding of the patient characteristics and the diversity treatment options. To present data of greatest clinical significance, it was decided to discuss treatment outcomes as dependent on the patient's presenting fracture type. The limitation of this approach is the lack of a reliable method for fracture classification. The articles describing outcomes following treatment of either 2- or 3-part fractures may be skewed, as the nonoperative group included valgus impacted fractures which are associated with a better outcome. For patients with 3-part fractures, plating techniques resulted in the best outcomes, as measured by the Neer and pain scoring systems. However, only 9 patients with an average age of 47 years were treated with plate fixation. In contrast, the average age of patients treated either nonoperatively or with humeral head replacement was 71 years. No treatment group was clearly superior in terms of ROM measures. Three of the 5 articles in this subgroup The majority of 3- or 4-part fractures have been treated with an HHR, and the remainder were treated in even proportions using percutaneous pinning, intramedullary fixation, sutures, wiring, or plating. Neer and pain outcome measures are most favorable in the ORIF miscellaneous group, using suture and an external fixation method, The outcomes reported following treatment of 4-part fractures again do not allow any conclusions to be drawn. Forty-seven percent of all patients treated with ORIF miscellaneous techniques were valgus impacted fractures which, as discussed previously, have a better prognosis; however, this group had a high rate of AVN at 24%. Those treated nonoperatively did have a 17% incidence of OA at the end of the 10-year follow-up. Forward flexion, abduction, and internal rotation were all diminished to a greater degree in fractures treated with HHR when compared to alternative surgical treatment methods for 3- and 4-part fractures. Forward flexion motion is similar when 4-part fractures are treated with HHR or nonoperatively. External rotation following HHR was comparable to other treatment modalities. The literature review identified two small randomized control trials. The first trial concluded that percutaneous reduction and external fixation had a superior outcome based on a statistically significant difference in Neer scores and the radiographic quality of reduction. However, their patient group had a single pin tract infection, and they stated that pin fixation in osteopenic bone and pin tract infections remain as challenges with this treatment modality. Two other systematic reviews have been published on the topic of PHF in the Cochrane database To add a further dimension to the analysis currently available, this study used different inclusion and exclusion criteria than previous work. Our study also adds to previous work by focusing on the variation in treatment approaches. All categories of proximal humeral fractures were reviewed to include the majority of evidence, which is of lower quality evidence, in an attempt to gain a further understanding by increasing the number of studies and patients. By doing so, it was possible to access and review a total of 66 articles encompassing 2155 patients in the current (1985-2004) literature. This may improve the applicability of this study for clinicians and yield a new perspective on the current literature. The current literature indicates a trend to using intramedullary devices for 2-part fractures and reserving HHR for complex fractures. However, the HHR typically produces an inferior ROM to other treatments. In general, plating techniques have great versatility of use, but are also high rates of complications. The inability to draw conclusions from the current literature, as well as the paucity of quality literature, demonstrates a need for higher quality evidence to enable the clinician to determine the optimal treatment interventions for each fracture. Methodological flaws were consistently recognized in the areas of randomization, including a lack of comparators, absence of independent evaluation, and inadequate statistical significance or power. It is encouraging that the quality of evidence has improved over time, suggesting an increasing awareness of the importance of quality research design. Future clinical research should be conducted with greater methodological rigor and with standardized outcome reporting. Ideally, the use of randomized control trials would enable the direct comparison of the most commonly utilized treatment modalities while eliminating other variables.     