Corrugated web plates have been used in recent years as the webs of steel girders in bridge constructions thanks for their advantages, especially their superior shear capacities relative to stiffened flat webs. Therefore, they have been extensively investigated under shear compared with their limited investigations on the bending behaviour which was exclusively concentrated on the girders formed from the conventional normal strength steels. On the other hand, the use of high-strength steels (HSSs) in bridges has been increased when large and column-free spaces are key design issues. This paper focuses on the lateral-torsional buckling (LTB) of bridge girders with corrugated webs (BGCWs) built up from HSSs. This is done by using the commercially available finite element (FE) analysis package ABAQUS which has been used to generate parametric studies addressing the different affecting parameters on the behaviour of these girders. Simply-supported girders subjected to uniform bending, representing the worst case in LTB which is used in developing the member capacity design rules in different standards, are used in developing the current nonlinear FE models. The recently suggested warping constants in literature are used to compare the critical buckling moments with the elastic FE predictions. Then, the design model included in the Eurocode 3 is compared with the nonlinear strengths of the girders. The comparisons show that it provides conservative outcomes; therefore a modified version of the design model is suggested by using another buckling curve.I-section plate girders with flat webs (IPGs) are currently main structural elements in numerous constructional areas In a LTB mode, the cross-section of the girder suffers from a rigid-body lateral movement (  For the case of BGCWs, Sause et al. Recently, it has been recognised that utilising high-strength steels (HSSs) in bridges A recent study on the LTB of IPGs built up with HSSs by Bradford and Liu This paper, accordingly, reports the investigation on such girders. This is made numerically by using the finite element (FE) analysis package ABAQUS Finite element (FE) analyses are conducted in this research by ABAQUS computer programme versions 6.13 Considering the case of uniform bending moment, each girder was loaded by a force couple acting on the upper and lower flanges as can be seen in Four node shell elements with reduced integrations (S4R) with linear base function were used to simulate the FE element models typical to the previous investigations by Moon et al. Kitipornchai and Trahair The results of the previous FE modelling by Elgaaly et al. In this investigation, the material behaviour followed the Von Mises yield criterion with isotropic hardening rule. The analyses were conducted herein by using the HSS material with yield and ultimate strengths of 460 and 540 FE models using Maupre bridge corrugation dimensions, given in Two main verifications should be made to trust the current FE models. The first is related to the boundary conditions, producing the constant bending moment shown in On the other hand, the nonlinear FE modelling of the BGCWs was successfully verified by the current authors A parametric study is conducted in this section, considering both linear and non-linear buckling analyses, to examine how different geometrical parameters affect the LTB critical and ultimate moments of the BGCWs. These FE models are based on the described FE modelling procedure of the previous section. Throughout this parametric study, one basic corrugated web was used which was taken identical to that practically used in the girders of Maupre bridge The girder length ( The flange width ( The flange thickness ( The web height ( The web thickness ( Three corrugation angles ( The dimension ( Beside the corrugation dimensions, The critical buckling moments from the linear analyses were compared with prediction of Moon et al. The BGCWs were found to buckle out-of-plan under the applied pure bending moments, resulting in LTB mode of failure. To explore the stress carried by the corrugated webs, With the aim of clarifying the general behaviour of BGCWs built up from HSSs, the bending moment-in-plane-deflection relationships of the basic group are plotted in This subsection investigates the effects of the different key parameters on the behaviour and strength of the BGCWs under pure bending moments. In addition to the girder's length ( In this subsection, the effects of varying the flange width (  The second important factor (beside the The impact of corrugation angle on the LTB behaviour of the BGCWs is discussed in this subsection. Three corrugation angles were used with 31.9°, 45° and 60°. Bar charts are, therefore, presented for both the ultimate ( According to the EN1993-1-1     Herein, the flexural strengths according to the EN1993-1-1 Defining the elastic LTB limit is important because after this limit the To ensure the accuracy of the design model modified in The relationships between the flexural strengths ( The lateral-torsional buckling (LTB) plays an important role in designing modern steel structural members based on the fact that its development can substantially reduce their load carrying capacity. Accordingly, this paper investigated the LTB behaviour and strength of steel bridge girders with corrugated webs (BGCWs) built up from the high-strength steel (HSS) S460. Based on this finite element (FE) investigation, the next conclusions may be drawn: The results showed that the length (and in turn the girder's slenderness) of the BGCWs has an important role in the behaviour and strength of the BGCWs. So, an elastic limit for the LTB slenderness was obtained from the FE analyses as The flexural capacity of the girders was found to enlarge with the increase of the radius of gyration of the compression flange ( It was obvious that increasing the web height ( It was recognised that increasing the corrugation angle ( The LTB design model given by the EN 1993-1-1 Finally, until additional experiments become available on the BGCWs built up from HSSs, it is currently suggested to be more conservative by using buckling curve (a) instead of (a