The elastic modulus of thin films can be directly determined by instrumented indentation when the indenter penetration does not exceed a fraction of the film thickness, depending on the mechanical properties of both film and substrate. When it is not possible, application of models for separating the contribution of the substrate is necessary. In this work, the robustness of several models is analyzed in the case of the elastic modulus determination of a porous aluminium oxide film produced by anodization of an aluminium alloy. Instrumented indentation tests employing a Berkovich indenter were performed at a nanometric scale, which allowed a direct determination of the film elastic modulus, whose value was found to be approximately 11GPa. However, at a micrometric scale the elastic modulus tends toward the value corresponding to the substrate, of approximately 73GPa. The objective of the present work is to apply different models for testing their consistency over the complete set of indentation data obtained from both classical tests in microindentation and the continuous stiffness measurement mode in nanoindentation. This approach shows the continuity between the two scales of measurement thus allowing a better representation of the elastic modulus variation between two limits corresponding to the substrate and film elastic moduli. Gao's function proved to be the best to represent the elastic modulus variation.Aluminium and its alloys have a natural surface heterogeneous oxide film, which is not enough corrosion resistant for many applications From the investigation of the performance of coated materials it has been determined that the elastic modulus of the film is an important parameter In order to analyze their reliability, all these models were applied in this work on indentation data ranging from nanoindentation to microindentation. For a sound discussion, these models must be applied on proper indentation data which are obtained after calibration of the instrument principally depending on the indentation mode and on the scale of measurement. Usually, the calibration must consider two aspects which can be analyzed separately: ( On the other hand, the frame compliance is considered to have a constant value in nanoindentation, whereas Chicot et al. However, in the case of porous film the porosity is a very important parameter which can have a considerable influence on the elastic properties of the film and, consequently, on its elastic modulus value. The relationship between porosity and elastic modulus has been already proposed by Jernot et al. In the present paper, the elastic modulus of a porous aluminium oxide film is determined by means of the instrumented indentation techniques at nano and micrometric scales. In nanoindentation, the continuous stiffness measurement mode is used to plot the elastic modulus as a function of the indenter displacement. In microindentation, the elastic modulus is determined by analyzing the unloading part of a load–depth curve. In this case, a unique value for the elastic modulus is obtained from each indentation curve. Both in nano and in microindentation, the same Berkovich indenter type is used. For analysing the load–displacement curve, the models of Oliver and Pharr The experiments were conducted employing samples of a commercial 2017A-T4 aluminium alloy provided as sheet, whose chemical composition is given in   Nanoindentation experiments have been performed with a Nano Indenter XP Microindentation experiments were carried out with a micro-hardness CSM 2-107 Tester equipped with a Berkovich diamond indenter. The load range of the instrument is from 0.1 to 20 A dwell-time of 15 In nanoindentation, pop-in events representing an increase in-depth at constant load are regularly observed for applied loads ranging between 10 and 30 It is important to note that the corresponding applied loads of these pop-in events, which are reported in Instrumented indentation is a non-destructive method used to determine the mechanical properties of massive materials by analysing the load-displacement curve. The elastic modulus is deduced from the analysis of the unloading part of the ( The correction factor Poisson's ratio of a massive aluminium oxide is given close to 0.21. Asmani et al. Moreover for a perfect Berkovich indenter, the projected contact area, Unfortunately, the indenter tip is never perfect and its bluntness must be taken into account for accurate measurements. Within this objective, a variety of models describing the contact area function have been developed However, such a calibration procedure is not possible in microindentation. In this case, Troyon and Huang Additionally, the calculation of the contact depth depends on the deformation mode around the indent. Indeed in presence of sinking-in, the method of Oliver and Pharr When piling-up is observed at the surface of the indented material around the indent, the methodology of Oliver and Pharr underestimates the actual indentation depth. For this reason, Loubet et al. When determining the mechanical properties of a coated system, especially in the case in which these involve very thin films, the reduced modulus calculated from Eq. The different models developed for nanoindentation From a general point of view, the deformation of the substrate is very small for the lowest loads and the system behaves globally like the film, whereas for higher loads the system behaves more like the substrate. When the indentation depth increases, the composite reduced elastic modulus changes gradually from the first limit, The different models are summarized in Gao's function has already been applied by numerous authors In the model of Perriot and Barthel In microindentation and due to the role of the frame compliance on the indentation data analysis, Tricoteaux et al. To determine the elastic modulus of a film using nanoindentation and/or microindentation tests, different aspects must be carefully studied regarding the terms involved in Eq. In this work, In a second step, knowledge of the deformation mode around the indent is necessary to select the methodology which must be applied, Now, the two methodologies are applied to determine analytically the mode of calculation of the contact indenter displacement by comparing the value of the elastic modulus obtained for the highest applied loads to the value of 73 This value of 73 The corrective parameters are  However, it is clear on this figure that the number of elastic modulus data obtained for the lowest indenter displacements is not consistent enough for an accurate determination of the elastic modulus of the film. That is why nanoindentation experiments have been performed. Among the 25 experiments, a small number of curves are considered for representing the elastic modulus variation.  This observation confirms the need to apply different models for separating the contribution of the substrate from the measurement. However,  As a result, the elastic modulus of the porous aluminium oxide is equal to 11 Consequently, the different weight functions collected in From a general point of view, it appears that the models, which involve the reciprocal elastic modulus, WF Among other weight functions, we retained two models, Indeed, This could explain the slight deviation which can be observed when As a conclusion, nanoindentation can be logically employed for determining the elastic modulus of the film but it must be carefully interpreted for estimating the elastic modulus of the substrate when its value is unknown. In the same way, microindentation can be useful to advantageously complete the range of nanoindentation data, which allows a better prediction of the elastic modulus of the substrate. However depending on the elastic properties of the film and substrate and of the film thickness, it is very important to keep in mind that the difference between the predicted value by the Gao's function and the actual value can diverge to a great extent. In these conditions, Gao's function must be carefully applied in microindentation. To estimate the deviation between the actual and the predicted values of the elastic modulus of the film, we represent in As an example, when the film thickness has a high value and when the two elastic moduli of the film and substrate are very different, the predicted value can be very different of the actual elastic modulus of the film. For the model of Korsunsky and Constantinescu Additionally, to support the determination of the elastic modulus of the film by instrumented indentation, the elastic modulus is then discussed as a function of the porosity of the film. To introduce the influence of the porosity on the elastic modulus determination, the model of Jernot et al. Application of Eq. In their work, the elastic modulus is close to 160 The determination of the elastic modulus of porous thin films poses some difficulties. In this work, it has been shown that the elastic modulus of the film can be determined by nanoindentation. However, for an accurate representation of the indentation data between the film and the substrate tendencies, association of nanoindentation and microindentation is required. For the porous aluminium oxide film, the model of Gao et al. gives an adequate representation of the indentation data, where only geometrical parameters linked to the size of the indent and to the film thickness are necessary. For a best determination of the elastic modulus both of the film and of the substrate, the model of Korsunsky and Constantinescu is probably the more consistent. However, it requires a large number of indentation data values over all the range of loads applied. Finally, it has been found that for the elastic modulus of the porous film,