A high dimensional data set comprising eleven chosen attributes of 594 bulk metallic glasses (BMGs) compositions has been analysed and classified. Each attribute corresponding to a given composition has been expressed in terms of the equivalent parameter, i.e., atomic fraction weighted sum. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) has been employed to perform the multivariate analysis, aiming at the dimensionality reduction of the high dimensional data set. The evolved principal components are evaluated on the basis of the characteristic temperatures of bulk metallic glasses. The analysis of 594 BMG alloys resulted into a classification model of the alloys which exhibits reliable agreement with Inoue’s classification developed on the basis of classical subject knowledge. The occasional cases of the BMGs remaining unclassified according to Inoue’s scheme have been judiciously designated as the new classes.Glass forming ability (GFA) is the key parameter for design of bulk metallic glass (BMG) alloys. There has been significant endeavour towards achieving an efficient glass forming ability parameters relating the compositional space of the alloys. The reported design strategies mostly rely on the formation of empirical rules from the amenable experimental observation to describe and/or classify bulk metallic glass alloys. In such endeavour, formation of the plausible description of glass forming ability becomes one of the major interests. In the earlier efforts on modelling the glass forming ability, the aim was to explore the extensive input space comprising the chemical attributes. Inoue has established the empirical description of glass forming ability in terms of three specific criteria: (i) number of components (elements) in the system, (ii) the atomic size difference between solvent and solute atoms and (iii) heat of mixing among the main constituent elements The atomic size difference was used by Egami et al. in their model for glass forming ability, considering the size mismatch as the key issue leading to the atomic size distribution plot The aforesaid efforts leads to classification of the input variable space for glass forming ability models into five different group Analysis of these models on the basis of the contemporary experimental data reveals the underlying ambiguity in explaining and predicting the glass forming ability of bulk metallic glass alloys The present approach relies on the fundamental atomic characteristics of the constituting elements of the BMG alloys, in quantitative sense, for modelling the GFA. The input parameter space from the elemental data of the constituent elements generates a high dimensional data for the alloys. Such approach is essentially bottom up in the sense that the fundamental physical attributes of the constituent atoms are precisely assembled to describe an alloy. The treatment constitutes a large multiple variable data space to describe the BMG alloys. The data development method and the subsequent computational treatment performed on the data set have been described in the subsequent sections. The high dimensional data space has also been analysed by using multivariate statistical learning tool, namely principal component analysis (PCA). The effort has been made to describe the evolved principal components as the newly extracted features and correlated with the characteristic transformation temperatures of the bulk metallic glasses. An effort has also been made to characterize the known BMG alloys in terms of the newly extracted feature variables The glass formation is governed by the combined effect of thermodynamics and kinetics of the solidifying alloy that leads to the rheological changes. Therefore, the thermal, mechanical, electronic/electro-chemical properties of the constituent atoms of the alloy and their interactions influence the glass forming ability. These interactions describing the typical solidification pattern during glass formation are characteristically complex and difficult to be addressed by means of the physical models or by first principle calculations. Therefore, in the present study, the relevant atomic properties of the constituent elements of the glass forming alloy, including their interactions, have been taken into account The high internal strain The electronegativity difference The constituent atoms of the metallic glass inherit attraction amongst each other. Conversely, the repulsion among the atoms leads to the liquid phase separation. Difference in work function ((Δ According to Miedema’s The elastic strain destabilizes the crystalline matrix The entropy of fusion described as The thermal expansion coefficient Heat of melting reflects the bonding strength The molar heat capacity The dense packing Thermal diffusivity, defined as the ratio of thermal conductivity to specific heat capacity per unit volume, is also an important attribute The aforesaid eleven attributes are summarized in The bulk metallic glass composition has been expressed as the aggregate In present study, atomic fraction weighted sum over the chosen attributes of the constituent elements is considered to represent the 410 bulk metallic glass alloys as summarized by Long et al. The structure of the computational methods and techniques implemented in the analysis of BMG data is summarized in The compositional data is converted into the numerical data using the eleven relevant atomic attributes as described in the figure citing the example of Cu The In the present computational exercise, the co-variance matrix is calculated for the mean-centred normalized bulk metallic glass data (594 As stated above, the present The choice of optimal number of The first two PCs are studied here with an aim to characterize the PCs on the basis of the domain knowledge. It may be seen that the PC Therefore, observed consistency in the correlations of PC  Linear expansion coefficient is related to glass transition temperature of bulk metallic glasses and PC For further analysis and more insight concerning PC The initial scrutiny reveals that the clusters originate essentially on the basis of major constituting elements of the bulk metallic glasses. Inoue et al. A comparative study between the classifications from the present data driven PCA analysis and the Inoue’s classification has been made. The comparison yields striking similarity between the clusters obtained from PCA analysis and different classes proposed by Inoue. The comparison between the classification proposed by Inoue and that emerges from the present work, as furnished in The 158 bulk metallic glasses compositions in Inoue’s Class-I appear in the PC The 130 compositions in Inoue’s Class-II bulk metallic glasses appear in the PC Only 3 bulk metallic glasses belong to Class-III of Inoue’s descriptions which appear in Cluster-C of the PC The 77 compositions in Inoue’s Class-IV bulk metallic glasses appear in the PC The 21 compositions in Inoue’s Class-V bulk metallic glasses appear in the PC The 77 compositions in Inoue’s Class-VI bulk metallic glasses appear in the PC The 95 compositions in Inoue’s Class-VII bulk metallic glasses appear in the PC The aforesaid illustration reveals that each of the Inoue’s classification is sub-classified in the PC The seven classes proposed by Inoue et al. could not place 33 BMGs out of 594 BMGs in any class as depicted in In Cluster-A, 3 La based BMGs namely La-based bulk metallic glasses (row 1–3 in The cluster-C comprising six Fe-based bulk metallic glasses (row 4–9 in The 13 bulk metallic glasses in Cluster-F, do not belong to any of the Inoue’s class, as shown in In the Cluster-I, 6 bulk metallic glasses remain unclassified (row 23–28 in It may be noted that even in the cases of the unclassified alloys, according to the Inoue’s description, the proposed classification assigns reliable compositional justification in grouping them into five new classes as identified above. Above comparative study clearly reveals that the new features described by PC The principal component analysis performed on the high dimensional data of 594 bulk metallic glass alloys has successfully reduced the dimensionality of the data set. The extracted features exhibited attractive correlation with the characteristic temperatures of the bulk metallic glass alloys. The score plots have resulted into the nine distinct clusters of bulk metallic glass alloys. The clusters revealed reliable correspondence with Inoue’s classification based on the classical subject knowledge periodicity of constituents in the periodic table. The PCA classification also resulted in 33 numbers of BMG alloys which remain unclassified according to the Inoue’s classes. Such unclassified alloys have been judiciously placed in five newly identified classes based on the compositional attributes. The present study has not attempted to establish the physical justification of the principal components (PCs). However, the extracted principal components can be used to model glass forming ability of bulk metallic glasses as evident from the high correlation with the experimentally measured characteristics temperatures.