Amelogenin, the major extracellular enamel matrix protein, plays a critical role in regulating the growth and organization of enamel. Assembly and mineralization of full-length native (P173) and recombinant (rP172) porcine amelogenins were studied by cryogenic Transmission Electron Microscopy (cryoTEM). The cryoTEM revealed that both native and recombinant porcine amelogenins undergo step-wise self-assembly. Although the overall structural organization of P173 and rP172 oligomers was similar and resembled oligomers of murine recombinant amelogenin rM179, there were subtle differences suggesting that a single phosphorylated serine present in P173 might affect amelogenin self-assembly. Our mineralization studies demonstrated that both P173 and rP172 oligomers stabilize initial mineral clusters. Importantly, however, rP172 regulated the organization of initial mineral clusters into linear chains and guided the formation of parallel arrays of elongated mineral particles, which are the hallmark of enamel structural organization. These results are similar to those obtained previously using full-length recombinant murine amelogenin (Fang et al., 2011a). In contrast to that seen with rP172, phosphorylated P173 strongly inhibits mineralization for extended periods of time. We propose that these differences might be due to the differences in the structural organization and charge distribution between P173 and rP172. Overall our studies indicate that self-assembly of amelogenin and the mechanisms of its control over mineralization might be universal across different mammalian species. Our data also provide new insight into the effect of phosphorylation on amelogenin self-assembly and its regulation of mineralization.Dental enamel is a unique and structurally complex nanocomposite material comprising the outer layer of a tooth crown. Its intricate three-dimentional organization arises from arrays of elongated apatitic crystallites known as enamel rods and identified as basic building blocks of enamel structure ( Amelogenin, the major structural protein of dental enamel, has been shown to play a critical role in the regulation of biomineralization in forming enamel ( To test the hypothesis that step-wise assembly is a universal trait of amelogenins, and to study the effects of phosphorylation on self-assembly of this protein and on its regulation of biomineralization, we have conducted a series of studies with native phosphorylated (P173) and recombinant nonphosphorylated (rP172) porcine amelogenins by cryo-TEM where protein assembly and mineralization processes to be studied in their native hydrated state. Hence, this approach can provide further insights into biological mineralization processes regulated by self-assembled macromolecules. The full-length native porcine amelogenin P173 was isolated and purified from developing tooth buds as previously described ( The self-assembly experiments were carried out in a manner identical to our earlier experiments with murine amelogenin rM179 and described elsewhere ( Aliquots of stock solution were added to 4 Three dimensional single particle reconstructions of amelogenin monomers and oligomers were performed using a single-particle image processing software package EMAN ( The self-assembly experiments were carried out in a manner identical to our earlier experiments with murine amelogenin rM179 and described elsewhere ( We observed several different particle classes in the self-assembly experiments with P173 1 In order to further explore the mechanism of amelogenin self-assembly process, a three-dimensional reconstruction of amelogenin P173 was calculated from 575 manually selected monomers. We have also conducted single particle reconstructions from 558 images of rP172 monomers and 512 images of oligomers. The reconstructed model of the rP172 monomer closely resembles that of P173 ( Mineralization experiments in the presence of full-length native porcine amelogenin P173 revealed that small isolated mineral clusters were formed after 10 The results of our cryo-TEM study of self-assembly of porcine amelogenins rP172 and P173 demonstrate major similarities between these proteins and murine amelogenin ( Single particle reconstructions of monomers of P173 and rP172 were remarkably similar to each other and to the previously published reconstruction of rM179. All three monomers had an ellipsoid shapes and a foot-like process at one end. Our earlier studies of monomers of full length and truncated recombinant mouse amelogenins rM179 and rM166 ( Single particle reconstruction analysis has also revealed that the most abundant class of oligomers in both P173 and rP172 is dodecamer and that their structural organization closely resembles previously reported barrel-like dodecamers of murine recombinant rM179 ( The ability of full-length amelogenin to stabilize the initial mineral clusters and guide their assembly into parallel arrays followed by their fusion into needle shaped mineral particles has been previously proposed ( One of the questions remaining is the nature of interactions between mineral clusters and amelogenin oligomers. Originally, the concept of small mineral clusters with stoichiometry Ca Our present findings on P173 are in aggrement with earlier studies ( In summary, our cryoTEM studies of native and recombinant porcine amelogenins have revealed that both proteins undergo step-wise hierarchical self-assembly. Taken together with earlier studies of self-assembly of murine amelogenins these data suggest that the hierarchical assembly is a common mode amelogenin assembly among mammalian species. At the same time several differences were observed between recombinant-nonphosphorylated and native phosphorylated amelogenins, which suggest that the differences in their effects on mineralization might be attributed to the structural differences in their protein assemblies. Furthermore, we demonstrate that recombinant non-phosphorylated porcine amelogenin can transiently stabilize initial mineral clusters and organize them into arrays of linear chains, followed by the fusion of the clusters in the chains. Similar modes of regulation of mineralization have been previously described for both murine and porcine recombinant amelogenins. In contrast, phosphorylated porcine amelogenin can stabilize initial mineral clusters and prevent their transformation. We propose that the enhanced capacity of phosphorylated porcine amelogenin to inhibit phase transformation might be due, in part, to the effect of phosphorylation on the structural organization of its oligomers and charge distribution. These studies were supported by NIH grants R56DE016376 (to H.C.M.), R01DE023091 (to H.C.M.), and R56DE016703 (to E.B.). Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 