Most previous development of the peridynamic theory has assumed a Lagrangian formulation, in which the material model refers to an undeformed reference configuration. In the present work, an Eulerian form of material modeling is developed, in which bond forces depend only on the positions of material points in the deformed configuration. The formulation is consistent with the thermodynamic form of the peridynamic model and is derivable from a suitable expression for the free energy of a material. It is shown that the resulting formulation of peridynamic material models can be used to simulate strong shock waves and fluid response in which very large deformations make the Lagrangian form unsuitable. The Eulerian capability is demonstrated in numerical simulations of ejecta from a wavy free surface on a metal subjected to strong shock wave loading. The Eulerian and Lagrangian contributions to bond force can be combined in a single material model, allowing strength and fracture under tensile or shear loading to be modeled consistently with high compressive stresses. This capability is demonstrated in numerical simulation of bird strike against an aircraft, in which both tensile fracture and high pressure response are important.Nearly all work on peridynamics up to now has assumed material models that are In the present work, we re-examine the possibility of peridynamic material models that depend only on the deformed configuration, but do so within the In Here we review key features and equations of the peridynamic theory, including the mechanical theory and thermodynamics. A more detailed discussion may be found in the review article The classical momentum equation for solid mechanics in Lagrangian form is The primary motivations for development of the peridynamic theory arise from the inapplicability of the PDE In contrast, the peridynamic theory of solid mechanics is based on integral equations, for which discontinuous solutions present no difficulty In the peridynamic model, any material point The bond forces are determined jointly by the collective deformation of For purposes of material modeling, the basic kinematical quantity is the Pairwise bond force densities are assigned through the Many peridynamic analogues of classical material models have been developed, including isotropic linear elastic In the limit as the peridynamic horizon approaches zero, the first term on the right-hand side of In the peridynamic theory, damage is incorporated directly into a material model. For application to crack growth in solids, damage is included in the material model by allowing bonds to break. For example, a peridynamic bond failure rule may specify that bonds are broken irreversibly when their elongation exceeds a prescribed critical value. After a bond breaks, the endpoints of the bond are effectively disconnected from each other, and the force that the bond was carrying is redistributed to other bonds that have not yet broken. This increased load makes it more likely that these other bonds will break, leading to progressive failure and crack propagation when this is energetically favorable. The work required to break a bond is determined by the critical energy release rate, an experimentally determinable quantity for brittle solids. In the peridynamic formulation of thermodynamics, the first law expression at any material point In the next section, we will use the free energy defined by In this section, we discuss a specialization of the peridynamic equations that yields, in effect, an Eulerian model for compressible fluids. The implementation of a Mie–Grüneisen equation of state is also described. The model contains both equilibrium and dissipative contributions according to the decomposition A nonlocal mass density To shorten the notation, denote a generic bond vector by Let For any nonlocal mass density Because of The internal energy density ε is found by integrating the energy balance The rate-dependent term Assume that the Hugoniot has a linear dependence of the particle velocity A simple way to account for damage that is useful when the stress level overwhelms significant effects from material strength, for example in a liquid, is to use a tensile pressure cutoff. The pressure found from the equation of state is modified according to An important aspect of shockwave propagation in fluids and solids is the spall and ejection of material at high velocity when the wave interacts with a free surface. Of particular interest is an irregular surface, due to the subtle interactions of incident and reflected waves that have a large effect on the breakup of material and the velocity distribution of the ejecta. This phenomenon presents challenges in computational modeling because it combines the effects of large deformations, high strain rates, and fracture. Ejection under shock loading has been studied experimentally for many years. Among the first experimental work is that of Asay In this example problem, we model an experiment by Ogorodnikov et al. The initial velocity of the flier plate is 3000 m/s. The impact creates a shock wave that propagates into the target with a pressure of 30 GPa, a particle velocity of The reflection of the shock from the wavy free surface creates a horizontal component of particle velocity in addition to a much larger vertical component as material is accelerated into the void. The reflected wave fronts, because they are curved, reinforce each other at some locations, causing damage to form preferentially where the surface profile was initially convex. The horizontal velocities induced near the wavy surface lead to the formation of jets. The jets form along the initially concave parts of the surface. The computed jet tip velocity is 4000 m/s, compared with the measured value of 3700 m/s. By the end of the calculation at 20 μ s, the tips of the jets start to break up. Contours of relative density Recall that the Eulerian formulation of the material response developed in The Eulerian contribution to the force state consists of terms in the material model that do not explicitly involve the undeformed bond configurations. In the fluid model derived in The Lagrangian contribution to the force state is included by summing the force states for the Eulerian and Lagrangian terms: In the microplastic model, bonds respond independently of each other, like a set of nonlinear springs. Under simple shear, some bonds extend while others contract, resulting in forces that resist the shear deformation. The Poisson ratio in three dimensions is restricted to 1/4 in microplastic materials. However, any admissible Poisson ratio can be reproduced by introducing terms that explicitly respond to volume change, as in the linear peridynamic solid model The scalar force state is given by The weighting term This example illustrates the capability described in the previous section for making a transition between a Lagrangian material model that captures features of solid response, including discrete fractures, and an Eulerian model for fluid-like response under large compressions. A cylindrical sample of diameter The initial response of the sample is to undergo nearly uniaxial compression. Stress concentrations near the corners of the specimen nucleate cone-shaped cracks that propagate toward the center ( Impact of a bird on an aircraft structure, or its ingestion by a jet engine, is an important safety concern in aviation. Experimental testing of the response of structures to bird strike usually uses a gelatin simulant of a roughly cylindrical shape shot by a gas gun. Many computational results for bird strike are available in the literature (see Heimbs The numerical simulations presented in this Section use the PDBird code, which is a specialized version of the Emu peridynamic code for modeling the impact of soft projectiles. Details of the method are given in the Appendix. The thermodynamic process is treated as adiabatic, since heat conduction occurs at a negligibly slow rate relative to the mechanical deformation in high-velocity impact. As a validation test, the peridynamic model was applied to a set of experiments by Wilbeck A peridynamic model of a typical test by Wilbeck is shown in The capability described above to combine Lagrangian and Eulerian contributions in a peridynamic material model helps to reduce the spray effect in applying a particle type discretization to the bird strike problem. Rate-dependent material response, including Newtonian viscosity and other rheological effects, may also influence the impact response of gelatin, but they were not included in the peridynamic model.  To demonstrate application of the method to impact on a deformable target, the LG997 calculation was repeated with the rigid target replaced by a thin aluminum plate as was used in the experiment (see Section 7 of The target plate at roughly the time of peak center displacement is shown in The traditional form of peridynamics, which is Lagrangian, encounters difficulties when applied to very large deformations, particularly in fluids. The root cause of these difficulties is that families become so distorted and entangled that Lagrangian material models no longer provide a reasonable physical representation of interactions between material particles. The method proposed here, which, in effect, continually redefines the family of a material particle in the deformed configuration, apparently solves this problem. The computational results demonstrate the viability of the Eulerian form of the peridynamic method for simulating large deformations of compressible fluids under high pressure and the spall of material due to shock waves. The meshless property of the method has important advantages for this application, because of the very large deformations involved and the prevalence of fracture. The ability to seamlessly combine Lagrangian (solid-like) and Eulerian (fluid-like) aspects of material response provides a way to model soft materials such as gels and post-failure response of fragmented solids. The use of a Lagrangian and Eulerian material model in a computation requires two neighbor lists to be supplied for each node: one in the reference configuration, and another in the current configuration. The latter must be updated frequently during the calculation; this results in a modest increase in the execution time. The dual-horizon formulation of peridynamics proposed by Ren et al. Although the examples presented in this paper involve high rate deformation and impact, there is apparently no fundamental reason why a peridynamic Eulerian fluid model could not also be applied to lower rate applications. However, in such applications, the importance of the stabilizing terms described in the Appendix would need to be evaluated relative to the physical response. Modification of the Eulerian material model to reproduce surface tension through the incorporation of nonlocal forces between material particles is currently under investigation. The authors gratefully acknowledge permission to use the data and results of Dr. Gerardo Olivares, National Institute for Aviation Research. Sandia National Laboratories is a multi-program laboratory operated by Sandia Corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary of Lockheed Martin Corporation, for the In this study we use the meshless numerical approximation for the equation of motion The discretized expression for nonlocal density