Rail corrugation is a significant problem in railway engineering, manifesting as an oscillatory wear pattern on the rail head. These profile variations induce unwanted vibrations, excessive noise and other associated problems. Constant train speed for consecutive train passes has been shown to accelerate corrugation growth while widening the probabilistic speed distribution can be shown to mitigate the phenomena. This paper extends this research by investigating the effect of non-uniformity (or asymmetry) in speed distribution on corrugation growth on curved track/corners. To this end, an efficient corrugation growth prediction model is further developed to include quasistatic bogie cornering dynamics and investigated under non-uniform speed distribution conditions. The results indicate that under typical cornering conditions, the rate of corrugation growth is increased (or decreased) when the mean or skewness of the distributed set of passing speeds is biased to higher (or lower) speeds. In particular, for the conditions investigated, controlling (or not controlling) skewness could achieve a further 12% (or −20%) in corrugation growth rate reduction from a nominal 41% reduction due to symmetric speed variation. Hence, non-uniform speed distribution could cause up to a 50% reduction in predicted effectiveness of widened speed distribution control to reduce corrugation growth rate.Wear-type rail corrugation is a dynamic wheel-rail contact phenomena that manifests as a periodic wear pattern on rail heads. It is a significant problem in railways worldwide Wear-type rail corrugation is caused by vehicle vibrations interacting with oscillatory contact conditions between the wheel and rail, resulting in a periodic variance in frictional power between the two running surfaces. This in turn differentially wears the surface of the rail, resulting in a ripple pattern on the rail head. This corrugated profile re-excites the wheel-rail contact and vehicle on subsequent wheel passages, at a similar vibration frequency if the speed is similar, which accelerates the growth process This paper aims to predict and quantify the effects of using a non-uniform speed distribution on the corrugation growth rate under curving/cornering conditions. In particular, asymmetric speed distribution parameters are defined and the additional benefits of asymmetry in corrugation control under a range of bogie cornering speeds are investigated. This was achieved by integrating triangular speed distributions of varying skewness to quantify its effects on the growth rate of the dominant wavelength of corrugation formation. The main contributions of this paper are an enhancement and validation of an efficient corrugation growth model to include bogie-wagon cornering dynamics and quantification of the effect of non-uniform speed distribution on rail corrugation growth in cornering/curved track conditions. To this end, a modified frequency domain corrugation model is first presented as a sequence of transfer functions and combined with a variable speed input to create a new, efficient corrugation growth model for cornering/curving conditions. It is noted that the modelling is made as simple as possible to enable efficient calculation of a distribution of train pass velocities while encapsulating the dominant dynamic behaviour. Subsequently, a method of integrating the corrugation growth function with a series of asymmetric triangular speed distributions is provided. The direct effects of nominal speed on corrugation growth on both rails in cornering is then determined and discussed. Cornering/curving results of traction and bogie yaw angle were benchmarked against a linearised cornering model presented in Wickens Corrugation modelling consists of four basic components shown in The following subsections outline details of the components in In the presence of high lateral contact damping experienced at creep conditions below critical, vibrational dynamics in cornering are dominated by vertical rail and wheel responses to existing profile height variations The variation in normal contact forces causes a variation in frictional power due to the contact mechanics of a bogie negotiating a curve (see The critical slip ratio, Referring to With the roll angle of a cornering wagon defined, the steady state normal forces on the high and low rails, The normal forces on the high and low rails are dominated by the first terms of the respective equations. This consists of half the weight of the train on each rail with a transfer of weight due to an induced centrifugal tipping torque, which increases with speed. The second term is a small correction due to track cant and the third accounts for the effect of the height of the wagon centroid above the roll centre, adjusted for angular deflection of the wagon. These contact forces are for steady state or quasistatic conditions irrespective of roughness profile. In order to evaluate the slip conditions of each wheel for a given speed, the steady state cornering position of the bogie must be located. For this purpose, The traction forces were calculated based on a bogie yaw angle used to find angles of attack of each of the four wheels. With angles of attack and tangential velocity of the train known, the slip ratio on each wheel defined as, Longitudinal traction has been neglected by the current model which assumes that the mechanism of corrugations is via lateral traction variations interacting with vertical dynamics. This assumption is tested in the results section using a more complex 3D model as described in In the presence of an oscillating normal force, the amplitude of oscillation in frictional power will be determined by the variation in creep Above critical slip, the traction ratio is not a closed form solution so a numerical finite difference approximation for solution to Variation in wear may be calculated using the friction wear hypothesis that it is proportional to variations in frictional power. This means that variation in frictional power, when multiplied with an experimental wear coefficient,  and Hence corrugation growth may be predicted using At growth rates much less than one, the equivalent wear sensitivity The growth rate function returns a spectrum in the wavelength domain. Therefore growth rate of the dominant wavelength of corrugation will be the maximum of this function across all wavelengths. In order to investigate the effects of speed distribution asymmetry on growth rate, a triangular probability density function was used. Two constraint cases were defined as being constant average with constant standard deviation, and constant average with constant domain width. Limits of statistical mode were chosen as full right angled left and right skewed curves and domain extremes were calculated to maintain the defined constraint cases. Referring to The standard skewness is defined as the second moment of a data set about the mean and is used as a standard measure of statistical spread asymmetry. For continuous distributions like the ones above, this can be evaluated as an integral of the distribution function, Twenty-five different, evenly spaced statistical modes were chosen between the domain limits for both fixed domain width and fixed standard deviation and 101 speeds were integrated within the domain of each associated distribution curve. All sets maintain an average of 90 The fixed standard deviation curves experience a reduction in the domain width at the upper and lower limits of standard skewness and conversely, the fixed width curves have a higher standard deviation at the upper and lower limits of standard skewness. Simulation parameters were chosen to represent a generic suburban site in Queensland (see The growth rate function, To fully understand the effects of altering the speed distribution skewness, it is necessary to understand the relationship between corrugation growth rate and train speed for a single bogie pass. Since the cant angle, The results highlight the substantial effect of speed on normal force, that is enhanced by wagon roll, and in turn affects the corrugation growth rate. The growth rate over multiple passes will be the geometric mean of the growth rate for all speeds. Therefore, if particular speeds are prone to higher growth for a single pass, a higher probability density at this speed will result in a higher overall growth rate.  The creep sensitivity increases with speed due to a combined effect of reduction in critical creep proportional to the cube root of normal force as per It was of interest to investigate the spectrum of corrugation growth rates versus wavelength to identify the effect of skewness on roughness spectrum with the full effects of curving/cornering conditions included. Note that a negative skewness indicates skew or a longer tail to the left and higher probability density for high speed and the opposite for positive skewness. By inspection of Note the nominal value According to the results in An existing frequency domain corrugation growth model was modified to investigate the effects of an asymmetric speed distribution on the maximum growth rate for trains in cornering. The model included simplified quasistatic bogie/wagon cornering dynamics to navigate large radius corners including the effects of weight transfer between the high and low rail due to centrifugal tipping torque from cant deficiency. Curving/cornering results of traction and bogie yaw angle were benchmarked against a linearised cornering model presented in Wickens Results showed that corrugation growth rate changed significantly in the presence of an asymmetric speed distribution as compared to a symmetric one. Under typical site parameters, a positive skew (higher distribution at lower speeds) in the speed distribution caused a decrease in corrugation growth while a negative skew (higher distribution at higher speeds) caused an increase. This was primarily caused by corrugation growth having a non-linear relationship with speed in cornering due to centrifugal forces as well as a less dominant spatial scaling effect between dynamic response frequency and corrugation wavelength spectra, independent of curving/cornering. These effects could be decreased significantly by decreasing the sensitivity of single pass growth rate to speed, achieved by either widening the curve/corner radius or decreasing the cant deficiency for the nominal speed. In particular, under the site parameters, an additional 12.3% reduction in corrugation growth rate due to speed variance could be achieved by skewing the speed distribution towards lower speeds from 41% reduction under a symmetric triangular speed distribution. This means that speed control via distribution skew manipulation without altering the average and standard deviation of train passing speed is feasible and could improve speed control-based corrugation mitigation schemes by up to 30%. It was also noted that if a maximum speed limit is enforced on a given site and corrugation mitigation is attempted via increased speed variance, the benefits of widening the distribution may be cancelled out either partially or fully by the effect of having a negative skewness (bias to higher speeds). In a worst case scenario, corrugation growth rate was shown to increase as much as 20% under the chosen site simulation parameters. This amounts to a 49% reduction in predicted effectiveness of speed control to reduce corrugation growth rate. It should be noted that, in the current study, vehicle speed varies in a large interval (approximately between 40 The authors are grateful to the The track receptance used in the simulations performed was created using a 5-mode theoretical model. Typically there are only two dominant modes in the frequency range at which corrugation grows and three in the range chosen, so five modes are sufficient to over determine the system. The total track receptance as a function of frequency is given by the equation, The modal parameters used are given in the following table: The resultant receptance of these parameters is plotted in The wheel receptance, The nonlinear bogie cornering model described in this paper was benchmarked against Wickens (chapter 4.4, page 117)  By inspection of The curving corrugation mechanism in this paper is based on the field and modelled behaviour identified in The effect of uncertainties in curving behaviour on corrugation growth is not easy to determine but a guide may be provided in terms of the key growth parameters in Constant value parameters stated, sequences are given ranges calculated variables have equation numbers. half contact patch length (m) half contact patch width (m) creep equation exponent 0.02 track cant elevation (m) 0.055 Kalker coefficient 3.46 creep sensitivity modal damping coefficient for mode, m (N Young׳s modulus (Pa) 210×109 complete elliptic integral of the second kind lateral creep coefficient ( contact patch eccentricity function acceleration of gravity (m shear modulus (Pa) 80×10 corrugation growth rate height of bogie centre of mass from the rail (m) 0.25 height of the geometric roll centre from the rail (m) 0.25 height of wagon centre of mass from the roll centre (m) 1.35 wheel number counted clockwise from front low [ complete elliptic integral of the first kind wear sensitivity to contact force variation equivalent single wheel pass wear sensitivity for a bogie rail head contact stiffness (N modal track stiffness for mode, m (N rolling stiffness of the wagon at its roll centre 402000 wear coefficient [ length of bogie between wheels (m) 2.5 track mode number total train mass per wheelset (kg) 11089 mass of bogie per wheelset (kg) 2271 modal track mass for mode, m (kg) Table 1 mass of wagon plus payload per wheelset (kg) 8818 unsprung mass per wheelset (kg) 970 wheel pass number statistical sample size probability density normal force variance (N) frictional power variance (J normal force on high rail (N) normal force on low rail (N) normal force (N) traction force (N) corner radius (m) 1000 longitudinal relative radius of curvature of contact (m) 0.605 transverse relative radius of curvature of contact (m) 2.400 modal track receptance for mode, m Eq. (A.2) vertical receptance of the rail Eq. (A.1) vertical receptance of the unsprung mass standard skewness train speed (m average train speed (m lower domain limit of speed distribution (m speed distribution mode (m upper limit of speed distribution (m neutral cornering speed (m speed distribution domain width (m track gauge (m) 1.067 yaw angle (rad) steady state wear depth (m) profile height (m) wagon roll (rad) cant angle (rad) 0.052 angle of attack (rad) wavelength (m) [0.06–0.3] traction ratio for wheel maximum coefficient of friction 0.4 coefficient of friction at infinite slip 0.3 Poisson׳s ratio 0.3 creep critical creep density of rail steel (kg speed standard deviation (m cant deficiency (rad) Eq. frequency (Hz) [43–620]