A biocrude was obtained via the catalytic hydrothermal treatment of lignocellulosic biomass. This was further co-hydroprocessed with Straight Run Gas Oil (SRGO) under desulphurization conditions. Amounts of biocrude of up to 20 wt% could be co-processed, while maintaining a diesel stream density within the specifications contained in the road diesel regulation EN 590. The changes in the diesel properties associated with an increasing amount of biocrude were not a simple linear function of biocrude content. Rather, some positive correlations seem to exist between biocrude and SRGO at low biocrude contents, possibly due to intramolecular hydrogen transfer, yielding a diesel stream with a better quality than would be obtained from simply mixing hydrotreated pure streams in a 80% to 20% ratio.The demand for liquid transportation fuels is expected to remain very strong in the decades to come, as it is likely that the increase in ICE (internal combustion engine) efficiency and the development of electric propulsion will be balanced by nearly a doubling of the car fleet in the next 20 years [ The biocrude was taken from a 10,000 slurry tonnes per year capacity demonstration unit in which Pine woodchips, after comminution, were processed hydrothermally in the presence of a catalyst in a tubular reactor, yielding a raw biocrude. The woodchips are prepared by grinding to a suitable particle size for slurry pumping, suspended in water and raised to the operating reaction temperature by a combination of electrical heating, heat exchangers and supercritical steam injection. The slurry is pumped into a vertically oriented, serpentine tubular reactor [ Elemental Analysis of the biocrude obtained after flash separation and distillation showed an oxygen content of around 12%, a low nitrogen content of 0.2%, no detectable sulphur (<0.1%) and a carbon to hydrogen molar ratio of 1.36. This biocrude is of much higher quality than thermal pyrolysis oil, where oxygen contents as high as 40% with H/C molar ratio close to 1.0 are commonly found. The biocrude oxygen content and C/H ratio are indeed not too far from those of the triglycerides present in plant oils or animal fats that are currently commercially hydrogenated. Simulated Distillation (SIMDIS) of this oily product was also performed. Although SIMDIS data of oxygen-containing streams cannot be compared directly with those of pure hydrocarbon streams, since the removal of oxygen will result in a shift to lower temperatures, it nevertheless gives an upper limit of the boiling point ranges in the sample. In our case this indicates that the biocrude would be similar to a petroleum-based diesel stream, with 20 wt% boiling above 360 °C. A commercial sample of a NiMo supported on alumina was used as the hydrotreating catalyst. Its general properties are summarized in As the boiling point of the biocrude heaviest components lies in the range of Vacuum Gas Oil (VGO), the catalyst was shaped into 0.2 to 0.8 mm particles to avoid diffusion limitation, as is commonly done for laboratory VGO hydrocracking [ A fixed bed was used for the processing of Straight Run Gas Oil (SRGO) and its various mixtures with Biocrude (BIO) and/or Light Cycle Oil (LCO) from Fluid Catalytic Cracking. The liquid mixture is fed from a heated, stirred tank (60 °C) though an HPLC pump into the reactor, where it contacts with the catalyst in the presence of hydrogen. Liquids are collected in a condenser at room temperature below the reactor, while the non-condensed gases are released through a Back Pressure Regulator (BPR) valve and can be analyzed online by a gas chromatograph. 4 g of catalyst were mixed with Silicon Carbide (CSi) to adjust the total bed volume to 8 ml (9 mm internal diameter, 130 mm length) in order to attain bed isothermicity and avoid coke plugging. CSi layers of around 1 cm thickness are also added above and below the catalytic bed to act as preheater and minimize heat losses from the bed. After sulphidation of the catalyst, the reactor was set to operating temperature and the system was pressurized with hydrogen. Once the pressure was stabilized, feed injection was started. Feed rate was 4 g/h (Weight Hourly Space velocity 1 h For each mass balance, the liquids recovered from the separator were weighed. At least one gas analysis was carried out during the period. Gas samples were taken downstream of the BPR valve. CO, CO Saturates, including paraffins, naphthenes, olefins (if any) and also multi-ring saturated compounds of the decalin (octahydrophenanthrene, two rings) and 18-norabietane (three-ring) families. Monoaromatics, including hydroaromatics with one aromatic ring such as tetrahydronaphthalene and octahydroanthracene families Polyaromatics with at least two aromatics rings, including naphthalenes, anthracenes, fluorenes families. Oxygenated compounds, mainly of the phenols and guaiacol families. A Straight Run Gas Oil was used as a reference feedstock to be treated under typical hydrotreatment conditions at 70 bar, 350 °C and a space velocity of 1 h The inclusion of Biocrude in the base stock led to an increase in the gas yield and water yield, proportional to the amount of Biocrude in the mix as shown in The hydroprocessed oil recovered showed a slight increase in light fraction (boiling point below 216 °C) and a slight decrease in the middle and heavy fractions with the increase of biocrude in the feed, in accordance with the distillation curve found when processing 100% biocrude. Note, that in spite of the observed shifts, the whole hydroprocessed oil distillation properties still fully match the distillation specifications for road diesel such as those found in regulation EN 590. Interestingly, although the oil had a lower boiling point range, its density increased. Mixtures with up to 20 wt% biocrude yielded oils that still laid within road diesel specifications (0.82–0.845 g/cm The very low amount of oxygenated products indicate that the oxygen content of the hydroprocessed oil will be very low, indeed it remained below the detection limits of Elemental Analysis (≤0.2 wt%). Meanwhile, the oil from processing 100% biocrude showed a 0.7 wt% oxygen content on Elemental Analysis. Most of the oxygenated components detected in the hydroprocessed oil were of the methoxybenzene, phenol and guaiacol families, their relative quantities and oxygen content being consistent with the observed overall composition of 0.7 wt% oxygen. Previous investigators found that such low oxygen contents in the hydrotreated products could only be obtained under more severe operating conditions when treating unmixed biocrude, with fully deoxygenated oil from 100% biocrude requiring space velocities of 0.1 h Mixtures of 80% base stock with 20% LCO or a blend of 10% LCO and Biocrude were also processed as comparison to common refinery operation. The results relevant to this comparison are summarized in Upon replacing biocrude by LCO, the gas yield decreased linearly and went back to the same value than observed for the base stock. While ethane and butanes yields were similar for all mixtures, methane and propane yields increased linearly with the content of biocrude ( None of the mixtures up to 20 wt% of LCO or Biocrude seems to experience deactivation during the 50 h on-stream of the testing, which was also reflected in the elemental analysis of the spent catalyst ( Four hydroprocessed oils from SRGO, SRGO + Biocrude, SRGO + LCO and biocrude feeds are compared in The biocrude/SRGO mixture resulted in a product composition similar to that obtained from just SRGO. However, the presence of characteristic diterpene components from the biocrude is clearly visible (area 9). An increase in hydro-aromatic structures is also observed compared to the base case. Moreover, various three-ring, saturated components (area 10) with 14 to 16 carbons (C Finally, the oil from the SRGO-LCO mixture showed a characteristic increase of saturated three-ring structures of 12–16 carbons (area 11). LCO is very rich in di- and tri-aromatics of the naphthalene and phenanthrene/anthracene families, which have between 10 and 16 carbons. After hydrotreatment, the whole range of saturated and partially saturated compounds that could be derived from these aromatics is observed. As a result, the oils from the SRGO-LCO and SRGO-biocrude mixture had similar properties, with a slight advantage for biocrude-containing mixtures as they contained a slightly higher proportion of saturated structures. The relationship between the groups listed in Saturates includes areas 1, 2, 6, 9, 10 and 11 Monoaromatics includes areas 3, 4 and 7 Polynuclear Aromatics corresponds to area 5 Oxygenated products correspond to area 8. We have shown that up to 20 wt% of a biocrude obtained through catalytic hydrothermal treatment of biomass could be co-processed with a Straight Run Gasoil, yielding a hydroprocessed oil having a boiling point range and a density fully within diesel road specifications (EN590) and with a very low content of oxygen. While mixtures with a high biocrude content might lead to premature catalyst deactivation due to a higher coke formation rate, keeping to lower amounts of biocrude provided a stable operation with complete hydrogenation of the oxygenates present in the feed during a 50 h run without a significant increase in coke on catalyst. Compared to light cycle oil (LCO), a highly aromatic diesel range feed derived from catalytic cracking, the biocrude was found to be easier to treat. A number of partially or fully hydrogenated structures with fused two- and three-rings explains the increase in density when processing biocrude, in a similar way to what is observed when processing blends containing LCO. A number of structures related to abietane are also observed, which are very likely to be derived directly from pine resin components. In spite of the increase of mono-aromatics, the hydroprocessed diesel stream remains well inside specifications for blends of biocrude up to 20 wt%, with barely any effect on polynuclear aromatics content. The authors thank