The roasting of molybdenum concentrates using NaCl has been carried out. During the roasting process, Mo is present both as a gas (25–40%) and as solid residue (60–75%). Molybdenum chloride and oxychloride condensate both dissolve in the alkaline solution with molybdenum recovery up to 100%. The results of the study show that 30–32% of molybdenum (sodium molybdate) in the roasted residue is water-soluble. This paper proposes a methodology for leaching roasted residue in two stages: first by water, then by alkaline solutions. Using this methodology, molybdenum recovery from the roasted residue exceeds 99%. It was determined that up to 40% of the sulfur contained in the concentrate remains in the roasted residue after the roasting process in the form of sodium sulfate, which enables a significant reduction of SO2 generation. The results were achieved under optimal roasting conditions: a roasting temperature of 420–430°С, NaCl ratio of 100% (from concentrate weight), and 90min roasting time.Molybdenum concentrates are generally processed using technologies based on oxidizing roasting followed by hydrometallurgical processing of the roasted product ( As an alternative to the above processes, a combined method for processing sulfide raw materials can be used. It involves preliminary pyrometallurgical preparation; low-temperature roasting (below 500 Unfortunately, there are few studies regarding chloridizing roasting of molybdenum concentrate using sodium chloride as the agent. Rajic and Zlatanovic were the first to identify the solid products after reacting MoS Thus, the aim of this work was to define an optimal roasting process based on thermodynamic data, the products obtained at various roasting conditions during molybdenite transformation, and on the distribution of molybdenum between the gas and solid phase, which is suitable for either water or alkali leaching. Thermodynamical analysis of possible reactions that can occur in the MoS The roasting chemistry is quite complex. In general, the interaction between metal sulfides and sodium chloride in the presence of oxygen is described by the principal reaction: However, from thermodynamics, a wide range of reactions take place and lead to the formation of chlorides, sulfates and metal oxides at temperatures from 300 to 500 The subject of this study is a molybdenum concentrate produced by flotation of copper-molybdenum ores from the Erdenet mineral deposit. The molybdenum concentrate composition (wt%) is 45.23% Mo, 2.30% Fe, and 1.41% Cu. The chemical composition of the concentrate was determined by ICP (inductively coupled plasma). NaCl was used as the chlorinator. The concentrate was mixed with sodium chloride in desired proportions and then roasted in a furnace at different temperatures and times. The experimental setup is shown in The chlorine-containing molybdenum compounds were collected in the condenser and absorbers. Three types of molybdenum-bearing products were formed as a result of the roasting process: the roasted concentrate, as well as the chlorides and oxychlorides, which were recovered from condenser and absorber solutions. The roasted concentrate was removed from the crucible and was then leached in either the water or the alkali solution. Water leaching was performed for one hour at 90 The solid roasting products were analysed by X-ray diffraction and scanning electron microscope (FEI Company SEM Quanta 650); microanalysis was conducted using Energy Dispersive Spectrometry (EDAX). Gaseous products were analysed by mass-spectrometry (NETZSCH QMS 403C Aëolos®). The sample of concentrate and sodium chloride mixture (180 During roasting, molybdenite oxidizes and partially chlorinates. As a result of chlorination, the molybdenite transforms into volatile chlorides and oxychlorides. The fraction of molybdenum that volatilizes can be up to 40% depending on the roasting process conditions. The transformation of molybdenite into the gas phase during low-temperature roasting as a function of NaCl to concentrate ratio is shown in The influence of roasting time on Mo volatilization is presented in  The mechanism that describes the reaction and consequently the distribution of gaseous MoO From a practical point of view, it is very important to understand the behavior of sulfur during the roasting process; the decreased formation of SO During the roasting process, it was found that up to 60–61% of sulfur volatilized, and that nearly half of the sulfur forms sulfates, which remains in the roast residue. The data presented in Apart from decreasing the roasting temperature, the addition of sodium chloride to the molybdenum concentrate before roasting leads to another significant effect, the formation of water-soluble molybdenum bearing compounds (molybdenum polymolybdates). It permits leaching of Mo from the roast residue using the least expensive reagent (water). This illustrates the importance of researching the roasting conditions and their influence on Mo recovery using water leaching of the roast residue. The relationship between the NaCl fraction in the mixture and the subsequent recovery of Mo from the residue after roasting and water leaching is shown in If the NaCl ratio does not exceed 25%, the Mo recovery using water leaching is quite low (less than 25%). Increasing the amount of NaCl to 25% or higher reveals a mostly linear dependency: each additional 50% of NaCl added to the mixture increases the Mo recovery by only 2–3%. It is not economically feasible to add more than 100–150% of NaCl. The relationship between roasting time and Mo recovery from the roast residue by water leaching is shown in   The efficiency of molybdenum recovery from alkaline leaching as a function of roasting time is included in It should be noted that, during the first 30 The optimum roasting temperature occurs within the range of 420–450 In summary, the optimum roasting conditions for molybdenum recovery with an alkaline leach are 420–450 Earlier ( Because of this, scanning electronic microscopy was used to determine the presence of sodium sulfate and confirm the presence of the compounds identified previously by X-ray diffraction. The results reveal ( The gaseous products of the molybdenite concentrate and sodium chloride reaction were analysed using a mass-spectrometer ( From the spectrum, it can be seen that after 94 Thus, it was determined that the products of the reaction between the molybdenite concentrate and sodium chloride are: a) solid MoO As mentioned earlier ( Molybdenite primarily oxidizes to form MoO In the presence of O This leads to a shift of the equilibrium for The generated MoO Combining According Le Chatelier's principle, the shift of equilibrium towards the products of the reaction leads to a significant acceleration of The presence of sodium polymolybdate (Na The formation of MoO MoO However, Most of the reactions mentioned above are likely to occur at 300–500 However, experimental evidence of Na Likewise, for The main requirement for molybdenum dioxide dichloride and sodium molybdate formation from molybdenite is the foregoing reaction where molybdenum trioxide is obtained. The presence of MoCl The roasting process residue, which contains up to 32% of water-soluble sodium molybdites, is suitable for two-stage leaching; the first with water and then with an alkaline solution ( The optimum roasting parameters ensure complete transformation of molybdenite and, therefore, complete molybdenum recovery from the roast residue and the gas phase. However, the amount of molybdenum converted to the gas phase should be low to minimize the requirements for gas-handling equipment. The amount of water-soluble Mo in the products should be high to reduce the cost of alkaline leaching. Analysis and evaluation of Based on the investigations in the current study, a conceptual flowsheet was developed for processing molybdenum concentrates based on roasting with sodium chloride. It has been determined that up to 40% of sulfur (as sodium sulfate) remains in the residue after roasting. The other roasting products have been identified. The reaction mechanisms have been provided to define products during the reaction. The present research has led to the development of a conceptual flowsheet for the processing of molybdenite concentrates. The flowsheet is based on roasting in the presence of sodium chloride. The optimum parameters for roasting were determined to be: a temperature of 420 to 430 The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Ministry of Education and Science of the Russian Federation in the framework of Increase Competitiveness Program of NUST «MISiS».