The mathematical model of partition curve is fundamental to evaluate and predict the gravity separation performance in coal cleaning industry. Existing models have achieved good fitting accuracy but lack explicit physical meanings. From the perspective of probability and error distribution, the common characteristics of actual partition curve and its differential curve were analyzed according to the generalized central limit theorem. A skew normal-Laplace (SNL) model with three parameters was established based on asymmetry and fat tail characteristics. Parameters in the SNL model represent location, scale and skewness of partition curve, which reflect separation density and error distribution, therefore it is convenient to evaluate the efficiency of the whole process. Compared with the existing models, the SNL model achieved smaller deviation with fewer parameters and conformed better to physical reality. For practical application, the parameters transformation law when separation density changed was provided according to their properties.Gravity separation is one of the main methods of mineral processing and relies on different densities of minerals. The performance of gravity separation is depicted by partition curve, which shows the relationship between average density and partition coefficient. Partition coefficient is the percentage of each density fraction distributed in reject, and the density where partition coefficient equals 50% is often regarded as separation density, which represents the cut point where a separation has taken place. Partition curve and its mathematical model are fundamental to evaluate and predict the gravity separation performance. They are also the bases of coal cleaning plant design. Mathematical models such as Whiten equation (WE) ( NI model could explain the separation process from the perspective of probability and error distribution theory ( Although modified models achieve higher fitting accuracy, they are still on the basis of normal distribution and adding extra characteristic parameters increases model complexity. The two-parameter models with relatively low accuracy are yet predominant in practical application and the evaluation index Ep that represents the distribution between partition coefficients 25% and 75% cannot reflect the entire process performance. An accurate model with physical meaning has not been applied. Accuracy is crucial for a mathematical model and parameters with clear physical meanings could be directly used to evaluate the whole process. When separation density changed, parameters could be transformed accordingly, therefore making it convenient in practical application. In this study, the authors employed a new probability distribution in the model building. It was investigated by analyzing the probability characteristics of partition curve and its differential curve. The proposed model achieved higher fitting accuracy with fewer parameters, thus making it superior in utilization. According to the physical meaning of NI model, the partition curve accords with normal cumulative distribution, therefore its differential curve can be regarded as probability density curve which shows the separation density fluctuation and error distribution clearly. In order to obtain the differential curve, a continuous MHT model function with the highest fitting accuracy was used to represent the actual partition curve. Model parameters were got by nonlinear curve fitting method, and then the differential curve could be plotted through differential operation of the model function. Features of the actual partition curve and its differential curve were summarized by comparing the differences between MHT model and NI model, and the probability characteristics were analyzed based on the generalized central limit theorem. The partition coefficient data of various gravity separators used in curve fitting were provided in Appendix A and they were collected from literature of single machine inspections and practical production in different coal cleaning plants in China. The separators included three-product dense media cyclone (TPDMC), jig, heavy medium vessel bath (HMVB), teeter bed separator (TBS), spiral and air dense medium fluidized bed (ADMFB). For convenience, the first and second stage of the TPDMC are designated as TPDMC-1 and TPDMC-2. The fitting accuracy is evaluated by root mean square error (RMSE), which is defined as: In probability theory, the central limit theorem states that the sum of a large number of independent random variables approximates a normal distribution. Assuming that the separation process was solely based on density and the variation of separation density was caused by various independent random factors, each of which had a minimal impact, the total variation of separation density would typically subject to a normal distribution. However, particle size has an obvious influence on gravity separation performance. With the decrease of particle size, the accuracy of gravity separation decreases. ( The central limit theorem requires that the random variables have finite variance. While the generalized central limit theorem holds that the limit of the sum of random variables obeys the stable distribution despite the assumption of finite variance ( The stable distribution is parametrized by μ, σ, α and β, which indicate location, scale, tail and skewness of the probability density curve respectively. Normal distribution is a special form when α = 2 and β = 0, and it has the thinnest tail in the family of stable distributions ( A set of partition coefficient data from Appendix A including different types of gravity separators was used in NI model and MHT model fitting. The fitting curves and differential curves are shown in (1) Asymmetry. Although the partition curve takes a shape of S on the whole, it is not symmetrical about the line of x = (2) Fat tail. The differential curve describes the probability distribution of separation density in detail and the differences between the two models are evident. As shown in The probability characteristics of partition curve can be explained by particle size effect on gravity separation. The probability of fine-size particles flowing into light product is high. It makes no difference to the separation of low-density fine-size particles, but the distribution error of high-density fine-size particles is large, making the partition coefficient of high-density particles lower than the NI model values. Since the particle size range of separation is wide and fine fraction content is high due to the fully mechanized mining method, the differential curve is asymmetric and has fat tail on the right end. The Laplace distribution which has a convenient computational form and has been widely used in financial data modeling and value at risk measurement ( and the Laplace cumulative distribution function (LCDF) is: The differences between Laplace distribution and normal distribution are shown in Piecewise functions are often used to express the asymmetric distributions ( and the SNL probability distribution function is: The fitting accuracy and universal applicability of SNL model were validated with 33 sets of data in Appendix A which were collected from literature including different types of gravity separators. Fitting results of the SNL model were compared with others and the RMSE values were listed in The ability of SNL model to describe each of the density fractions in clean coal was validated with a set of TBS partition coefficient data from literature ( The SNL model conforms to practical situation better than other models. In In practical application, the initial parameters of SNL model could obtain through curve fitting method with a set of partition coefficient data which represents the ability of a separator. Parameters can be transformed according to their characteristics when predicting separation results of different raw coal which requires different separation densities. Keeping Ep, imperfection (I = Ep/(δp-δm), δp is separation density and δm is the density of separating medium) and Ep/δ The differential partition curve which represents the probability distribution of separation density provides new sights into separation evaluation. Asymmetry and fat tail characteristics of partition curve are summarized according to probability and error distribution theory. The Laplace distribution was used to express the fat tail and a piecewise function was used to describe the asymmetry. A three-parameter skew normal-Laplace model of partition curve was built. Parameters σ  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This study was financially supported by the 