Aqueous foams are formed of air bubbles dispersed in a water phase. Despite the simplicity of these ingredients, the resulting foams can have an impressive range of material properties. In this review, an overview will be given on recent results obtained on the foaming properties of particles, self-assembled and aggregated structures. We will highlight how the presence of objects inside the foam can drastically modify the foam stability from unstable to ultrastable.Aqueous foams are formed of air bubbles dispersed in a water phase. Despite the simplicity of these ingredients, the resulting foams can have an impressive range of material properties. The foam can have a fleeting existence, as champagne bubbles that disappear within minutes on top of the glass. They can also be solid, yet fluid under the shear of the razor blade in shaving foam. Bubbles also transform cream to a sensual delight, by making it airy and light. In addition to these few examples foams are found in a whole range of applications: detergents, oil recovery, food, and cosmetic products     In the case of surfactant monolayers, an exchange of surfactant monomers can occur between the bulk and the interface due to the freely desorption and adsorption of the monomers at the interface for soluble surfactants. This phenomenon leads to a low resistance of the monolayer to compression. The resulting foam resistance to coarsening is low. In the same way, the mobility of the surfactant at the interface can have an impact in the drainage rate. In the case of surfactant monomers which can desorb from the interface, the surface coverage can be in some cases too low to avoid the coalescence phenomenon. The presence of a surfactant monolayer influences the coarsening process depending on the mechanical properties of the surface Despite decades of research, the correlation of the foam stability and aging mechanisms to the chemical nature of the foam stabilizer remains a great challenge at the frontier between chemistry and physics  All these self-assembled and aggregated structures can be blocked inside the foam liquid channels and increase the viscosity of the liquid phase leading to slow down or arrest drainage. They can also adopt various configurations at the air/water interfaces with possibilities of rearrangement inside the films due to the confinement. The challenge remains to link the behaviour of all these objects in bulk (not in foams) to their behaviour when they are inside, or stabilising foams. The main question is to determine if the self-assembly or aggregate structure is modified because of the presence of the interfaces and the confinement within the soft walls. Similar challenge concerns the understanding of emulsions stabilized by particles, aggregated proteins and surfactant self-assemblies, as described in a recent review In this review, an overview will be given on recent results obtained on the foaming properties of particles, self-assembled and aggregated structures. We will highlight how the presence of objects inside the foam can drastically modify the foam stability from unstable to ultrastable. Solid particles can be used in foams either to suppress foaming, or to increase foam stability. The way in which the particles interact with the bubbles can be coarsely predicted by the hydrophobicity or hydrophilicity of the particles, which is described by the contact angle the particles make with the interface. A hydrophobic particle would mainly be immersed in the gas phase, and have a small contact angle, while hydrophilic particles will stay mostly in the aqueous phase and have large contact angles. Particles of intermediate wettability sit squarely at the interface, and have contact angles in the vicinity of 90°. In general The presence of particles that are When hydrophilic particles are added to foams they tend to remain in the aqueous phase ( Particles much smaller than the bubble diameter ( As the particle concentration is increased studies of individual films show that the stratification of even larger films can be obtained Using colloidal particles in conditions where they make even stronger gels, allows for the creation of foams that are stable indefinitely, if the gel elasticity is sufficiently high to arrest both drainage and coarsening. This is often done with particles that are both surface active adsorbing onto the bubble interfaces (for example through the addition of a co-surfactant) and that gel in the bulk (  Studies at the scale of a single PB have shown how the transport of particles of different buoyancies is modified due to the presence of interfaces In more concentrated particle suspensions, where both the particle suspension and the foam have a yield stress, the suspended particles can even arrest drainage Surfactants are amphiphilic molecules with a hydrophobic part and a hydrophilic part. They play an important role in both foam formation and their subsequent stability. When a surfactant is added to water, it spontaneously adsorbs at the surface and decreases the surface energy. When surfactants are adsorbed at the interface, a monolayer is formed, with the hydrophilic parts of the surfactant molecule in contact with water and the hydrophobic parts in contact with air. All the properties of the surfactant monolayers are directly linked to the nature (anionic, cationic and non-ionic) and the structure of the surfactant used to produce the foam In some surfactants systems, an increase in the surfactant concentration above a threshold concentration known as critical aggregation concentration (CAC) leads to the formation of aggregates in bulk such as lamellar phases, vesicles, tubes, etc. ( For the same surfactant molecule, various foaming stabilities can be obtained as a function of the surfactant aggregated structure. For example, some recent studies have focused on the effect of the fatty acid aggregate structure on the foaming properties In order to elucidate the link between the structure adopted by the aggregate inside the foam with the resulting foam stability and aging, multiscale approaches are necessary, starting with the characterization of surfactant aggregates in bulk before foaming, continuing with the structure under confinement in the Plateau borders and in the thin films and then at the air/water interface. Only recently, studies have clearly described the link between the surfactant aggregate and the resulting foam stability mechanisms using such an approach highlighting the importance of the aggregates at all length scales of the foam structure. Indeed, in the last decade new techniques have been developed and applied to characterize precisely the structures present inside a three dimensional aqueous foam leading to an accurate determination of the aggregate structures both in the Plateau borders or in the film and at the interface. In recent years, Small Angle Neutron Scattering (SANS) has been applied to investigate The self-assembled structures can also remain entrapped in the foam films separating bubbles depending on their size and composition. For example, Curschellas et al. have shown by coupling SANS and confocal microscopy that polyglycerol ester surfactant vesicles are entrapped both in the Plateau borders and in the thin films ( At the air/water interface, various techniques can be used to characterize the properties of interfacial layers made from self-assembled surfactant structures such as tensiometry, interfacial rheology, Brewster angle microscopy and scanning force microscopy. In the last decades, neutron reflectivity has been successfully applied to characterize the surfactant adsorption for various interfacial architectures such as monolayers, lamellar phases or multilamellar vesicles in the vicinity of the air/water interface If the surfactant has self-assembled, there is first the adsorption of free molecules and then a release of molecules from the aggregates to the air/water interface. In some cases the surfactants adsorb until the formation of a dense monolayer with low interfacial tension and high compression rigidity and elasticity Proteins are the foam stabilizer of choice in the food industry. They are amphiphilic components that can adsorb at the air/water interface because they possess both hydrophobic regions (amino acid residues) and hydrophilic ones. In most proteins, the hydrophobic regions tend to be shielded away from the aqueous phase by the more hydrophilic regions which make the proteins water soluble. Thus, factors which tend to increase the exposure of hydrophobic regions to the aqueous phase will increase the protein surface activity. Protein adsorption at the interface and the subsequent changes in interfacial properties depend on the protein structure, the net charge, the exposed hydrophobicity and the size of the proteins. Nevertheless, while there is plenty of literature about foaming and interfacial properties of proteins, there are only few generalized concepts on protein stabilized foams More complex systems of aggregated protein structures attract more and more interest. Recently several studies have been published focusing on the effect of protein aggregates on the properties of interfaces and foams. In most cases, the protein aggregates are obtained from heat or pressure treatment. As a function of the nature of the protein and of the treatment, various aggregates can be obtained. For example, the heating of globular proteins can lead to four types of aggregates: long semi-flexible fibrils, flexible strands, dense spherical particles and fractal aggregates Solutions of protein aggregates can have different foaming properties in comparison with solutions of non-aggregated proteins depending on the protein nature, the structure and size of the aggregate and on the solution conditions. In the case of foams obtained from whey protein fibres, the foam stability and foamability have been shown to be significantly improved in comparison with non-fibrous whey proteins The mechanism by which aggregates contribute to foam stabilization is not completely elucidated. It is not clear why one type of aggregate is more useful than another to improve formation and stabilization of foams. Depending on the size and the structure, the proteins aggregates can increase or decrease the foam stability in comparison with their analogous non-aggregated protein. The presence of protein aggregates plays a role at all foam length scales. To perfectly understand how these structures can stabilize the foam, multiscale approaches have been applied recently in the literature for various systems As a function of the aggregates, they can adsorb or not at the interface. When they do not adsorb to the interface, they remain in the bulk and can be confined inside the foam films and the Plateau borders. The protein aggregates can be entrapped inside the Plateau borders as a function of the structure and size of the aggregates. For various aggregated protein systems of few hundred nanometres in size, the foam drainage rate decreases in presence of aggregates due to an increase of bulk viscosity The use of the thin film balance apparatus has been very useful to understand how the protein aggregates behave inside thin liquid films. In the case of fractal betalactoglobulin aggregates, the films are either fluid or gelified depending on the aggregate size A useful method for the study of protein aggregates in films is the modified thin film liquid cell, where the liquid between two adsorbed layers in a thin liquid film can be exchanged Non-aggregated proteins are known to adsorb to the air/water interface more rapidly than protein aggregates due to their higher mobility. For fractal betalactoglobulin aggregates the differences in surface tension observed show that the mechanisms of adsorption and anchorage of protein aggregates are different from non-aggregated proteins Recently, the interfacial properties of fibre aggregates from various proteins have been studied We have shown how the presence of particles, whether solid or composed of surfactants, proteins and polymers can influence foam stability. They can be used to destroy foams, but we have focused on the cases where they enhance foam stability. The objects can adsorb onto the gas/liquid interfaces to create thick solid films which can be sufficiently rigid to arrest coarsening. They can remain in the liquid phase, where they can slow down drainage either by blocking in the Plateau borders or simply by changing the viscosity of the fluid. It is even possible to create foams which are stable for months if not years by choosing correctly the stabilizing agents. Many open questions remain on the stability and ageing of foams, independently of the stabilizing objects or processes present. The use of particles, proteins, amphiphilic aggregates, or polymers also adds complexity to the study of foams. The objects used can have a specific structure of their own over several length-scales and relaxation time-scales over several decades. This makes the study of these foams particularly difficult and requires specific experimental approaches spanning the whole structures and time-scales. We can also invert the question and ask what is the influence of the gas/water interfaces and in particular the potential confinement in the foam liquid channel on the assembly of these objects? We can use foams as confining media providing us with macroscopic samples of micro-objects confined by soft walls. The complexity of the objects can also be tuned to an advantage; they can be specially designed to understand specific foam ageing behaviour. Studies have been carried out using light-sensitive surfactants to probe interfacial adsorption and film stability The organization and behaviour of aggregated structures in foams still holds open questions, which will allow us both to further understand the mechanisms of foam ageing and to achieve even finer control over the foams. We would like to thank