A device based on an electrochemical transfer junction (constituted by M
                        x
                     Mo6S8 or M
                        x
                     Mo6Se8) placed between two tanks allows the transfer of cations by application of current density controlled between electrodes placed in tanks. The transfer protocol was tested on different mixed electrolytes containing cations directly engaged in the batteries industry (M2+
                     =Co2+, Ni2+, Cd2+, Zn2+, Mn2+, Cu2+). Good performances of the process are provided until 1.6mAcm−2. The electrolysis through an electrochemical transfer junction made of Chevrel phases represents a suitable method for the selective extraction of cations with appreciable selectivity rates with an appropriate choice of the host lattice (sulfide or selenide). Remarkable separations between Co/Ni, Zn/Mn with Mo6S8 and Cd/Zn, Cd/Ni, Cd/Co and Zn/Ni, with Mo6Se8 were observed.The high mobility of cations in Chevrel phases M This reaction is easily realized when the guest cation radius is less than 0.1 The device is built around an electrochemical transfer junction (ETJ) consisting in a compacted Mo M reversible deinsertion of the same cation at the interface M The cation mobility into the Chevrel phase allows the de-solvated cation transfer from the source electrolyte (liquid waste) to the second electrolyte (up-grading solution or valorization) without any transfer of other chemical species from any compartment. The initial published development was led and validated for the Co The device is based on the arrangement between two tanks of a host lattice membrane offering insertion capabilities. The junction membrane consisting of Chevrel compound crystallite conglomeration has to fulfill the following conditions: a good watertightness, a satisfying mechanical behavior, adapted dimensions (thickness, area), highest possible electronic conductivity and a maximal compactness allowing the cation diffusion into the matrix from a crystallite to another one. All these reasons guided the choice of reactive hot pressing for the elaboration of the ETJ. A powder mixture of a composition adapted for the desired material stoichiometry was realized. Electrochemical transfer junctions were prepared at Unité Sciences Chimiques de Rennes. For the sulfide phases, disks of a ternary Chevrel phase were chosen as initial material according to a procedure previously described For the selenide phase, the direct synthesis of the binary Mo All experiments were carried out in a laboratory built cell. It is made of PVC and constituted of two compartments (100 The EJT was maintained by a mechanical grip between two compartments and an electronic contact allowed to control the potential. The system of insertion–deinsertion was studied in a galvanostatic mode established between the anode A This device can be used in a single cell for a classical electrochemical work in a three-electrode configuration with the Chevrel phase disk as the working electrode. This configuration was used to condition the mineral membrane prior to proceed on the cation transfer. Electrochemical de-intercalation of copper ternary sulfide was performed in Na For a weak current density, there is an over-occupation of the sites to interface 1 and under-occupation to interface 2. The interface potentials are those of the intercalation and de-intercalation systems for the Co/Mo For a limit current density, the totality of the intercalation (at interface 1) and de-intercalation (at interface 2) sites is involved. The gradient is thus maximal and results in highest diffusion speed. At both interfaces only reactions of intercalation and de-intercalation take place and give a 100% faradic yield. For a current density higher than the limit one, the intercalation sites remain saturated at interface 1 but there is an additional reaction of the system H The phenomenon of transport in the matrix refers to a cation flow in a concentration gradient established by the development of the two reactions at each interface ( The follow-up of the potentials of interfaces 1 and 2 of the ETJ compared with reference electrodes (SCE) in both electrolytes and monitored by a Keithley multimeter (KEI 2700) allowed to control the electrochemical process during the cation transfer operation. During the electrochemical transfer operation 1 The ETJ composition was measured by X Fluorescence spectrophotometer (Bruker AXS S4 Explorer). X-ray diffraction data were obtained with a Bruker diffractometer (D8 Advance, CuK Before studying the transfer of M The voltamperograms representative of the behavior of the Mo According to the exploitation defined by Boulanger and Lecuire The cation transfer between the source electrolyte (0.1 During experiments the potentials of the insertion interface in compartment 1 and the deinsertion interface in compartment 2 were measured versus reference electrode. In this case, the applied intensity simultaneously serves to the insertion reactions and the solvent reduction. Similarly, the potentials of the interface 2 are situated in the range of the cation deinsertion. A continuous variation was observed until 1.6 These reactions induce the degradation of the Mo Two domains can therefore be defined. In the first domain for lower current densities (inferior to 1.6 During the electrochemical transfer operation, the quantity of transferred cation determined from withdraw in compartment 2 was measured as a function of time and current densities applied up to 1.6 The composition and XRD analysis of the membrane before and after transferring each cation ( The electrochemical transfer of various cations being studied, the examination of selective cation transfer from binary mixtures was examined. The classification of the normal potentials located in the scales determined by analytical study suggests possible separation. Synthetic mixtures representative of the industrial electrolytes of interest were selected and realized such as: Co/Ni (leachates of Ni hydrometallurgy), Cd/Zn (leachates of Zn hydrometallurgy) and Cd/Ni (leachates of accumulators). The studies of selective transfer were carried out on both matrices Mo The voltamperogram relative to the Mo It is possible to predict a cadmium insertion without reaching the insertion of zinc if the electrochemical parameters remain in the higher potential range. So the Cd The electrochemical cadmium and zinc insertion curve in Mo The quantitative study of the selective transfer using each matrix (Mo An improvement of the selectivity rate is reached by a modification of the ETJ (Mo The separation between Co Concerning the selenide host lattice powder tested in this work, the voltammetric curves ( The transfer process into double compartments was studied for Mo The electrochemical insertion of nickel and cadmium from a Ni/Cd mixture in Mo Using the selenium phase (Mo The amounts the cadmium and nickel transferred from an equimolar 0.1 The stoichiometry and crystallographic parameters of the ETJ were checked after the transfer performed on the mixed solution ( Transfer experiments were also performed with other equimolar electrolytes: Zn The selectivity rate depends on the current densities. A highest selectivity is reached with the highest current densities inducing moreover highest transfer speeds. One can notice that the nature of the electrochemical transfer junction ETJ plays a key role in the selective transfer of the cations. The selectivity of Cd The feasibility of the two cells process for a transfer cation based on the electrochemical reversible systems insertion/deinsertion in Chevrel phases was reported. The possibility to use an electrochemical transfer junction (ETJ) (Chevrel phases Mo This selective extraction of cations in solution by an electrolytic process could open many ways of application in the mineral liquid waste management. This process is now being developed for investigations of real industrial liquid wastes. The authors would like to gratefully acknowledge Dr. Odile Merdrignac-Conanec (Unité des Sciences Chimiques de Rennes, Verres et Céramiques) for her help in the synthesis of electrochemical transfer junction of Chevrel phases by Hot Pressing.