Background
                  In this study we describe the morphology of the posteromedial fragment in pertrochanteric fractures using 3D CT scans and answer two questions 1) Do differences exist between the 3D CT appearances of posteromedial fragments and the depictions made in the AO classification 2) Does the posteromedial fragment affect stability in pertrochanteric fractures, in terms of fracture collapse?
               
                  Methods
                  Preoperative CT scans of eight 31-A1 and fifty 31-A2 fractures were analysed. The presence of PM fragment, its fragmentation, greater trochanter (GT) involvement, lesser trochanter (LT) fragment size (in terms of its posterior and medial extent as well as LT length), LT fragment displacement (in terms of medial displacement and rotation) were determined. All fractures were treated with a DHS. Fracture collapse was determined on postoperative radiographs. The relationship between fracture collapse and patient factors including age, gender, fracture type (A1 versus A2), characteristics of the posteromedial fragment, and the presence of a lateral wall fracture were determined.
               
                  Results
                  Three out of eight 31-A1 fractures demonstrated a separate GT fragment (three part fracture). Out of the 50 31-A2 fractures, 12 had a single PM fragment, which included the LT and GT in continuity. The more common four part fractures seem to form by further fragmentation of this basic form. In A2 fractures, the GT was almost always broken and the broken fragment comprised a mean 56% of normal GT. The LT fragment involved an average of 74% of the posterior wall, and an average of 36% of the medial wall of the proximal femur. Larger LT fragments were less displaced as compared to smaller fragments. Univariate regression analyses revealed that fracture collapse was significantly correlated with fracture type (A1 versus A2, p 0.036), GT size (p 0.002) and the presence of a lateral wall fracture (p<0.001).
               
                  Conclusions
                  This study revealed some important differences between the 3D CT appearances and AO classification of pertrochanteric fractures. Further, neither fragmentation of the posteromedial fragment, nor the size of the lesser trochanter fragment was found to predict stability in pertrochanteric fractures. A perioperative lateral wall fracture is the main determinant of stability in these fractures.The common bond among all classification systems for pertrochanteric fractures is the concept of stability. By definition, a stable fracture is one that resists displacement after adequate reduction and fixation while an unstable fracture shows a tendency to collapse even after adequate reduction and fixation Several deficiencies remain in the literature regarding the description of the posteromedial fragment and the role it plays in defining stability in pertrochanteric fractures. The basic AO classification into three groups has been shown to be reliable and is now one of the commonest used methods to classify trochanteric fractures However, several concerns have been raised with this classification scheme. 1) Not all fracture morphologies fit into the classification schema, in particular the greater trochanter is not included in the depiction and its role in influencing stability is not completely recognized We believe that one of the reasons for these short comings is that the detailed morphology of the PM fragment has never been described using 3D CT scans. In this study therefore we wanted to describe the morphology of the posteromedial fragment using 3D CT scans and answer two specific questions 1) Do differences exist between the 3D CT appearances of posteromedial fragments and the depictions made in the AO classification 2) Does the morphology of posterior-medial fragment affect stability in AO/OTA 31-A2 fractures, in terms of fracture collapse after adequate reduction and fixation of these fractures? A retrospective analysis of prospectively collected data at our level 1 trauma centre was undertaken. Between November 2013 and May 2014, 55 patients with 31-A2 fractures were enrolled for a CT based project at the Jai Prakash Narayan Apex Trauma Centre to determine predictors of lateral wall fracture Patients with 31 A1 and 31-A2 fracture more than 18 years of age were included in the study. The exclusion criteria included pathologic fractures, bilateral fractures, periprosthetic fractures, and fractures which were determined to have preoperative lateral wall fracture (A3). A preoperative CT scan of the pelvis with both hips was obtained for all patients using a 40 slice CT scanner (somatom sensation) Siemens, Germany. The superior, medial and posterior views of the 3D CT reconstructions were assessed for The number of PM fragments and associated comminution. For the purpose of description, PM fragment was divided into greater trochanter fragment and lesser trochanter fragment. The fragment which included the lesser trochanter was named LT fragment, similarly the fragment which included the greater trochanter was termed GT fragment. The presence and characteristics of comminution associated with the PM fragments, including location, fragmentation (single vs. Multiple fragments), and extent (minor vs. major, with major being defined as measuring more than 1.5 Greater trochanter (GT) involvement: The GT was defined as the extension of the lateral femoral surface proximal to the vastus ridge. Percentage of the GT, which was fractured was calculated. Using the grid, the numbers of small squares filling the involved portion of the greater trochanter were counted ( Posterior extent of the lesser trochanter fragment (LTp) defined as the distance between the medial margin of the LT to the lateral margin of the LT fragment ( Medial extent of the lesser trochanter fragment (LTm) defined as the distance between the center of the LT to the medial margin of the LT fragment ( Lesser trochanter length defined as length of the beak of the LT fragment from the tip to the bottom edge of the LT (distal extent) ( Lesser trochanter displacement was determined by measuring the medial displacement and the rotation. Medial displacement was measured between the posterior fracture line and the posterior margin of the LT, at the level of the LT ( All patients were treated with a 135° DHS (Synthes, GmbH, Oberdorf, Switzerland) after obtaining a good reduction and correction of the posterior sag The degree of fracture collapse was used as the outcome tool in this study. This is because instability has been defined as a tendency to collapse even after adequate reduction and fixation. It was determined by comparing the distance from the tip of the screw till the barrel between the immediate postoperative and the latest anteroposterior radiograph at the time of fracture union or just before cutout The analysis focused on examining the strength of association between the outcome measure (fracture collapse) with age, gender, dimensions of the posteromedial fragment, type of fracture (A1 versus A2) and the presence or absence of a lateral wall fracture. Linear regression was used to evaluate the associations between the independent variables and the outcome. Univariate and multiple regression analyses were performed to assess the individual patient effects on fracture collapse. The level of significance was set at p Patient demographics are summarized in Eight A1 fractures were analysed. Five of these fractures were essentially two part fractures and did not have a PM fragment. The remaining three fractures had a separate greater trochanter fragment (3 part fracture) ( Fifty A2 fractures were analysed. Thirteen fractures had a single PM fragment. In 12 of these, this fragment included the LT and GT in continuity as a single fragment ( In A2 fractures, the GT was always broken (except one patient). The size of the broken GT ranged from 20% to 90% as compared to the normal side. The mean percentage was 55.9% (SD 16.8%). Larger involvement of the GT leads to a smaller available height of the lateral trochanteric wall (r The LT fragment involved an average of 74% (SD 14%) of the posterior wall (LTp%). The posterior extent of the LT fragment is often quite large and is underappreciated on the plain radiographs, probably because this posterior portion often comes to lie in an end on position ( The initial displacement of the lesser trochanter fragment is of an anterior opening with a posterior hinge ( The average fracture collapse was 9.79 The genesis of the PM fragment seems to occur by the superior portion of the femoral neck ‘hitting’ on the trochanteric overhang as the primary trochanteric fracture line exits superiorly ( We found that the greater trochanter is almost always broken in A-2 fractures (49/50), a finding supported by previous studies We found that as long as the lateral wall remains intact, fracture collapse is minimal (mean 5 A previous biomechanical study found that increasing medial comminution causes instability in A2 pertrochanteric fractures This study has various limitations. Firstly, we have compared the broken hip with the normal contralateral hip. There may be some differences between the two sides in the same patient. However, substantial symmetry of the proximal femur has been reported in a recent study This study demonstrated some important differences between the 3D CT appearances and AO classification of pertrochanteric fractures. This may explain the low interobserver reliability seen in classifying these fractures. Neither fragmentation of the posteromedial fragment, nor the size of the lesser trochanter fragment was found to predict stability in pertrochanteric fractures. A perioperative lateral wall fracture is the main determinant of stability in these fractures. Further studies with accurate description of the PM fragment and its relation to outcome is required to confirm the findings of this study. None of the authors have any potential conflicts of interest. No funding was obtained for this study. The work was done at the Jai Prakash Narayan Apex Trauma Centre, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India-110029 and approval was obtained from the Institute ethics committee. No funding or grant was received for this study.