A serious heavy metal pollution of the Tisza River occurred on March 10, 2000, arising from a mine-dumping site in Romania. Sediment samples were taken from the main riverbed at six sites in Hungary, on March 16, 2000. The objective of this work was to distinguish the anthropogenic and crustal erosion particles in the river sediment. The samples were investigated using both bulk X-ray fluorescence (XRF) and thin-window electron probe microanalysis (EPMA). For EPMA, a reverse Monte Carlo method calculated the quantitative elemental composition of each single sediment particle. A high abundance of pyrite type particles was observed in some of the samples, indicating the influence of the mine dumps. Backscattered electron images proved that the size of particles with a high atomic number matrix was in the range of 2 μm. In other words the pyrites and the heavy elements form either small particles or are fragments of larger agglomerates. The latter are formed during the flotation process of the mines or get trapped to the natural crustal erosion particles. The XRF analysis of pyrite-rich samples always showed much higher Cu, Zn and Pb concentrations than the rest of the samples, supporting the conclusions of the single-particle EPMA results. In the polluted samples, the concentration of Cu, Zn and Pb reached 0.1, 0.3 and 0.2 wt.%, respectively. As a new approach, the abundance of particle classes obtained from single-particle EPMA and the elemental concentration obtained by XRF were merged into one data set. The dimension of the common data set was reduced by principal component analysis. The first component was determined by the abundance of pyrite and zinc sulfide particles and the concentration of Cu, Zn and Pb. The polluted samples formed a distinct group in the principal component space. The same result was supported by powder diffraction data. These analytical data combined with Earth Observation Techniques can be further used to estimate the quantity of particles originating from mine tailings on a defined river section.Mining and mineral processing operations produce large amounts of waste which are deposited in waste dumps and tailings. Such tailings contain fine-grained material and a considerable amount of metal sulfide. During January and March 2000, two mining technology accidents occurred, which polluted the rivers Tisza and Szamos, both originating in northern Transylvania (Romania). In a tailings management facility, a dam overflowed on March 10, 2000 and released 100 In the past decade, several important mine tailings dam failures occurred, resulting in ecological disasters, e.g. Harmony, South Africa (1994); Omai, Guayana (1995); Marcopper, Philippines (1996); Jinduicheng, China (1998) Several international agreements related to the protection of transboundary watercourses from pollution are in existence. However, to date, there are no clear rules on liability and responsibility for this type of pollution. Liability is only effective where polluters can be identified, damage is quantifiable and a causal connection can be shown. In most cases, quantifying the damage is very difficult since large areas are involved with widely varying concentrations in the deposits. Trace and microanalysis techniques can be useful in the context of both acute environmental disasters and long-term release of pollutants, as a means of tracing pollution sources from the chemical fingerprint of such heterogeneous material as, e.g. river sediments. The objective of this work was to distinguish anthropogenic and crustal erosion particles in river sediment of the Tisza River. The trace and microanalysis methods used here are based on X-ray analysis; they require very simple sampling and preparation techniques that are non-destructive but still provide useful qualitative results for identification of particles of different origin in river sediments. The bulk X-ray analysis methods have been applied very extensively to study river sediment composition in various contexts; a review of single particle analysis applied to solid particulate matter suspended in aqueous systems has been published by Jambers and Van Grieken Sediment samples were taken from the main bed of the Tisza River at six sites (Szatmárcseke, Tivadar, Vásárosnamény, Aranyosapáti, Tiszakanyár and Tiszadob), on 16 March, 2000. A map indicating the sampling sites is shown in For XRF analysis, 20-mm diameter pellets were pressed containing 0.5 g of dried sediment material and 0.05 g of boric acid for dilution. The tube-excited XRF measurements were performed using a Seifert diffraction tube with W anode and Ag secondary target. The X-ray spectra were collected by a Canberra Si(Li) detector with an energy resolution of 170 eV for Mn-K The measurements were carried out on a JEOL 733 (Tokyo, Japan) electron probe micro-analyzer equipped with an OXFORD (Bucks, UK) energy-dispersive X-ray detector. For optimising the detection of low- The characteristic X-ray spectra obtained from the particles have been evaluated by non-linear least-squares fitting, using the AXIL code Based on the data set obtained, the particles were further classified using hierarchical cluster analysis (HCA). The calculations were performed using the statistical software package IDAS The sediment samples were collected just 6 days after the mine dump failure at Baia Borsa. A few days after the pollution the water level decreased and a black sediment layer could be visually observed at the river bank in Szatmárcseke and Tivadar. These sampling sites were 200–220 km from the pollution source (see The concentrations of 19 elements were determined in the 12 sediment samples collected at the Tisza bank using bulk XRF. For comparison, a sediment sample collected from the main riverbed of a tributary of Tisza originating in Slovakia (Sajó), was also measured. The bulk XRF and XRD analysis indicated that the contaminated samples had different ratios of natural and anthropogenic components. The contribution of the possible sources was examined by a microanalytical technique that enables identification of the composition at the individual particle level. Approximately 300 particles in each of the 12 Tisza samples prepared on Ag foil were measured using thin-window EPMA and classified by NHCA. Single particle analysis is a time consuming measurement since the beam has to be deflected to the particle and the X-ray collection can only start when the beam hits the desired particle. In some applications, the particles of interest might have a very different average atomic number from the major constituents. This is the case when crustal particles from sedimentary rock erosion — being the natural constituents of the Tisza sediment — have to be distinguished from pyrite or heavy metal sulfide particles. When the particles are sitting on a Si wafer as a substrate, only particles shown in the BSE image to have significantly higher average atomic number than that of silicon are selected for measurements. In order to study the efficiency of such an approach, one of the Tivadar samples of highest pyrite content (TV4) was prepared on Si backing. In order to optimize the excitation conditions (to minimize the penetration of electrons into the Si substrate), a 10-kV accelerating voltage was used. Heavy metals could still be identified and determined using L and M X-ray line groups. As the aim of our study was to quantify the input of sedimentary pollution from mining areas, all the analytical results were merged into a common data set that was processed by PCA. The elemental concentrations obtained by bulk XRF, as well as the abundance values of the nine particle classes obtained by single-particle EPMA over the 12 samples, were used as variables, which were standardised using the X-Ray emission methods like XRF and single-particle EPMA are efficient tools for the identification of different sedimentary particulate matter. PCA based on concentrations obtained by XRF and abundance of particle classes found by EPMA enables clear and unambiguous identification of mine tailings originated particles. These pyrite-type particles were observed in some of the samples with an average diameter of 2 μm. Most of the heavy metals were found to be connected to the pyrite particles. These analytical data can be used in the future as ‘ground truth’ combined with Earth Observation Techniques. If the impact of pollution has to be determined for an extended geographical area like a 200-km river section or the catchment area of a smaller tributary river, the chemical information can be fused with remote sensing, largely reducing the number of necessary samples. The present research was partially supported by the National Science Foundation (OTKA) through Contract No. T034195 and by the Flemish and Hungarian governments through Joint Project No. B14/98 and B4/00. This work is part of the activity of WP6 ‘Environmental and biomedical analysis’ of the CMRC-CE. The János Bolyai Research Fellowship for J. Osán is also appreciated. The authors are indebted to Zsuzsanna Hartyáni for the XRD analysis.