Demand for high purity silica used in component manufacture is set to outstrip current supply in the near future. As such, alternative processing routes to feed-stock materials suitable for use in lighting and solar cell fabrication are required, without having to rely on reject material from semi-conductor manufacture. In this work, we report a facile, environmentally friendly method of producing quartz powder with a total residual impurity level of 30 ± 3 ppm from whole pebbles having an initial impurity level of 158 ± 22 ppm. This has been achieved using a metallurgical upgrading process incorporating microwave pre-treatment, crushing and milling, High Intensity Wet Magnetic Separation (HIWMS) and acid leaching. This process yielded a quartz powder having an 80% reduction in residual impurities compared to the untreated quartz pebbles. Pre-treatment of whole quartz pebbles in a multimode microwave cavity for 10 min yielded a reduction of the residual elemental impurity content associated with micro-fluidic inclusion sites containing calcium, potassium and sodium of 84, 78, and 50% respectively. Statistically significant reduction in residual aluminium phases was also observed (83%) compared to the as received material to below the IOTA® specification for Ultra High Pure Quartz produced by Sibleco. Mechanistically, this has been achieved by selectively heating impurity containing micro-fluidic inclusion sites. Resulting in their explosive decrepitation and enabling removal of the impurities in subsequent processing steps. It has been concluded that natural quartz pebbles can be upgraded through a combination of microwave treatment, magnetic and chemical refinement to produce a viable feedstock for the subsequent production of solar grade silicon.Increasing global energy demands coupled with ambitious carbon reduction targets have served as the key drivers for the development of clean energy technologies ( Naturally occurring quartzite deposits are normally mined as the raw material for these applications. Impurities typically reside in microfluidic inclusions; mineral associations (such as rutile TiO Microwave heating has established itself as an enabling technology. It is characterised by rapid, volumetric and when used to treat multiphase materials - selective heating. As such, it has found use in industrial sectors as diverse as mineral processing ( Fluid inclusions are micron-scale cavities which contain paleo-fluids physically trapped within mineral grains in crystal lattice imperfections, in structural holes or channels, or along grain boundaries ( Fluid inclusions in quartz originate from hydrothermal geological processes during deposition, or through subsequent alteration events and changes in pressure and temperature conditions ( When a fluid inclusion contained within a mineral grain is heated it may rupture or decrepitate. Decrepitation refers to the process by which the heating and subsequent increase in internal pressure of a fluid inclusion exceeds the confining pressure of the surrounding mineral grain. Once the confining pressure is exceeded, the inclusion will irreversibly rupture and crack the surrounding grain or rock, releasing or leaking the contained fluids or gases. Fluid inclusion decrepitation events can be partial, with an incomplete release of inclusion contents, total, or explosive, which result in pits or cavities to be formed in the sample. The temperature of decrepitation of fluid inclusions in quartz is controlled by a number of parameters, including inclusion size, shape, composition and the characteristics of the host mineral grain. Thermally induced mechanical decrepitation of fluid inclusions in quartz has been shown to occur initially at temperatures of <600 °C ( The propensity for a material to be heated in an electromagnetic field is defined by its dielectric properties. The dielectric constant is a measure of a materials ability to store electromagnetic energy. The loss factor is a measure of a materials ability to dissipate absorbed electromagnetic energy as heat. The higher the loss factor, the better the material will heat in an applied microwave field. It can be seen from the table that quartz itself has a very low loss and so essentially transparent to microwave energy, while the sodium chloride solution has a loss many orders of magnitude higher, so will heat strongly in an applied field. As a result of these widely differing dielectric properties, when the quartz pebbles are exposed to microwave energy of sufficient intensity, a selective heating effect is expected to occur. This could then result in targeted heating of the microfluidic inclusions, while the bulk quartz remains relatively cold. In this case, it may result in targeted decrepitation events and explosive fracture within the inclusion zones, then enabling subsequent processing steps to yield a refined quartz with reduced residual levels of trace contaminants. This mechanism of differential thermal expansion has been shown to yield significant process benefits in the treatment of mineral ores ( The aim of this work is to investigate if the selective heating effect can be utilised in a microwave pre-treatment step to upgrade naturally occurring quartz pebbles by enhancing the removal of impurities associated with micro-fluidic inclusions, containing the elements aluminium, sodium, calcium and potassium. The experimental programme was divided into a sample pre-characterisation stage, followed by four experimental stages each comprising of the following steps - microwave treatment, size reduction, Wet High Intensity Magnetic Separation (WHIMS), chemical leaching and analysis. Initial microwave treatment used a multimode cavity for treating batches of quartz placed in its base. After treatment, the quartz pebbles were resized using a jaw crusher and planetary ball mill. The fine powders were then subject to magnetic separation and chemical leaching using either acid or water. Residual contaminant levels were quantified by Inductively Coupled Plasma Atomic Absorption Spectroscopy (ICP-AES), using a Varian Vista-Pro Inductively Coupled Plasma - Optical Emission Spectrometer. Solid samples were first digested in a mix of hydrofluoric, perchloric and nitric acid. A second round of multimode tests was then undertaken with the multimode cavity using a microwave transparent ceramic crucible and silica flour which was used an insulator to minimise heat loss from the samples. Also trialled was treatment in a Radio Frequency (RF) tunnel. Again these samples were subject to the same subsequent processing steps. Evaluation of the final product was again undertaken using ICP-AES, in addition to qualitative SEM-EDS studies to evaluate the effect of the treatment on any microfluidic inclusions, supported by optical analysis of thin sections taken from the treated whole pebbles. To investigate if the final purity of the processed quartz powder could be improved, the effect of more aggressive leaching conditions was evaluated on samples remaining from the magnetic separation step from the previous work. Finally, powders derived from the magnetic separation step of quartz pebbles treated in the optimised multimode cavity were retreated in a single mode microwave system. These were then subjected to the most effective chemical leaching (in terms of reduction in residual contaminant levels) procedure taken from the previous stage. The structure of the experimental programme is presented in Stage One – initial trials in a multimode microwave cavity; followed by sizing to 75–300 μm; WHIMS; then each sample mass split in two; one half leached with hydrochloric acid and the other half with water. Stage Two – optimised trials of separate samples in a multimode microwave cavity (using a crucible and silica packing) or Radio Frequency tunnel; then size reduction; WHIMS and leaching with hydrochloric acid. Stage Three – quartz powder originating from the 2nd stage multimode tests (after WHIMS) were subjected to a more aggressive leaching procedure – ca.3% HF or reflux with 7 m HCl. Stage four – again quartz powder originating from the 2nd stage multimode tests (after WHIMS), were retreating in a single mode microwave cavity, then leached with ca. 3% HF. A detailed description of the methods used in each stage of the experimental program is given in the next section. Pre-characterisation of impurities present within the quartz was conducted using a combination of optical microscopy and SEM-EDS. Optical analysis of untreated material was conducted under transmitted light using a Leica M205 automated stereomicroscope with a 5 mega pixel digital camera on particulate sample grain mounts (+75–300 µm) and Petrographic Thin Sections (PTS) of whole quartz pebbles (−15 mm, +15 mm–26.5 mm, +26.5 mm pebbles). The thin sections were prepared by impregnating the samples with clear epoxy resin, which were then cut to size, flattened and stuck to object glasses before being ground to 40–50 μm thickness on a Pelcon Automatic Thin Section Machine. The sections were then polished on a Buehler EcoMet 300 Grinder-Polisher and finished at a thickness of approximately 30 μm. The polish was achieved by using 3 μm and 1 μm diamond suspensions on perforated and felt cloths respectively. The analysis was conducted in order to qualitatively assess the characteristic size and morphology of fluid inclusions present within the quartz, and to investigate the spatial distribution of inclusions within the quartz pebbles. SEM-EDS analysis was conducted using a FEI Quanta 600 Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) with dual Bruker XFlash® 5030 EDX detectors and Mineral Liberation Analyser (MLA) automated mineralogy software. Quartz samples were prepared for SEM-EDS analysis as carbon coated 30 mm resin-mounted polished sections produced from crushed and milled particulate samples (+75–300 µm). Qualitative and semi-quantitative EDS analysis was conducted using Bruker Esprit® microanalysis software for the collection of EDS spectra, EDS line scans and elemental sample surface mapping. Impurities analysed using this method represent surface, or near-surface features, that occur within the range of the interaction volume of the electron beam within the samples (∼5 µm depth from surface). Analysis by ICP-OES was undertaken using a Varian Vista-Pro spectrometer, on diluted solutions derived from digestion in a mix of hydrofluoric, perchloric and nitric acid of 2.0 g samples of the quartz powders. In stage one, microwave treatment used a multimode cavity coupled to a 15 kW microwave generator operating at 2.45 GHz. Impedance matching was achieved using a 3-stub autotuner in the transmission line. 1.5 kg batches of material placed on the base of the cavity were subject to three treatment regimens corresponding to the maximum microwave power that could be applied and coupled into the load. A power of 4 kW was applied to the multimode cavity for 40 10; and 0 min (untreated control). Each treatment was repeated in triplicate. Every 2½ min, the samples were turned by hand with a spatula so as to ensure even treatment of the whole batch. These samples were then jaw crushed to <5 mm and planetary ball milled inside a ceramic lined pot to a produce a 75 – 300um size fraction. This is considered the optimum size fraction for the production of solar grade silicon. The fine material was subsampled to 100 g, then subjected to high intensity wet magnetic separation (HWIMS) to remove magnetic and paramagnetic material at a magnetic field strength of at least 15,000 Gauss. Finally, initial leaching trials were conducted using a moderate strength HCl solution (25% w/w) and high purity water for comparison, in a solids to liquid ratio of 40:100 with stirring for 3 h at a temperature of 60–70 °C, in a three-necked round bottom flask. After cooling, the solids were filtered under vacuum and washed with successive volumes of Millipore water until the washings were pH > 6. Analysis of the final quartz was then undertaken by ICP-AES using the digestion procedure described previously for the following elements: Al; Ca; Cr; Fe; K; Na; and Ti. Stage two work focussed on optimising the microwave treatment regime in the multimode cavity by using a ceramic crucible made from boronitride. 1.1 kg batches of quartz pebbles were blended with 400 g silica flour into the crucible and placed on the rotating plinth of the cavity. In this configuration, the applied power could be increased from 4 kW to 7–10 kW. Four separate microwave treatments were undertaken. Each targeting the maximum applied power for the longest processing time. The end of the test was taken to be when the reflected power increased to >10% forward power. This was taken to correspond to removal of the absorbent phases (principally the inclusion fluid). The treated pebbles were then washed in Millipore water to remove the silica flour and dried in the oven at 105 °C. At lower frequencies, the ionic loss mechanism makes the dominant contribution to the heating effect ( In stage three, the three of the previous samples (two microwave and one RF treated) processed up to the magnetic separation step were treated under more aggressive leaching conditions. The samples were split in two, for each, half the subsample was then further reduced to 40 g and leached with 60 g of 3.125% hydrofluoric acid solution in a PTFE crucible for 3 h with warming in a water bath at 45 °C. After cooling, the samples were vacuum filtered and washed with successive volumes of Millipore water before drying in the oven at 105 °C. The remaining half of the magnetically separated sample was subsampled to 100 g and refluxed in a round bottom flask at 107 °C with 7 M hydrochloric acid solution and stirring for 4 h. Following cooling, the solid was vacuum filtered and washed with successive volumes of water until the pH of the washing was pH > 6. Analysis of the final treated products was undertaken by ICP-AES and SEM-EDS as previously described. The final stage took the two samples not subjected to retreatment by aggressive leaching and processed them again using a microwave single mode cavity. This type of cavity is characterised by supporting a single spatially well-defined area of high electric field propagating at one frequency or mode within it. At 2.45 GHz, they are therefore smaller than a multimode cavity, but enable the heating effect to be focussed in the sample without the use of a turntable. For these tests, 100 g of each sample was placed in a boronitride crucible and treated with microwaves at a power of 1.1 kW generated from a Sariem 2 kW generator operating at 2.45 GHz. Matching was achieved using a combination of a variable position piston short at the terminating end of the waveguide and a 3-stub automatic tuner in the transmission line itself. Analysis of the final treated products was undertaken by ICP-AES. The as received pebbles generally fell into the −10+75 mm size fraction. Analysis by AES-ICP revealed that the pebbles had the composition presented in The results of the optical analysis of thin sections made from untreated quartz is presented in SEM-EDS analysis of the -75-300um powdered untreated material was undertaken to investigate the occurrence and distribution of impurities within the sample. As SEM-EDS is a 2D surface analysis technique, inclusions and impurities were required to be on or very near (<∼5µm) the sample surface in order to be analysed by EDS. In order to attempt to locate intact near surface inclusions, an initial mineral map was collected using the Mineral Liberation Analyser (MLA) automated mineralogy capability of the SEM. A customised mineral list was applied to identify areas within the quartz grains where the interaction volume of the electron beam within the grain, intersected a volume of the quartz that indicated the presence of an elevated sodium concentration. This produced a sodium ‘hot spot’ map where inclusions could be found near the surface of the sample mount for further analysis with element mapping, element line scans and collection of x-ray spectra. The results are shown in The as received quartz pebbles were arranged in the base of the multimode cavity as shown in The final elemental composition of the product quartz powders after being subject to microwave treatment, size reduction, magnetic separation and leaching is shown in Optical analysis taken from powered T A characteristic property of multi-mode cavities is that they support a number of propagating modes (dominant frequencies) which can constructively or destructively interact with each other ( For each multimode cavity test, the highest power for the maximum treatment time was applied. The end of the run was indicated by an increase in process arcing within the cavity. This occurs when the electric field strength within the cavity exceeds the breakdown voltage of air. It results in an electrical discharge from one point in the cavity to another. In this case it is associated with a drop in absorbed energy by the quartz, possibly due to the absorbent fluid phases being driven off by the heat evolved in the test samples. For the RF test, the system described in ( Using the optimised treatment regimes, the level of total residual contamination was actually higher (∼15 ppm) than T However, residual sodium levels were about 2 ppm lower across the samples tested. The effect of RF treatment yielded no significant change in contaminant levels compared to the microwave treated set. To investigate why no enhancement of contaminant removal was found overall, despite using an improved treatment regime at higher power, thin sections prepared from the whole treated pebbles which were analysed to characterise any change in the microstructure of the quartz, and in particular, residual fluidic inclusions. Example analysis of sample M It has been shown that the samples subjected to the optimised multi-mode microwave and RF treatments exhibited significant micro-structural damage as a result of rupture at fluid inclusion sites, but that fluid appeared to have been deposited within grain boundaries; cleavage planes and fractures. Selected samples from the previous set (M Retreating the quartz with boiling concentrated HCL results in a marginal drop in total contaminant levels for samples M Little change by either procedure affected the final sodium content nor that of the other elements evaluated in the analysis. This suggests that the previous, less aggressive leach procedure, was effective at removing contaminants residing on the surface or in fractures accessible to the leach solution. Residual contaminants then remained locked within the matrix of the quartz. This is evident by SEM-EDS analysis. Overall, the samples M In The comparative effect of leaching with HF on M A single mode cavity only supports a well-defined area of electric field at single principle frequency (or mode) ( The right-hand figure shows the sample held in a boronitride crucible during treatment. Note the two glowing hot-spots at the incident and rear face of the sample. This corresponds to the electric field maxima and thus the area which is heated strongest in the test sample ( The single-mode tests yielded no further reductions in residual contamination levels. Despite measured temperatures (by infra-red pyrometer) of 450 °C at the hotspot on the surface of the test sample during treatment and is considered in following section. The preliminary tests were the most effective in terms of reduction in residual contaminant levels. Optical and SEM-EDS analysis of the treated material revealed that significant alteration of the bulk quartz was affected by exposure to microwave energy. This was particularly evident at micro-fluidic inclusion sites, where decrepitation resulted in explosive fracture of the contaminant site. In some cases, however, this was contained within the material resulting in a redisposition of the contaminant debris around its edge. This is supported by the re-leaching tests of the treated material (M The second factor which may explain the persistence of sodium in the treated samples, is the fact that solid halite was identified, which appeared largely unaltered in treated samples ( In the stage two tests, these samples had a higher aluminium content (24 ± 2 ppm) compared to stage one T It is suggested that further improvements in the upgrading of quartz can be achieved by evaluating the effect of a higher power microwave/RF system and the effect of feedstock preparation size. By optimising the grain size subject to microwave treatment, the evolution of micro-fracture to the grain surface can be enhanced and thereby increasing the effectiveness of subsequent leaching steps. The HF leaching trials, showed a significant reduction in residual aluminium, which could further be reduced using a stronger solution (only 3% was used in the present work). Overall, microwave treatment of whole quartz pebbles, can selectively fracture containment sites, yielding reductions in residual contaminant levels of almost 25% compared to the non-microwaved untreated controls. Evaluating the processing as a whole, a total reduction in residual contamination of over 80% was achieved using simple and relatively environmentally friendly steps. In particular, removal of impurities associated with the elements calcium, sodium and potassium (those likely to be held in inclusion fluid) were reduced by 84; 78 and 50% respectively. Also significant was the reduction in residual aluminium containing impurities to an average of 12 ppm (multi-mode treatment for 40 min), compared to an average 19 ppm for the Ultra-High Pure Quartz product specification according to ( The refining steps presented in this work provide a viable alternative to traditional metallurgical routes to obtain solar grade silicon ( The fine and ultra-fine size classes have been shown to be particularity resistant to microwave induced fracture. The corresponding increase in selective heating would be expected to enable fracturing in the difficult to treat fine and ultra-fine size-classes of inclusion. In this work only one source of quartz was evaluated. The process may be more amenable to other sources of quartz whose composition of fluid inclusions are higher in the larger sizes. Notwithstanding, the work presented shows that a microwave pre-treatment step is a simple and rapid method of securing commodity feedstocks for the production of Solar Grade Silicon (SoG) without having to rely on reject material from the semi-conductor industry. The whole quartz pebbles evaluated in this study had a total impurity content of 158 ± 22 ppm. Impurities were shown to predominantly reside in micro-fluidic inclusions and as solid inclusions within the quartz matrix itself. Using a combination of microwave treatment of the whole quartz pebble in a multimode cavity, crushing and milling, high intensity wet magnetic separation, and acid leaching, in the best case reduced the total residual impurities to 30 ± 4 ppm (or 80%). Significant is the targeted reduction in residual elemental impurity content, associated with micro-fluidic inclusion sites, containing calcium; potassium and sodium of 84; 78; and 50% respectively. Also, a statistically significant reduction in residual aluminium phases was also observed of 102 ± 14 ppm (in as received pebbles) to 12 ppm (multi-mode treatment, 40 min) and is below the grade limit for IOTA Ultra-High Pure Quartz. The final product quartz has and purity intermediate between metallurgical and solar grade silicon. Considering the microwave step alone, this yielded a reduction of 10 ppm (or 25%) compared to the control set subject to size reduction, magnetic separation and leaching alone, which gave a residual impurity level of 41 ± 6 ppm. This was attributed to targeted decrepitation of micro-fluidic sites within the quartz matrix by selectively heating the inclusion fluid. The resulting fracture of the site then allows subsequent processing steps to remove the impurities. The persistence of residual impurities were found to be the result of re-deposition of inclusion debris around the fracture site and persistent solid inclusions that were less amenable to microwave treatment. The initial multimode cavity microwave treatments were shown to be the most effective in terms of upgrading the quartz pebbles. Treatment times of only 10 min in a relatively simple system were required. Residual impurity levels remained constant when retreated under more aggressive leaching conditions (3% HF). This work has shown that natural quartz pebbles can be upgraded through a combination of microwave treatment, magnetic and chemical refinement to produce a viable feedstock for the subsequent production of solar grade silicon.