Despite advances in surgical techniques and pharmacology, healing of injury-associated soft tissue defects is frequently complicated by infections, which often requires a secondary intervention.
                  Cytokines are important mediators of healing. Application of autologous platelet-rich plasma enriched in growth factors and antimicrobial proteins, known also as platelet–leukocyte rich plasma (PLRP), represents a novel approach to the treatment of soft tissue and bone healing disturbances. This case is the first report on the application of PLRP in an infected high-energy soft tissue injury and shows that the volume and concentration of platelets and leukocytes is adequate to induce healing processes despite concurrent infection.Despite advances in surgical techniques and pharmacology, healing of injury-associated soft tissue defects is frequently complicated by infections, which often requires a secondary intervention. Secondary operations to promote healing processes of the wound are associated with high rates of patient morbidity and reduced quality of life Cytokines are important mediators of healing processes. Application of platelet-rich gel, known also as autologous platelet–leukocyte rich gel (PLRG) A 42-year-old man experienced femoral and crural fracture with large skin defect after accident in a coalmine. This was associated with an injury of popliteal vessels, so the transplantation of a vein from undamaged leg was necessary to restore the arterial blood circulation. Since the venous circulation system was insufficient, the patient underwent fasciotomy. With the symptoms of respiratory and circulatory failure the patient was transferred to Intensive Care Unit. Mechanical ventilation with respirator was applied; dopamine intravenous infusion was required to correct hypotension. Therefore, fracture operation could not be performed immediately after the injury. Due to significant blood loss after injury (hemoglobin level of 4.8 Subsequently, we observed instant angiogenesis and epithelialization processes; only in popliteal fossa the healing was slower. Therefore, nonhealing skin defect was covered with PLRG on two other occasions 10 and 20 In vitro laboratory bacterial susceptibility to PLRG was also determined by the Kirby–Bauer disc diffusion method Wound healing is a multi-step biological process that begins with trauma and ends with scar formation This patient case shows that the volume and concentration of PLRG is adequate to induce healing processes despite concurrent infection. Interestingly, no bacteria were isolated from the wound immediately after covering with PLRG. This might be partly related to the increased concentrations of intravenous antibiotics in plasma and also in PLRG The ideal timing and the frequency of PLRG administration is unknown. Our study showed that during first 6/7 PLRG is new inductive biomaterial This case is, to our knowledge, the first report on the application of PLRG in an infected high-energy soft tissue injury. This patient case shows that the volume and concentration of PLRG is adequate to induce healing processes despite concurrent infection. We believe that the using of autologous platelet-rich gel enriched in growth factors and antimicrobial proteins might be a promising treatment method for infected soft tissue injuries. We gratefully acknowledge the assistance of Dr. Allan Mishra and Matthew Swift in the preparation of this manuscript. This work was supported by Committee for Scientific Research – Polish Ministry of Science No. N403 070 32/4120. Director of Grant: Agata Cieslik-Bielecka, M.D, Ph.D.