Fine-milling is a crucial objective for lignocellulosic biomass valorization. Co-milling appears to be a promising technique to improve its efficiency. However, the mechanisms occurring while co-milling remain poorly understood. In this study, an experimental work was performed to produce co-milled powders from both lignocellulosic (wheat, straw or pine sawdust) and mineral materials (limestone, quartzite or tile) with very contrasted physicochemical properties. The main consequences of co-milling were studied for both materials. A two-component mixing law for the prediction of the blend properties was proposed (particle sizes and true densities) to highlight the gain of this single processing step compared to separate milling and mixing. The predicted values were compared with experimental data for co-milled powders at 7 biomass contents from 0% to 100%. In all cases, co-milling leads to a reduction in particle size of lignocellulosic materials and create strong interweaving with mineral particles.lignocellulosic materials mineral material LM to MM ratio (weight %) particle size distributions 10th and 90th percentiles 50th percentiles equivalent to the median particle size dispersion index principal component analysis true density In many processes (plant biorefinery, pharmaceutical, chemical, mineral, food processing ...), particle size reduction is a common unitary operation, which is applied to a large variety of materials (plants, rocks, waste, metals, plastics, food ...). In most cases, grinding is used to reach a target particle size, ideally with the lowest energy consumption ( This technique could be particularly well adapted to biomaterials applications such as bio-based ceramics ( In recent years, co-milling has received increasing attention especially in the field of polymer composites ( In this work, lignocellulosic biomass and mineral materials with very contrasted physical properties have been co-milled together. Minerals exhibits highly brittle behavior ( Numerous grinders could be potentially used to carry out the co-milling of two materials together. In first examination, it makes sense to select technologies efficient for the milling of both materials separately. However the technologies promoting impact between particles tends to create strong interactions and are more frequently described in the literature as media mill ( In this study, three minerals and two lignocellulosic biomasses were co-milled in pairs in a vibratory ball mill at 7 blending ratios. To compare properties of co-milled powders with mixture of separately ground parent materials a mixing law was proposed to take into account the filling volume variation in the chamber. This approach allowed to deduce specific mechanisms, occurring during co-milling and to propose potential fields of application. In this study, two lignocellulosic materials (LM) were selected: wheat straw and pine sawdust, which are respectively residues from agriculture and wood industry. The wheat straw ( After an initial drying at 9% moisture content, both straw and sawdust were coarsely ground using a cutting mill (Restch® SM100) with a 2 The milling device selected in this study is a vibratory ball mill (Retsch® MM400) with two separate milling bowls. This device is relatively simple and the main parameters that influence the milling are the mass of the ball, its frequency, its amplitude, and the milling time. In each 50 The amplitude of the ball is directly related to the volume of the powder in the chamber and cannot be easily determined. Indeed this volume can vary according to the raw material used, the way of filling the chamber and the milling time. To conduct reliable and reproducible experiments, we chose to work by controlling the mass of the sample and not its volume. A mixing law was proposed to overcome volume variations due to the different blending ratio in co-milling conditions. In each bowl, samples of different masses from 0.5 to 9 In co-milling conditions, sample mass was fixed to 3 Particle size distributions (PSD) of raw materials were assessed according to In all cases, PSD were expressed in volume and characterized according to their median diameter (d50), 10th (d10), 90th (d90) percentiles and Dispersion Index (DI An environmental scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Analytic FEI Quanta FEG 200) coupled with EDS was used for co-milled powder observations. To this end, powders were fixed on the SEM stage and blast clean with compressed air. For the determination of the true densities an Ultrapycnometer 1000 (Quantachrome®) using Nitrogen gas (25 The co-milling step leads to mixtures of both mineral and lignocellulosic particles. As direct analyses on the co-milled powders did not inform on the individual PSD of the mineral materials (MM) and lignocellulosic materials (LM), the powders were sieved into different fractions and the proportion of parent materials have been determined by differential weighting and calcination (900 The different raw materials properties such as size, shape and density are summarizes in  A principal component analysis (PCA) has been performed on the set of PSDs for all materials. PCA is a technique used to emphasize variations in a dataset by reducing the high dimensional dataset into a smaller dimensional subspace with new coordinate system (F1, F2 ... etc). In the new coordinate system the first axis corresponds to the first principal component, which explains the greatest amount of the variance in the data. This analysis is of great interest especially when the dataset can be represented by a small set of new coordinate system. This new system has no direct physical meaning, as it combines different parameters but it is possible to represent the initial parameter in the PCA axis as we have done, in The procedure has been applied to the whole PSDs. Each PSD is represented by a single point in the new coordinate system, which summarizes the discrepancy between the different profiles ( Impact is the main mechanical mode generated in the chamber of the vibratory ball mill. The origin of the milling energy lies in the kinematic energy of the ball, which depends on its mass, motion amplitude and frequency. To clarify the effect of the ball amplitude in the context of the study ( Straw was the only material for which true densities ( As described in the material and method section, the mass of the ball and the loading frequency were fixed. The chamber was filled with 3 As it is not possible to assess the characteristics of each powder separately in the blend after the co-milling step, the global characteristics of the blend (d10, d50, d90 and DI) have been compared to predicted values from the linear fits (theoretical values, th: d10th, d50th, d90th and DI For example, the d50th value can be evaluated from a mixing law that account for the ratio of lignocellulosic materials: In this section, the co-milling of a blend composed of quartzite and straw is studied. These two materials were chosen for their very contrasted mechanical properties (see Section  Comparisons between the predicted values (plain lines) of the main size parameters (d10, d50, d90, DI) and the experimental values (dotted lines) are given in One important issue in this study was to compare the relative efficiency of milling for mineral materials and lignocellulosic materials. Although there is no consensus on the milling efficiency, a straightforward definition is to consider the energy consumption per unit of specific area, which is directly related to particle size distribution. From previous results, co-milling appears to be particularly efficient at high ratio of lignocellulosic materials ( Further studies will be necessary to clarify the role of the different microscopic mechanisms involved in the milling efficiency such as the effect of mineral particle shape (angularity, sharpness of edges ...), hardness and poly-dispersity.  This hypothesis was verified by observing co-milled powders on an environmental scanning electron microscope (see The same experimental approach was applied to all lignocellulosic/mineral blends. Each blend was milled at five value of The same general tendency is observed whatever the pairs of the parent materials as previously discussed in Section Finally, these results show that the milling efficiency could be improved further by choosing well adapted pairs of minerals/lignocellulosic materials.  This study shows that co-milling has several effects on generated particles depending on the amount of lignocellulosic materials inside the blend. For small amount of minerals, a significant decreased in particle size was observed for the same input energy. Thus, a slight amount of mineral particles improves significantly and at low cost the grindability of biomasses due to their sharp and angular shapes. This is especially interesting for applications in which a separation step of mineral and lignocellulosic materials is not required such as extraction of value added molecules ( Although more investigations must be done to analyze the homogeneity of the blend, co-milling operation allows the mixing of products in addition to comminution. As in this case milling and mixing are simultaneous, a gain in energy consumption is performed compared to the case of separate milling and mixing. Furthermore, the creation of interactions between minerals and lignocellulosic particles could lead to an intimate mixing in which particles of different natures are associated limiting widely a possible segregation effect ( Finally, the purpose of co-milling could be dual: improving the reduction of particle size at some blend ratios, and intimately associate and homogenize the matter inside particles, which is particularly interesting when mixed powders are targeted. The main objective of this paper was to understand the co-milling mechanisms of different lignocellulosic biomasses and minerals blends. The effects of co-milling appear to be dual: (1) intimately associate and homogenize the minerals and lignocellulosic particles and (2) improve the particle size reduction of lignocellulosic materials. This opens up new perspectives especially for lignocellulosic biomasses valorisation where the milling efficiency is crucial for the whole process. In future works, the microscopic mechanisms involve during the whole co-milling kinetics will be clarified together with the evolution of the nature of the strong interactions induced at the particle scale. The authors wish to thanks Frederic Fernandez for his help in SEM pictures acquisition and analysis. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 