LiCoPO4 has been prepared by the Pechini-type polymerizable precursor method. The formation of the compound is confirmed by XRD analysis. Ion transport mechanism has been analyzed using the AC impedance technique. The conductivity parameters such as ion hopping frequency (ω
                     p) and the charge carrier concentration term (K) have been calculated using Almond and West formalisms. The conductivity relaxation time (τ
                     c) is calculated from the peak frequency of the modulus spectra.With the increasing demand for electric and hybrid electric vehicles, to resolve energy and environmental problems, cathode material with high specific energy density, high power density, and excellent thermal stability is necessary for lithium-ion batteries Owing to high operating potential close to 4.8V vs. Li/Li LiCoPO The Rietveld refined XRD pattern for LiCoPO An impedance investigation of the ionic conductors over a wide frequency range has an advantage in that it allows the identification of charge transport processes in the grains and grain boundaries of ceramics over a wide temperature range The ionic conduction in the material is due to ions movement by hopping mechanisms between allowed sites. The frequency dependence conductivity The conductivity spectrum of sample is fitted with Eq. The power-law regime of the a.c. conductivity is much less temperature dependent than the d.c. conductivity. The temperature dependence of d.c. conductivity extracted from conductivity spectra is found to obey the Arrhenius relation The hopping rate ( The charge carrier concentration term (K) remains almost constant over the temperature range studied for all the samples as shown in In the modulus formalism, an electric modulus M∗ is defined in terms of reciprocal of the complex relative permittivity ε∗ The modulus spectra show slightly asymmetric peaks at each temperature. The broad nature of the peaks can be interpreted as being the consequence of the distributions of relaxation time. The maximum of the modulus spectra M″ The values of relaxation time ( The activation energies calculated from conductance spectra (H LiCoPO One of the authors (M. Prabu) is thankful to authorities of Department of Science and Technology/Japan Science and Technology for offering a JRF position in the DST/JST project