This paper presents the results of the surface hardness of coal, estimated with the Shore Scleroscope Rebound Hardness tester. The Shore hardness can be related to fracture toughness and tensile strength, which are important input parameters for fracture stimulation design of coal seam gas reservoirs. The Shore hardness experiments were performed on low rank coal specimens from an open cut mine from the Surat-Clarence-Moreton Basin, and a borehole from the Surat Basin, Australia. All measurements were conducted on polished coal surface confined within epoxy blocks following similar preparation required for coal petrographic analyses. The resulting indentations and microlithotypes were analysed under the microscope, then associated to the Shore hardness number. Three common microlithotypes were identified for the sub-bituminous specimens tested: vitrite, clarite and carbominerite. Results indicate the hardest microlithotype is clarite, followed by vitrite, and then carbominerite. Quantification of the micromechanical properties is possible using simple Shore hardness tests, and opportunities to improve fracture propagation may be further explored from this work.Coal is a complex heterogeneous material with distinct characteristics reflecting hardness, tenacity, and fracture which are influenced by rank (thermal maturity), lithotype (biochemical composition), and grade (amount and type of minerals) ( The SH tester involves dropping a diamond-tipped metallic hammer made of pure hardened high‑carbon steel onto the polished specimen surface. The spherical diamond-tipped hammer falls under the force of its own weight from a fixed height and rebounds, imprinting an indentation on the specimen surface. The instrument setup consists of adjustment of the level vial, to guarantee a free vertical drop of the hammer. The rebound height is measured on the dial gauge (a graduated scale) on the scleroscope. The scale of the rebound consists of Shore units, divided into 140 parts. The Shore (dynamic) Hardness (denoted SH) is a measure of the elasticity of the material; the harder (more competent) the material, the higher the rebound and its measurement number ( A conversion table is supplied with this equipment, correlating the graduated scale for SH with an equivalent estimation of Vickers scale (which uses a square-base diamond pyramid indenter) as well as tensile strength (σ The low rank, sub-bituminous coal samples were collected from two locations: The first, an open cut mine in the Surat-Clarence-Moreton Basin with a maximum vitrinite reflectance of 0.50%. The following plies were collected: C8 ply banded (PC8-B), C8 ply white marks banded (PC8-WB), and C6 ply dull (PC6-D). All three plies belong to the same pit (north pit) with minimal depth variation. Note that the “white marks” are clay blebs. In addition to the open cut mine specimens, samples were collected from a borehole named Guluguba-2 in the Surat Basin, with a maximum vitrinite reflectance of 0.43–0.47%. The specimens were collected at different depths within the Walloon Coal Measures. The specimens were called GG- followed by a specimen number e.g. GG-4 and had been previously studied for petrology by During the SH test, the rebound of the hammer is affected by the smoothness of the material surface. Therefore, all specimens were prepared as ground and polished coal surface at epoxy-set blocks. According to The specimens were placed into moulds exposing the coal layering, embedded in epoxy, and dried for 24 h. Specimens were then ground and polished to 0.04 μm grit, exhibiting a clean, flat polished coal surface ( To perform the SH test, each sample was positioned manually on the flat base of the instrument. The resulting distance of the rebound for each indentation should be recorded, then later averaged. Procedures for classic analysis suggest collecting and averaging 20 randomly placed measurements on a homogeneous rock, to account for any variation, following calibration on the quenched and tempered steel standard which measures 81.4 ± 2.5 ( As coal is a heterogeneous rock, this study followed a different procedure for data collection. The SH values were recorded in transects to encapsulate changes in microlithotype within a block ( Following SH testing, the specimens were examined under a reflected-light microscope (Leica DM 6000 M) equipped with the Hilgers' Diskus Fossil computer program for image capture. The microlithotype was identified for each SH test point to determine a relationship to surface hardness values. By definition, microlithotypes are assemblages of macerals occurring within a 50 μm area or layer ( Vitrite (monomacerite vitrinite, commonly telovitrinite >95%); Clarite (bimacerite vitrinite plus liptinite >95%); Carbominerite (vitrite or clarite comprising 20–60% of minerals). Photomicrographs were taken using a 5× objective in air, resulting in ~50× magnification. Microlithotype/ lithotype bands in these coals are of variable thickness, between 50 and 600 μm; though thicker bright bands do occur, they are rare ( The approach for measurement along transects, gave a precise SH value for each indentation, allowing for a match between the SH number and microlithotype. The histograms for transect investigations presented uni-, bi- or trimodal distribution, for each clustered average in SH. Measurements identified on epoxy were removed from the analysis, as well as any overlapping indentations. Comparison of SH values mode, and mean and range utilising box-and-whisker plots was conducted for the different populations. SH values ranged from 39 to 94 across all specimens tested, with a gross average value of 75 ± 6 for the open cut mine specimens, and 68 ± 6 for the borehole specimens. A summary of the SH results for each microlithype, at each sample location is summarised in The SH trend for each observed lithotype (from least hard to most hard) is: carbominerite (70.2 ± 6.8), vitrite (71.3 ± 6.9), clarite (84.0 ± 3.6). Each of these microlithotypes exhibited some variation in SH dependent on their maceral composition. The variability of coal microlithotypes and their associated SH value was observed for three distinct plies (PC8-B, PC8-WB, and PC6-D) from the open cut mine. Specimen PC6-D #M5 is composed of clarite and carbominerite, with a minor proportion of vitrite ( Specimen PC8-WB #M1 is predominately comprised of clarite, with minor carbominerite ( PC8-B #M2 is comprised of carbominerite (43%) and clarite (57%) ( Overall, the results of the transects illustrate a strong correlation between hardness and microlithotype ( There is a lack of representative data for vitrite in the above specimens. According to In the specimens PC6-D #M9 and PC8-B#M3, some thin vitrite bands were observed and indented. Because vitrite bands tend to present cracks, it is difficult to affirm if cracks/fractures occurred pre- or post-indentation. Nonetheless, vitrite observed in specimens PC6-D #M9 and PC8-B#M3, indicate that cracks and chips are exacerbated by multiple surrounding cracks and/or thick cracks/fractures, in addition to a slight overlapping indentation. The SH reached values of 71 and 77 on the vitrite for PC8-B#M3 and PC6-D #M9, respectively ( PC8-B #6a shows a distinct vitrain band (approx. 4 mm thick), the specimen was tested and analysed for indentations performed inside this band only (i.e. selective indentation on vitrite). A population of eleven ( Sub-bituminous coals samples with slightly lower reflectance were tested from exploration borehole, Guluguba-2, from 138 m to 486 m depth. The interpretation includes 30 specimens in total, where 2 specimens were tested using transects, while the other 28 specimens were indented selectively by microlithotype. For specimen GG-16, the microlithotype variability was observed using three transects parallel to each other, to ensure repeatability of results. The indentations represented a population of 59 SH values measured. The entire specimen GG-27 is a vitrain band with small cracks/fractures distributed across the polished surface. For GG-27, the coal variability was observed using four transects, three of them parallel to each other and one perpendicular, where the vitrite microlithotype could be tested. The indentations represented a population of 69 measurements. Results for this specimen are consistent with previous observations, but exhibit higher variation when indentations punch pre-existing cracks/fractures ( For Guluguba-2, a total of 24 specimens, from distinct depths, were tested for the clarite lithotype ( For Guluguba-2, the SH values on clarite can be grouped as consistently hard (higher rebound, SH values >80) across 13 specimens. The SH ranged from 73 to 94, average of 84.5 ± 4.6 see For Gulugula-2, only 3 specimens are used for the selected indentations on vitrite. The SH ranged from 52 to 83, average of 68.8 ± 6.8 on vitrite for tested specimens. Again, it is observed that the cracks influence the SH values measured (i.e. specimens with more cracks surrounded or reached by the indenter showed large variability). SH values measured on Guluguba-2 carbominerite microlithotype indicate values ranging from 39 to 58, average of 47.7 ± 4.5 (again, SH measured for 3 specimens only). Note that SH values are much lower than observed for the open cut mine (average of 70.2 ± 6.8). From observing the summarised data for both open cut and borehole specimens, there is a clear, and consistent relationship between SH and microlithotype. The series of indentations made on the three microlithotypes (clarite, carbominerite, and vitrite) exhibit different values of yield strength/Young's modulus, therefore growth of fracture patterns is expected upon fracture stimulation or loading. Clarite can be really hard, like pure hardened high‑carbon steel (SH equal to 82.3 ± 3.0). Clarite is the most heterogeneous microlithotype observed in this study, therefore its hardness must be the higher. The energy applied by the Shore scleroscope dissipates through the microlithotype heterogeneity and prevents fractures and cracks from propagating through the coal. In another microlithotype, the occurrence of clay minerals in the carbominerite absorbs the energy applied by the Shore scleroscope. While it might exhibit some indentation mark, evidence of fracture and crack propagation/ growth through the coal is less common. Last, the vitrite is the homogeneous microlithotype, and the applied energy cannot dissipate without changing the material characteristics. Chips surrounding the indentation and fracture propagation showing the crack growth onto vitrite are quite common. Also, because cleat systems can be developed on brighter vitrite, they might assist to create a pathway for fracture propagation, reducing the Shore hardness values. The specimens from the open cut mine correspond to a reflectance of 0.5% while those prepared from Guluguba-2 showed a reflectance range of 0.43–0.47%. While photomicrographs displayed the differences in texture between both specimens' locations, the difference in rank (thermal maturity) which is still sub-bituminous (roughly for purpose of comparison) does not seem to be an issue. It is suggested that the SH values for vitrite and clarite microlithotypes at these locations are statistically the same, though Guluguba-2 is affected by clay rich (mineral matter) and fractures (natural and/or pre-existing). The carbominerite is slightly softer in Guluguba-2 which again seemed be an influence of clay rich minerals where Guluguba-2 tends to comprise the highest end (percentage) of mineral matter.  This work addressed the hardness response of the microlithotype in sub-bituminous collected from two locations (open cut mine and borehole) for low rank sub-bituminous coal. Three microlithotypes were identified for the sub-bituminous specimens tested: vitrite, clarite and carbominerite. Quantification of the micromechanical properties is possible using such a simple test, and opportunities to improve fracture propagation can be further explored. Results suggested that a strong correlation exists between microlithotype and hardness when interpreting thin weak and bedding plane surface of sub-bituminous coal. Specifically, The microstructural heterogeneity and anisotropy of the coal can be captured by the variation in hardness when transects or selective measurements are performed. The variation in Shore Hardness (SH) is a function of the presence of cleats, cracks/fractures, different textures and mineral matter. The harder microlithotype is clarite, followed by vitrite, and then carbominerite. The Shore hardness values decrease from clarite with an increase in mineral matter towards carbominerite. However, measurements of Shore hardness by itself give no evidence about micro-brittle (vitrite) or micro-ductile (carbominerite) behaviour of coal. It happens that vitrite displays purely brittle behaviour, while carbominerite has a ductile component. The differences between microlithotypes are not small enough to be ignored in numerical modelling simulations, as the variation occur at centimetre to millimetre scale it has implications for fracture propagation across bands in a coal seam. Further studies are required to determine how these properties can be better represented and upscaled from the microstructural observations to the rock mass depending on the numerical modelling approach and aim. Lastly, the band thickness distributions were not accounted for in this study and could be the subject of further work. Also, a comparison between similar microlithotype for other ranks would be of interest to describe the hardness behaviour by microlithotype across rank. The authors wish to thank the UQ Centre for Coal Seam Gas (CCSG) and its industry members: APLNG, Arrow Energy, Santos (2011–2021), and Shell/QGC (2011–2017) for financial support of PhD scholarship (UQ Project number: 017851; RM number: 2015000765), as well as the The authors wish to declare that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at