The distribution and diversity of microbial community in Zijinshan commercial non-aerated copper heap-bioleaching system operated at pH 0.8 for three years were investigated. In this research, 12 ore residue samples and 3 liquid samples were collected, the microbial community structure of heap was investigated by clone libraries, key acidophiles were assayed by real-time PCR, and physicochemical characteristics of the samples were also analyzed. 27 OTUs were obtained from 16S rRNA libraries, among them, bioleaching microorganism accounted for 40.7% of OTUs and 95.6% of clones. The species which had the ability to oxidize reduced inorganic sulfur compound accounted for 52.9% of clones and to oxidize Fe2+ accounted for 42.7% of clones. The other remaining OTUs accounted for 59.3% of OTUs and 4.4% of clones, most of which belong to heterotrophic and facultative bacteria. These bacteria could use organic compounds of the heap system and decrease the inhibition of organic compounds to autotrophic bacteria. In the heap, Acidithiobacillus mainly located in the inner and higher sites of ore heap, Leptospirillum mainly located in the outer and lower sites of ore heap, and heterotrophic and facultative microbes mainly located in the middle of the ore heap. There was higher leaching efficiency in the core of the heap, this might be related with the higher temperature of the heap core and higher diversity of microorganism community.Biohydrometallurgy has been employed to economically extract metal from certain sulfide minerals over half a century ( In commercial copper heap bioleaching plant, finely crushed material (typically 80% smaller than 10 Microbial communities researches focused on heap bioleaching plants were reported previously ( Zijinshan Copper Mine located in the southeast of China, and the heap bioleaching plant is now the largest bioleaching plant in China. From 2008 Flowchart of bioleaching system and sampling sites were shown in Total DNA was extracted according to the reference ( Chimera detection and sequences blast were analyzed using the RDP site and NCBI database respectively. Alignments of 16S rRNA gene sequences were performed with the CLUSTAL_X program ( Real-time PCR based on SybrGreen I was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions (SYBR Primix Ex Taq, RR420, TAKAKA) with Rotor-Gene 6000 (Corbett Research), all tests were conducted in triplicate. For the quantification of Ore samples were fused with nitric acid, hydrochloric acid, dilute hydrochloric acid and hydrochloric acid successively. Iron, copper and sulfur contents were determined using ICP-AES ( The chemical composition of ROM (run of mine) was shown in In the archaea clone libraries, only Samples similarity tree and samples community composition bar graph were shown in  The percent of residual copper increased horizontally from 0.05% of A1 to 0.098% of A3 and increased vertically from 0.05% of A1 to 0.091% of E1 on the whole (  In this paper, not only autotrophic bacteria were detected in the heap bioleaching system, heterotrophic and facultative bacteria were also detected in the internal part of the heap and in the liquid samples. Up to now, the contributions of heterotrophic and facultative bacteria have not received as much attention as the chemolithotrophs ( In this research, Fe  The results of clone libraries and copper/iron distribution in the leached ore residue samples are helpful for understanding the spatial variation and patterns of bacterial community structure, helpful for understanding the relationship of microbial distribution and copper recovery. This work was funded partially by the