In intensive livestock production areas, land application remains the traditional management of manure and slurries for nutrient recycling. For sustainable agriculture there is fear, however, that this practice may have detrimental effects, particularly on the depletion of Soil Organic Matter associated with pig slurry applications. We investigated the long-term fate of nitrogen in a reconstituted soil having received high doses of pig slurry during 5 years (1991–1995). After 5 years of intensive application rates (nearly 1000m3
                     yr−1), the N and C content of the soil profile (0–20cm) had increased by about 60% and 50%, respectively. These results confirm previous findings although it seems that the particularly high rates of application may explain, in part, the relatively important N incorporation in soil. Pig slurry applications ceased in 1995 and nitrogen content in soil and drainage water have been monitored. Apparent mineralization rates were calculated from the decrease in N content of the soil. This analysis indicated that more than 50% of the added N stored in the soil at the end of the applications would eventually be mineralized, leaving nearly 50% of the stored N to be immobilized in the soil. These results are the first published of their kinds, as most reports never examine the fate of applied pig slurry N after halting applications. In addition the few reports on long-term experiments suggest that Soil Organic Matter following pig slurry applications may be unstable. Our analysis tends to show the contrary. However, this conclusion must be tempered because data on nitrate leachate patterns suggest that soil management such as ploughing and sowing may actually trigger mineralization that could eventually deplete nitrogen stored following applications.A new framework policy to promote soil protection and sustainable land use has been developed by the Environmental Action Programme of the European Union (EU) ( In intensive livestock production areas, land application remains the traditional management of manure and slurries for nutrient recycling. This management may have both positive and negative consequences for soil quality. Indeed, these practices have resulted in a build up of major nutrients (such as nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium) and micronutrients (such as copper and zinc) into soil profiles ( In this paper we present results from a reconstituted soil or macro-lysimeter experiment initially designed as a treatment reactor ( The study site is located in Western Brittany near the town of Plouvorn (France, 48°58′ N; 4°03′ W). The climate is humid and temperate with a mean annual rainfall of 1100 From 1996 to 2005 this experimental treatment facility was maintained and no more pig slurry was applied. This was done so as to study the fate of the accumulated soil N over time. Ryegrass sward was maintained over the lysimeter and regularly cut and left in place so that there would be no plant exportation. In October 1995, September 1999 and September 2003, the field was ploughed to a depth of 20 For soil sampling, the experimental lysimeter was divided into four equal plots of approximately 800 During the first phase of the experiment, soil samples were taken on the following dates: 19 March 1991, 17 March 1992, 16 March 1993, 19 April 1994, 30 March 1995 and 4 April 1996. After manure applications ceased, the soil sampling campaign was carried out on 3-year intervals: 15 March 1999, 5 April 2002 and 24 March 2005. Soil bulk density was measured in 1991 in the Solepur macrolysimeter from undisturbed samples obtained from a soil pit for the three soil layers explored. An average of 1.3 During the drainage seasons (October–April in general), drainage flow rates were measured using a narrow V-notch weir equipped with an ultrasonic water level recorder (ISCO 3210, USA). Drainage water was sampled four times a day and composited into a 1-L bottle using an automatic sampler (ISCO 2100, USA). Samples were then collected on a biweekly basis during site servicing. Soil sample were first oven-dried at 45 Throughout the drainage season, drainage water samples were analyzed for nitrate Chemical properties of the pig slurry applied ( From 1991 to 1996, during the intensive application period, total soil nitrogen content increased from 1.8 to 3.5 During 5 years of intensive applications, the soil total N stock in soil increased by about 60% (from 10 to 16 These results confirm a number of previous reports. Nitrogen soil data recovered during our experiment only included total nitrogen and mineral and organic species were not specifically measured ( For the special Solepur study case, the source of total nitrogen accumulation into the profile was not clear, nevertheless, both organic N load applied (8303 After the slurry applications ceased, a decrease in total soil N content was expected due to the mineralization of the easily degradable SOM recently constituted by pig slurry spreadings, as well as leaching of stored mineral nitrogen (processes reviewed by Between 1996 and 2005, the total soil N content decreased significantly in the top layer from 3.5 to 2.5 It is difficult to compare apparent N mineralization measured to data published as there are, to our knowledge, no reports describing the evolution of soil N content after halting of manure or slurry applications. In a recent article From 1996 to 2005, the apparent nitrogen mineralization flux was estimated to have reached 2.6 To explore whether stored N would eventually be totally released or, if there would be a soil N level at which apparent mineralization would be “halted”, we fitted an exponential curve on the amount of N apparently mineralized in the 0–20 Based on a non-linear least square regression, model fitting yielded a mineralization potential for N To our knowledge, there are no reports of similar experiments where the fate of nitrogen was monitored after halting of pig slurry applications. Few N accumulation results from long-term experiments are reported in the literature and in all cases the manure or slurry were applied on a continuous basis and were not halted. Additional information obtained from drained water nitrate gives more light on the actual dynamics of the processes and are discussed below. Dynamics of nitrate leaching on a multi-annual basis is represented in After the pig slurry applications ceased, and during three years (1996–1997, 1997–1998 and 1998–1999), the slope of the curves regularly decreased, suggesting, in light of what is presented above, that the source of nitrate leaching actually decreased. In 1996, ryegrass sward was sowed. It was then cut on a regular basis but grass was left in place. In 1999, the experimental plot was ploughed and sowed in grass to maintain the ryegrass sward and the same soil management was applied in 2003. It is remarkable to note that at each ploughing and sowing period corresponds a clear increase and a break in the slope of the multi-annual curves. This suggests that ploughing clearly increased the source of nitrate reaching leaching water. Nitrate leaching losses in the Solepur lysimeter between 1999 and 2005 accounted to 1200 Recent results describing the dynamics of nitrate leaching associated with drainage have shown that nitrate export usually follows an asymptotic curve as a function of drained water, reflecting the apparent leaching of residual soil N ( We extrapolated the model results to the following years to evaluate the exportation of nitrate that would have been exported without new soil management (“model” curve in It thus seems that most of the easily mineralizable organic matter in soil was exported within the first three years after ceasation of application and that lower amounts of N would have been exported had the soil not been disturbed. Our results from the previous section were obtained on soil N content actually obtained after (2002 and 2005) the two ploughing and sowing events (1999 and 2003). The apparent mineralization rates computed thus correspond to the combined mineralization of undisturbed soil and the mineralization induced by tillage. Our conclusion that a sizable amount of incorporated N was immobilized in a rather stable form may very well be invalid or only represent a particular soil management after application. Indeed, looking at the increased exportation of nitrate associated with ploughing, it seems that annual ploughing could very well trigger additional exportations of N that could eventually deplete N immobilized in the soil. Information brought by analysis of nitrate exportation dynamics thus showed that immobilization of applied slurry N to soil is totally dependent on soil tillage and management. The long-term fate of nitrogen in a reconstituted soil having received high doses of pig slurry during 5 years (1991–1995) was monitored. After 6 years of intensive application rates (nearly 1000