Acidic moisture-conditioning plus low temperature drying (AMCLTD) was applied as a pretreatment on flaxseed kernel, for the first time, prior to aqueous extraction (AEP) of flaxseed oil with lower water consumption. Limited information is available on how different pretreatments affect the free oil recovery during AEP. The use of AMCLTD pretreatment with 0.3 M citric acid and drying at 70 °C for 1 h resulted in approximately 83.27 ± 0.67% free oil recovery with thinner cream layer than the sample without pretreatment. Confocal laser scanning microscopy and transmission electron microscopy observations reveal that the coalescence of oil bodies and shrinkage of protein bodies resulted in the decrease of cream and the increase of free oil from AEP. Interestingly, the lowest mean particle size of AMCLTD sample proved that this pretreatment was beneficial to flaxseed comminution. Moreover, the pretreatment showed no significant effect on the fatty acid composition and quality of flaxseed oil. These results demonstrated that AMCLTD pretreatment holds high potential for high-quality flaxseed oil extraction from AEP.Flaxseed, which is also known as linseed, is cultivated in more than 50 countries nowadays, and Canada is the largest producer and exporter of flaxseed in the world, other important flaxseed growing countries include China, United States, India, and Ethiopia ( Similar with other vegetable oil, flaxseed oil is mainly recovered with solvent extraction, cold pressing, hot pressing, or supercritical fluid extraction ( Aqueous extraction processing (AEP) as an environmentally friendly and safe technique for oil extraction, has been applied for the extraction of oils from oilseeds such as canola ( Conventional pretreatments include dehulling, grinding, thermal treatment (roasting and steaming) to break down the cell wall and make the oil bearing material ready for oil extraction. In the case of high pressure processing as reported by Therefore, the main objectives of this research were to investigate the effect of pretreatments including low temperature drying (LTD), moisture-conditioning plus low temperature drying (MCLTD) and acidic moisture-conditioning plus low temperature drying (AMCLTD) on the flaxseed oil extraction with AEP under low water consumption (at a ratio of 1:2.5 (kg/L)). Meanwhile, the mechanism for oil extraction with different pretreatments would be explored by microstructural observation of flaxseed kernel. Besides, the flaxseed oil quality under different pretreatments would also be evaluated for further understanding of this technology. Flaxseed kernel (dehulled flaxseed) was obtained from Fengjimiao Co. Ltd. (Inner Mongolia Autonomy, China) harvested in 2018. The oil content and protein content of flaxseed kernel were 59.21 ± 0.42% and 22.92 ± 0.31%, respectively. Fluorescein isothiocyanate isomer I and Nile red for CLSM were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Co. (St Louis, Mo, USA). All other reagents used were of analytical grade. Low temperature drying (LTD) pretreatment: 150 g of flaxseed kernels were settled in a single layer and placed in an air oven (DGH-9240A, Shanghai Yiheng Scientific Instrument Co., Ltd., China). The flaxseed kernels were dried at 70 °C for 1 h. Moisture-conditioning plus low temperature drying (MCLTD) pretreatment: 45 mL water was added to 150 g flaxseed kernels and they were mixed in a valve bag and incubated at 25 °C for 6 h prior to drying at 70 °C for 1 h. Acidic moisture-conditioning plus low temperature drying (AMCLTD) pretreatment: 45 mL citric acid solution was added to 150 g flaxseed kernels and they were mixed in a valve bag and incubated at 25 °C for 6 h prior to drying at 70 °C for 1 h. The dried flaxseed kernels were cooled to ambient temperature, and ground into paste with a high-speed universal grinder (Model DFY-500D, Wenling Linda machinery Co. ltd., China) and a three-cylindrical roll crusher (Model, Changzhou Zili Chemical Machinery Co. Ltd., China). The grinding (10 s per time, 3 times) and crushing (3 cycles) were combined to crush flaxseed kernels into paste. The paste samples were kept in plastic bags under vacuum and stored at 4 °C until used. Effect of citric acid concentration: 45 mL citric acid solution with the concentration of 0.0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5 M was added to 150 g flaxseed kernels respectively, and the mixture was incubated at 25 °C for 6 h. Then, the flaxseed kernels were dried at 70 °C for 1 h. Effect of drying temperature: 45 mL citric acid solution with the concentration of 0.3 M was added to 150 g flaxseed kernels and the mixture was incubated at 25 °C for 6 h prior to drying. In order to remove the extra water in flaxseed kernels as complete as possible and to avoid excessive heating, the drying duration extended 5 min for every 10 °C drop in drying temperature. In another word, the flaxseed kernels were dried at 70 °C for 1 h, 80 °C for 55 min, 90 °C for 50 min, 100 °C for 45 min, 110 °C for 40 min, 120 °C for 35 min, 130 °C for 30 min and 140 °C for 25 min after the set temperature was attained. The moisture content of flaxseed kernels under different drying temperature were all between 3.5% and 4.0%. The flaxseed paste (100 g) was dispersed in distilled water at a ratio of 1:2.5 (kg/L), the pH of the slurry was adjusted to 9.0 with 2 M NaOH. The extraction was performed in a jacketed reactor connected to a thermostat circulating water bath (MP-501A, Shanghai Yiheng scientific instruments Co. ltd., China) followed by incubation at 60 °C with constant stirring at 70 r/min. Then, the incubated slurry was centrifuged at 4180 × Total oil content of flaxseed pastes and the sediment phase were determined using Soxhlet extraction method ( A suspension system was prepared by adding 0.5 g of flaxseed paste to 10 mL of acetone, then it was agitated for 1 min using a vortex mixing oscillator (Lab dancer, IKA, German) to break the clumps. After leaveing at 4 °C for 2 h, the mixture was centrifuged at 4180 × The viscosity of slurry samples was assayed using a rheometer (DHR-3, TA Instruments, New Castle, USA). The temperature was maintained at 25 °C using a water bath. The viscosity of flaxseed paste was measured over a shear rate range of 100–0.01 s Microstructure of flaxseed kernel was observed with a Zeiss LSM 710 confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM, Carl Zeiss Jena, Germany) as described in our previous study ( Transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEOL Ltd, Tokyo, Japan) was also used to find out microstructural change after different pretreatments. The untreated samples and samples under the pretreatments of MCLTD and AMCLTD were prepared according to The fatty acid composition was determined after methyl-esterification and analyzed using an Agilent 7820A gas chromatograph (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA, USA) equipped with a Trace TR-FAME capillary column (PEG-20 M, 60 m × 2.5 mm × 2.5 mm, Thermal Fisher, MA, USA) and a flame-ionization detector according to the AOCS Official Method Ce 1–62. Iodine value, peroxide value ( Unless specified otherwise, all experiments were repeated three times, and the results were given as means ± standard deviations. Duncan's multiple-range test was used to evaluate significant differences ( The oil distribution among free oil, cream, aqueous phase, and sediment phase for untreated samples and samples pretreated by LTD, MCLTD, and AMCLTD were summarized in The effect of citric acid concentration on the oil yield is shown in The effect of drying temperature on free oil yield with AEP was investigated and the results were presented in To better understand the mechanism of the AMCLTD pretreatment for oil extraction from flaxseed kernels, cotyledon of flaxseed kernels before and after different pretreatments were examined by CLSM ( The subcellular organelles of flaxseed kernels under different pretreatments were also observed with TEM. The large black particles represent protein bodies, while the off-white areas represent oil bodies. Generally, the lower particle size of ground material brought out the higher oil yield from AEP, which could be attributed to more complete cell wall disruption during size reduction ( The apparent viscosity of ground flaxseed paste with different pretreatments is shown in Oil quality is a foremost scaleplate to evaluate the feasibility of the pretreatment as well as the process for oil extraction. Hence, the fatty acid composition and quality indicators of extracted oil under different pretreatments were investigated. Fatty acid composition of the flaxseed oil under the pretreatments of LTD, MCLTD and AMCLTD as well as untreated are shown in From the results shown in Pretreatment of AMCLTD was attempted for flaxseed kernel in this study, and free oil yield could be obtained as 83.27 ± 0.67% in AEP, which was greatly improved compared with that of untreated flaxseed at 18.95 ± 0.91%, Further, the cream formed by employing AMCLTD pretreatment were thinner than one formed without the use of AMCLTD. Meanwhile, the water consumption was remarkably saved for the reason that the low ratio (1:2.5 (kg/L) of water to oil-bearing material was used. High amount of free oil was achieved from AEP under the optimal pretreatment condition: mixing flaxseed with 0.3 M citric acid (25 °C, 6 h) and drying (70 °C, 1 h) under low temperature. However, the increase of insoluble protein in sediment phase caused oil was entrapped in sediment phase slightly. CLSM and TEM observation showed that coalescence of oil bodies and shrinkage of protein bodies were the main reason to release high amount of free oil and to decrease the amount of cream under the pretreatment of AMCLTD. Besides, the only difference between AMCLTD pretreated and untreated flaxseed was its higher peroxide value (2.34 meq kg In conclusion, AMCLTD showed great potential as an effective pretreatment for flaxseed to obtain higher free oil yield, decreased cream amount and lowered water consumption during AEP, which is of high economic feasibility. Meanwhile, further research needs to be carried out to understand the change of flaxseed protein in both the aqueous and sediment phase and to explore the utilization of by-products from AEP. We declare that we have no financial and personal relationships with other people or organizations that can inappropriately influence our work. The authors acknowledge the financial support provided by the