Membrane-based solvent extraction offers many advantages over conventional solvent extraction technology including lower solvent inventories and reduced solvent losses. In this work, the extraction of cobalt with a hollow fiber contactor was studied in the context of nickel electrolyte purification. Distribution data were obtained for cobalt extraction with 2-ethylhexyl 2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid (Ionquest® 801) in an aliphatic diluent, and cobalt extraction with bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)phosphinic acid (Cyanex® 272) in a low aromatic diluent.
                  Mass transfer of cobalt with Ionquest® 801 and Cyanex® 272 as extracting reagents was carried out with a hollow fiber Liqui-Cel® Extra-Flow module. The overall mass transfer coefficients were found to be much lower than those predicted assuming transport limited extraction. It was concluded that with relatively dilute cobalt concentration in the feed, reaction extraction kinetics were a major contributor to the overall resistance to mass transfer.membrane area at the interphase solute concentration internal membrane diameter log mean diameter outer membrane diameter diffusivity local mass transfer coefficient overall mass transfer coefficient length of hollow fiber equilibrium distribution coefficient flow rate Reynolds number Schmidt number Sherwood number velocity membrane thickness fractional resistance membrane porosity viscosity density membrane tortuosity interfacial reaction membrane organic shell tube aqueous module inlet module outlet The application of solvent extraction technology using a hollow fiber membrane contactor instead of the more conventional contacting devices such as mixer–settlers, columns or centrifugal contactors is an active area of research. The hollow fiber membrane contactor has many advantages including high surface area to volume ratio and dispersion free contact, preventing emulsion formation, phase separation difficulties and leading to reduced entrainment Hydrometallurgical processes are increasingly being applied to the recovery of nickel from low-grade sulfide and laterite ores, which occur in association with cobalt containing minerals. These processes often combine leaching with solvent extraction and electrowinning. Solvent extraction technology produces concentrated nickel solutions, which contain impurities such as cobalt with a concentration range typically one to two orders of magnitude lower than the nickel concentration. During electrowinning, nickel is deposited at the cathode and the spent electrolyte recycled to the solvent stripping stage. In this closed circuit, cobalt can build-up as an impurity. It is in the context of purification of such nickel solutions that the non-dispersive, membrane-based solvent extraction of cobalt, using hollow fibers, was explored. One of the advantages of the application of hollow fibers to liquid–liquid extraction is that this technology is as selective as solvent extraction but the risk of electrolyte contamination through entrainment of organic is lower, because the two phases are not intimately dispersed. Minimising solvent contamination is particularly important in the context of this application, because such contamination adversely affects metal deposition during electrowinning. The aim of this work was therefore to explore the potential of using a hollow fiber membrane contactor of commercial design (Liqui-Cel Organic solution was made up of Ionquest The hollow fiber module was a Liqui-Cel The hollow fiber module was operated continuously in conjunction with a mixer–settler circuit in order to enable the solvent to be continuously recycled. The mixer–settler rig comprised five mixer–settlers, which were constructed in-house of high-density polyethylene. Each mixer–settler unit was made up of a 0.5 Equilibrium distribution coefficients ( Iodine extraction was performed with a Liqui-Cel Data for cobalt mass transfer was obtained using a Liqui-Cel The extraction of cobalt from an aqueous to a solvent phase containing either Ionquest The distribution coefficient The overall mass transfer coefficient can be defined by considering an overall mass balance around the module (aqueous phase): The conventional approach is to define the Sherwood number in terms of the outer fiber diameter, Schoner et al. For the application of hollow fiber technology to liquid–liquid metal extraction, the first step required is the identification of a suitable solvent system. The solvent extraction of cobalt and its separation from nickel is well-established technology with many examples of commercial operations around the world The reaction between cobalt and organophosphorus acids has been studied by various authors, and they report the formation of blue tetrahedral complexes in the organic phase The potential of Ionquest As expected from Eq. The extraction of Co with Ionquest The equilibrium constant ( Additional data for the Co/330 Published values for the equilibrium constant for Co extraction with 2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester, the active component in the commercial Ionquest The data obtained for the Cyanex For a full description of mass transfer in a hollow fiber module, knowledge of all the transport parameters, including tube and shell side mass transfer coefficients is required. An inspection of the available literature showed, however, that the mass transfer correlation for the shell side in a Liqui-Cel The iodine water/heptane system was chosen because mass transfer in this case did not involve a chemical reaction and the main resistance has been reported to be in the aqueous phase boundary layer In the first set of tests, the aqueous phase, containing iodine was pumped through the shell in a once-through mode. The solvent was recirculated in the tube side via a reservoir. The increase in iodine concentration in the solvent was monitored and the steady-state outlet iodine aqueous concentration calculated by mass balance. An example of the experimental data and overall aqueous mass transfer coefficients calculated as per Eq.  The predictions for Sherwood numbers using the Schöner correlation were compared to the Sherwood numbers using our data, using Eqs. This same trend was observed by Baudot et al., when they tried to fit the Schöner correlation to their data for liquid–liquid extraction of aroma compounds with sunflower oil using the same Liqui-Cel  In the second set of iodine mass transfer tests, the aqueous phase, containing iodine was pumped through the lumen in a once-through mode, whilst the solvent was pumped through the shell side. Less emphasis was placed on the tube side correlation as the Lévêque approximation is well accepted. The Lévêque approximation is valid for Graetz numbers ( The extraction of cobalt with the two chosen solvent systems, Ionquest To ensure effective extraction and relatively high distribution coefficients, pH control was required. As seen from Eq. The experimental overall mass transfer coefficients obtained for cobalt extraction were compared with those predicted using the conventional resistance-in-series model, assuming transport limited mass transfer. Eqs. The diffusivity of Co in 330 The predicted The first term in Eq. The relative contribution of each resistance can be estimated by calculating the fractional contribution relative to the total resistance. The first three terms of Eq. For the Co-Ionquest Two studies on cobalt extraction kinetics with 2-ethylhexyl 2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid (the main component of Ionquest Mass transfer studies with cobalt, carried out in a Lewis type cell, with bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)phosphinic acid (Cyanex The significant contribution of reaction kinetics to mass transfer in hollow fibers, for metal extraction with other chelating reagents, has been discussed by other authors. Lin and Juang The current study has highlighted, that for the extraction of low cobalt concentrations, with commercially proven solvent extraction reagents, chemical reaction kinetics slows down mass transfer, and this is likely to have a significant negative impact on the size of the equipment required for application of hollow fiber contactors in this particular context. The extraction of cobalt from sulphate media, with Ionquest Data for the overall mass transfer coefficients for hollow fiber cobalt extraction were experimentally determined and compared with predicted values assuming diffusion control mass transfer. Correlations used to describe tube and shell side flow in the Liqui-Cel The overall mass transfer was found to be much lower than that expected assuming transport limited reactive extraction. It was concluded that under the conditions tested, with relatively low cobalt concentrations in the aqueous phase, reaction kinetics were a major contributor to the overall mass transfer resistance to extraction of cobalt. The experimental contributions of A. McCormick and L. Chin are gratefully acknowledged. The authors would like to thank Cytec, Canada, Albright & Wilson, USA, and Shell, Australia for the supply of Cyanex