This paper presents flotation results carried out on fluorite ore using a relatively short column, operated under negative bias regime and without wash water. The term short column is used from a kinetic point of view from which collection zone comes out to be around 8m tall (the relation height/diameter appears valid for industrial size columns). Negative bias was achieved making tailing flow smaller than feed flow. Hence, part of the water is carried up within bubbles wakes. No wash water is added.
                  It was found that, heavily loaded bubbles, formed in high-grade fluorite pulps, at negative bias, levitate easier than positive bias. Under such conditions, carrying capacity of columns seems to increase due to a decrease in downward velocity of pulp. Recovery increases considerably, resulting in a sort of rougher flotation. High recovery as well as grades was obtained under negative bias regime.Conventional column design was originally modeled from experimental data, fundamentally from sulfide ores. In such ores, valuable species are in small concentrations. However, for other minerals, such as industrial ones, the species of interest are in much higher concentrations. Due to that, it is probable that the conditions to float such ores might not be similar to sulfides. In this regard, many new designs have being proposed. The fluorite ore used in this work came from Nossa Senhora do Carmo (NSC) Mining Co. from Criciúma city, Santa Catarina state, Brazil. The sample, as received, was 100%—20 The chemical analysis gave 68.7% CaF Grinding was carried out in a 19.8 The pulp was prepared at 30% solid concentration. The pulp was conditioned at 900 A house made modular column, constructed with three 1-m long, 4 For the sake of clarity, the term bias, Bias water (  As it is seen, from zero to 1.2 Above 1.2 “Negative bias” flotation scheme was devised after Air hold ups as a function of gas flow for fluorite pulps are plotted in  In order to substantiate negative bias effect, a flow of water was injected at 31.5 It is seen from this figure that, air hold ups decreases as water added from the bottom increases. Such a decrease might result from the reduction of the actual downward flow of pulp in the collection zone, by the water addition since an equivalent amount of water had to come out through the overflow of the column due to that tailing flow rate was kept constant. It is seen that, hold up tends to a value similar to that of pure solution as can be deduced comparing these values with those of It seems that, water addition counterbalance the decrease in uprising velocity due to particle attachment resulting in a bubbles residence time reduction in the collection zone. Consequently, recovery of fluorite increases as flow rate of water injected augmented. In addition, recovery of fluorite also increases as a function of  Column flotation, operated under negative bias, is able to concentrate fluorite. The best results are obtained when water is added from the bottom of the column. Hold ups reach values similar to the one obtained with pure solutions. Also, recovery increases as water addition increases. On the other hand, grade decreases as water flow increases. From here it can be said that, column act as a rougher flotation machine. The authors would like to thank to the General Manager of Nossa Senhora do Carmo Mines, from Criciúma, Mr. Carlos Sartor, for his enthusiastic support to this work and the Chief Engineer Mr. Julio Gomes for his invaluable help.