Vitamin D is essential for life in higher animals. Classically, it has been shown to be one of the most important biological regulators of calcium homeostasis. It has been established that these important biological effects are only achieved as a consequence of the metabolism of vitamin D into a family of daughter metabolites, including the two key kidney-produced metabolites 1α,25(OH) It has become increasingly apparent since the 1980s that 1α,25(OH) The first scientific description of rickets, which is the hallmark of a vitamin D-deficiency, was provided in the seventeenth century by both Dr. Daniel Whistler (1645) and Professor Francis Glisson (1650). The major breakthrough in understanding the causative factors of rickets was the development of nutrition as an experimental science and the appreciation of the existence of vitamins. Considering the fact that now we accept that the biologically active form of vitamin D is a steroid hormone, it is somewhat ironic that vitamin D, through a historical accident, became classified as a vitamin. It was in 1919/20 that Sir Edward Mellanby, working with dogs raised exclusively indoors (in the absence of sunlight or ultraviolet light), devised a diet which allowed him to establish unequivocally that rickets was caused by a deficiency of a trace component present in the diet. In 1921, he wrote, ‘The action of fats in rickets is due to a vitamin or accessory food factor which they contain, probably identical with the fat-soluble vitamin.’ Furthermore, he established that cod-liver oil was an excellent antirachitic agent; this ultimately led to the antirachitic factor being classified as a vitamin. The chemical structures of the vitamins D were determined in the 1930s in the laboratory of Professor A. Windaus at the University of Gottingen. Vitamin D The modern era of vitamin D began during the period of 1965–70 with the discovery and chemical characterization of 1α,25(OH) Vitamin D The structures of vitamin D Vitamin D (synonym calciferol) is named according to the revised rules of the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC). Because vitamin D is derived from a steroid, the structure retains its numbering from the parent compound cholesterol (see Vitamin D Vitamin D The three enzymes responsible for the conversion of vitamin D The most important point of regulation of the vitamin D endocrine system occurs through the stringent control of the activity of the renal 25(OH)D The process of nuclear receptor-mediated regulation of gene transcription is exquisitely dependent upon the complimentary relationship between the unoccupied receptor and its cognate ligand. Thus, the unoccupied receptor is largely incompetent to engage in a productive fashion with the transcriptional machinery to effect meaningful regulation of gene transcription. It is only after the ligand–receptor complex has formed (which results in conformational changes in the receptor protein) that a functional receptor protein is generated. Thus acquisition of a detailed understanding of the complementarity of the ligand shape with that of the interior surface of the nuclear VDR receptor ligand binding domain is believed to be the key not only to understanding the structural basis of receptor action and its formation of heterodimers and interactions with coactivators (see The receptors for all steroid hormones (estrogen, progesterone, testosterone, cortisol, and aldosterone) and the nuclear receptors for 1α,25(OH) The World Health Organization (WHO) has responsibility for defining the International Unit (IU) of vitamin D The vitamin D requirement for healthy adults has never been precisely defined. Since vitamin D Since vitamin D In the USA, adequate amounts of vitamin D can be readily obtained from the diet and/or from casual exposure to sunlight. The UV exposure can be as little as three 20-min periods of exposure of the face and hands to ambient sunlight per week. However, in some parts of the world where food is not routinely fortified and sunlight is often limited during some periods of the year, obtaining adequate amounts of vitamin D becomes more of a problem. As a result, the incidence of rickets in these countries is higher than in the United States. Many countries as well as the WHO have prepared recommendations on the daily intake of essential nutrients, including vitamin D. The current ‘adequate intake’ allowance of vitamin D recommended in 1998 by the Food and Nutrition Board of the US Institute of Medicine is 200 Animal products constitute the bulk source of vitamin D that occurs naturally in unfortified foods. Marine fish, such as herring, salmon, and sardines, and fish liver oils are good sources of vitamin D In the classical target tissues such as intestine, bone, and kidney, 1,25(OH) In the intestine, 1,25(OH) In addition to the genomic effects of 1,25(OH) In the kidney, 1,25(OH) 1α,25(OH) The 1,25(OH) In the immune system, 1,25(OH) Insulin production by the endocrine pancreas is influenced by vitamin D status in that the blunted secretion of insulin and impaired glucose tolerance seen in vitamin D-deficient conditions are corrected by treatment with vitamin D Myopathy and abnormalities in muscle contraction seen in patients afflicted with metabolic bone disease are amenable to correction with vitamin D therapy. 1α,25(OH) In humans, diseases related to vitamin D can arise because of (1) altered availability of vitamin D; (2) altered hepatic conversion of vitamin D Chronic renal failure, also known as renal osteodystrophy, is characterized by impaired renal production of 1,25(OH) Also known as familial X-linked hypophosphatemic rickets, vitamin D-resistant rickets is characterized by a primary phosphate leak in the kidney, skeletal deformities, and hypophosphatemia. A combination of oral phosphate and 1,25(OH) Vitamin D-dependent rickets is also referred to as hereditary hypocalcemic vitamin D-resistant rickets, and is classified into Type I and Type II disease states. Type I rickets is believed to arise as a result of an inborn error in the renal 1-hydroxylase enzyme. The clinical features include hypocalcemia, hypophosphatemia, and several rachitic lesions. These symptoms can be treated with pharmacological doses of vitamin D Point mutations in the vitamin D receptor gene have been shown to be responsible for the defective receptors seen in these children with Type II rickets. The clinical manifestations are defective bone mineralization, decreased intestinal calcium absorption, hypocalcemia, and increased serum 1,25(OH) Hypoparathoidism exhibits hypocalcemia as a major clinical consequence and is corrected with large doses of vitamin D or physiological doses of 1,25(OH) Increased 1,25(OH) Pseudohypoparathyroidism results from a state of resistance to PTH. The biochemical abnormalities are hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, elevated serum PTH, and decreased serum 1,25(OH) Clinically, a deficiency in vitamin D manifests as rickets in children and osteomalacia in adults. Hypocalcemia, hypophosphatemia, increased serum alkaline phosphatase, and decreased serum 25(OH)D Current evidence supports the concept that the classical biological actions of the nutritionally important fat-soluble vitamin D in mediating calcium homeostasis are supported by a complex vitamin D endocrine system which coordinates the metabolism of vitamin D 