In India, over the last few decades, there has been a remarkable increase in sewage sludge production due to population increase and unplanned urbanization. The aim of the present study was to investigate the ability of an epigeic earthworm Eisenia foetida to transform primary sewage sludge (PSS) amended with cow dung (CD) into value added product, i.e., vermicompost in laboratory scale experiments. Two approaches investigated in the study were: (1) evaluation of vermistabilization of PSS and CD mixtures after 15 weeks in terms of fertilizer quality of the products and; (2) growth and reproduction of Eisenia foetida up to 11 weeks in different vermireactors. In all the PSS and CD mixtures, a decrease in pH, TOC and C:N ratio, but increase in EC, TKN, TK and TP was recorded. The heavy metals’ content in the vermicomposts was higher than initial mixtures. Maximum worm biomass was attained in 10% PSS+90% CD mixture while, the worm growth rate was highest in 30% PSS+70% CD feed mixture. It was inferred from the study that addition of 30–40% of PSS with CD had no adverse effect on the fertilizer value of the vermicompost as well as growth of Eisenia foetida. The results indicated that PSS could be converted into good quality manure by vermicomposting if mixed in appropriate ratio (30–40%) with cow dung.During the recent years, discharge of untreated or semi-treated sewage water into water bodies has resulted in increased water pollution incidences in India. Due to prohibitive cost of sewage water treatment and non-availability of electricity, most of the sewage treatment plants in India have only primary wastewater treatment facilities (sedimentation) to treat the sewage water which yields huge quantities of primary sewage sludge. The environmentally accepted means of sewage sludge disposal include incineration and sanitary land-filling. The authors have observed that the primary sewage sludge is generally disposed off in agricultural fields, open dumps, along the roadside or railway tracks and poorly designed sanitary landfills which can pollute surface or ground water causing public health hazards. Apart from this, such practices entail wastage of organic and inorganic nutrients present in the sludge that might be put to good use Use of earthworms for waste management, organic matter stabilization, soil detoxification and vermicompost production has been reported The use of earthworm in sludge management has been termed as ‘vermistabilization’ Mitchell Fresh PSS was collected from the dumping site of a sewage treatment plant situated near village Dhanwapur (Gurgaon), India. The wastewater treatment capacity of this plant is 15 MGD. PSS was foul smelling so it was dried in direct sunlight for a week with periodic turnings. Then it was screened to remove non-biodegradable materials such as brick pieces, stones, glass pieces, metal pieces, leather, plastics, polythene, etc. before its mixing with CD. Fresh CD was procured from an intensively live stocked farm at Hisar, India. The physico-chemical characteristics of PSS and CD are given in  To achieve the objectives, two different experiments were conducted. The first experiment was established to determine the effect of PSS on the fertilizer quality of vermicompost. The second experiment was undertaken to study the growth and fecundity of In six bench-scale vermireactors (vol. 10 Vermireactor No. 1: 1000 Vermireactor No. 2: 900 Vermireactor No. 3: 800 Vermireactor No. 4: 700 Vermireactor No. 5: 600 Vermireactor No.6: 500 These mixtures were turned manually every day for 21 days in order to eliminate volatile gases potentially toxic to earthworms. After 21 days, 20 adult individuals of Six circular plastic containers (diameter 14 The pH and electrical conductivity (EC) were determined using a double distilled water suspension of each vermicompost in the ratio of 1:10 (w/v). Total organic carbon (TOC) was measured using the method of Nelson and Sommers All the chemicals used were analytically reagent (AR) grade supplied by S.D. Fine Chemicals, Mumbai, India. Alkali resistant borosilicate glass apparatus and double glass distilled water was used through out the study for analytical work. The samples were used on dry weight basis for chemical analysis. All the samples were analyzed in triplicate and results were averaged. The results were reproducible with in 3–7% error limits. One-way ANOVA was used to analyze the significant difference between different reactors for observed parameters. Tukey's  A significant increase in the TKN content occurred following the vermiconversion of sludge into vermicompost in different vermireactors. The initial TKN content of the vermireactors was in the range of 6.3–10.5 The C:N ratio is used as an index for maturity of organic wastes. As evident from the Heavy metals appear in the sewage sludge from a variety of sources like batteries, consumer electronics, ceramics, light bulbs, plastics, house dust and paint chips, etc. So, the vermicompost made from sewage sludge may have higher heavy metal concentrations. In small amounts, many of these elements may be essential for plant growth, however, in higher concentrations they are likely to have detrimental effects upon plant growth The biomass production by Disposal of sewage sludge by environmentally acceptable means is a serious problem. Our trials have demonstrated that vermicomposting can be an alternate technology for the management of primary sewage sludge mixed with cow dung. In the present study, the vermicomposting of PSS amended with CD resulted in the conversion of a waste into value added product, i.e. vermicompost. A high degree of PSS stabilization was achieved after 105 days of worm activity. The results indicated that after the addition of primary sewage sludge in appropriate quantities (30–40%) to the cow dung, it can be used as a raw material in the vermicomposting. The fertilizer quality of PSS-based vermicomposts was almost equal to control (prepared by using the cow dung only). But addition of PSS in the CD is not suggested if prime concern is vermiculture (production of earthworms) as the cocoon production is lesser if PSS is present in the earthworm feed. The study also inferred that the application of PSS-based vermicompost in the agricultural fields as a soil conditioner or manure, would not have any adverse effect due to heavy metals. One of the authors (Renuka Gupta) is thankful to University Grants Commission, New Delhi (India) for providing financial assistance in the form of Junior Research Fellowship to conduct this work.