Wet low-intensity magnetic separation (LIMS) is used in the magnetic separation of ferromagnetic minerals. The performance of the separation is controlled primarily by the internal flow in the separator, governed by the process and machine settings. However, a very important factor has been usually ignored in the LIMS process, namely the behavior of the intergrowth particles. The detailed influence of the various condition parameters on the behavior of the particles with different characteristics in LIMS is still not clear. In this study, a two-way coupled multiphysics model was used to simulate the dynamic capture process of the multi-type intergrowth particles and its impact on the performance of LIMS separation. All predictions indicate that the operating parameters and particle properties affect the capture behavior of intergrowth particles, which significantly affects the separation performance of the LIMS. Intergrowth particles play an important role in the process of LIMS. Additionally, the capture time for the intergrowth particles of different particle sizes and liberation degrees to reach the drums’ surface from the initial location are different. Because the capture time of the coarse intergrowth particles is much shorter than that of the ultrafine pure magnetic particles, the coarse particles will preferentially accumulate on the drum to cause a magnetic entrainment phenomenon. The phenomenon of magnetic entrainment facilitates the recovery of intergrowth particles. In LIMS, however, for a high grade and recovery magnetic product, intergrowth particles and high liberation is necessary and excessive grinding of the particles should be avoided.Wet low-intensity magnetic separation (LIMS) as a rapid and clean method has been widely used in various industries, such as separation of magnetic material from non-magnetic waste (  The aim of this study is to investigate the dynamic capture process of multi-type intergrowth particles and its impact on the separation performance of LIMS based on a validated multiphysics model. Such an investigation is necessary to accurately model and understand the dynamic behavior of multi-type intergrowth particles in LIMS, especially the phenomenon of entrainment of intergrowth particles often encountered in industrial LIMS. In this study, the entrainment mechanisms and the properties of intergrowth particles have been systematically compared and investigated through detailed computational simulations corresponding to the operating conditions. In this study, the effect of magnetic entrainment mechanism in LIMS will be investigated based on a validated multiphysics model. In this model, particle tracing in the fluid flow module is used to calculate the location and dynamic capture behavior of the ferromagnetic particles under the determined magnetic and flow fields. While calculating the magnetic force, hydrodynamic drag force, gravity, and centrifugal force, the model also inherently retains its ability to simulate the influence of ferromagnetic particle–fluid interactions. The accuracy and validity of the model have been verified by previous experimental data and phenomena, and the detailed modeling process and the parameters for multiphysics model can be consulted in previous literature (    The 2D wet separator used in the multiphysics model is shown in To make this study more realistic and relevant, it is assumed that the particles are spherical with a diameter The density of the intergrowth particle ( The mass of the intergrowth particle can be expressed as Thence, the Fe grade ( In this model, six types of particles with liberation degree were defined. The Fe grade of each type particle is shown in In this model, the forces in LIMS that compete with the magnetic forces and act on all particles, which are gravity, drag force and centrifugal force are considered. Particle-to-particle interactions, such as electrostatic, Van der Waals, and magnetic dipole–dipole are neglected because of their inherent complexity. In addition, the inertial force on particles a few dozen micrometers in size can be neglected because it is much smaller than the magnetic and fluid drag forces ( When a magnetic force ( The gravitational force (  In this study, the particles are adsorbed on the surface of the drum after separation, or the separation of the particles occurs on the surface of the rotating drum, and the particles are subjected to centrifugal force. For an intergrowth particle, the centrifugal force ( The separation performance of wet LIMS based on the grade and recovery of the particles captured on the drum surface was evaluated. The mass of the total captured particles is given by Eq. The mass of the magnetite minerals in the total captured particles Therefore, the Fe grade At the outlet, the velocity and the concentration gradient for all the phases are set as zero, and the pressure is considered to be atmospheric. In particular, the suppress backflow check box is selected by default and is used to adjust the outlet pressure to prevent slurry from entering the tank through the outlet boundary. At the inlet, the normal inflow velocity of slurry is specified as The tank wall boundary condition is used to determine the particle behavior when they are in contact with the tank wall is constructed. The specified tangential and normal velocities of the reflected particle velocity ( In addition, the drum surface boundary condition is set as the slip velocity to describe the rotary movement of the drum. The surface is sliding in its tangential direction. However, the drum does not have to actually move in the coordinate system. The linear velocity is given as a scalar In this model, 1200 multi-type particles are released once every 0.01 s from 0 to 1.5 s (151 times). Therefore, the run time of an 181200-particle simulation using the validated multiphysics model in this work corresponds to approximately 2 h on a 3.20 GHz dual core processor. When the particle proportion of one type of the intergrowth particle is The other conditions and parameters are provided in Drum rotation speed is a key parameter in the operation of an LIMS separator. A proper rotation speed is critical for the drum to ensure that the low-grade intergrowth particles are thrown out of its surface. Meanwhile, the high magnetic content and fully liberated strong magnetic particles are captured onto the surface of the drum, thereby improving the selectivity of separation while maintaining high recovery. It is evident that if the rotation speed is higher, the centrifugal forces acting upon the particles and the concentrate grade are stronger. In addition, the rotation speed of the drum also affects the local fluid turbulence around the drum surface, thereby affecting the particle separation ( As shown in      The accumulation of intergrowth particles is caused by magnetic attraction and mechanical entrainment, and magnetic attraction is dominant. Two mechanisms can result in the intergrowth particles magnetic entrainment. The first is the coarse intergrowth particles getting attracted or dragged by a magnetic or hydrodynamic force with fine magnetic particles, translating toward the surface of drum. The second mechanism is where the coarse particles will accumulate on the surface of drum preferentially because the capture time for the coarse intergrowth particles is much shorter than that for the ultrafine pure magnetic particles. Then, suspended magnetic particles approach from behind and lock into the magnetic floc, and the intergrowth particles becomes surrounded. It is possible that these two mechanisms could exist simultaneously, both contributing to the capturing of intergrowth particles. However, the high recovery of the magnetic minerals is not the only criterion in the actual industry of LIMS; magnetic products with a high grade are equally important. The analyses above show that the intergrowth particles play an important role in LIMS. With the increase in particle size, most low-grade intergrowth particles can be recovered to the concentrate, leading to a rapid decrease in the grade of the concentrate. Therefore, the least intergrowth particles and a high liberation degree are required to obtain a good product in LIMS. In this study, a more realistic description of the influence of the operating parameters and particle properties on the separation performance of LIMS is presented. All predictions indicate that the particle size and feed speed, as well as the drum speed affect the separation performance of LIMS. Intergrowth particles plays an important role in the process of LIMS. As the proportion of low-grade intergrowth particles increases, the grade and recovery of concentrate products decrease rapidly. As the rotation speed increases, the stirring effect of the rotating drum and the competing forces acting upon the particles increase as well; therefore, more magnetically low-grade degree are thrown out of the rotating drum, resulting in a significantly improved concentrate grade at the expense of recovery. In a coarser particle size or lower feed and drum speed, the low-grade degree can largely be captured on the surface of the drum, which will result in a magnetic product of low grade and high recovery. In particular, under different particle size conditions, the feed speed required for different liberation degree to achieve maximum recovery is different. Additionally, the capture time for the intergrowth particles of different particle sizes and liberation degrees to reach the drums’ surface from the initial location are different. The coarse particles will accumulate on the drum preferentially owing to the capture time for the coarse intergrowth particles, which is much shorter than that of the ultrafine pure magnetic particles. Then, the suspended magnetic particles approach from behind and lock into the magnetic floc, and the intergrowth particle becomes surrounded. As the particle size increases, most of the low-grade intergrowths particles can be recovered to the concentrate, thereby leading to a rapid decrease in the grade of the concentrate. Thus, the least liberation degree and a high pure magnetic particles dissociation degree are required to obtain a good product in LIMS. Likun Gao and Huixin Dai designed model; Feiwang Wang and Dongdong Tang simulated model; Purong Wang and Zhihui Gong analyzed simulation results; Feiwang Wang and Dongdong Tang wrote the manuscript. We declare that we have no financial and personal relationships with other people or organizations that can inappropriately influence our work, there is no professional or other personal interest of any nature or kind in any product, service and/or company that could be construed as influencing the position presented in, or the review of, the manuscript entitled. The authors gratefully acknowledge and appreciate the financial support provided by the