Calcific aortic valve disease is the most common heart valve disorder. So far, there is no medical treatment for calcific aortic valve disease. The expression of ectonucleotidases, which metabolize nucleotides into phosphate products, may influence the calcification of the aortic valve. In this study, we investigated if the administration of an ectonucleotidase inhibitor, ARL67156 (6-N,N-Diethyl-D-β,γ-dibromomethyleneATP trisodium salt), may prevent the calcification of the aortic valve in the warfarin-induced mineralization rat model. Male Wistar rats were treated with warfarin or warfarin+ARL67156 for 28 days. All rats had comprehensive Doppler-echocardiographic studies at 28 day. A gene profiling of ectonucleotidases expressed in aortas of rats was documented by quantitative real-time PCR. The amount of calcium was determined by quantitative method and von Kossa staining. Ex vivo cultures of rat aortas were also used to further assess the effect of ARL67156 on the calcifying process and Akt signaling. Mineralization of the aorta/aortic valve was documented in warfarin-treated rats and was accompanied by the development of aortic stenosis. These changes were paralleled by an increased of ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase-1 (ENPP1). Administration of the ectonucleotidase inhibitor, ARL67156 prevented the development of aortic stenosis by lowering the level of apoptosis and mineralization of the aortic valve/aorta. In addition, ARL67156 normalized the level of pAkt, an important kinase involved in the survival pathway. Inhibition of ectonucleotidase activity prevented the development of calcific aortic valve disease in a rat model. On that account, ectonucleotidase may represent a novel target in the treatment of calcific aortic valve disease.In developed countries, aortic stenosis or also called calcific aortic valve disease is the most frequent cause of valvular heart disorder, affecting up to 3% of the population older than 65 years old ( The ectonucleotidase family of genes represents a group of membrane-bound enzymes, which includes ectonucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterases (ENPPs), ectonucleoside triphosphate diphosphohydrolases (ENTPDs), 5′-nucleotidase (NT5E), and alkaline phosphatase (ALPL) ( Animal experiments were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of Laval University and University of Montreal. Male Wistar rats (initial weight 200 At day 28, animals were anesthetized with pentobarbital (65 Doppler-echocardiographic analyses (Sonos 7500, Philips Medical) with the use of high frequency (12 Immunostaining analyses were performed with anti-ENPP1antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA). Slides were then incubated with EnVision Dual Link System-HRP, followed by AEC substrate (Dako, Carpinteria, CA, USA). Nonimmunized rabbit serum was used as a negative control in all immunohistology experiments. Mineralization was detected with von Kossa staining. Morphometric analyses were carried out using the Image-Pro Plus 6.1 (MediaCybernetics, Bethesda, MD, USA) image analysis software. RNA was extracted from aortas explanted from rats. Total RNA was isolated with RNeasy micro kit from Qiagen (Qiagen, Mississauga, ON, Canada). The RNA extraction protocol was performed according to manufacturer's instructions using 100 Apoptosis was documented in rat paraffin slides by TUNEL assay using Apoptag Plus Peroxidase In Situ Apoptosis Detection Kit (Millipore, Billerica, MA) and quantitative morphometric analysis was performed. The apoptotic cells were counted on the whole section. Then, the area of each valve was determined using the Image-Pro Plus Version 6.1 image analysis software and the percentage of apoptotic cells on the total area was calculated. Under general anesthesia thoracic aortas were retrieved from male Wistar rats (Charles River Breeding Laboratories St Constant, QC, Canada). They were then rinsed with PBS and incubated for 4 days with a pro-calcifying medium containing: DMEM+5% FBS, 10 A segment of aorta tissue was kept in liquid nitrogen until determination of the calcium content. Aortas were treated with HCl 6N at 90 ARL67156(6- For the comparisons of groups with regards to q-PCR analyses and the amount of valvular calcium, the results were expressed as means ±S.E.M. For continuous data, values were compared between groups with Student t-test or ANOVA when two or more than two groups were compared, respectively. Post hoc Tukey analyses were done when the In rodents treated with warfarin, we observed an increased level of calcium concentration within the thoracic aorta, which was paralleled by a significant rise in the pulse wave velocity (PWV) ( To understand the functional relevance and contribution of ectonucleotidases in calcific aortic valve disease, we first investigated, by quantitative-PCR analyses, the expression of the ectonucleotidases in aortas of control, warfarin and warfarin+ARL67156-treated rats. In control rats, we found that the following ectonucleotidases were expressed in the aortas: ENPP1, ENPP2, ENPP3, ENTPD2, NT5E and ALPL ( As programmed cell death may have a crucial role in the mineralization of the aortic valve/aorta, we investigated the levels of apoptosis in warfarin-treated rats. The number of apoptotic cells, detected by TUNEL staining and quantified with morphometric analyses, increased significantly in aortic valves of warfarin-treated rats when compared to the control group ( To further understand the pathway by which ARL67156 prevents apoptosis and mineralization, we next investigated, in an The major findings of this study are that: 1) mineralization of the aortic valve/aorta is associated with the rise of ENPP1 and 2) administration of ARL67156, an inhibitor of ectonucleotidases, prevented the development of calcific aortic valve disease in the wafarin rat model. Also, calcification of the aorta was associated with a decreased phosphorylation of Akt. A treatment with ARL67156 restored pAkt levels within aortas and prevented apoptosis-mediated mineralization. In this study we documented, for the first time, that administration of a non-hydrolyzable ectonucleotidase inhibitor, ARL67156, prevented the mineralization of the aortic valve/aorta and thereby halted the development of aortic stenosis. Examination and analyses of aortas revealed that among 8 different genes of the ectonucleotidase family, ENPP1, ENPP2, ENPP3, ENTPD2, NT5E and ALPL are expressed within control tissues. During mineralization of aortic valve/aorta only ENPP1 was up-regulated, whereas ENPP2 was down-regulated and the others genes were not differentially expressed. Whereas, ENPP2 uses mainly lysophosphatidylcholine as a substrate and is rather a poor enzyme involved in the metabolism of nucleotides, other enzymes such as NTE5E and ALPL have been associated previously to the mineralization process ( Warfarin is a potent inhibitor of the γ-carboxylation of matrix Gla-protein (MGP) and Growth Arrest Specific gene 6 (Gas-6) ( Pathologic mineralization of the aortic valve is often, if not always, associated with some degree of vascular calcification of the aortic root and aorta. In this respect, systolic hypertension is highly prevalent (∼75%) in the population with calcific aortic valve disease. Mineralization of the aorta reduces vascular compliance, which is manifested by a higher pulse wave velocity ( In this study we have stressed that inhibition of ectonucleotidase with ARL67156 prevented the development of calcific aortic valve disease. Considering the profile of expression of the different ectonucleotidases it is likely that ENPP1 play a major role in this model. However, we cannot conclude with certainty that other unknown off-target effect of ARL67156 may have contributed to reduce mineralization. Nonetheless, the present work has underscored that inhibitors of the ectonucleotidases may represent a novel class of drugs in order to treat calcific aortic valve disease. The present study has highlighted the role of the ectonucleotidase system in the pathobiology of calcific aortic valve disease and has identified that the administration of an enzyme inhibitor, ARL67156, prevented N.C., D.E.H., P.P. and P. Mathieu conceived and designed experiments. P. Mathieu wrote the manuscript. A.P., C.B, L-A.G., N.C., D.F., and D.E.H. performed the animal studies including tissue analyses and echocardiographic studies. N.C. and D.F. performed q-PCR analyses. A.A. performed immunostainings, histologic analyses, morphometric studies and apoptosis analyses. P.P. supervised echocardiographic analyses. All authors reviewed the manuscript. P. Mathieu and N.C. have patent applications for the use of ectonucleotidase inhibitors in the treatment of CAVD. Correspondence and requests should be addressed to P. Mathieu (patrick.mathieu@chg.ulaval.ca). This work was supported by HSFC grant (P.Mathieu) and CIHR grants MOP114893 (P.Mathieu), CCD 161999 (P. Moreau and P. Mathieu) and the Quebec Heart and Lung Institute Fund (P. Mathieu). N.C and D.E.H. are supported by studentship grants of Fonds de Recherche en Santé du Québec (FRSQ). P. Mathieu is a research scholar from the Fonds de Recherche en Santé du Québec, Montreal, Québec, Canada. P.P. holds the Canada Research Chair in Valvular Heart Diseases, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.