The hydration of clay minerals due to adsorption of water molecules and hydrated cations in electrolyte aqueous solutions would affect the stability of dispersions, resulting in some detrimental effect in mineral processing and hydrometallurgy. A parameter, called as hydration index I, was presented to evaluate hydration layers on fine clay mineral surfaces in different electrolyte aqueous solutions through measurements of the relative viscosities of fine mineral dispersions as a function of the volume fractions of dry particles. The effect of type and concentration of electrolyte on hydration of fine clay mineral particles in aqueous solutions was investigated. The results showed that both hydration index I of montmorillonite and kaolinite in Na+ aqueous solutions were larger than that in Ca2+ aqueous solutions at the concentration of 0.001mol/L; either in Na+ or Ca2+ aqueous solutions, the hydration index I of montmorillonite increased firstly with increasing concentration of electrolyte in aqueous solutions, then decreased when being above a certain concentration, whereas the hydration index I of kaolinite decreased with increasing electrolyte concentration when it being above 0.001mol/L.Clay suspensions are the first step to obtain commercial products that have diverse size, shape, material composition and cost. The stability and flow properties of clay suspensions are of great importance in the manufacturing of various products. Hydration properties of clay particles in an aqueous solution play a significant role in understanding the dispersion. These properties govern the flotation, coagulation and dispersion properties in suspension systems and also identify the optimal conditions of a well dispersed system The most typical property of clay minerals is their ability to adsorb water molecules and hydrated cations in aqueous solutions, resulting in hydration on the external surface and internal surface. There are numerous evidences of the existence of ice-like structure water on clay minerals The purpose of our investigation is to understand the effect of Na The viscosity of liquid would increase after adding the colloidal particles owing to the effect on the flow pattern. Einstein viscosity equation, which was put forward by Albert Einstein in 1906, expresses the viscosity of a dilute dispersion of solid spheres as follows It is stressed that the Einstein viscosity equation is based on the most essential postulate that dispersed particles are rigid spheres with no hydration layers on their surfaces If the particle concentration is not negligible in nanoscale particle dispersion, the ratio ( Defined Because montmorillonite samples used in the series of measurements were same, similarly for kaolinite samples, the slopes in Eq. Therefore, hydration index The montmorillonite was obtained from Fenghong New Material CO., LTD. (Zhejiang, China). The kaolinite was obtained from Huaibei Jinyan Kaolinite CO., LTD. (Anhui, China). Both of the purity was more than 99%. The water used in this study was first distilled and then passed through resin beds and a filter (0.2 In this work, a given weight of dry clay mineral powder was first put into a 100 Scatter diagram was drawn by the data points ( The viscosities of montmorillonite and kaolinite dispersions in different electrolyte aqueous solutions were measured. The relative viscosities of montmorillonite and kaolinite dispersions as a function of volume fractions of dry particles in 0.001 The montmorillonite used in our experiment were di-octahedral smectite, which was 2:1 clay mineral. There was a large amount of permanent negative charge on the basal surface of montmorillonite, which arose from the isomorphous substitution (Al for Si in the tetrahedral sheet or Mg for Al in the octahedral sheet) From It was stressed that several layers of water molecules may enter into the interlayer space of montmorillonite and be adsorbed on the external surface, resulting in swelling The relative viscosities of montmorillonite and kaolinite dispersions at various concentrations of NaCl aqueous solutions as a function of the volume fraction of dry particles were shown in As can be seen from With the increase of Na Based on the Einstein viscosity equation, the hydration index Both hydration index The hydration index With the increase of concentration of electrolyte in aqueous solutions, the hydration degree of montmorillonite would increase firstly and then reduce when being above a certain concentration. The hydration degree of kaolinite would decrease with increasing electrolyte concentration when being above 0.001 The financial supports for this work from the