The extraction of Ga(III) from HCl, HNO3 and H2SO4 media using 0.50 mol/L Cyanex 923 in toluene is investigated. Ga(III) is quantitatively extracted over a wide range of HCl at high concentration while the extraction is poor over the entire concentration range of HNO3 and H2SO4. The extracted Ga(III) is recovered by stripping with 0.10 mol/L HCl. The extracted species is identified as GaCl3.3Cyanex 923. The extraction behaviour of some commonly associated metal ions is also investigated. Based on the partition data, conditions have been identified for attaining some binary and ternary separations involving Ga(III) and V(IV), Al(III), Fe(III), In(III), Ti(IV), Ni(II), Mn(II), Cu(II), Zn(II), and Hg(II). The conditions are extended for the recovery of pure gallium from light emitting diode (LED) waste and bottom ash. The extractant is stable towards prolonged acid contact and there is a negligible loss in its extraction efficiency even after recycling ten times.Gallium assumed the importance of an indispensable rare metal mainly because of its fast growing demand as GaAs in integrated circuits. Other than digital circuitary, GaAs finds increasing applications in opto-electronics: for light emitting diodes (LED), semiconductor lasers, solar cells, optical computing and in analogue microwave devices. All these applications have put great pressure on the availability of pure gallium in large amounts. Gallium does not have its own ore and is commonly associated in nature with aluminium, zinc and germanium. It is primarily recovered from aluminium and zinc ores. Gallium can be found also in bottom ash produced by the coal and phosphate industries. If one visualizes the overall scenario for the recovery of gallium from natural resources, the matrices are leaner in gallium and complex in composition. As the sources of the metal are likely to exhaust there is a growing interest to develop chemistry for the recovery of gallium from secondary sector namely semi-conductor waste and bottom ash. As far as gallium content and the complexity of the matrix is concerned, the situation is similar to natural resources. Of the different separation techniques which can be employed for the recovery of the metal from complex leaner sources, solvent extraction offers a better alternative. Selectivity in separations is easy to attain because of the availability of a wide variety of extractants and diluents. The aqueous and organic phase parameters can be easily manipulated to attain a high separation factor. A variety of extractants of different classes have been used for the extraction of Ga(III). Among the chelating agents 8-hydroxyquinoline is one of the most studied extractants. Different groups of workers ( Various alkyl-phosphorus compounds namely TBP, DEHPA, TOPO have been used for the extraction and separation of gallium ( The ongoing discussion highlights the emerging interest towards the recovery of Ga(III) from different types of leaner sources. Cyanex 923 has established itself as a well known extractant with several inherent advantages ( The present communication embodies studies on the extraction of Ga(III) in Cyanex 923 from HCl/HNO Stock solutions of the metal ions were prepared by dissolving their nitrates/chlorides/sulphates in double-distilled water containing a minimum amount of the corresponding mineral acid and standardized by the usual complexometric titrations. The chemicals and organic solvents used were Analytical/Synthetic grade materials from Thomas Baker/E. Merck, Mumbai (India). Kerosene of the boiling fraction 160–200 °C was used. Cyanex 923 was received as a gift sample from Cytec Inc., Niagara Falls, Ontario (Canada) and employed without further purification. Cyanex 923 is a mixture of four trialkyl-phosphine oxides namely dioctyl-hexyl-phosphine oxide (∼ An Atomic Absorption Spectrometer (Perkin Elmer, 3100) and an Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectrometer (Perkin Elmer) were used for the determination of concentration of metal ions in the aqueous phase for distribution studies and analysis of ores. For the partition studies, equal volumes (10 mL) of the aqueous and organic phase were shaken at room temperature (25 About 0.5 g of the crushed gallium coated portion of light emitting diode (LED) waste was kept for 24 h in contact with 2 mL of 2.0 mol/L, 6.0 mol/L and 12.0 mol/L HCl at ambient temperature. The solutions were filtered and analysed for Ga(III) content. It is observed that 2.0 mol/L HCl was sufficient to leach maximum amount of gallium. In order to recover gallium the waste was left in contact with 2.0 mol/L HCl for 24 h, the solution was filtered and made up to 250 mL keeping the overall acidity to 5.0 Various 2–12 mol/L HCl solutions were tried for the leaching of metal ions from bottom ash and 2 mol/L HCl was found sufficient to leach the maximum amount of gallium. In order to recover gallium, 5.0 g of the bottom ash was kept overnight in contact with 2.0 mol/L HCl at room temperature. The solution was filtered and the filtrate was made up to 100 mL adjusting the acidity to 5.0 The extraction behaviour of Ga(III) in Cyanex 923 from HCl, HNO The effect of equilibrium time (0.5–30 min) on the extraction of Ga(III) was studied using 0.20 mol/L Cyanex 923. It was observed that under the experimental conditions a minimum of 2 min equilibration time was sufficient for attaining limiting extraction in Cyanex 923. Apparently the kinetics of extraction is fast, particularly compared to oximes ( The effect of temperature (10°–70 °C) on the distribution of Ga(III) was investigated at 1.0 mol/L HCl using 0.20 mol/L toluene solution of Cyanex 923. The results are illustrated in To discern the effect of the nature of organic diluents on the partition of Ga(III), n-hexane, toluene, xylene, benzene, nitrobenzene and kerosene (160–200 °C fraction) were used. The results ( The metal to extractant ratio in the extracted gallium species was investigated by observing the effect of varying the Cyanex 923 concentration (5.0 In order to ascertain the composition of the extracted gallium chloro-species, the variation in the partition of Ga(III) was observed as a function of chloride ion concentration (1.0–5.0 mol/L) using NaCl as the source of Cl Based on the slope analysis data the species can be formulated as GaCl The loading capacity of Cyanex 923 for the extraction of Ga(III) from 5.0 mol/L HCl was determined by investigating the distribution of Ga(III) over the metal ion concentration range 1.0 Various reagents were tried for the stripping of Ga(III) from Cyanex 923. The results indicating the efficiency of the different stripping reagents are given in Experiments were conducted to evaluate the hydrolytic stability of Cyanex 923 towards HCl by keeping its toluene solution in contact with 5.0 mol/L HCl for 50 days with intermittent shaking. The extraction of Ga(III) was checked periodically after 5 days. An insignificant variation (± For determining the regeneration capacity of Cyanex 923 successive extraction/stripping cycles for Ga(III) were carried out using two volumes of 0.10 mol/L HCl to strip Ga(III). The recovery of each step was calculated from the amount of metal ion that was extracted in the organic phase in that particular cycle. A negligible change (± The extraction behaviour of associated metal ions from 1.0 The aforementioned partition data offer conditions for the separation of Ga(III) from the associated metal ions either by selective extraction or selective stripping. The conditions of binary and ternary separations are discussed below. All these separations have been achieved using 0.50 mol/L toluene solution of the extractant. In the case where two stripping agents were sequentially used to strip the metal ions from the organic layer, washing of the organic layer was done in between the two steps. For the separation of Ga(III) from V(IV), Al(III), Ni(II) and Mn(II) the aqueous phase of 3.0 mol/L HCl was contacted with the extractant phase. Ga(III) was quantitatively extracted leaving V(IV)/Al(III) /Ni(II)/Mn(II) in the aqueous layer. Around 10% V(IV) was co-extracted along with Ga(III) which was selectively stripped using 3% H For Ga(III)–Al(III)–Hg(II) separation the acidity was initially adjusted to 0.10 mol/L HCl. At this acidity Hg(II) was quantitatively extracted while Ga(III) and Al(III) remained in the aqueous layer. To achieve Ga(III)–Al(III) separation the acidity of the remaining aqueous layer was adjusted to 3.0 mol/L HCl. Ga(III) was transferred into the organic layer leaving Al(III) in the aqueous phase. Ga(III)–Cu(II)–Ni(II) separation was achieved with 1.0 mol/L HCl. The aqueous layer was twice contacted with the extractant phase. Ga(III) extracts while Cu(II) and Ni(II) remain in the aqueous phase. The acidity of the aqueous phase was then adjusted to 5.0 mol/L HCl and contacted twice with fresh extractant solution to extract Cu(II) quantitatively leaving Ni(II) in the aqueous layer ( A majority of the separations planned and achieved involve those elements which are likely to be encountered in gallium bearing matrices whether they are ores, minerals or waste. Most of these separations are attained by controlling the acidity of the aqueous phase. In some cases selective stripping from the organic phase proved useful.  The present investigations highlight the utility of Cyanex 923 for achieving various metal ion separations from Ga(III) conveniently. The hydrolytic stability and the recycling capacity of the extractant is good. The loading of the metal is quite high and the phase separation is fast. Thanks are due to Cytec Inc., Canada, for gifting the Cyanex 923 sample. The financial assistance of the Department of Science and Technology, New Delhi, India is acknowledged.