The aim of the present research work was to investigate the possibility of adding red mud, an alkaline leaching waste, which is obtained from bauxite during the Bayer process for alumina production, in the raw meal for the production of Portland cement clinker. For that reason, two samples of raw meals were prepared: one with ordinary raw materials, as a reference sample ((PC)Ref), and another with 3.5% red mud ((PC)R/M). The effect on the reactivity of the raw mix was evaluated on the basis of the unreacted lime content in samples sintered at 1350, 1400 and 1450°C. Subsequently, the clinkers were produced by sintering the two raw meals at 1450°C. The results of chemical and mineralogical analyses as well as the microscopic examination showed that the use of the red mud did not affect the mineralogical characteristics of the so produced Portland cement clinker. Furthermore, both clinkers were tested by determining the grindability, setting time, compressive strength and expansibility. The hydration products were examined by XRD analysis at 2, 7, 28 and 90 days. The results of the physico-mechanical tests showed that the addition of the red mud did not negatively affect the quality of the produced cement.The general trend of today for the industrial wastes or by-products, which are produced in industrial countries, is to examine alternative ways for their exploitation in order to eliminate cost of disposal and avoid soil and water contamination. Many of these undesirable industrial materials contain significant amounts of inorganic ingredients, such as oxides of silicon, aluminum, calcium and iron, which, at suitable combinations, can be used in the production of Portland cement clinker. Red mud is produced during the digestion of bauxite with sodium hydroxide. It generally exits the process stream as a highly alkaline slurry (pH 10–12.5) with 15–30% solids At all the world's 85 alumina plants, 1.0–1.6 In Greece, the bauxitic red mud from the alumina processing plant is discharged, through a pipe line, at a rate of 500,000 It is well known that various industrial wastes, such as metallurgical slags, fly ash, glass, ceramics from the electronic industry, spent catalysts from refineries, sludge from waste water treatment and others, have been successfully used in clinker production The aim of the present research work was to investigate the possibility of using red mud as a raw material for the production of a typical Portland cement clinker. For that reason, two samples of raw meals were prepared, one with ordinary raw materials, as a reference sample ((PC) Uncausticised red mud from Aluminum de Grece was used as received and its mineralogical phases, which were determined by XRD analysis, are given in The effect on the burnability was evaluated on the basis of the unreacted lime content in samples sintered at 1200, 1350, 1400 and 1450 The sintering process applied was common for the production of both types of cement clinkers. The raw meals were shaped in small spheres, with a diameter of 2 The clinkers were crushed and ground in a Bond ball mill to a specific surface area of about 3950 The soluble SO Compressive strength measurements were conducted at the ages of 2, 7, 28 and 90 days on mortar prisms (dimensions 40 For the study of the hydration products, the cement pastes were prepared by mixing 300 The reactivity of the raw mixtures was evaluated on the basis of the unreacted lime (CaO The chemical analysis and the potential mineral composition of the Portland clinkers produced are given in The clinkers were coground with 5% (w/w) gypsum in a ball mill of 1.5 The XRD analyses of the produced Portland clinkers are given in The microstructure of the Portland cement clinkers was examined by optical microscopy in polished sections. The addition of the red mud residue by 3.5% did not seem to affect its microstructure and the formation of its characteristic mineralogical phases ( The water requirement and setting time, determined by Vicat probe and Vicat needle apparatus, as well as the results of expansion are reported in The mortars of the samples under investigation were tested for compressive strengths after 2, 7, 28 and 90 days of curing. The obtained results are shown in The XRD patterns of the (PC) The addition of red mud residue by 1% in the raw meal did not affect either the sintering or the hydration process during Portland cement production. More specifically, the sample with red mud presented the following characteristics: The alite phase occurred as small well-formed crystals. The belite crystals were few and evenly distributed in relation to alite, indicating that the clinkering reaction had proceeded extensively in the direction of alite and that the raw mix was homogenous. The liquid phase occurred as fine crystals, uniformly distributed. The values for setting times, water content for standard consistency and expansion were similar to those obtained with the reference ordinary Portland cement sample. The compressive strengths were at least as high as those of the reference sample during hydration. It is thus concluded that the red mud residue, produced during the digestion of bauxite with sodium hydroxide, can be utilized as a raw material in cement production, at no cost to the producer, contributing, in this way, to reduction of the process cost.