Although various novel adsorbents with different structures are exploited for rhenium recovery, developing cost-effective micron-sized adsorbents with high adsorption capacity, rapid uptake, and excellent selectivity is still challenging from a practical point of view. In current work, two ionic liquid functionalized cellulose microsphere (ILFC-NO3 and ILFC-Cl) were prepared via radiation technique and their performance for Re(VII) separation was investigated through batch and dynamic experiments. The ILFC-NO3 and ILFC-Cl exhibited not only high adsorption capacity (ILFC-NO3 of 581 mg/g and ILFC-Cl of 552 mg/g) for the high concentration of Re(VII) but also fast adsorption rate with equilibrium time of 1.5 h. Adsorption-desorption experiments indicated that both ILFC-NO3 and ILFC-Cl had excellent reusability and could be recycled four times with negligible capacity loss. Their adsorption mechanism could be explained as the combination of ion exchange and reduction. Furthermore, ILFC-NO3 could recover trace Re(VII) at 10 ppb from aqueous solution with the enrichment factor of 417. The ILFC-NO3 also exhibited excellent Re/U selectivity from synthetic uranium underground leaching solution in which the concentration of U was 200 times higher than Re(VII). This work provided two micron-sized adsorbents with superior adsorption capacity for Re(VII) recovery, which are promising candidate adsorbents for Re(VII) recovery in practical applications.Rhenium (Re) is one of the rarest metal with an estimated concentration of approx 1 ppb in the earth crust ( Various methods are elaborated to separate rhenium in literature, such as solvent extraction ( Ionic liquids have received extensive attention in the separation of metal ions due to intriguing physicochemical properties such as good chemical and thermal stability, radiation-resistant and tunable properties ( In previous work, two ionic liquid supported cellulose microspheres were developed via radiation grafting technique. Cellulose microsphere-based adsorbents have been proved to be promising alternative for commercial polymeric resin, because they could be directly used in column operation ( Microcrystalline cellulose microspheres (MCC, 200–300 μm) from Asahi Kasei Chemicals Corporation (Japan) were used as matrix. Ionic liquid 1-aminopropyl-3-methyl imidazolium nitrate ([APMIm]NO Preparation of ILFC resin was conducted through radiation grafting GMA onto MCC using pre-irradiation grafting polymerization followed by ring-opening reaction and the procedure was as shown in The amount of functional ionic liquid (FG) was expressed as follows: Nicolet 6700 spectrometer (USA) was used to record the FTIR spectra with a KBr background in the range of 4000–600 cm The batch experiments were performed by agitating 0.01 g ILFC with 10 mL Re(VII) aqueous solution for a certain time (t). The mixture was filtered using a 0.22 μm nylon filter. The concentration of Re(VII) in the filtrate was determined by prodigy high dispersion inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometer (ICPS-7510, SHIMADZU, Japan). The adsorbed amount (Q The regeneration of ILFC was carried out as follows: 0.01 g ILFC was mixed with 10 mL Re(VII) solution of 400 mg/L for 24 h. The equilibrium concentration of Re(VII) was measured to calculate adsorbed amount. Subsequently, Re-loaded-ILFC was regenerated through agitating Re-loaded-ILFC with 10 mL 5 mol/L HNO Column adsorption experiments were performed in a fixed-bed column (1 mL) at room temperature. The solution containing Re(VII) at pH (optimum pH) was pumped into the column packing with ILFC from the bottom to obtain saturation dynamic adsorption capacity. The flow rate was adjusted to 90 mL/h using a pump in which has a corresponding space velocity (SV) of 30 h Desorption experiments were carried out as follows: deionized water was firstly fed into the column to wash out the excess feed solution remaining in the column, and then 5 mol/L HNO After the ring-opening reaction in ionic liquids, the prepared adsorbents were spherical and the characterization parameter was listed in The solution pH plays an essential role in Re(VII) uptake, and it affects the surface properties of adsorbents. The effect of pH on adsorption capacity of Re(VII) on ILFC was investigated through tuning solution pH ranging from1.0 to 11 using 0.1 mol/L HCl or 0.1 mol/L NaOH. The results are shown in In the case of pH < 2.37, the adsorption of Re(VII) was restrained by the competing of chlorine ions or nitrate ions. With increasing of pH (pH > 2.37), the adsorption capacity slightly decreased due to the deprotonation of amino. It should be noted that the Re(VII) uptake by ILFC remained almost unchanged over a wide pH range. Many adsorbents containing amino groups for Re(VII) uptake showed high adsorption capacity only in a narrow range of pH, beyond which the adsorption efficiency of Re(VII) significantly declined due to the deprotonation of amino ( To evaluate the adsorption rate and determinate the equilibrium time, the adsorption kinetics of two ILFC adsorbents were investigated with an initial Re(VII) concentration of 100 and 400 mg/L by varying contact time from 10 min to 12 h. As shown in The experimental data is often fitted using both pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order kinetic models expressed by Eqs. The fitting data were listed in The adsorption isotherms of two ILFC were investigated through varying Re(VII) concentration from 50 mg/L to 1000 mg/L. As shown in The data from adsorption isotherm were analyzed using Langmuir and Freundlich isotherm models, which were expressed by Eqs. The fitted parameter values and the calculated correlation coefficient (R Re always exists in other main minerals as copper sulfide, molybdenum ore and uranium ore. In reported work, underground leaching solutions along with uranium contain rhenium and other valuable elements from in situ leaching solution, including (g/dm However, the content of anions (such as Cl The regeneration of the ILFC was an important consideration in practical application. In order to evaluate the reusability of ILFC-NO Column experiments were conducted to analyze the dynamic charateristics of ILFC-NO Thomas model, Yoon-Nelson model and Bohart-Adams were applied to fit the experimental data in breakthrough curves ( In fact, the Thomas model and Y The key parameters of the three models were calculated and shown in The values of Thomas constant K After saturation adsorption, the recovery of Re could reach nearly 100% at 77 BV for ILFC-NO To assess the possible application of adsorbent for trace Re(VII) recovery, the breakthrough volume could reflect its absorbability better than batch process ( Uranium raw material with polymetallic properties served as additional Re supply. It was reported that uranium underground leaching solution contained 0.1–0.8 mg/L Re at pH 2 (  The spectra of ILFC-Cl and ILFC-NO To explore the adsorption mechanism of ILFC-NO The comparison of overall XPS surveys of ILFC-NO In Based on the results, a postulated mechanism for removal of Re(VII) by ILFC-NO Ionic liquid modified cellulose microsphere was prepared to separate Re(VII). The adsorption process of Re(VII) was better described by Langmuir isotherm with adsorption capacities of 581.4 and 552.5 mg/g for ILFC-NO The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the