Dry beneficiation of fine coal was investigated using air fluidization in a vibrating air table. A systematic study based on a response surface method of experimentation revealed the features of separation. The ash content of the −1.0mm coal feed was reduced from 25.8% to 16.2% with 40.9% mass yield of the clean coal. Optimization was carried out for a target clean coal ash and process conditions were identified for maximum mass yield. A detailed statistical analysis revealed the complex nature of influence of the operating variables on the separation performance. Mathematical models for the mass yield and ash content of the clean coal were developed based on the statistical analysis. The operating regimes for any target product were identified. It was established that complex interaction of the process variables described the separation performance. The longitudinal and transverse velocities of the particles were estimated by considering the components of force due to side tilt, end tilt, vibration frequency and bulk flow. The experimental results were explained in the light of the findings from force balance analysis. A phenomenological description of the separation features of air table has also been given.Wet cleaning of fine coal has serious issues associated with it. Not only is the dewatering process a daunting task, but the waste disposal is also equally challenging from an environmental perspective. Yet, wet beneficiation is the established practice for fine coal cleaning primarily because of the absence of any proven, commercially viable technology employing dry operations. A number of studies have been reported in literature for dry processing of coal though. An excellent review of dry beneficiation technology was given by However, in the fine coal segment literature has been limited. A fast fluidized bed for dry separation of iron ore and coal is reported for relatively finer size coal ( However, literature on fundamental and applied aspects of coal cleaning using air table has been very scanty. Air fluidization for separating the heavy mineral matter from the light combustibles is a prospective technique for dry beneficiation of coal. Air tables are used for separation of dry uniformly sized solid particles having different specific gravity in a shallow bed with controlled fluidization. Along with fluidization, the tilted and inclined deck of the air table is also subjected to vibration to achieve vertical as well as horizontal stratification. The air table is well suited to process − Air table works on shallow bed fluidization principle in combination with the principles of stratification in wet shaking table separating the particles on the basis of specific gravity. The air entering from below the deck screen provides an upward thrust and supports the weight of the particles in variable degrees depending upon the size and density of the particle. In fact, the minimum fluidization velocity even for the fine, light particle is also barely reached. Vertical stratification of the particles takes place and the bed forms. Thus, all particles remain in effective contact with the surface of the deck screen. The deck is inclined in both transverse (side tilt) and longitudinal (end tilt) directions. The deck oscillation results in the heavier particles being pushed sideways towards the higher end of the deck on account of moment of inertia combined with traction offered by the deck. This operation results in the separation of particles with different densities and is the essence of fine coal cleaning in air table. The experimental apparatus used for present study is shown in The seemingly simple movement of the particles on the deck surface is extremely complex to describe from a fundamental perspective. Apart from gravity and the fluidization forces the particles are also acted upon by vibrating force, frictional force, drag force and the force due to bulk flow of solids down an inclined plane. Consideration of all these forces and interaction among them may be an extremely difficult task. An effort has been made to quantify some of these forces with some degree of simplification and explain the experimental observations from the fundamental understanding derived thereof. The forces on a particle may be described with the help of Therefore, the vibrating force acting on the particle having a mass m is given as The normal force on the particle perpendicular to the deck surface will be given by the resultant of the gravity force and the component of the vibration force as follows The frictional force can be easily estimated as Force balance in the x-direction (along the width of the deck surface or transverse) gives From Eq. At time t The vibration force does not affect the y-directional (longitudinal or along the length of the deck surface) motion of the particle. Hence, force balance in the y-direction is given as An expression of the velocity of a particle in the y-direction can be obtained by integration of Eq. Again, at time t Eqs. The stratification of particles on the x–y plane is completely governed by their velocity components in the x and y directions. Depending upon the process conditions the light particle has significant difference in the x-directional velocity from that of the heavy particle. This essentially defines the spread of the bed with lights at one end and heavies at the other. The larger the spread the better would be the separation. Of course, the spread is a function of time and location on the deck. In the initial stage (near the feed entry) the spread would be small and as it moves along the longitudinal direction of the deck the spread increases. Thus, the y-directional or longitudinal velocity also assumes great significance since it essentially defines the y-location of the particle on the deck surface as well as the overall residence time of the particles. In this manner, then, the movement of the light and heavy particles can be described by the two velocity components as derived above. Efforts have been made in this article to explain the experimental observations from the above theoretical formulations. Thermal coal from Hingula area of Talcher coal fields in India with an ash content of 25.8% was used in the present investigation. The ROM coal was crushed in a roll crusher to a top size of 1.0 About 60 It was observed ( The process variables individually as well as in association with each other affect the separation efficiency intensely. Hence, identifying the optimum conditions for maximum benefit is extremely important. In order to carry out optimization, the experimental data were fitted to a mathematical model for yield and ash content of the light fraction. It was observed that a modified cubic model fitted the yield data well with a correlation coefficient (R Optimization exercise was carried out for a target ash level of 17% in the clean coal to obtain the maximum possible mass yield of the clean coal. The optimum conditions were identified to be at 160 The linear measures (mm) of the side tilt and end tilt were converted to angular equivalent (degree). The angle β was estimated from the geometry of the design of the machine and it was found to be 45°. Using Eqs. The side tilt essentially governs the quality of separation. In conjunction with vibration frequency, the side tilt helps in determining how the horizontal segregation is obtained by spreading the light and heavy layers. It is evident from  At an intermediate feed rate it was possible to obtain the best yield at relatively lower side tilt values. Although at an intermediate feed rate it was possible to obtain the same clean coal ash values at relatively lower side tilts. Evidently, there is an optimum side tilt level where best yield values are obtained for a targeted clean coal ash level. The frequency of vibration imparts linear oscillations to the deck and hence, is mainly associated with the quality of separation in conjunction with the side tilt. As described earlier, the oscillations are responsible for generating a vibration force that acts on the particle. This was estimated by taking the root mean square value of the wave form for the vibrating force as defined by Eq. The experimental observations of the effect of vibration frequency and feed rate were plotted in Effect of feed flow rate may be quantified by considering the force due to bulk motion. Of course the end tilt will be intricately associated with such estimation since the motion of particles down the inclined plane will be strongly dependent on the end tilt. The force due to bulk flow alone may be approximated as. From these data the force due to bulk flow was estimated at different mass flow rates. The computed data are shown in To elaborate, End tilt is primarily related to the residence time and it provides the time for which the feed material is exposed to the separation conditions on the deck. Its effect on the separation process may be described with the help of Eq.  Air tables operating on shallow fluidized bed principles were shown to have good potential for application in dry beneficiation of fine coal. For − End tilt and feed rate were found to have greater influence on the mass yield of the product in cleaning fine coal using the air table. On the other hand, the clean coal grade was more influenced by the side tilt and the vibration frequency under a given state of fluidization. However, the interaction among the process variables was very strong and careful control over them was required to obtain the desired product. It is preferable to have a low end tilt and a high side tilt if high mass yield of the clean coal is desired. The operating conditions under which a high mass yield of the product is achievable by sacrificing the clean coal grade to some extent were identified. On the other hand, a low side tilt and a low end tilt is preferable for a low clean coal ash. High frequency levels are to be avoided if low ash is desirable in the clean coal. Thus, the operating regime under which a low ash product is achievable with a relatively lower mass yield is also established. High feed rate would be preferred in view of the high throughput achievable. However, caution is to be exercised as too high a feed rate leads to poorer clean coal grade. Models for the mass yield and ash levels of the clean coal have been developed based on the response surface methodology. The suitability of the models was established through in-depth statistical analysis. The complex nature of the influence of the operating variables, individually as well as interactively, on the responses (mass yield and ash content of the clean coal) was unraveled. Based on these responses the process optimization was carried out and conditions were identified under which the mass yield could be maximized for a target ash level in the clean coal. The differential velocities of the particles on the deck surface were quantified based on the fundamental force balance approach. It was concluded that the computed velocities in the longitudinal and transverse directions can adequately explain the observed responses. The derived expressions for the velocities as well as the bulk flow force were used successfully to explain the experimental observations. Thus, it was established that the operation of the air table can be explained by considering the longitudinal and transverse velocities along with the inertia forces. It was demonstrated that a reasonably good model can be derived by considering the forces acting on the particle on the deck surface. A phenomenological description of the separation features has been offered based on the experimental observations and theoretical considerations. Research funding received from the