The surface dissolution pretreatment using oxalic acid as an organic agent was applied for modifying the surface properties of minerals and improving the selectivity of ilmenite flotation from its usual accompanied gangue minerals such as olivine, pyroxene, tremolite and clinochlore. The effect of this pretreatment method was investigated by various techniques including flotation experiments, ICP mass analysis, UV-visible spectroscopy, FTIR analysis and zeta potential measurements. The single mineral flotation tests show that after surface dissolution the maximum flotation recovery of ilmenite occurring at a pH of 6.3 is improved from 73% to 93.4%%, while at this condition the floatability of olivine-pyroxene and tremolite-clinochlore is decreased from 59.6% to 31.5% and 20.1% to 15.4%, respectively. Also, the cell flotation experiments indicate the increase of separation efficiency and selectivity index of ilmenite flotation from 8.37% to 42.04% and 1.18 to 2.6, respectively through the surface pretreatment process. The improvement of flotation selectivity can be due to the more significant removal of active cations from the surface of gangue minerals in comparison with ilmenite which has been shown by ICP mass analysis. By decreasing the surface active sites, as evidenced by UV-visible spectroscopy and FTIR analysis, the collector adsorption density on the surface of gangue phases is considerably reduced. This is also confirmed by zeta potential measurements showing the diminution of negative charge on the surface of pretreated gangue minerals conditioned with sodium oleate collector. The enhancement of collector adsorption on the surface of ilmenite and consequently the improvement of its floatability can be due to oxidation of some Fe2+ ions to Fe3+ ones through the surface dissolution process. Generally, the surface dissolution pretreatment by oxalic acid can easily and effectively improve the selective flotation of ilmenite from iron containing gangue minerals. This organic reagent also assists to this improvement by depressing the gangue minerals when it is used as a pH adjuster agent.The surface dissolution is a method in which the surface properties of valuable and gangue minerals are transformed via solvent media. This method can change the amount and arrangement of ions on the minerals surfaces. This phenomenon would have some consequences in physicochemical separation methods of minerals, including changing the solution chemistry via entering the ions into the solution The importance of the minerals is due to containing of metals as a primary resource. Titanium metal is well known for its excellent features such as resistance to corrosion and high strength to weight ratio which makes it suitable for aerospace applications. Titanium is mainly used in the production of white TiO In recent years, by decreasing the Ti content in the titanium ores and liberation degree of ilmenite, the flotation technique has become more prominent for separation of ilmenite from gangue minerals In order to increase the differences between the surface properties of ilmenite and gangue minerals; and for improving the ilmenite floatability considerable amount of various reagents including collectors Commonly, the selective separation of ilmenite from accompanied minerals using the flotation method has not been achieved even by adding significant amount of different reagents. Thus, In order to improve the selective flotation of ilmenite, the effects of some auxiliary methods such as microwave irradiation In the surface dissolution method, the sulfuric, nitric and hydrochloric acids have been used for modifying the minerals surfaces and improving the ilmenite flotation recovery in the presence of different gangue minerals such as calcite, titanaugite, olivine-pyroxene, magnetite, enstatite and anortite. All of these researches have reported the positive effect of surface dissolution on the ilmenite flotation In the mineral processing operations, oxalic acid as an organic acid has been recently used as a depressant and solvent agents in the flotation and leaching processes, respectively It seems that the oxalic acid is the most effective complexion carboxilic ligand for iron dissolution High capacity of Fe mobilization Oxalate ions can form a strong ligand with Lewis acid Fe centers and labilizes the Fe Fe(III) oxalate complex can improve the dissolution of iron ions via facilitating the electron transfer between dissolved Fe(II) and surface Fe(III) Dissolution via sulfuric acid is expensive and the ensuing effluents are environmentally unacceptable while application of organic acid like oxalic acid may be more effective and environmentally acceptable There are some useful literatures about environmental benefits of organic acids such as citrate oxalate, and malate species in many processes operating in the rhizosphere, including nutrient acquisition and metal detoxification, alleviation of anaerobic stress in roots, mineral weathering and pathogen attraction. Also, methane sulfonic acid by low toxicity, high acid recovery and metal alkane sulfonate salt preparation are also environmentally favorable can be used as an ideal electrolyte for many electrochemical processes of tin and lead. On the other hand, the harmful effect of inorganic acids such as sulfuric acid have been proved through the production of acid mine drainage (AMD) Despite the great benefits, the application of oxalic acid in the surface dissolution of minerals is not significant. Thus, in this work, the effect of surface dissolution by oxalic acid on the surface properties of ilmenite and its accompanied gangue minerals such as olivine, pyroxene, tremolite and clinochlore was investigated. In this regard, the flotation behavior of ilmenite and gangue minerals were investigated by microflotation and mechanical flotation experiments before and after surface dissolution pretreatment. For interpretation of the flotation results, some analytical techniques including zeta-potential measurements, ICP mass analysis, UV-visible spectroscopy and FTIR analysis were also used for analyzing the ilmenite and gangue samples before and after surface modification. The handpick samples were supplied from Qara Aghaj titanium deposit which is located in West Azerbaijan province, Iran. They were used for preparing the relatively purified samples of ilmenite (Il), olivine-pyroxene (Ol-Px), and tremolite-clinochlore (Tr-Cch). After crushing, grinding and screening to the size of −150 +20 Sodium oleate (with 95% purity) was used as a collector agent. The analytical grade of sulfuric acid (97%), oxalic acid (99%) and sodium hydroxide (98%) were applied as a pH regulator. Also, the oxalic acid was used as a surface dissolution media. Sodium silicate (99%) was consumed as depressant agent. All the chemical reagents were supplied by Merck Co., except sodium oleate which was supplied by Sigma Aldrich Co. Additionally, the double distilled water was used throughout the all experiments. X-ray fluorescence (XRF, Philips X Unique II) and the XPERT MPD diffractometer (with employing Cu Ka radiation) were used for determining the chemical and phase composition of the samples, respectively. The surface dissolution of the pure samples prior to the flotation experiments was carried out by various concentrations of oxalic acid solution at different dissolution times. After dissolution, the pulp was filtered, and the solid phase was washed for 5 The microflotation experiments were conducted in a 300-cm The flotation experiments carried out in a 1.5 The zeta potential of the mineral suspension was measured using a Malvern instrument (Nano ZS, ZEN3600, UK). For determining the zeta potential, 50 Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) is an analytical technique used for elemental determinations. This technique is versatile analytical tool having a wide variety of research applications and routine use in numerous application fields, such as environmental analysis, geochemistry, and biological mater. The CETAC ADX-500 auto-diluter system was tested with ELAN The calibration curve was created via standard solutions based on the Beer–Lambert law, ranging from 0.8 The FT-IR analyses have been carried out with NEXU670 FT-IR (Nicolet Corporation, USA) to specify the nature of the interaction between the collector and mineral phases. The sample was ground in a laboratory ring mill to 100% minus 15 The acid concentration and dissolution time are the important factors affecting the surface dissolution performance. In order to determine the optimal condition of these parameters, various microflotation tests were carried out on ilmenite (as a valuable mineral) in the presence of 3.65 The flotation behavior of Il, Ol-Px and Tr-Cch were examined as a function of pH in the presence of 3.65 As seen from According to the evidences, in the flotation of ilmenite, the Ol-Px would be more troublesome gangue mineral in comparison with Tr-Cch one.  For example, in the presence of 1.83 The effect of collector dosage was also investigated on the artificially mixed minerals using the microflotation tests before and after surface dissolution. In these tests, the samples were prepared by mixing 0.5 In most of the flotation processes, sulfuric acid and sodium silicate are commonly used as pH adjusting and gangue minerals depressing agents, respectively. The effects of these reagents on the floatability of ilmenite and both gangue phases are shown in In this research, the oxalic acid was also used as the pH regulator agent before and after surface dissolution. The results are presented in After surface dissolution, the recoveries of Ol-Px and Tr-Cch are still decrease, while the floatability of ilmenite is negligibly improved. These results reveal that the oxalic acid not only can be used as the regulator agent, but also it plays the role of a suitable depressant. It can be concluded that the oxalic acid simultaneously plays both depressant and regulator roles even better than sodium silicate and sulfuric acid in the ilmenite flotation. Based on the positive results of microflotation experiments, the effect of surface dissolution was examined on the artificially mixed minerals as a feed material in the bench-scale flotation at pH The ICP-MS method was used to analyze the liquid phases before and after surface dissolution of purified minerals. The presented results in Before surface dissolution pretreatment, the dissolution of ions from minerals surfaces is negligible. This means that there are still enough surface active sites for reacting with collector species. After surface pretreatment by oxalic acid, most of the surface active ions (including Fe, Mg and Ca) from gangue minerals are released to the solution phase. Thus, the decrease in the flotation recovery of both gangue samples can be due to absence of Fe, Mg and Ca ions on the surface of Ol-Px and Tr-Cch phases causing the reduction of collector adsorption ( The increase in the flotation recovery of ilmenite can be related to conversion of Fe It should be noted that the ionic radius and length of cation bonds with oxygen atom are the important factors affecting the dissolution behavior of ions. The investigation on Fe bonds with oxygen in ilmenite and olivine reveals that the less dissolution of iron from ilmenite surface can be due to the shorter length of Fe The adsorption capacities of collector on the surface of ilmenite and gangue phases were determined by UV-vis before and after surface dissolution. These analyses were carried out as a function of pH (2.5–11) at ambient temperature using 3.65  The FTIR analysis was used to investigate the adsorption of sodium oleate on the surface ilmenite, gangue phases before and after surface dissolution. The zeta potential of ilmenite and gangue minerals before and after pretreatment was measured at various pHs in the absence and presence of sodium oleate. The results are presented in After surface dissolution pretreatment by oxalic acid, the IEP values of ilmenite, olivine-pyroxene and tremolite-clinochlore are decreased to pHs of 3.2, 2.9 and 2.8, respectively. This means that the surface dissolution increases the negative charges on the surface minerals at acidic pH ranges. The decrease of ilmenite IEP through surface dissolution can be due to the enhancement of Fe The decrease in the zeta potential and IEP of gangue minerals through the surface dissolution process can be attributed to the removal of some surface ions. The selective dissolution of Fe, Mg and Ca cations from the surface of olivine-pyroxene and tremolite-clinochlore minerals causes that the surface properties of these minerals to be similar to the quartz having low values of IEP and PZC. In the presence of the sodium oleate as collector, the zeta potential of non-treated minerals has been changed strongly toward the negative values. This can be due to the entrance of oleate ions into the Helmholtz layer of the minerals. The most negative zeta potentials are obtained at pH 6.3 for ilmenite and olivine-pyroxene and at pH 9 for tremolite-clinochlore where the maximum flotation recoveries of minerals are achieved. After surface dissolution, by adding the collector agent, the zeta potential-pH profile of ilmenite has been shifted toward the more negative values. This means that the surface dissolution which oxidizes the Fe This reveals that after surface dissolution, the adsorption of oleate ions on the surface of gangue minerals is decreased by removing some surface active sites including Fe The surface chemistry of minerals and solution chemistry are the most important factors affecting the flotation behavior of minerals. The distribution diagrams of Ti On the other hand, the oleate species in the solution have a key role in the flotation of minerals. The distribution of oleate species as a function of pH By placing the minerals in the solution, the first hydroxyl complexes of divalent metalic ions such as FeOH Ilmenite flotation is controlled by the activity of Fe At alkaline solutions, Ca and Mg species play the most important role in the flotation of olivine-pyroxene and tremolite-clinochlore. At pHs between 8.5 and 10, the higher floatability of tremolite-clinochlore in comparison with olivine-pyroxene can be attributed to the higher amount of Ca and Mg ions in the tremolite-clinochlore phase. The flotation recovery of both phases at alkaline pHs is greater than that of acidic conditions. This can be due to the lower p As evidenced by FTIR analysis and zeta potential measurements in this work and literatures The dissolution process depends on the surface interactions that take place on the mineral surfaces The surface dissolution pretreatment improves the selectivity of ilmenite flotation from gangue phases. This improvement takes place by increasing the floatability of ilmenite and its reduction for gangue minerals. As shown by ICP mass analysis, the dissolution of Fe ions from the surfaces of ilmenite is less and slower than that of gangue minerals. The contact of oxalic acid with ilmenite oxidizes some of the surface Fe In the surface dissolution process, when the dissolution time or acid concentration exceeds the optimal values, the floatability of ilmenite is decreased. This may be due to the more dissolution of Fe As indicated by ICP-MS analysis, through the surface dissolution pretreatment by oxalic acid, the dissolution and removal of cations including Mg Also, the decrease of gangue minerals floatability can be related to the depressing effect of oxalic acid. Because, C The surface dissolution by oxalic acid has a good potential for improving the selectivity of ilmenite flotation from gangue minerals. This improvement is achieved by creating significant differences between the surface chemistry of minerals. These differences can be caused by changing in the surface ions arrangement, conversion of some ions to other active ions, removal of some ions and changes in the surface charge of minerals. In this regard, the Fe ions play an important role. The conversion of Fe The occurrence of above mentioned reactions on the surface of minerals through the pretreatment process by oxalic acid improves the various metallurgical parameters of ilmenite concentrate including grade, recovery, separation efficiency (SE) and selectivity index (SI). The improvement of these parameters has a good negative correlation with the iron content of gangue minerals. The lower Fe content the greater improvement in grade, recovery, SE and SI. When the oxalic acid is used as a pH adjuster agent in the ilmenite flotation, it acts simultaneously as a depressant for gangue minerals such as olivine, pyroxene, tremolite and clinochlore. This characteristic of oxalic acid beside its higher performance in iron dissolution and lower environmental problems in comparison with sulfuric acid makes it favorable media for surface dissolution pretreatment and desirable agent for pH adjustment in the flotation process. The authors declare no conflicts of interest.