To solve complicated function optimization problems, a function optimization algorithm is constructed based on the Susceptible–Infective–Susceptible (SIS) epidemic model, the function optimization algorithm is called SIS algorithm, or SISA in short. The algorithm supposes that some male and female organisms exist in an ecosystem; each individual is characterized by a number of features; an infectious disease exists in the ecosystem and infects among individuals, the infection rule is that female individuals infect male individuals or male individuals infect female individuals, the disease attacks a part of features of an individual. The infected individuals can be cured; the cured individuals can be infected again after a period of time. The physique strength of an individual is decided synthetically by the infection, cure and susceptibility of certain features. The S–I operator is used to transfer feature information from male to female or female to male, the I–S operator is used to transfer feature information from male to male or female to female, the I–S operator and S–S operator are used to transfer feature information among individuals without sex difference. The individuals with strong physique can continue to grow, while the individuals with weak physique stop growing. Results show that the algorithm has characteristics of global convergence and high convergence speed for the complicated functions optimization problems, especially for high dimensional function optimization problems.Consider a complicated function optimization problem: It is very difficult for traditional optimization techniques to solve the optimization problem; some population-based intelligent optimization algorithms have been developed to solve it. The existed intelligence optimization algorithms are as follows: Genetic Algorithm (GA) WANG Lei, PAN Jin and JIAO Li-cheng propose the immune algorithm (IA) with analogies to the concept and theory of immunity in biotic science The vast majority of achievements of AIA are based on Burnet's clone selection theory However, individuals involved in AIA are genes, the immune operator is constructed through the two operations: vaccine selection and vaccination; construction of an immune operator must be associated with actual optimization problems to be solved. AIA has not form a universal algorithm frame as yet, most proposed AIAs focus on basically improvements of other intelligent optimization algorithms, especially the evolutionary algorithms. Actually, there are only several immune operators in AIA, if other operators need to be constructed, the profound immune knowledge on life sciences is needed, and hence it is very difficult for researchers who are not good at the immune knowledge in life sciences. When dimension of an optimization problem is very high, the performance of AIA decreases greatly. Moreover, AIA cannot take into account state transitions among susceptibility, infection, morbidity and cure for any individuals. The Susceptible–Infective–Susceptible (SIS) epidemic model, which is constructed according to KM Assumptions proposed by Kermack and Mckendrick in 1927, describes dynamic behaviors between susceptible and infectious individuals by some nonlinear dynamics methods In recent years, The SIS epidemic model is supported by extensive researches and applications Because the SIS epidemic model has a good description on transmission laws of infectious diseases among individuals, it has good advantages to describe information exchange among many alternative solutions of optimization problem To enable SISA to be fit for many kinds of optimization problems, objective function Kermack and Mckendrick used some nonlinear dynamics methods to build a mathematical model of infectious diseases; we refer to this model as a KM model. This model is based on the following three basic assumptions, known as KM Assumptions The number of individuals in an ecosystem is constant and does not change over time. Owing to the influence of an infectious disease, the rate that the number of susceptible individuals changes over time is proportional to the product of the number of susceptible individuals and the number of infected individuals. The rate transferring from a class formed by infected individuals to another class formed by recovered individuals is proportional to the number of infected individuals. Based on the three assumptions, individuals in an ecosystem are divided into two categories: Class Class SISA supposes that there are The search space of optimization problem Suppose that the number of male individuals in an ecosystem is 1 unit, the number of female individuals in the ecosystem is 1 unit also, let If we treat Assumption A: Assumption B: Assumption C: If we further assume that there are no natural birth and death rate within the given period of time, by KM Assumptions and the chemical kinetics modeling method, we can get the mathematical model of an infectious disease, namely the SIS epidemic model In an ecosystem, for male or female individual For the cure rate In the SIS epidemic model, the infection rate At time Because at any time the infection rate In the random search, if IPI of individual According to the scene design of SISA, we can construct execution logic of the algorithm as follows (start time: Randomly generate the infection rate Use formula Determine which probability is largest between If If individual If individual If If individual If individual Repeat (2)–(4) until all male and female individuals are processed. Then go to (5). Let In an ecosystem, at time Randomly select Randomly select Randomly select Randomly select Then the operator S–I, I–I, I–S and S–S are defined as follows. The S–I operator. Because the infection happens between male to female or female to male, at time The S–I operator can make an individual to obtain the information of average state values of some features of other individuals, thereby reducing the probability that the individual drops into local optimum solutions. The I–I operator. At time The individuals with higher IPI use the I–I operator to transfer their strong physical information to the individuals with lower IPI, these individuals are enabled to grow for the better. The I–S operator. At time The I–S operator has similar function with the I–S operator, it can make an individual to obtain the information of average state values of some features of other individuals, thereby reducing the probability that the individual drops into local optimum solutions. The S–S operator. At time Because the calculation of the state value of feature The growth operator. The growth operator is used to compare the new generation of individuals with the corresponding previous generation of individuals, the better individuals are updated into the new generation, the poorer individuals will be retained to their original states without any change. The growth operator can be described as follows: SISA applies the S–S, S–I, I–I and I–S operator to exchange information among individuals. Suppose that the search interval for each variable is [ Step 1: Calculate discrete points for each variable Step 2: Use the orthogonal Latin squares generating method to produce initial solution where  SISA includes the following steps: Step (1): Initialization: (a) Let Step (2) Calculate Step (3) Calculate the SIS state of individual Step (4) Initialization ends, the following operations are executed:  The evolutionary process is a Markov process. From the definition of the S–S, S–I, I–I and I–S operator, we know that the new generation of an alternative solution relates only with the current state of the alternative solution, has no relation with the process how the alternative solution evolved to its current state; The evolution has the characteristic of “each-step-is-not-bad”. From the definition of the growth operator, we know this. The time complexity of SISA is evaluated as shown in We know from SISA that the ecosystem is a discrete space, we rearrange Let Without loss of generality, we define that Each element in set ∀  Obviously, a state transition is made in Assume that Because  The proof of formula The meaning of formula The proof of formula If state If state Comprehensively considering all the situations mentioned above, we have  The above matrix The proof of  We know from Section We know from formula We know from the above-mentioned discussion that Because  The above formula shows that when Therefore, SISA has the global convergence. QED In order to facilitate understanding of the above certification process, an example is given below. the characteristics of matrix Through continuously calculating  Note that all elements on the first column of matrix The parameters in SISA are set according to We use Michalewicz function The function has From  From  From  From Because the infection rate   From From From We use 16 benchmark functions to carry out comparative analysis, as shown in The benchmarks that we minimized are functions that are representative of those used in the literature for comparison of optimization methods. First, we use SISA to solve 16 benchmark functions mentioned above, the results are shown in We choose 8 population-based optimization algorithms to make comparison; these algorithms include Genetic Algorithm (GA), Ant Colony Algorithm (ACA), Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO), Artificial Fish Swarm Algorithm (AFSA), Biogeography-based Optimization (BBO), Differential Evolution (DE), Artificial Immunity Algorithm (AIA) and Evolution Strategy (ES) for each benchmark function. When calculation, the parameters of the 8 population-based optimization algorithms are initialized according to Each algorithm had a population size of 1500, an elitism parameter of 2, and ran for The optimum objective function values of optimization problems For each benchmark function, its optimum objective function value in In order to evaluate the actual performance of SISA and the 8 population-based optimization algorithms, for each benchmark function, an algorithm with the best performance scores 9 points, while an algorithm with the worst performance scores only 1 point. The performance of an algorithm is defined as follows: At the same period of time, the closer an algorithm can reach the theoretical optimum solution, the better its performance is, the higher the score will be. The less the CPU time consumed by an algorithm to reach the theoretical optimum solution is, the better its performance is, the higher the score will be. Based on the two rules, the performance score of each optimization algorithm for each benchmark function is shown in From  The average score of SISA for each benchmark function is 8.4375. For anyone of 9 population-based optimization algorithms, after iteration continues a long time, the best objective function value when it solves any one of 16 benchmark functions can not arrive at 90% of the theoretical global optimum objective function value, we think that the population-based optimization algorithm fails to solve the benchmark function. Success and failure of SISA and the 8 population-based optimization algorithms for 16 benchmark functions are listed in From The reasons that SISA has good performance are as follows: SISA has more operators than other population-based optimization algorithms, these operators enables SISA to make sufficient information exchange among individuals from different ways. For example, the individuals with higher IPI use the I–I operator to transfer their strong physical information to the individuals with lower IPI, these individuals are enabled to grow for the better; the S–S operator enables an individuals’ vitality to increase, thereby expanding its search scope; the S–I and I–S operator can make an individual to obtain the information of average state values of some features of other individuals, thereby reducing the probability that the individual drops into local optimum solutions; Diversity of operators in SISA leads to high adaptability of SISA to many different optimization problems, therefore SISA can solve more types of optimization problems than other population-based optimization algorithms do; By use of the orthogonal Latin squares generating method to produce initial populations, SISA can ensure distribution of initial populations to have good balance dispersion and neat comparability, the technique enables SISA to obtain better and better search ability and higher and higher accuracy of global optima as the number of individuals increases; When individuals staying at different states exchange state information of features, only a very small part of features are dealt with, both a very large part of features’ states of these individuals keep unchanged, and their IPI indexes can be improved, and also the number of features to be processed decreases greatly, it can substantially improve the convergence speed of the algorithm for complicated optimization problems, especially for high-dimensional optimization problems; The individuals with strong physique can continue to grow, while the individuals with weak physique stop growing, it ensures SISA to be globally converged, and therefore the convergence process is very smooth. SISA has the following advantages when comparing with other population-based optimization algorithms: Configuration of parameters in SISA is very simple. For example, we can simply set For SISA, if the number of individuals increases, the accuracy of global optima increases also; but for other population-based optimization algorithms, if the number of individuals increases, the accuracy of global optima may not increase; SISA can solve much more types of optimization problems than other population-based optimization algorithms do; SISA has much higher convergence speed than other population-based optimization algorithms do when solving an optimization problem. SISA represented in this paper has the following advantages: Individuals involved in SISA are ones in a population, its relevant operators S–S, S–I, I–I and I–S are constructed by use of the three basic assumptions of the SIS epidemic model, these operators need not to depend on actual optimization problems to be solved. Because the SIS epidemic model does not need the support of pathology knowledge, SISA does not need the support of pathology knowledge also. The characteristic facilitates improvement and expansion of SISA. The S–I operator in SISA is used to exchange information between the opposite sex individuals, the I–I operator is used to exchange information between the same sex individuals, the I–S operator and the S–S operator are used to exchange information among individuals, regardless of sex. Therefore, SISA can get full realization of information exchange among individuals from a variety of angles; it means a lot to broaden search scope. Because the disease attacks a part of features of an individual, when individuals staying at different states exchange state information of features, only a very small part of features are dealt with, both a very large part of features’ states of these individuals keep unchanged, and their IPI indexes can be improved, and also the number of features to be processed decreases greatly, it can substantially improve the convergence speed of the algorithm for high-dimensional optimization problems. The individuals with strong physique can continue to grow, while the individuals with weak physique stop growing, this characteristic ensures SISA to be globally converged. The algorithm possesses of global convergence. The following aspects are required further study in the future: How to implant virus independent describing factors into the features of an individual. How to integrate several different types of virus into the algorithm. How to integrate more different types of individual organisms into the algorithm. How to reflect delay differences of outbreaks of different types of virus. The article is supported by the