The hybrid correlation was developed in Part II of this work under conditions where the concentration of nickel was held constant in the feed solution (infinite solution volume conditions). In this paper, the correlation is shown to hold for single element loading from synthetic solutions under finite solution volume conditions. This is achieved by using it to predict the performance of batch tests where the nickel concentration in the feed solution varied, and to predict the performance of a five stage resin-in-pulp miniplant. Furthermore, a modified Helfferich number is presented which allows one to estimate the changes in rate-limiting step of an ion exchange resin bead as it loads.Diameter of resin beads [m] Apparent diffusivity coefficient for hybrid correlation [m Diffusion coefficient across the boundary layer [m Fractional attainment of equilibrium Rate constant for film diffusion model [1/s] Hybrid correlation rate constant [1/s] Mass action law selectivity coefficient [−] Concentration of divalent metal ion in solution [mol Concentration of metal ion loaded onto ion exchanger [mol Ion exchange resin equilibrium loading [mol Ion exchange resin maximum loading [mol Time [s] Time required to achieve a loading of F under film diffusion control [s] Time required to achieve a loading of F using the hybrid correlation [s] Time required under current conditions to achieve the initial resin loading value [s] Separation factor of resin for ion B over ion A [−] Hybrid correlation fit parameter [−] Thickness of mass transfer boundary layer [m] This paper is the third part in a series of papers whose objective is to develop an engineering model for nickel loading onto an iminodiacetic resin, for use in resin-in-pulp (RIP) applications. In Part I of this work, an experimental method was devised that was able to collect a near-continuous set of data under infinite solution volume conditions (i.e. composition of solution remained essentially constant for the duration of the test). A qualitative evaluation of the rate limiting steps was carried out, by performing a series of loading experiments with nickel, cobalt, and copper. Results showed that the process was film diffusion controlled in the very early stages of loading, and was predominantly controlled by some combination of intraparticle diffusion and ion exchange reaction. Data from the early portion of the loading experiments was modeled using the linear approach to equilibrium to quantify the loading rate under film diffusion control. The key equations for loading a divalent cation, M, onto resin under film diffusion control are described in Eqs. The majority of the data collected in the experiments was shown to be controlled by some combination of intraparticle diffusion and the ion exchange reaction itself. In order to separate out these two effects, a rigorous investigation would be required. Such a fundamental approach could provide insight into how to improve the design or production of the actual resin beads. However, due to the complex equations that would result from such a model, a fundamental model is of limited interest to designers and operators of ion exchange circuits. Since the goal of this particular study is to develop a simple model to adequately describe RIP circuit performance, the decision was made to find a single engineering model to adequately describe the data. In Part II of this work, various engineering models were evaluated for their applicability to describe the system during the time when the system was being controlled by intraparticle diffusion and the ion exchange reaction. Since none of the conventional models were able to describe the system satisfactorily over the range of conditions tested, a new two-parameter hybrid correlation was proposed. Using the hybrid correlation, the fit of the apparent diffusivity (D The hybrid correlation is based on two engineering models: Vermeulen's approximation to intraparticle diffusion and the shrinking core model. It is reasonable to expect that shrinking core behaviour would be observed for a fast, irreversible ion exchange reaction, and that no distinct boundary would be present for a slow, reversible ion exchange reaction. A new fit parameter, α, was developed to provide insight into the metal loading profile within the ion exchange bead. For an α-value of zero, the hybrid correlation reduces to Vermeulen's approximation to intraparticle diffusion. For an α-value of one, the hybrid correlation reduces to an approximation of the shrinking core model. To see if the fit value could be correlated to observations, the cross-section of resin beads loaded to 50% capacity were examined with an optical microscope. For beads loaded with nickel and cobalt (α The key equations for the hybrid correlation are described in Eqs. The goal of this paper is to verify the hybrid correlation. The hybrid correlation was generated under infinite solution volume conditions (i.e. solution concentrations remaining constant), and the question is whether or not the correlation can be applied to adequately describe loading rates in situations where the solution concentration varies with time. It is important to remember that, in the batch tests under infinite solution volume conditions, the rate-limiting step changed from film diffusion control to intraparticle diffusion/ion exchange reaction control. Unfortunately, combining the film diffusion control model with the hybrid correlation into a single equation is highly complex, since the first model is based on a linear approach to equilibrium, and the second model is based on a quadratic approach to equilibrium. Therefore, in lieu of combining the two models into a single equation, a simple criterion was developed to identify when the process is film diffusion controlled and when the process is controlled by intraparticle diffusion/ion exchange reaction. In order to quantify whether an ion exchange process was predominantly film diffusion limited or intraparticle diffusion limited, Helfferich developed a criterion, now referred to as the Helfferich number. This criterion was developed by taking the ratio of the predicted time to reach 50% loading under film diffusion conditions to the predicted time to reach 50% loading under intraparticle diffusion control. It was defined for the case of complete conversion of an ion exchange initially fully loaded with ion A to being fully loaded with ion B. Furthermore, it was defined assuming that the two ions were of equal mobility and equal valence, and that the reaction was carried out under infinite solution volume conditions. Helfferich's criterion for finding the overall rate determining step is described in Eqs. As proposed by Helfferich, this criterion truly only gives the rate limiting step when the resin is loaded to 50% capacity. For the ion exchange process being studied, the resin initially starts out film-diffusion controlled, and the rate-limiting step changes to a combination of intraparticle diffusion and the ion exchange reaction. It is reasonable to expect that the process must go through a zone where both film diffusion and the intraparticle diffusion/ion exchange reaction contribute significantly to the loading rate. In this paper, this combined zone is simply referred to as “mixed control”. In order to know when to apply the film diffusion model and when to apply the hybrid correlation, there would be value in modifying the Helfferich criterion so that it is able to track the rate limiting step as the resin loads. To achieve this goal, the ratio of the time it would take to load a resin to any given fraction of loading, F, under film diffusion control (t The same criteria for determining rate limiting step are used as for the original Helfferich criterion (i.e. film diffusion if ≫ The hybrid correlation was verified using batch tests under finite solution volume conditions (concentration changes with time) and through the operation of a five stage RIP miniplant. The batch tests with variable nickel concentration were carried out in a 1 A dual concentration batch test was conducted, where TP207XL resin (lot CHC 5034) was reacted under a constant nickel concentration of 50 A test was run with TP207MP resin, where the solution nickel concentration was increased over the course of the test. This was achieved by adding an overly-strong nickel stock solution, so that as the resin loaded, the concentration of nickel in the beaker increased. The test started at 50 The test with decreasing nickel ion concentration was run using TP207MP resin. In this test, no stock solution of nickel sulphate was added. The test solution was made up to start at approximately 250 A five-stage RIP miniplant (560 The resin selected for the RIP miniplant was the TP207XL. Five litres of resin were converted to the hydrogen form and wet-screened to the + RIP circuits can be operated in either cascade operation (where resin is continuously moved counter-current to the flow of pulp) or in carousel operation (where the resin does not move from tank to tank, but the order of the tanks changes with time). Elution was done in columns at a flowrate of 2 Bed Volumes (BV) per hour. Stripping consisted of 10 During cascade operation, fresh feed was pumped to the Feed Mix Tank and then was fed by gravity through the five RIP loading stages. Resin was fed continuously from the Resin Feed Tank to the final RIP stage using an airlift pump. In order to maintain the resin inventory in the Resin Feed Tank, fresh resin was manually added every 15 Three nickel loading tests were run in cascade mode. In these tests, the circuit was run for 16 A single copper loading test was run in cascade mode. This test lasted 11 At the end of each run, the total resin volume in each contactor was recorded and a 5 A 30 Solution samples were taken at 24.75, 29.25, 29.5, 29.75, and 30 The results and discussion for the batch tests will first be presented, followed by the RIP miniplant. Results for the three batch tests will be presented and discussed, in turn. The first part of the dual concentration test is being carried out under infinite solution volume conditions, and so the first portion of the curve (50 The time to achieve the final predicted resin loading of 27.9 Results from the dual concentration test are plotted in To model the changing solution composition in the test where the nickel concentration in solution increased from 50 to 500 The fit of the model to the observed data indicates that the model continues to capture the rate of loading adequately. The same model was used for the batch test where no nickel stock solution was added. Results from this test are displayed in To get a sense of rate-limiting step over the course of the test, the modified Helfferich number was plotted in The results from the three batch tests carried out with changing nickel concentration indicate that the hybrid correlation can be applied to situations where the solution concentration varies with time. Furthermore, it suggests that the hybrid correlation, used in conjunction with the modified Helfferich number and the film diffusion model, should be adequate for modeling a counter-current RIP circuit. In particular, the test run without any stock solution being added suggests that minimal error is introduced by not having a specific model to describe mixed control conditions. Therefore, no further work was done to try and develop a more rigorous model for mixed control. Instead, the research focus shifted to model verification with the RIP miniplant. To predict RIP miniplant performance, circuit models for both cascade and carousel operation were developed. These will be discussed and compared to the actual miniplant results. To develop the steady-state circuit profiles (both solution and resin) under cascade operation, the following additional inputs were required: feed flowrate (15 The predicted steady-state solution and resin profiles for the three nickel cascade circuits are displayed with lines in In terms of the modified Helfferich numbers, most of the circuit is observed to be rate-limited by particle diffusion/chemical reaction, rather than by film diffusion. The only tank predicted to be film diffusion limited is the final tank in Run B. Tanks with a modified Helfferich number close to one (mixed control) are the fourth tank in Run B, and the fifth tank in Runs A It is important to note that with the recirculating load of nickel on the resin (3 The steady-state solution and resin profiles from the single copper cascade run are displayed in When a circuit is operated under carousel conditions, the solution and resin profiles for each contactor vary with time. Thus, the working volume of each contactor (0.56 The carousel circuit model is based on coupling the resin loading equations with the solution phase mole balance. Euler's finite difference method was used to solve these equations, using a time-step of 0.24 A modified Helfferich number has been developed which allows for estimating when the rate-determining step changes as a resin bead loads. This can be applied to the various stages of an RIP circuit to determine the rate-limiting step in the various tanks. The hybrid correlation has been verified for use in situations where the solution concentration changes with time. This was achieved by using the hybrid correlation, in conjunction with the modified Helfferich number, and a film diffusion model to predict nickel loading rates in batch tests where the solution concentration varied over the course of the experiment. Furthermore, this same approach was shown to adequately describe the performance of a five stage RIP circuit for the case of nickel loading under cascade operation and for copper loading under both cascade and carousel operation. The assistance of Ross McLeod, Carl Ng, Wonsang Kim, and Dave Torok for their contributions to the design and construction of the RIP miniplant is gratefully acknowledged. Thanks also to Parisa Abbasi and Fernando Parada for their help with the operation of the RIP miniplant.