Selective flocculation is an efficient separation method for processing fine coal. In this work, one type of hydrophobically modified polyacrylamide, poly(AM-NaAA-C16DMAAC) (HMPAM), was synthesized and used as flocculants of coal. The adsorption and interaction of HMPAM on model coal surface under the influence of KCl concentration were compared with a commercial polyacrylamide (PAM) using quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation monitoring (QCM-D), multi-angle laser light scattering (MALLS) and atomic force microscope (AFM). The QCM-D results showed that the adsorption amounts of both PAM and HMPAM on model coal surface increased with increasing KCl concentration, and the amount of HMPAM was much higher than that of PAM in 100 mM KCl solution. This result could be due to the fact that the high salinity (e.g., 100 mM KCl) led to the compressed conformation of the polymers and significantly compressed electric double layer repulsion. The conformational changes were determined using MALLS. The AFM force measurement results showed that the adhesion between the polymers and model coal surface increased with increasing the KCl concentrations due to the compressed electric double layer, and the average adhesion of PAM was about one order of magnitude smaller than that of HMPAM. Such difference was mainly ascribed to the hydrophobic attraction between the hydrophobic chain of HMPAM and model coal surface. Meanwhile, the attractive hydrophobic interaction between the hydrophobic chains induced the formation of multiple layers of HMPAM, which was in consistence with the QCM-D results. The fundamental insights into the interaction mechanisms of HMPAM/PAM on model coal surface will benefit the rational development of effective polymer additives for fine coal preparation.Selective flocculation is an important method for processing fine particulates during mineral beneficiation ( Recently, hydrophobically modified polyacrylamides with relatively low amount of a hydrophobic monomer (generally less than 2 mol%) have received great attention ( In this work, to enhance the adsorption selectivity of flocculants on coal surface, a hydrophobically modified polyacrylamide, poly(AM-NaAA-C  The synthesis and characterization of HMPAM were descried in detail in the literature ( The preparation procedure of model coal surface for QCM-D by spin-coating asphaltene solution onto OTS treated silica sensors was shown in the literature ( A silica microsphere (radius around 2.5 μm) was glued onto a tip-less AFM cantilever (Bruker, Santa Barbara, USA) using a two-component epoxy glue, and dried in ambient condition for at least 24 h. As show in In this work, the adsorption of PAM and HMPAM polymers on the model coal surface was investigated using a QCM-D system, Q-sense E1 (Q-Sense AB, Gothenburg, Sweden). The experiments were conducted at 20 °C (±0.02 °C). The flow rate was 100 μL/min. HMPAM solution was firstly prepared by hydrating under gentle stirring for approximately 10 h to obtain a homogeneous solution (0.1% w/v). The above stock solution was diluted to 20 mg/L in KCl solutions of different concentrations at natural pH. For each experiment, KCl solution was pumped into the QCM-D module for recording the baseline, of which the frequency Δ An MFP-3D AFM instrument (Asylum Research, Santa Barbara, USA) was used for force measurements. In the experiments, both polymer functionalized silica probe and model coal substrate were placed in a fluid cell filled with aqueous solutions (i.e., 1 mM or 100 mM KCl). For each force measurement, the colloidal probe was driven to approach the substrate at a velocity of 1 μm/s till a maximum loading force of 4 nN was reached, and then retract from the substrate. The deflection of the cantilever was detected by an optical laser detecting system. The spring constant of the AFM cantilever was calibrated using thermal tuning method prior to the force measurement. Thus, the force profiles were obtained. To further analyze the interaction, adhesion force mapping was conducted over an area of 10 × 10 μm The  The adsorption of 20 mg/L PAM and HMPAM in saline solutions (i.e., 1 mM, 10 mM and 100 mM KCl solution) on model coal surface were determined using a QCM-D. The changes of frequency shift (Δ As shown in As shown in In order to investigate the conformational changes of the polymer layer, the Δ Meanwhile, high salinity condition could also screen electrostatic repulsion between the polymer molecules. By the 18-angle light scattering measurements, the hydrodynamic radius of HMPAM was measured as 182.2 ± 7.1 nm in 1 mM KCl solution but decreased to 93.2 ± 8.2 nm in 100 mM KCl solution. The hydrodynamic radius of PAM changed from 176.7 ± 9.1 nm in 1 mM KCl to 66.2 ± 8.8 nm in 100 mM KCl. It indicates both HMPAM and PAM form more compressed structures in high salinity solution. In 100 mM KCl solution, the Debye length was calculated to be 0.96 nm, suggesting that the electric double layer interaction was significantly compressed with strong screening effect. The weakened electrostatic repulsion could lead to more compressed polymer conformation and higher amount of the polymers adsorbed on the surfaces, thus contributing to the strong bridging effect and enhancing the flocculation. Topographic AFM images of APTES, HMPAM and PAM grafted wafer are shown in  AFM force measurements were carried out to quantify the interactions between polymer (i.e., PAM and HMPAM) and model coal surface in KCl solutions (i.e., 1 mM and 100 mM). The typical force-distance plot in In summary, QCM-D measurements show that HMPAM displays higher adsorption capacity in high salinity (i.e., 100 mM KCl) solution on model coal surface than that in dilute (i.e., 1 mM KCl) solution. The hydrodynamic radius measurement demonstrates that the polymer is more compressed in 100 mM KCl solution. AFM force measurements also show that the hydrophobic chain of HMPAM and high salinity could enhance the attractive interaction between HMPAM and model coal surface. Therefore, the increased adsorption in high salinity solution can be well explained by the conformational changes of HMPAM polymer and weakened repulsive interaction between polymer and model coal surface. As illustrated in In this study, a hydrophobically-modified polymer flocculant, HMPAM, was synthesized by introducing a hydrophobic segment with long hydrocarbon chain (C Wenjie Zou and Lu Gong contributed equally to this work. The authors would like to thank the