Solar pond utilizes a salinity gradient to trap thermal energy in the storage zone. The stored heat can be employed for several potential applications. A transient analysis is carried out to investigate the effect of various parameters such as variation of the thickness of zones, ground conditions, and surface losses on the temperature development of solar pond. The numerical model is validated with experimental results from two different locations obtained from the literature. The thickness of each zone is determined based on the maximum temperature of LCZ and fast warm-up time under the meteorological conditions of Bhavnagar. The thickness of UCZ, NCZ, and LCZ are selected as 0.3 m, 1.3 m, and 1.5 m, respectively, for the subsequent study of the solar pond. It is found that a phase difference of nearly 42 days occurs between maximum values of solar radiation and temperature of LCZ for a given set of conditions. The dependence of LCZ temperature on the thickness of NCZ and ground conditions is also presented. A detailed assessment of surface losses shows the evaporation loss to be higher than convection and radiation losses. The impact of evaporation loss is highest in the temperature of UCZ and LCZ; however, the change in the LCZ temperature due to surface losses is minimal. Also, the shading area should be considered for the investigation of smaller area of pond. Solar pond with larger area requires less duration to acquire high temperature.area of the pond, m humid heat capacity, J/kg·°C specific heat, J/kg·°C instantaneous change in the energy content, J convective coefficient of heat transfer between UCZ and air, W/m heat transfer coefficient of evaporation, W/m fraction of solar radiation that reaches to depth convective coefficient of heat transfer between UCZ and NCZ, W/m convective coefficient of heat transfer between NCZ and LCZ, W/m convective coefficient of heat transfer between LCZ with bottom of pond, W/m convective coefficient of heat transfer at the ground water level, W/m intensity of solar radiation strikes the surface of UCZ, W/m intensity of solar radiation entering the pond surface, W/m thermal conductivity of ground, W/m·°C thermal conductivity of water, W/m·°C length of the pond, m shading length of corresponding depth number of layers number of days of the year refractive index of air refractive index of water partial pressure of water vapour at ambient temperature, mm of Hg atmospheric pressure, mm of Hg vapor pressure of water at temperature of UCZ, mm of Hg rate of conduction heat transfer, W rate of convection heat transfer, W rate of evaporation heat loss from the surface of solar pond, W rate of ground heat loss from LCZ, W rate of heat extraction from LCZ, W rate of heat loss, W rate of radiation heat loss from the surface of solar pond, W rate of solar radiation absorbed in a layer, W coefficient of reflection ratio of hourly total radiation to total daily radiation ambient temperature, °C temperature of ground, °C sky temperature, K temperature of the node, °C thickness of layer, m overall heat transfer coefficient of the ground, W/m overall heat transfer coefficient of the pond, W/m wind velocity (m/s) width of the pond depth of water table, m corresponding depth of the pond from the top, m angle of incidence, degree angle of refraction, degree declination angle, degree incident angle of beam radiation with normal to a vertical plane, degree surface azimuth angle, degree sunrise and sunset hours, degree hour angle, degree latitude of location, degree profile angle, degree density, kg/m emissivity of water Stefan–Boltzmann constant, W/m present time, s time increment, s latent heat of evaporation, J/kg humidity of air efficiency of the pond, % effective input instantaneous lower convective zone non-convective zone output shading upper convective zone Solar energy is abundant, clean, and inexhaustible source of energy. The utilization of solar energy is associated with significant challenges due to its low energy density and intermittency characteristics. The salinity gradient solar pond provides a solution to these problems by employing a large collection area and storage system ( A wide range of application of solar pond has been successfully demonstrated in electric power generation ( Many researchers investigating solar pond have utilized mathematical models to predict the behavior of the system and optimize it. Physics of salinity gradient solar pond was first explained analytically by The thickness of different zone strongly influences the performance of a solar pond. To accurately estimate the temperature behavior of the solar pond, the effect of surface losses should be taken into account. The thermal performance of a solar pond is also dependent upon the solar irradiation of the location due to seasonal variation ( In the present study, the transient analysis of a solar pond is carried out under the metrological condition of Bhavnagar. The objective of the study is to select the size of various zone based on the maximum temperature of LCZ and fast warm-up under a given set of operating condition. The combined impact of ground condition and NCZ thickness on LCZ temperature is investigated. An attempt is also made to assess the impact of surface losses and shading area on the temperatures of UCZ and LCZ. A numerical model of salinity gradient solar pond is solved using a finite difference method. Following assumption has been made for the present analysis ( Both UCZ and LCZ are assumed to be perfectly mixed. The side walls are correctly insulated. The solar radiation reaching the LCZ is wholly absorbed in this layer. Heat storage in the NCZ is not considered for the estimation of temperatures of LCZ and UCZ. Conduction heat transfer as per Fourier’s law is considered in NCZ. Mass transfer is not considered in this study.  The following procedure is adopted to obtain the apparent movement of the sun ( The sunrise hour angle is taken as negative of sunset hour angle. The angle of refraction Therefore, The energy balance equation for UCZ is described as below ( The left-hand side of the Eq. When solar radiation of intensity, The amount of solar radiation enters the In order to determine the intensity of solar radiation reaching any depth of the pond, the fraction of solar radiation Thus, the amount of solar radiation leaving the UCZ is written as, Substitution of Eq. The conduction heat transfer from LCZ to UCZ, The total heat losses from UCZ comprises of surface losses and wall loss. The heat losses from the surface to atmosphere take place mainly due to convection, evaporation, and radiation. The wall losses are considered to be negligible in this study. Therefore surface losses can be computed as, The heat loss due to convection heat transfer can be calculated from the following equations, The heat loss from the surface due to evaporation can be found using the following equation, ( The partial pressure of water vapor The evaporation heat loss can also be obtained by the method proposed by The heat loss due to radiation from UCZ is presented in Eq. The temperature profile of NCZ is determined by dividing the zone into The energy balance equation for LCZ is represented as, The amount of solar energy stored in LCZ is described as Eq. It is assumed that the amount of solar radiation is completely absorbed in this zone. Therefore, the term, The heat transferred from LCZ to UCZ by conduction is calculated from the Eq. The values of overall heat transfer coefficient, In order to investigate the effect of the aforementioned parameters, a transient computer model is developed. The flowchart of complete algorithm is shown in  The purpose of NCZ is to suppress the convective current from the LCZ. It is noticed that a smaller depth of NCZ results in the lower temperature of the storage zone; although, it requires a small duration of warm-up time. As the thickness of NCZ increase from 0.5 m to 1.0 m, the maximum temperature rises by 16.1% in 11 days. Whereas, for an increase in thickness from 1.0 m to 2.0 m, results a temperature rise of 5.06% only, in 13 days. It is depicted from In the study conducted by The function of UCZ is to prevent the gradient layer from the effect of rain, wind, and surface losses ( According to In  This section is an attempt to assess the combined impact of ground thermal condition and thickness of NCZ on the temperature of LCZ. The thermal conductivity of the ground varies with soil moisture content (  For the further investigation of a solar pond in the metrological condition of Bhavnagar, the thickness UCZ, NCZ, and LCZ are selected as 0.3 m, 1.3 m and 1.5 m, respectively. The thickness of zones obtained is comparable to the results presented by other investigators ( It is depicted from The average annual efficiency of first year of LCZ is found to be 16.25% without heat extraction (  The negative values of convection heat loss imply that heat is added to the pond from the atmosphere ( Accurate estimation of surface losses is necessary to determine parameters such as the rate of evaporation, quantity of makeup water required, and rate of surface washing. The individual impact of different surface losses on the temperature of UCZ and LCZ has been obtained by neglecting each type of losses separately ( In a study conducted by The various terms in Eq. The surface azimuth angle, The effect of the shading area is investigated with a pond having a depth of 3.1 m. A transient model is developed to investigate the temperature distribution of a solar pond under the meteorological condition of Bhavnagar. The conclusions from the present study are: The model is validated with experimental results of two different locations. It is found that the excellent agreement of UCZ temperature is obtained using the equation of evaporation heat loss presented by The selection of thickness of each zone is based on the maximum temperature of LCZ and fast warm-up time. The optimum thickness of NCZ depending on the maximum temperature of LCZ is found to be 2.0 m. However, based on the percentage of temperature rise and fast warm-up time, the NCZ thickness is selected as 1.3 m under the given sets of operating conditions. Also, the thickness of UCZ and LCZ are selected as 0.3 m and 1.5 m, respectively. The development of LCZ temperature is examined by varying the thickness of each zone. The thickness of NCZ and LCZ significantly influenced the temperature of LCZ; whereas, the thickness of UCZ has a minor impact on it. Higher depth of the LCZ reduces the fluctuation of the yearly temperature of LCZ. However, it reduces the maximum temperature achieved by LCZ and also takes longer warm-up time. The characteristics of solar radiation of the location also influence the duration to reach the maximum temperature of LCZ. The phase difference of nearly 42 days is observed between maximum solar radiation and maximum temperature of LCZ for the meteorological conditions of Bhavnagar. The effect of NCZ thickness on the maximum temperature of LCZ varies depending on the thermal conductivity of the ground and depth of water table. It is found that the higher depth of water table and lower value of ground thermal conductivity increases the temperature of LCZ. Thus, the ground condition is to be taken into account for the selection of NCZ thickness to obtain the desired range of LCZ temperature. The behavior of surface losses is exhibited for the variation in ambient conditions. An accurate estimation of evaporation loss can be obtained using the equation of evaporation heat loss presented by The effect of shading area on LCZ temperature is observed to be very small for a pond with a larger area. Solar pond with larger area achieves high temperature in less warm-up time. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The first author is a research scholar and acknowledge