A grain boundary engineering approach was made to improve the microstructure of a commercial Pb-base alloy for better performance in automobile battery application. For the purpose of enhancing the resistance against intergranular corrosion, cracking and creep, a thermomechanical processing route was sought to promote special boundaries, specifically coincidence site lattice (CSL) boundaries. Through a combination of cold working and recrystallization heat treatment, it was possible to increase the fraction of low ΣCSL boundaries more than 91%. Annealing twins, produced during the thermomechanical processing, were identified as a key factor for regeneration of CSL boundaries. Multiplication of the CSL boundaries was interpreted in terms of the ‘Σ3 regeneration’ model proposed by previous authors.Pb-base alloys are the major workhorses for automobile batteries. Like other secondary batteries, those made with Pb-alloy lose charge/discharge efficiency during usage, which originates from the materials degradation. With the recurrence of PbO The objective of the present investigation was to obtain over 90% low A commercial Pb–0.09Ca–1.8Sn (all is wt.%) alloy for the anodic plate in automobile batteries was used as experimental material. The plate was continuously cast into a thickness of 10 mm. Combinations of cold working and recrystallization heat treatment, as shown in For optical microscopy, surface of specimens was subsequently electropolished in a solution of water: ethanol: perchloric acid: 2-butoxyethanol=7:7:5:1 in parts under 12 V per 15 s. GBCD of thermomechanically processed specimen was analyzed with an electron back scattered diffraction (EBSD) equipment (JEOL JSM-6300/OPAL). Specimen preparation for this study consisted of grinding, polishing and electrochemical etching, which ensured removal of deformed and stressed surface layer. From this analysis, distribution of grain boundary misorientation angle and that of CSL boundaries were obtained. To identify the CSL boundaries, the Brandon criterion Thermomechanical processing resulted in a significant reduction of the grain size. As shown in Concurrent with the grain refinement, the fraction of CSL boundaries increased during thermomechanical processing. This is illustrated in the composite data presented in GBCD sensitively varied with the thermomechanical processing parameters. In the case of 70% cold rolling and additional thermomechanical processing, the fraction of CSL boundaries was 20%, which is considerably lower than that produced by 90% rolling. However, the fraction of low angle boundaries ( The greater amount of CSL boundaries was obtained in the specimen most heavily cold worked (90%) and then further thermomechanical processed. A set of micrograph, GBCD, OIM and CSL distribution pertaining to this condition is shown in For the purpose of comparison, the statistics on the fraction of CSL boundaries are summarized in For metallic materials of low stacking fault energy such as Pb-base alloys there is a high probability of increasing the special boundaries. Previous works by Palumbo et al. Promotion of the particular CSL boundaries is keenly associated with annealing twins. This is most clearly demonstrated in The high frequency of Implication of the special microstructure filled with CSL boundaries on practical application to automobile battery material needs further investigation, which is out of the scope of the present work. According to previous reports Based on the study of promoting special CSL boundaries in a commercial Pb-alloy for automobile battery plates, the following conclusions were drawn. A special microstructure was produced by thermomechanical processing, in which up to 91% of the entire boundaries were low Sharpening the intensity of frequencies of the low Thermomechanical processing also resulted in a significant grain refinement of the as-received (cast) microstructure, from 180 μm to about 60 μm. This work was performed under auspices of the Korean Ministry of Science and Technology through the ‘2001 National Research Laboratory Program’. The authors would like to thank the Global and Yuasa Battery Co., Ltd. for the supply of the experimental materials.