Gold leaching with calcium, sodium and ammonium thiosulphate salts was investigated in both pure gold and ore leaching systems. The type of thiosulphate salts was found to influence significantly the solution and surface chemistry, and hence the leaching of pure gold and the pyrite concentrate in the ammoniacal thiosulphate solutions. Calcium thiosulphate gave a higher gold extraction rate with negligible consumption of thiosulphate in the leaching of pure gold. Sodium thiosulphate had the least thiosulphate consumption and the lowest gold extraction rate in the leaching of pure gold. Ammonium thiosulphate had a better gold extraction rate than sodium thiosulphate, but had the highest thiosulphate consumption due to lower solution pH in the leaching of pure gold. The difference in the leaching of pure gold by the thiosulphate salts was attributed to the ability of ion-pair formation of thiosulphate ion with the cations.
                  The mineralogy affected substantially the gold leaching of the ores with different thiosulphate salts. The leaching of the sulphide gold ore with a low-sulphide content followed the same trend as the leaching of pure gold, where the dissolution behaviour of gold with different thiosulphate salts governed the gold extraction rate. In contrast, the extraction rate of gold from the pyrite concentrate was dependent not only on the leaching behaviour of gold but also on the interactions of the associated sulphide minerals. Ammonium thiosulphate had a marginally higher gold extraction rate from the pyrite concentrate than calcium thiosulphate, due to the greater extent of leaching of the copper sulphide minerals in the ammonium thiosulphate solution. The thiosulphate consumption was the lowest in the leaching of the pyrite concentrate with calcium thiosulphate. Sodium thiosulphate had the lowest gold extraction rate from the pyrite concentrate despite low thiosulphate consumption. Ammonium thiosulphate is preferred for the leaching of high-sulphide ores and calcium thiosulphate is preferred for the leaching of low-sulphide ores.In recent years a significant amount of research has focused on thiosulphate as a potential alternative lixiviant for gold due to the growing environmental and public concerns over the use of cyanide. Acceptable gold leaching rates using thiosulphate have been achieved in the presence of ammonia with cupric ion acting as the oxidant. The chemistry of the leaching system is complicated due to the simultaneous presence of complexing ligands such as ammonia and thiosulphate, the Cu(II)–Cu(I) redox couple and the stability of thiosulphate in solution. However, by maintaining suitable concentrations of thiosulphate, ammonia, copper and oxygen in the leaching solution, and consequently, suitable Eh and pH conditions, acceptable gold leach rates can be achieved. Most work has been carried out on complex ores containing high copper, carbonaceous ores or ores containing high concentrations of lead, zinc or manganese ( The leaching of gold in thiosulphate solution is an electrochemical reaction, with the constituent half reactions being the oxidation of gold to gold thiosulphate, and the reduction of copper(II) amine to copper(I) thiosulphate ( The cupric ion was suggested to promote the oxidative degradation of thiosulphate to tetrathionate ( It has been realised that thiosulphate concentration plays an important role in gold leaching, because thiosulphate takes part in both the anodic and cathodic half reactions (Eqs. Cations originating from various thiosulphate salts have different alkalinity in solutions, and will influence Eh and pH conditions in the leaching system and hence gold leaching. However, the effect of different thiosulphate salts on leaching of gold ores with varied mineralogy has not been reported in the literature. It is the purpose of this paper to investigate the effect of three typical thiosulphate salts, i.e. ammonium, calcium and sodium thiosulphates, on gold leaching from a solution chemistry perspective. Leaching of pure gold and two gold ores with different mineralogy was investigated using the three thiosulphate salts. Gold foils (99.99% Au, thickness 0.2 A pyrite concentrate and a sulphide gold ore were obtained from Newcrest gold mines with a particle size of 80% passing 75 Laboratory grade ammonium thiosulphate, sodium thiosulphate and ammonia water (25%) were provided by Westlab Chem Supply Pty Ltd., Australia. Calcium thiosulphate (24 Elemental concentrations in solutions were determined by ICP-OES, after oxidising the sulphur species to stable sulphates. After oxidation by hydrogen peroxide, solutions were acidified by aqua regia and boiled to ensure complete conversion of the metal species to their chloride forms. The thiosulphate concentration was determined by iodometric method with the indicator Vitex. Acetic acid (10% solution) was applied to eliminate the effect of the cupric ammonia complex on iodine titration. A platinum electrode (M21Pt, Radiometer) was used to measure the mixed solution potential with a double-junction reference electrode (Ag/AgCl, saturated KCl, Orion) to eliminate the interference of thiosulphate with the reference electrode. All potentials were given with respect to the Standard Hydrogen Electrode (SHE). The concentration of the cupric ammonia complex was monitored at 618 Experiments for pure gold leaching were performed in a 400-ml reactor with a sampling port open to the air using a magnetic stirrer. 250 Leaching of the pyrite concentrate and the sulphide ore was performed in a 1.5-L baffled PVC reactor using an overhead stirrer with a flat-bladed impeller. The reactor was open to the air through the sampling port. A leach solution of 1 Initially, leaching of pure gold was conducted with gold foils at varied concentrations of different thiosulphate salts. The pH was about 11.5 in 0.1 As noted from All leach curves ( The mixed solution potentials decreased sharply within the first 7 In general, the mixed solution potential was significantly higher for the calcium thiosulphate leach solution than in the other two thiosulphate salt solutions (   It is believed that the ammoniacal thiosulphate leaching of gold depends not only on the dissolution behaviour of gold, but also critically on the behaviour of the associated sulphide minerals. The dissolution of sulphide minerals could expose gold to the leach solution and hence, improve gold leaching. In the presence of dissolved oxygen, the oxidative reactions of pyrite and chalcopyrite in the ammoniacal thiosulphate solutions can be represented by the following simplified reactions ( As can be inferred from Eqs. In the leaching of the pyrite concentrate, the cupric tetra-amine concentration decreased substantially at the initial stage of leaching in all thiosulphate leach solutions and gradually increased afterwards, as shown in The mixed solution potential followed the same trend as the cupric tetra-amine concentration in the leaching of the pyrite concentrate in the leach solutions. Besides the cupric tetra-amine concentration, ammonia concentration also governed the mixed solution potential. Thus, the calcium thiosulphate solution had the highest mixed solution potential, followed by sodium thiosulphate solution and ammonium thiosulphate solution.  The gold extraction rate was substantially higher from the sulphide ore than the pyrite concentrate with different thiosulphate salts under the same condition ( Like in the leaching of pure gold, the mixed potentials substantially decreased during the initial stage, followed by a gradual decrease in the leaching of the sulphide ore with the calcium and sodium thiosulphate salts (  The thiosulphate consumption was significantly lower in the leaching of the sulphide ore than the pyrite concentrate ( Different thiosulphate salts were found to significantly influence the solution chemistry, and hence the leaching of pure gold, a pyrite concentrate and a sulphide ore in the ammoniacal thiosulphate leach solutions. In the leaching of pure gold, calcium thiosulphate had a significantly higher gold extraction rate than ammonium and sodium thiosulphates at the same reagent concentrations, and the gold extraction rate was slightly higher for ammonium thiosulphate than sodium thiosulphate. A higher thiosulphate concentration was beneficial for the gold extraction rate. The solution potential was significantly higher in the leaching of pure gold with calcium thiosulphate than sodium and ammonium thiosulphates, and the thiosulphate decomposition was negligible in the calcium thiosulphate solution. The thiosulphate concentration remained largely stable in the sodium thiosulphate solution, while the thiosulphate consumption was the highest in the ammonium thiosulphate solution. The leaching of the gold ores was dependent not only on the dissolution behaviour of gold but also on the interactions of the minerals. Ammonium thiosulphate gave a marginally higher gold extraction than calcium thiosulphate in the leaching of the pyrite concentrate, due to a greater extent of leaching of the copper minerals. The gold extraction rate from the pyrite concentrate was the lowest for sodium thiosulphate. In general, the calcium thiosulphate solution had the highest mixed potentials, followed by the sodium and ammonium thiosulphate solutions. The thiosulphate consumption was the least in the leaching of the pyrite concentrate with calcium thiosulphate and the most with ammonium thiosulphate. The leaching of the sulphide ore was the highest for calcium thiosulphate, followed by ammonium and sodium thiosulphate. Like in the leaching of pure gold, the thiosulphate concentration remained substantially constant in the leaching of the sulphide ore with sodium thiosulphate, while it decreased marginally with calcium thiosulphate after 24 The financial support from