Increasing concerns about environmental issues have led to more attention being paid to the recycling of mining wastes and smelting byproducts. In the present study, the utilization of gold tailings, waste limestone, red mud, and ferronickel slag was investigated for producing continuous glass fibers. To verify the applicability of the down-drawing process, the viscosity of the present mixture was measured in the molten state at a high temperature. The viscosity in the low temperature range was estimated using the Mauro–Yue–Ellison–Gupta–Allan equation. Compared to other commercially used basalt fiber systems, a similar fiber-forming temperature in the range of 1466 K–1503 K with viscosities ranging from log 2.5 to log 3.0 dPa s, was observed, which indicates the applicability of the down-drawing process. Measurements of the tensile strength and the Young's modulus of a single filament were carried out following standard test methods. In spite of the thick diameter of the present filament, the fiber produced in the present study exhibited a Young's modulus of 60 GPa–80 GPa, which was found similar to those of other commercial fibers. It is expected that a higher tensile strength will be achieved by reducing the diameter of the filament lower than 10 μm by increasing the drawing speed. Therefore, utilization of the present mixture; mining wastes and smelting byproducts, is feasible for producing continuous glass fibers.Environmental issues have increased the importance of recycling and management of the byproducts of smelting and mining wastes. The Center for Sustainable Resource Processing (CSRP) supported by the Australian government evaluated various waste streams produced by the mineral industry from technical, economic, and environmental aspects. According to their study, sulfide tailing including acid mine drainage and the bauxite residue from the Bayer process were ranked first and second, indicating waste requiring the most urgent treatment ( Owing to the depletion of high-grade gold ores, the economically minable gold concentration is decreasing and is currently of the order of 3–4 g/t Au ( For environmental reasons, the utilization of gold tailing and red mud has attracted attention ( Basalt fiber produced from volcanic rocks has gained attention as its production cost is similar to or less than that of typical glass fiber, but it shows certain superior properties. Basalt fiber has higher tensile strength, corrosion resistance, and temperature resistance than typical E-glass fiber; that is the most common type of glass fiber generally used for FRP, despite similar densities (2.6–2.7 g/cm In the present study, the utilization of smelting byproducts such as red mud and ferronickel slag and mining wastes such as gold tailing and waste limestone were investigated for application in glass fiber production. In the Korean mining industry, limestone production constitutes approximately 72% of the total value of mineral production ( The raw materials used in the present study were collected from Korean mining and mineral processing companies ( A Pt-10%Rh crucible (outer diameter: φ41 mm, inner diameter: φ40 mm, and height: 65 mm) was filled with the homogeneous mixture and placed in a vertical furnace equipped with an MoSi After determination of the drawing temperature based on the viscosity result, the quenched sample was crushed and filled in the Pt-10%Rh crucible. The crucible with the vitreous sample was placed in a muffle furnace equipped with SiC heating elements. The sample was heated at 1723 K, which is approximately 220 K higher than the target drawing temperature of 1503 K, where its viscosity was log 2.5 dPa s. After 1 h of heating, the crucible was removed from the furnace. The molten oxide was slowly poured on a rotating refractory cylinder (φ50 mm) and drawn at a speed of 1.3 m/s. The amorphous phase of the obtained fiber was determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD; D/Max 2200; Rigaku, Tokyo, Japan). As shown in The viscosity of a molten mixture of smelting byproducts and mining wastes at various temperatures is shown in Equation During the down-drawing process, the fiber-forming temperatures of typical glass fibers have viscosities ranging from log 2.5 to 3.0 dPa s ( In SEM images of glass fiber obtained in the present study are shown in  In The Young's modulus ( Owing to the extremely low diameter of glass fiber, perfect attachment of the fiber on a strain gauge was not possible ( Eq. In The present result is in accordance with the reported Young's modulus of commercial continuous basalt fibers ( The utilization of mining wastes, namely gold tailing and waste lime stone and smelting byproducts including red mud and ferronickel slag was suggested for producing glass fiber having similar physical properties as that of continuous basalt fiber. To evaluate the possibility of adopting the down-drawing process, the viscosity of a molten mixture of mining wastes and smelting byproducts was measured. Compared to other glass and basalt-rock fibers, a similar or lower fiber-forming temperature was obtained for the present system, indicating the applicability of the down-drawing process for the production of continuous glass fiber. With the aid of the MYEGA equation, the fiber-forming temperature was determined to be in the temperature range between 1466 K and 1503 K. Following the measurement standard (ASTM C1557 – 03) for fibers, the tensile strength and Young's modulus were investigated. Due to a slow drawing speed in the present equipment, higher diameters of glass fibers were obtained, resulting in lower tensile strength compared to other commercial fibers. However, a similar Young's modulus to that of other basalt fibers was observed, since the glass fibersis independent of the filament diameter. By achieving a lower fiber diameter, a higher tensile strength for the present system could be expected implying the practical applicability of mining waste and smelting byproducts for continuous glass fiber production. The authors are grateful for the financial support provided by the