During tunnel excavation, convergence, i.e., a tendency for reduction of the section area of the void formed, is observed due to the stress redistribution around the excavation free surface. This deformation accumulates with a gradually decreasing rate until an equilibrium level is obtained, its amplitude depends on the rock mass conditions, the support system and the excavation procedure, as well as on the state of stress, and is usually recognized as a two dimensional effect; i.e., a deformation confined to a plane normal to the tunnel axis, not affecting neighboring sections.
                  In the last years, electronic theodolites, a new generation of geodetic instruments which can describe in detail the 3-D changes in the shape of tunnels during their excavation stage relative to fixed reference frames, became available, making possible the understanding of the detailed pattern of such changes; especially the effect of rejuvenation of deformation in previously stabilized sections while tunnel excavation is progressing.
                  Analysis of geodetic monitoring records of certain recently constructed tunnels indicates that, occasionally, large deformation from specific ‘source’ sections is transferred along the tunnel axis to “host”, neighboring sections, causing additional time-delayed deformation of previously stabilized sections and necking of the tunnel.
                  This “induced” deformation is not due to effects such as nearby excavations, changes in the hydrological conditions, etc., and to tertiary creep; its distribution along the tunnel axis seems to depend on the potential of “host” sections to accommodate additional stresses from neighboring deformation “source” sections, and it may lead to a progressive, domino-type failure. The overall process is reminiscent of the triggering of new earthquakes by Coulomb static stress changes caused by a certain earthquake, on the condition that the stress level in the epicentral areas of the new events was close to the rupture limit.Excavation of a tunnel produces a rearrangement of stresses along the opened void, leading to gradual contraction of this void (convergence), in most cases not exceeding the critical threshold of ∼1% (i.e., 10 cm in a 10-m diameter tunnel, Yet, there are some cases of tunnels for which the hypothesis of an essentially planar deformation seems not to be satisfactory. In those cases, after a first period of deformation and stabilization ( The Krieburg tunnel, however, is not an isolated effect. Extreme convergence and fissuring of the primary support propagating along the tunnel axis for tens of meters or even more, backwards from the excavation front or bi-directionally, have been observed elsewhere as well ( Although such failures have caused severe delays in the projects, dramatic cost overruns and occasionally fatalities (especially in mine collapses; In the present study we shall try to shed some light to some aspects of the pattern of deformation as a function of time along the tunnel axis, based on geodetic data from two recently excavated tunnels in Greece. More specifically, we shall try to show that (i) there is evidence for ‘propagation’ of deformation along the tunnel axis resulting to an induced deformation; (ii) such propagation occurs under certain circumstances and seems to have a clear time and space-controlled pattern; (iii) this effect is well-known in the mining industry and is not a reaction of the tunnel support shells to locally imposed stresses. Soon after a certain ground volume is excavated at the face of a tunnel, a primary support shell consisting of shotcrete, steel sets, bolts, etc. is added and convergence control devices are installed. In the past, such devices were usually geotechnical instruments (borehole extensometers, pressure cells etc.) and convergence tapes ( In the last years, however, the advent of electronic “total station” geodetic instruments revolutionized tunnel excavation monitoring, permitting to record absolute accurate displacements of monitoring points. With these instruments, displacement measurements of a large number of control points relative to stable reference points outside the tunnel (i.e., absolute coordinates and coordinate changes of control points) and relative displacements between control points at very low cost and high frequency. In certain cases, robotic theodolites acquiring and processing automatically and in real time basis measurements have been used, especially to monitor the effects of tunneling on buildings (for instance, monitoring of the New North–South Amsterdam Metroline; For conventional tunnels, up to a length of a few kilometers, electronic theodolites are used in a first step to determine the coordinates of selected survey stations along the tunnel. The geodetic network is established in the form of open-end traverses. As is analyzed elsewhere, the standard error At a second step, from the survey stations, the coordinates and coordinate changes of control points (reflectors) fixed on the crown and sides of the primary support shell of the tunnel at a spacing of usually 10–20 m are computed ( Evidence of induced tunnel deformation for some transportation tunnels supported by linings of various stiffness and an unsupported mining tunnel is presented below. The Tymfristos road tunnel, 1365 m long and 11 m in diameter, was excavated through a low strength and highly deformable rock mass, a flysch complex consisting of claystone and slickensided argillaceous schist, intensely folded and tectonised. The excavated cross-section was subdivided into top-heading, bench and invert parts following the NATM and using mechanical excavation from both portals. The support system consisted of 40-cm-thick shotcrete shell, steel ribs, invert lining and rock bolts 6 to 9 m long. No limitations had been set concerning the advance rate or the ring closure distance. During excavation, excessive deformation (radial convergence up to 20%), as well as cracks in the shotcrete along the crown and the sidewalls of the tunnel was observed. About 500 m of the tunnel track had to be re-excavated. The new support included lattice girders instead of steel ribs and the advance rate was set to 1 m. Certain re-excavated sections were temporarily stabilized, but deformation resumed (up to 6%, The Kallidromo twin railway tunnel, 9 km long and 9 m in diameter, was excavated through ophiolites and consolidated to loose, highly tectonised Pliocene and Quaternary sediments. The construction sequence included three phases (top-heading, bench and invert excavation) and ring closure occurred no later than 6 days from the section excavation (ERGOSE, unpublished data). The support system included shotcrete, steel sets, rock bolts and occasionally fore-poling and face fiber-glass nailing when face was unstable. When the tunnel entered a zone of low-quality rock masses, buckling of the lining and cracking of the shotcrete shell along the tunnel axis were observed. More specifically the tunnel face moved toward the excavation void, the floor heaved, while cracking initiated at the tunnel face and spread backwards along the excavated tunnel segment, up to a distance of approximately 50 m. Additionally, several longitudinal cracks of the support shell propagated along the tunnel sidewalls causing launching of several nuts of yielded bolts ( The time-history of convergence of many sections reveals that their deformation temporarily stabilized during a nearly 3-month period (days 160–240 in Coal exploitation in the Tanoma mine was based on the room and pillar and retreat mining techniques at a depth of 200–300 m. More than 20 galleries approximately 1000 m long were excavated in two perpendicular directions, and the cavities produced were supported by pillars of unmined material. When the galleries reached the end of the panels, remaining coal bodies including pillars were excavated (retreat mining). This caused roof collapse and stress relief in the mine retreat area, as well as redistribution of stresses and of associated deformation in the adjacent parts of the mine. The typical pattern of convergence in most tunnel sections can be described as a period of high convergence rates when the tunnel face is still close, but as the tunnel front advances, convergence gradually attenuates until the section is fully stabilized. In most tunnels, this process lasts for about 1 month on the average. Analytical expressions for this pattern has been introduced by Usually, rejuvenation of deformation in previously stabilized tunnel sections can be attributed to (1) other, nearby excavations (shafts or twin tunnels, for instance); (2) hydrological effects; (3) swelling rocks and (4) gradual failure of the support shell under the imposed stresses, as for instance in the case of the step-like deformation of tunnel support rings in absence of invert lining ( Creep is another effect that may lead to excessive time-dependent strain in tunnels excavated in geological formations characterized by a viscous behaviour. Creep occurs in rocks stressed beyond the shear stress limit ( Consequently, a It is far from coincidental that the period of rejuvenation of deformation in certain control sections (subsequently regarded as sites of “induced” deformation) postdates certain critical events producing much higher strain in relatively distant sites (at distances ranging from a few to at least several tens of meters, see In the absence of any other reasonable explanation for the pattern of deformation of We can therefore conclude that (i) the deformation of tunnel sections may not simply be a result of 2-D deformation, but can be influenced by stresses released from neighbouring sections and (ii) that this deformation ‘migrates’ laterally along the tunnel axis resulting in a bulge-type deformation and ‘necking’ of the tunnel. Thus, our data testify to a 3-D change of the tunnel shape during excavation. This change is important in weak rock masses and definitely not generated from the interaction between This process that can be viewed as a generalization of the concept of initiation and propagation of failure in tunnels: when the rock capacity has been exceeded locally, stresses are transferred from failing ground to stable ground, away from the point of failure initiation ( at short distances (up to a few meters) if the soil/support system at the neighboring host sections can withstand the additional stresses; at relatively long distances (several tens, even several hundreds of meters) if the support capacity of the nearby sections has been overwhelmed and no more stresses can be accommodated (for example S8 and S15 in when “resisting” sections are met, i.e., sections in which rock strength is high enough to Lateral propagation of deformation from the source of the initial deformation to rather remote sections is not unusual in geotechnical engineering (e.g., This effect is reminiscent of the studies of Coulomb static stress changes associated with earthquakes: relaxation of elastic stresses due to fault reactivation leads to an increase of stresses in specific adjacent areas. If the latter are close to the failure limits, new earthquakes are triggered at a distance from the focus of the first earthquake; a theory supported by the correlation of the geographical distribution of triggered earthquakes with the zones of stress increase produced by the initial earthquake ( Geodetic data permit to record the three-dimensional deformation during tunnel excavation and its time-history and to understand the sequence of events leading to rejuvenation of deformation of some temporary stabilized section and occasionally to failure. This evidence reveals that while tunnel deformation is usually modeled as a 2-D effect, geodetic data from transportation tunnels and mining galleries presented here suggest that this deformation is a 3-D effect, i.e., that there exists a so-far ignored component of deformation along the tunnel axis which is responsible for propagation of deformation along tens of meters or even more. This may explain the step-like pattern of deformation accumulation (rejuvenation of displacement and deformation) in certain tunnel sections during their excavation (for instance Deformation generated in a “source” section and propagating along the axis of the tunnel (induced deformation) is added on the deformation of host sections (locally produced deformation) and if the total amount exceeds the rock and support strength of the host rocks, it is gradually transmitted to more distant sections. This process is analogous to the increase of Coulomb geostatic stresses in specific areas close to the epicentre leading under certain circumstances to new earthquakes ( This article is a contribution to the research project PENED of the G.S.R.T. We are indebted to ERGOSE S.A. and especially to Mr. N. Diasakos for providing unpublished data from Kallidromo tunnel, Greece. Careful reviewing by Dr. P. Blumling, comments by Dr. R. Goel and the help of Prof. W. Schubert with literature are acknowledged.