A perovskite (SrTiO3) and reduced graphene oxide (rGO) based nanocomposite (rGO/SrTiO3
                     ) material has been synthesized in-situ. The rGO/SrTiO3 nanocomposite was characterized by PXRD, SEM, EDX mapping, TEM and SAED pattern to confirm its purity and morphology. The surface of the glassy carbon electrode (GCE) was modified by coating rGO/SrTiO3 nanocomposite without any binder. This modified electrode GCE-rGO/SrTiO3 (MGCE) was employed for electrochemical detection of nitro-substituted aromatics such as p-nitrophenol (p-NP), 2,4-dinitrophenol (2,4-DNP), 2,4-dinitrotoluene (2,4-DNT) and 2,4,6-trinitrophenol (TNP) which shows a rapid electronic communications. The MGCE exhibited the limit of detection (LOD) of 110nM, 134nM, 128nM, 146nM, high sensitivity of 193.43μAμM−1
                     cm−2, 25.34μAμM−1
                     cm−2, 71.66μAμM−1
                     cm−2, 13.16μAμM−1
                     cm−2 and a linear range between 0.3–0.8, 0.4–0.7, 0.5–0.8, 0.5–0.7μM for p-NP, 2,4-DNP, 2,4-DNT and TNP, respectively. The developed MGCE sensor thus implemented is also advantageous for its low cost, stability, reliability and rendering applications for real system analysis.In general, ABO A derivative of phenol family such as Although there are few reports on the detection of So far, most of the results related to the detection of explosives have the following disadvantages: (i) use of expensive metal such as Au, Pt, Ag and Ru based composites To the best of our knowledge, so far no report available on rGO/SrTiO The studied nitroaromatics { All the chemicals were purchased from Sigma Aldrich and Alfa Aesar were used as received. The powder x-ray diffraction patterns (PXRD) were recorded on a Rigaku, Japan, RINT 2500 GO was synthesized according to the well-known Hummer’s method with some modifications The SrTiO  The nanoparticles composite (rGO/SrTiO  The XRD pattern for GO shows the presence of a broad peak (10.8) which corresponds to GO ( The morphological features of GO, SrTiO Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high magnification transmission electron microscopy images of the rGO/SrTiO The charge transfer behavior at different modified GCE surfaces has been investigated using impedance study. The Nyquist plot for the four different modified electrodes a) Bare, b) SrTiO  In presence of Further, the differential pulse voltammetry (DPV) was employed for four nitroaromatics which also revealed that highest current was obtained for The effect of various concentrations from 0.1 to 1 The effect of scan rate on the cyclic voltammetry of Further, to endorse the results obtained by CV and DPV we have employed linear sweep voltammetry for The The proposed redox reactions takes place during the sensing of the In the proposed mechanism (where, O The limit of detection (LOD), was calculated using the equation, LOD There are various reports on electrochemical sensing of nitroaromatics using different modifiers for GCE and presented in The reproducibility of the For a strong effective sensor of any material, the sensor should have anti-interfering properties. To evaluate the selectivity, a competitive effect of interference species on the electrochemical behavior of the Real sample analysis for the In summary, we reported the facile SMM would like to acknowledge CSIR, New Delhi and IIT Indore for funding and Sophisticated Instrumentation Centre (SIC), IIT Indore for providing the characterization facility. We also thank the Advanced Imaging Center, IIT Kanpur for providing TEM facility. KA and AM would like to thank to UGC, New Delhi for providing research fellowship (RGNF-D) No. F./2014­15/RGNF­2014­15D­OBC­UTT­57599 and MHRD, Govt. of India, New Delhi, India, respectively. PM gratefully acknowledges J. C. Bose National Fellowship. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: