Extracellular bacterial protein (EBP) isolated from Paenibacillus polymyxa was fractionated through ammonium sulphate precipitation (ASP) method and characterized through SDS-PAGE. Role of such fractionated proteins in selective mineral separation was demonstrated through microbially-induced selective flotation and flocculation. Proper use of fractionated protein groups rendered pyrite and chalcopyrite hydrophilic while quartz, sphalerite and galena exhibited enhanced surface hydrophobicity after biotreatment. Sphalerite, galena and quartz could be selectively separated from pyrite–chalcopyrite through prior interaction with bacterial proteins.Utility of microorganisms and associated extracellular metabolic products in selective flotation and flocculation has been reported earlier ( Besides development of microbially-induced mineral separation processes knowledge about the specific bacterial metabolic products responsible for mineral-specificity becomes essential. Specific affinity of bacteria and the role of extra cellular polysaccharides and proteins in regulating attachment need to be understood. In this investigation, the affinity of quartz, pyrite, chalcopyrite, sphalerite and galena towards extracellular bacterial protein (EBP) has been established. Extracellular bacterial protein encomposes itself numerous kinds of amino groups. Hence EBP was fractionated with ammonium sulphate precipitation (ASP) and their effect on mineral separation was studied. Selective separation of both pyrite and chalcopyrite from quartz, sphalerite and galena was studied through microbially-induced flocculation and flotation using different groups of proteins obtained from the ASP process. Different protein fractions exhibited varying surface affinity towards different minerals. Growth of bacterial cells in the presence of various minerals resulted in the specific expression of extracellular protein groups which exhibited unique surface affinity to a particular mineral. Proteins isolated from such mineral-grown bacterial cells could be used to bring about desired mineral separation from multi-mineral combinations. Hand picked highly pure mineral samples of quartz, pyrite, chalcopyrite, sphalerite and galena were obtained from Alminrock, Indscer Fabriks, Bangalore, India. Chemical, X-ray and mineralogical analyses were carried out to ascertain the purity of the minerals. The purity of minerals was ascertained as quartz 99.5%, pyrite 99.9%, chalcopyrite 99.8%, sphalerite 99.9% and galena 99.7%. The above samples were ground in a porcelain ball mill, sieved and fractioned to obtain different size fractions (− Strain of The fully grown bacterial culture (48 h) was centrifuged (Sorvall RC-5B) at 10,000 rpm for 15 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was decanted and filtered through sterile Millipore (0.2 μm) filter paper to remove all insoluble materials and any bacterial cells still left out. The cell pellet was washed with deionised double distilled water and again centrifuged. This process was repeated twice to obtain pure cell pellet. One liter of batch culture of Separation of proteins in EBP (extracellular bacterial protein) was carried out by electrophoresis using a discontinuous polyacrylamide gel as a support medium and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) to denature the proteins. 12% SDS-PAGE gel was used for the purpose. Samples were loaded onto the gel. EBP was further fractionated though ammonium sulphate precipitation (ASP) method. The protein was then run on the gel and analyzed ( Proteins run in the above SDS-PAGE indicated that there are numerous proteins varying in molecular weight extracted from culture cells-free supernatant (EBP). So far as individual bands in the SDS-PAGE were concerned each band consisted of more than one different protein. Altogether it was quite evident that the EBP dealt with contained a large range of different kinds of proteins with versatile functional characteristics. Hence the next step involved purification and fractionation of the proteins responsible for mineral flocculation and flotation. EBP was fractionated through ammonium sulphate precipitation. EBP was partially purified through fractionation of EBP, where it was separated by removing the protein pellets after dissolving calculated amount of ammonium sulphate. In the first phase protein pellet was removed after dissolving 20% of ammonium sulphate. After removing the pellet ammonium sulphate of 30% was dissolved to the remaining supernatant and the protein pellet was again separated indicating it as 0%–20% ASP protein. Third ASP protein was obtained from 20%–40%, 40%–60% and 60%–90% ammonium sulphate dissolution. The protein pellets obtained this way in each case were dialyzed as mentioned earlier. SDS-PAGE of all these ASP proteins was carried out ( For adsorption tests, 1 g each of the individual mineral sample was suspended in 100 ml of 10 Flocculation behavior of individual mineral samples was studied by dispersing 1 g of the mineral in 100 ml of deionised double distilled water in a 100 ml graduated measuring cylinder. The stoppered cylinder was tumbled 10 times, by repeatedly inverting, and then allowed to stand still for 2 min. 90 ml of the supernatant was then carefully decanted, filtered, dried and weighed to obtain the weight percentage of solids dispersed (desliming). Experiments were carried out with respect to pH and time. Flocculation experiments with proteins were carried out by adding 50 ml of the mineral slurry containing 1 g mineral to 50 ml of various ASP groups of protein suspension of known concentration in a 100 ml stoppered measuring cylinder. Both the mineral slurry and ASP groups of protein were preadjusted to the same pH prior to mixing. Selective flocculation studies were performed on 1:1:1 wt% ternary mineral mixtures as per procedures discussed above. 50 ml of the mineral slurry containing 0.5 g of each mineral was pulped to 50 ml of ASP cut off EBP in a graduated cylinder. One gram of the desired mineral was suspended in 100 ml of deionised double distilled water in a conical flask containing desired concentrations of ASP EBP at neutral pH. The flask was incubated on a rotary shaker at 250 rpm for 30 min. After interaction with ASP EBP, the mineral particles were separated by decantation of the supernatant. Mineral particles remaining at the bottom were filtered through Whatman 42 filter paper followed by washing with deionised double distilled water. The conditioned minerals were transferred to a modified Hallimond tube. Flotation of the mineral was carried out using nitrogen bubbled through the flotation mixture at a flow rate of 40 ml/min for 3 min. The settled and floated fractions were analyzed using ICP Spectrometry. Effect of subsequent addition of a collector (such as hexylamine for quartz and potassium isopropyl xanthate for sulfides) after interaction with ASP EBP on the flotation behavior of the minerals was also studied. In selective flotation tests, 1 g each of the minerals (1:1:1, wt %) with a particle size in the range of − All the above experiments were carried out in triplicate. The maximum deviation was within ± Various bands observed in the SDS-PAGE indicated that EBP consisted of numerous protein groups. Hence fractionation of EBP was attempted by isolating different protein fractions from culture supernatant (metabolite). The separated fractions (designated as A, B, C, and D) were used in adsorption, flocculation and flotation tests. Adsorption studies with fractionated groups of proteins onto all the minerals were carried out and the results are shown in Extracellular bacterial proteins separated from the metabolic products of Flocculation behavior of minerals with ASP EBP fractions was studied as illustrated in In presence of group C protein, pyrite and chalcopyrite showed highest settling rate (> Selective flocculation tests were carried out at pH 8–9 using mixtures of sphalerite pyrite and chalcopyrite and galena, pyrite and chalcopyrite. Five desliming stages of 3 min duration each were used. The percent separation of sphalerite and galena is shown in Even though only effects of groups B and D proteins on selective flocculation of sulfide mineral mixtures are discussed in this paper to demonstrate microbially-induced mineral separation, similar tests were also carried out using groups A and C proteins. Pyrite and chalcopyrite exhibited enhanced flocculation while sphalerite and galena could be increasingly dispersed through continuous desliming stages. Selective microflotation studies were also carried out with different groups of fractionated proteins. Flotation behavior of various minerals is depicted in The following points are note-worthy: Flotation recovery of quartz was 65%, 80%, 30% and 40% after interaction with groups A, B, C, and D proteins respectively. Groups A and B proteins are more effective in the flotation of quartz. Both pyrite and chalcopyrite were depressed in the presence of all groups of protein fractions. 70%, 80%, 30% and 65% of sphalerite could be floated after interaction with proteins from groups A, B, C and D respectively. Except protein from group C, rest of the protein fractions promoted the flotation of sphalerite. Group D proteins conferred highest flotability on galena. The effect of different % ASP cut off on selective flotation was then studied. It could be observed from Selective separation of Sphalerite was attempted from a mixture with pyrite and chalcopyrite. Results in Potassium isopropyl xanthate (PIPX) is universally used as collector to enhance flotability of sulfide minerals. Surface reaction (adsorption) of xanthate renders the mineral hydrophobic facilitating its separation through flotation. It has been established in our studies that certain bacterial proteins could also enhance surface hydrophobicity of certain minerals such as quartz, sphalerite and galena promoting their flotability. Hence in order to understand the added benefit of a hydrophobic chemical reagent such as xanthate on the selective flotation of sulfide minerals, protein-interacted minerals were reconditioned with PIPX collector. As could be seen from the above results, subsequent xanthate conditioning of protein-interacted mineral mixtures further enhanced separation of galena and sphalerite from pyrite/chalcopyrite. Similarly, amines are used to enhance flotability of quartz. Reconditioning of protein-interacted quartz with hexamine (collector) further enhanced the surface hydrophobicity of quartz and significantly enhanced its selective flotation. Extracellular bacterial proteins (EBP) derived from This study has demonstrated the utility and amenability of microbially-induced mineral beneficiation through the use of bacterially generated proteins. Bacterial proteins could effectively replace conventionally used amine and xanthate type mineral collectors which are toxic and expensive. Large scale tests are however essential using real ore systems to establish the techno economic feasibility of such bioprocesses for subsequent commercial applications.