A co-composting of chestnut burr and leaf litter mixed with solid poultry manure was assessed by comparison of several chemical, physicochemical and biological parameters. The final pH of the co-compost was 8.89 and the C/N ratio was 13. The germination index (GI) obtained using the co-compost varied with the seeds used. It was 155.35% for ryegrass seeds, 56.56% for wheat seeds and 100% for barley seeds. The co-compost was mature in 103 days from a biological point of view.Chestnut ( Composting of chestnut burr and leaf litter could be a simple and low-cost way to prevent forest fires if its deficit in nitrogen and moisture were supplemented with a co-composting material. Poultry farms generate solid manure from the deep litter which contains significant quantities of lignocellulosic materials, ammonia nitrogen and moisture ( Therefore, the transformation of chestnut burr and leaf litter mixed with solid poultry manure into compost would be a good use of both these wastes. The main purpose of this study was to evaluate the possible co-composting of chestnut burr and leaf litter with solid poultry manure and its use as a fertilizer. Physicochemical characterisations of the initial and final materials and germination indices for several seeds were determined. Burrs and leaves from the chestnut litter and solid poultry manure from the deep litter were collected from a local cultivar and a local farm, respectively. The basis of the deep litter was pine chips. Reactors for composting experiments were built. Polyurethane (3 cm thickness) was formed into the walls of plastic vertical boxes with covers. The volume of each reactor was 108.8 l. The temperature was measured during the composting and before sampling. The mass was aerated by removing the whole mass manually before sampling or daily when the temperature was higher than 60°C. Samples of 150 g each were taken at random during the composting. Chemical analyses and germination indices were carried out in triplicate and results given are averages. The pH was determined in the aqueous extract of a 5 g aliquot of a sample with distilled water at a solid:water ratio of 1:25 (w/v). Moisture was determined by drying at 105°C for 24 h, and total organic matter content (TOMC) determined by weight loss on ignition at 540°C for 16 h. Total carbon content (TCC) and oxidizable carbon content (OCC) were estimated by the expressions proposed by Chestnut burr and leaf litter and solid poultry manure showed a high organic matter content (96.26% and 85.38% on dry weight basis, respectively). But burrs and leaves were deficient in nitrogen (0.2%). Poultry manure supplemented very well the chestnut burr and leaf litter, adding the nitrogen and moisture needed. Duplicate lots of 18 kg of solid poultry manure and 6 kg of chestnut wastes were mixed and the composting process proceeded for 103 days. The ratio between the raw materials was 3/1 because this relation was considered the optimum for the co-composting of poultry manure with other lignocellulosic materials ( The temperature during the co-composting reached 60°C in 14 days. The thermophilic phase continued for 10 days and was followed by the cooling phase of 20 days to a stable temperature around 18°C. The composting of the control never reached the thermophilic phase. This fact could have been due to the compaction of the solid poultry manure leading to anaerobic conditions. The initial moisture contents of the co-composting mixture and the solid poultry manure control were 54.81±1.15% and 48.70±0.11%, respectively. During the composting the moistures were in the range 35–58%. The pH was in the narrow range 8.16–8.89 in both experiments. An initial fall in pH was observed, due to the production of organic acids by microorganism. After the thermophilic phase an increase of the pH was observed in accordance with the ammonium production from the protein degradation, as reported by In both experiments the initial total organic matter contents were similar (87.20% in the co-compost and 85.38% in the control) and a slow decrease was observed in both composts, although at the end of the process the loss in organic matter was negligible. The final values (80.93% and 80.78%, respectively) were above the minimum percentage (25%) required by the EC specifications to be considered as composts. In both composts a decrease of available potassium during the composting was observed. The value in the co-compost changed from 2820±7 to 3265±153 ppm, and the value in the control changed from 3796±180 to 3446±90 ppm, both expressed as K The available phosphorus showed an inverse behaviour. A decrease during the co-composting from 1786±9 to 1695±96 ppm and a increase from 710±10 to 1943±113 ppm in the control were observed. In both cases expressed as P  Germination indexes were determined with samples from both composts. A value of 155.35% for GI was found using the co-compost as substrate for ryegrass seeds. The control gave a GI of only 73.56%. The GI of wheat seeds was lower than that of rye-grass. The co-composting gave 56.56% wheat germination, while the control was only 21.18%. Obviously, the use of the co-compost as fertiliser cannot be recommended for wheat crops. For barley seeds, better results were obtained. The GI reached 100% using the co-compost, but was only 69.93% for the control. These results compare very well with those reported for the co-compost obtained using spent pig litter with pig sludge ( In conclusion, the co-compost of chestnut burr and leaf litter with solid poultry manure showed a better behaviour than the manure control. From a biological point of view the co-compost can be considered mature after 103 days and can be used as fertiliser for grasslands and barley crops. The authors are grateful to the following institutions: Coren industries (Ourense, Spain) for supplying poultry manure and Pitita chestnuts (Dozón, Spain) for supplying chestnut burr and leaves.