Reactive molecular dynamics simulations are a useful approach for investigating chemical reactions and structural transformations in complex systems. Coal pyrolysis is one such area in which additional insights would be beneficial for utilization improvements and pollution control. Here the ReaxFF reactive force field was used to perform pyrolysis simulations on a large-scale (>50,000 atoms) molecular model for Illinois no. 6 coal to examine structural modifications and reactions associated with coal pyrolysis. The previously constructed large-scale molecular model of Illinois no. 6 coal composed of 728 diverse molecules was used in pyrolysis simulations at 2000K for 250ps. This high temperature enabled chemical reactions to occur within a practical simulation time. The ReaxFF simulation was performed until about 60% of the cross-links had been disrupted primarily through thermolysis. For this coal pyrolysis was mainly initiated by the release of hydroxyl groups, dehydrogenation of hydroaromatic structures, and by cleavage of heteroatom-containing cross-links. The main pyrolysis products were hydrogen, methyl, ethylene, acetylene, formaldehyde, ethynol, alkylphenols, alkylnaphthalenes and alkylnaphthols, in agreement with experimental data. During pyrolysis the molecular weight distributions shifted to lower molar mass values due to thermal decomposition to form smaller fragments. Tar structural components were also found to be in reasonable agreement with literature data. The thermal degradation of sulfurated and oxygenated cross-links was more substantial than that of alkyl linkages, indicating a higher reactivity around these heteroatoms. Analysis of sulfur form distribution showed that aliphatic sulfur decomposed more rapidly while thiophenic sulfur was more thermally stable, in agreement with experimental results. The extent of decomposition for heterocyclic 5-membered rings was as follows: 57% for pyrrolic, 47% for thiophenic, and 29% for furanic type structures. The ReaxFF simulation was repeated on a sulfur-free model to further analyze the role of organic sulfur forms in Illinois coal pyrolysis. Analysis of trajectories showed that the rate of generation of inorganic gases and tars was higher in the presence of sulfur. Further analysis of ReaxFF simulations showed that aryl and alkyl CS bonds are weaker than aryl and alkyl CC bonds. Hence, cleavage of the CS bonds resulted in more extensive fragmentation leading to larger quantities of aliphatic and aromatic structures that evolved as inorganic gases and tars within Illinois coal model (sulfur containing) compared to sulfur-free model. Thus, sulfur atoms enhanced the reaction kinetics during coal pyrolysis. This work demonstrates that ReaxFF integration with representative coal molecular models can be a useful tool for probing complex chemical processes and transformations involved in coal pyrolysis.Pyrolysis is the initial reaction step in most coal utilization process and influences the course of any subsequent reactions such as combustion, gasification, or liquefaction. Coal pyrolysis involves several physical and chemical processes in which coal is transformed via heating within inert gas atmospheres into a carbon-rich solid residue (coke or char), and volatile products, tar, inorganic gases, and water Coal pyrolysis reactions are highly complex, largely involving bond breaking, vaporization and condensation. The chemistry of coal pyrolysis generally includes the thermal decomposition of surface functional groups to form gases, and the degradation of the macromolecular network to produce smaller fragments that can evolve as tar. Volatile species and tars are conveyed by mass transport processes to the exterior of the coal particle Despite extensive research, improved understanding of fundamental reaction mechanisms and chemical processes involved in coal pyrolysis remains desirable. Reactive molecular dynamics (MD) simulations Coal has been recognized to have a continuum distribution of structural features over a wide range that influences the behavior of coal during utilization processes Reactive force fields (RFFs) can simulate the dissociation and formation of chemical bonds during reactive MD simulations of large systems with accuracy similar to quantum mechanical (QM) methods but with significantly reduced computational time and cost. Therefore, RFF methods can provide unique insight into the highly complex chemistry associated with structural transformations and chemical reactions occurring during coal conversion processes. Among the various RFF-schemes that have been developed Salmon et al. Recently, the ReaxFF reactive force field for hydrocarbon combustion was expanded to include organic sulfur forms and correctly simulate pyrolysis and combustion dynamics of coal molecules and hydrocarbons containing sulfur functionalities. This extended ReaxFF was used to perform combustion simulations on a molecular representation for a devolatilized Illinois no. 6 coal char to investigate the structural evolution of char structure and chemical processes related to combustion under high-temperature conditions The Illinois no. 6 Argonne Premium coal is a high-volatile bituminous coal (C ReaxFF For the ReaxFF pyrolysis simulations, the Illinois and sulfur-free models were equilibrated at 300 ReaxFF pyrolysis simulations of the Illinois coal model at constant temperature of 2000 Snapshots of Illinois coal model at 0, 125, 150 and 250 Comparison of model results with available experimental data is complicated because coal pyrolysis experiments are often conducted using as-received coal samples. At molecular scale, mineral matter is expected to influence coal pyrolysis behavior but was not included into coal model construction. Future modeling efforts should incorporate this structural component. Furthermore, the pyrolysis behavior of coals is highly dependent on the conditions used. ReaxFF pyrolysis simulations were performed at temperatures and heating rates extending beyond normal experimental/industrial conditions to enable chemical reactions to occur within a practical computational time. With advances in computing power and software tools, ReaxFF simulations over longer time scales and lower temperatures will be reachable. The product distribution obtained from ReaxFF pyrolysis simulations for the Illinois no. 6 coal model is given in Further analysis of ReaxFF simulations showed a complicated reaction pathway for the thermal decomposition of organic sulfur forms. Snapshots of thermal degradation for a representative thiophenic type structure observed during ReaxFF simulations are presented in  Formation of tars (defined as compounds with molar mass between 100 and 700 Thermal decomposition of cross-link structures within the Illinois coal model was monitored as a function of time to gain a better understanding of the chemistry during pyrolysis ( The evolution of 5- and 6-membered rings as a function of time was also monitored during Illinois coal pyrolysis ( The chemical evaluation of coal structure and gas and tar fractions comprised elemental analysis, heteroatom classes, distribution of molecular weights and DBE numbers. Lee et al. The proportion (atomic percent) of sulfur and nitrogen content distributed into the gas, tar and final solid residue fractions was found to be 11:76:13 and 9:83:8, respectively, indicating that most of the evolved sulfur and nitrogen atoms were primarily released into the tar fraction. Similar trends were reported by Cai et al. The distribution of compounds containing the largest number of heteroatoms (O, N, S) in the Illinois gas and tar fractions is presented in Simulated Illinois tar fraction exhibited values for number ( Molecular weight distributions were determined from Illinois coal model as a function of time and the results are shown in The distribution of double bond equivalents (DBE) determined on the initial and pyrolyzed Illinois coal structures are shown in By combining ReaxFF reactive force field with realistic large-scale coal molecular models that better capture coal structural diversity we obtained a versatile computational approach that enables investigation of the complex chemical reactions and physical transformations associated with high-temperature coal pyrolysis. With computational speed gains, it is anticipated that this approach could be utilized at reactor pyrolysis temperatures, over longer simulation times, with very large coal atomistic representations. Both large-scale and long time simulations are required to capture the coal pore size distribution and hence the mass transport effects relevant to coal pyrolysis. Ultimately, many orders of magnitude gains in size and time are necessary to simulate systems of interest. The work presented here provides additional insights into the initial chemical reactions of the thermal decomposition of Illinois coal at high temperature conditions. This simulation approach can be readily extended to incorporate inorganic and aqueous-phase components or coal/catalyst interfaces to enable evaluation of coal liquefaction strategies. The ReaxFF reactive force field was utilized to perform pyrolysis simulations on a large-scale molecular model of Illinois no. 6 coal to investigate coal pyrolysis chemistry and the effects of organic sulfur content. A large-scale structural model of Illinois coal was created in previous work using an automated construction approach based on available characterization data This project was funded by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the supplementary data to this article: