Experimental study on co-combustion of rice straw and natural gas has been performed in a bubbling fluidized bed. The used combustor allows a novel jetting-fountain configuration and the conventional operation as well. In the jetting-fountain configuration, natural gas premixed with the air sufficient for combustion proceeds through the jet pipe to create a jet-fountain zone. Whereas only the air required for rice straw combustion passes through the gas distributor. The findings of the experiments confirm that smooth combustion of natural gas with rice straw can be performed in the novel jetting-fountain fluidized bed. This avoids acoustic effects and explosions of burning bubbles that occurs in the conventional operation. Natural gas contribution had a major impact on combustion characteristics and the performance of the combustor has been found to be much better when applying the jetting-fountain configuration. There are considerable reductions (up to 64%, 28% and 34%) in CO, NO
                        x
                      and SO2 emissions, respectively. The fixed carbon loss reduces (up to 65%) as well. Combustion efficiency records generally higher values with the jetting-fountain configuration. Combustion efficiency steadily improves with increasing natural gas contribution (up to 99.8%). Increasing bed temperature (up to 900°C) is beneficial for reducing CO, decreasing fixed carbon loss and improving combustion efficiency. The existence of an optimum bed temperature for sulfur retention has been confirmed. As normal, NO
                        x
                      increases with bed temperature.Biomass is recognized as a potential energy resource to mitigate emission of greenhouse gases Co-combustion with fossil fuels promotes the use of biomass and provides one alternative to achieve emission reductions. Among the other renewable energy options, co-combustion is the lowest risk, least expensive, and most efficient Open burning of rice straw is a serious problem in Egypt where smoke cloud be easily detected during the harvest season. Burning rice straw in the field releases pollutants that contribute to greenhouse gases without energy gain. Utilization of rice straw and rice husk in energy production is a promising option. Combustion of rice by-products in fluidized beds has been carried out in different works However, the combustion of gaseous fuels in fluidized beds may be characterized by acoustic effects and explosion risk In this work co-combustion of rice straw and natural gas in fluidized bed has been investigated. To avoid the shortcomings discussed above, a novel configuration of bubbling fluidized bed developed by Okasha A bubbling fluidized-bed combustor has been modified to adopt the jetting-fountain configuration as shown in In conventional operation all the air is pre-mixed with natural gas and delivered through the gas distributor. In the jetting-fountain configuration, on the other hand, natural gas premixed with the air sufficient for combustion proceeds through the jet pipe to create a jet-fountain zone. Whereas only the air required for rice straw combustion passes through the gas distributor, see The combustor is equipped with a continuous over-bed fuel feeding system using a calibrated paddle shaft. The shaft is driven by a variable speed electric motor. Downstream the paddle shaft, a screw feeder is used to drive the fuel pellets through an inclined pipe flanged with the combustor at 1500 The column is implemented with 21 portals to insert probes for measuring purposes. It is also furnished with two eyeglasses to enable visualizing the freeboard of fluidization column. The first eyeglass is put on a 2″ horizontal tube at 50 The jetting-fountain configuration enables a rapid and reliable method for initial heating of the fluidized bed reactor. Gaseous fuel partially premixed with air is fed through the jet pipe. The remaining part of air is fed through the distributor plate to fluidize bed solids. When the bed reaches a pre-set temperature the operating parameters are regulated to predetermined values of a designed test. In particular, the bed temperature is regulated by adjusting the penetration lengths of the heat exchanger pipes inside the bed. When the unit stabilizes at the pre-set temperature, different measurements are carried out. It appears worthy to indicate that the combustor sustains itself and no external heating source is used. Temperatures have been measured in the bed using various thermocouples of type K at heights of 50, 150, 300, 400, 500, 650, 800, 1100, 1500,1900, 2400 and 2900 Silica sand of size range (0.5–0.8 Two series of steady-state experimental tests have been performed to investigate co-combustion of rice straw and natural gas. The first series gives a comparison between the conventional operation and the jetting-fountain configuration. In the conventional operation all air premixed with natural gas is fed through the gas distributor. On the other hand, in the jetting-fountain fluidized bed, only air required for the combustion of rice straw is fed through the distributor. While natural gas premixed with the air required to its combustion is fed via the jet pipe creating a large fountain zone in the freeboard. In this series, the blending ratio of natural gas and rice straw is 50%:50% based on the thermal load. The second series of experiments is dedicated to study the effect of fuels blending ratio on the combustion performance. In all tests the static bed height is fixed to 30 Concentrations of different species have been measured at the combustor exit. Materials collected in cyclone were chemically analyzed to assess elutriated fixed carbon. Fixed carbon loss is calculated as a ratio between the rates of elutriated and fed fixed carbon. Combustion efficiency, During this work each test continued for about 2 The conventional operation of the combustor was characterized by relatively high acoustic effects due to burning bubbles explosions. A relatively rigorous vibration of the combustor was recognized. Post-combustion in the freeboard was also observed. On the other hand, the jetting-fountain configuration was characterized by smooth combustion and less vibration. A jet-fountain-flame zone was also observed.   Sulfur dioxide emission as a function of bed temperature is shown in  NO  The combustion efficiency is shown in Studying fuels blending ratio is important not only for the combustion characteristics but also for the bed hydrodynamic behavior. Increasing natural gas contribution multiplies the amount of gases delivered via the jet pipe creating a larger jet fountain zone as reported in  Sulfur dioxide emission as a function of bed temperature and fuels blending ratio is shown in  NO  The combustion efficiency is shown in Experimental study on co-combustion of rice straw and natural gas has been performed in a fluidized bed. The used combustor enables the novel, jetting-fountain configuration, and the conventional operation as well. The findings of the experiments confirm that smooth combustion of natural gas with rice straw can be performed in the jetting-fountain fluidized bed. This avoids acoustic effects and explosions of burning bubbles that occurs in conventional operation. The performance of the combustor has been found much better when operates at the jetting-fountain configuration. There are great reduction in different emissions including CO, NO The results demonstrate that natural gas contribution has a major impact on combustion characteristics when applying the jetting-fountain configuration. Considerable reductions in CO, NO The influence of bed temperature on combustion performance has been studied. Increasing bed temperature is beneficial for reducing carbon monoxide, decreasing fixed carbon loss and improving combustion efficiency. Existence of an optimum bed temperature for sulfur retention has been confirmed. As normal, NO