The biosorption-desorption of multi-components solution obtained from coal power plant ash aqueous solution composed on La, Ce, Er etc. as rare earth ions (REEs) and Li, Fe, Cu, Al as metals were investigated using 450°C carbonized gingko leaves as low-cost biosorbent. Evaluation of the effect of pH with respect to contact time indicated a dependency of the system with those parameters. pH=3 was found as optimum one and a rapid uptake of Er ions up to 95% in 900s is observed. La and Ce despite their low concentration in the solution reached their maximum uptake within 900s. The effect of counter ions like Li, Fe and Cu indicated that REEs were adsorbed together with metals. The mechanism of the biosorption is explained by the electrostatic interaction between carbonate ions on the surface of the biosorbent and ions in the solution as well as adsorption onto carbonyl functional group. Desorption system was highly dependent on temperature and time and was not favorable for La and Ce ions whereas 99.22% of Er ions were recovered with 0.3M concentrated HCl pointed out a selective recovery of Er ions.Rare earth elements (REEs) are often referred as the “seeds of technology” because of their uses in high-tech strength permanent magnets, lasers, automotive catalytic converters, fiber optics/superconductors, electronic devices, and green energy sectors Furthermore, all the coal mines in Japan closed until 2002. Therefore, Japan depends totally on foreign countries. According to the Agency for Natural Resources and Energy, Coal Energy Center Several expensive processes exist to recover REEs from ores, including pyrometallurgy, hydrometallurgy, etc. in case of high grade REEs ores, Kim et al. As far as leaching of rare earth elements from coal ashes is concerned, various researchers studied several leaching processes, Rabie et al. and Panda et al. Based on the leaching methods cited above, coal provided from Japanese power plant company has been analyze in order to find out a suitable leaching conditions to recover as much as possible REEs and heavy metals. Biosorption-desorption process of the recovered REEs have been conducted using the leached solution as multi-components REEs solution. The coal power fly ash named DK-TOP have been used in the leaching process. DK-TOP sample was dried in the electric furnace in 70 As biosorbents, 450 Acid leaching is the method used to dissolve as much as possible REEs and metals from DK-TOP power plant coal. Acid type, acid concentration, leaching time are some of the parameters used to find out the leaching optimum conditions. A multi-component solution prepared from DK-TOP, containing Y, La, Ce, Pr, Nd, Er in various concentrations and others metals like Li, Fe, Cu, Al, was then used to conduct the biosorption process. Batch studies were conducted to investigate the parametric factors such as pH, solution temperature, biosorbent dosage and contact time for both biosorption and desorption processes. The pH of the solution was adjusted by using 1     Furthermore, the model studies help to the transfer of technology from laboratory to an industrial scale since it brings some technical information such as the maximum biosorption density, the affinity between biosorbent and sorbate as well as design the sorption system. Usually, Langmuir and Freundlich models are used for the isotherms studies. Langmuir isotherms deal with monolayer coverage formed by adsorbed molecules, Langmuir (1917) whereas the Freundlich isotherm assumes a multilayer biosorption on a heterogeneous surface, Freundlich (1906). The linearized form of Langmuir equation is shown in (Eq.       Sorbate on the surface of the biosorbent In addition, a successful biosorption process deals with a good desorption process. The desorption process depends on the experimental results of the biosorption process since it designs the reverse process of biosorption. Desorption process is done by using The desorbed amount of sorbate ions using solution Experiments have been performed using hydrochloric acid in the concentrations of 0.25 The most efficient concentration of hydrochloric acid for the removal of REEs and metals from DK-TOP ash is 2.5 pH is one of the most important and predominant factors to be considered when assessing the biosorption system as it influences the biosorbents adsorptive sites as well as the solution chemistry of REEs. The pH of the system controls the sorption capacity due to its influence on the surface properties and metals speciation Xu et al. The first step of the experiments consists of studied the effect of pH on leached solution in order to point out pH at which precipitation started. Results are shown in The second step concerns the batch biosorption process. The biosorption experiments were carried out in the pH range 1–9 for 1800s of contact time by keeping other parameters constant. Results are shown in  The low REEs uptake observed in the pH range 1–2 may be explained by the protonation of biosorbent sites with H Due to the fact that Er ions reached its maximum uptake around pH REEs uptake onto GL450 was investigated with respect to contact time in the time range of 0–3600 For better understanding of the mechanism of the biosorption process, kinetics of counter ions such as Li, Al, Fe and Cu present in the leached solution have been evaluated. Those concentrations have been compared to the initial ones obtained at pH Reactions occurring on the biosorbent surface may be explained by the following: Therefore, the mechanism of the system may be explained by an electrostatic interaction between Er Isotherms study has been conducted in order to evaluate the maximum biosorption density. Sorption density of GL450 as function of biosorbent dosage was investigated over the biosorbents dosage range of 0.5–10 Moreover, from 5 to 10 In the present study, the maximum biosorption density obtained for Er, La and Ce using linearized Langmuir equation and Freundlich equation (Eq. Many parameters affect the biosorption process that creates a discrepancy in experimental results. In multi-component solution, all sorbates compete for a single population of surface sites and interact each other. In that case competitive Langmuir adsorption occurs Generalizing the above result to the case where j sorbates compete for the same site we obtained: The recovery of adsorbed REEs is an important step to obtain the metals in their pure forms. Desorption process may help to decrease the operating cost and diminish the dependency to continual supply of the biosorbents. Thus, more the desorption percentage is high more the process is efficient and biosorbent useful, Ponou et al. The present study investigated the biosorption/desorption of La, Ce and Er ions present under various concentration in aqueous solution obtained from coal power plant ashes leaching, onto 450 The present work is the result of international research work cooperation between Korea institute of　Geoscience and Mineral Resources (KIGAM) and　the University of Tokyo. The authors are very grateful to the Korea Institute of Energy, Technology, Evaluation and Planning through the ETI program,