Background
                  Acetabular fractures are complex high-energy injuries. Increasing in recent years with the increased use of high-speed motor vehicles. One of the most important complications of acetabular fracture is the post-traumatic hip osteoarthritis; this complication has been associated to poor fracture reduction, type of fracture and delay in the reduction and fixation of acetabular fracture (Timing surgery). The aims of this study were to determine the incidence of post-traumatic hip osteoarthritis after acetabulum fracture and demonstrate whether the delay surgery is associated to early post-traumatic hip osteoarthritis.
               
                  Methods
                  Using the database of patients with acetabular fractures treated with open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) over 3 years (2011–2014) with minimum of 2 years follow-up. Data was acquired and saved in a digital format. Demographic information was obtained from each patient with minimum of 2 years follow-up. Acetabular fracture was distributed according to the classification of Judet. The quality of reduction was classified in anatomic (0–1mm) and non-anatomic (>1mm) and the timing surgery, early (<7days) and delay (>7days). Clinical and radiographic follow-up was generally performed at six weeks, three months, one and two years after fracture fixation. Multivariate logistic regression analyses were performed to assess the strength of the covariates in relation to the development of post-traumatic hip osteoarthritis.
               
                  Results
                  59 (48%) patients of 122, developed post-traumatic hip osteoarthritis before 2 years. Posterior wall fracture with or without transverse fracture was associated with higher post-traumatic hip osteoarthritis compared with other types of fractures (p<0.05). Patients with better anatomical reduction had less post-traumatic hip osteoarthritis compared with those who had nonanatomic reduction (p<0.05). There was no evidence of association between early timing of the surgical procedure and the presence post-traumatic hip osteoarthritis (p=7092).
               
                  Conclusions
                  According to our results, the anatomical reduction of the articular surface in acetabular fractures is the most important factor in hip osteoarthritis prevention. This factor is strongly associated with early surgical treatment, preferably done within seven days. The timing surgery it is not a factor associated with post-traumatic osteoarthritis.Acetabular fractures are life-altering injuries that commonly occur in young, active, and productive members of society, although the number of elderly patients sustaining acetabular fractures has increased. This study was approved by our local institutional review board. Using the database of patients with acetabular fractures treated with open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) over 3 years (2011–2014) with minimum of 2 years follow-up. Data was acquired and saved in a digital format. Demographic information was obtained from each patient which included age (years), sex, and BMI, mechanism of injury, timing of surgery, classification of the fracture and complication as well as follow-up and patients with hip osteoarthritis demonstrated by radiography, according to the classification of hip osteoarthritis by Bombelli. All patients were evaluated with the use of five standard radiographic views: anteroposterior radiograph, two Judet views, cephalic and caudal views of the pelvis. All patients were further evaluated with computed tomography (CT) of the pelvis. Each fracture was classified on the basis to the method of Letournel and Judet. SPSS version 21 statistical software (Chicago, Illinois, United States) was utilized to perform the statistical analyses. The chi-square test was used to compare the categorical data. A p value less that 0.05 with the two-tailed test was considered statistically significant. Multivariate logistic regression analyses were performed to assess the strength of the covariates (Timing surgery, type of fracture, accuracy of reduction, age, gender and BMI) in relation to the development of post-traumatic hip osteoarthritis, emphasizing the placed upon impact of timing surgery. A threshold for statistical significance was also established at p According to the data collected, 147 patients were initially obtained. Exclusion criteria were applied to eleven patients that present surgical site infection during follow-up (7%), fourteen had avascular necrosis of the femoral head. Of the 122 patients remaining, 90 (74%) male and 32 (26%) were female. Mean age was 41 years (range 20–79 years) with a mean duration of follow-up of 2.4 years. We found 59 (48%) patients with development of post-traumatic hip osteoarthritis before 2 years. No difference was found between age, gender, BMI and post-traumatic hip osteoarthritis ( The mechanism of injury was high-energy trauma in all cases (100%) (70 car accidents, motorcycle 32 and 20 falling more than 3 Of the 122 acetabular fractures, 80 (65%) had a simple fracture pattern and 42 (34%) had an associated fracture pattern. Of the 59 patients with post-traumatic hip osteoarthritis, 12 (9%) were associated with transverse fractures, 26 (21%) had posterior wall fracture, 19 (16%) had transverse with posterior wall fracture and 2 (2%) had both columns fracture. Patients with anterior column and anterior wall fracture did not present hip osteoarthritis at 2 years. Patients with posterior wall fracture, and with transverse plus posterior wall fracture being higher rate of post-traumatic arthritis compared with other types of fracture The postoperative reduction was graded as anatomical in 75 (61%) patients and nonanatomic in 47 (39%). Patients with better anatomical reduction had less post-traumatic hip osteoarthritis compared with those who had nonanatomic reduction (24:35 The average time between injury and surgery was 11 Based on the multivariate regression analyses, an association between the type of fracture There was no evidence of association between early timing of the surgical procedure and the presence post-traumatic hip osteoarthritis In the retrospective analysis, we examined 122 patients from 2011 to 2014 with acetabular fracture provided epidemiological data that coincides with recent literature. The male-female ratio of 3:1 was comparable with other series. Studies that report poor results in acetabular fractures are those restricted to posterior wall, transverse plus posterior wall or complex posterior wall fractures. Any patient experiencing hip dislocation should be reduced urgently in the first 24 Many authors have highlighted the need for optimal reduction to improve functional results, as anatomical reduction has shown to be the most important factor to prevent the development of osteoarthritis. The present findings showed that surgical intervention within seven days of the fracture, significantly improves anatomic fracture reduction this is compared to other series. The incidence of post-traumatic hip osteoarthritis due to acetabular fracture, within two years follow-up was 48%. We believe this is a high rate compared to other studies. The present study highlights the importance of initial reduction. This study lacks a full statistical analysis, mainly because of it is categorical variables and noncontinuous. The same surgeon did not perform the surgeries, and we believe this may affect surgical outcomes. According to our results, the anatomical reduction of the articular surface in acetabular fractures is the most important factor in hip osteoarthritis prevention. This factor is strongly associated with early surgical treatment, preferably done within seven days. The timing surgery it is not a factor associated with post-traumatic osteoarthritis. None.