There are many applications in the mining industry where various material features may only be calculated by means of an image analysis method. Good examples of this are size analysis of open-pit muckpiles, on-line size analysis of ore on a belt conveyor, mineralogical composition analysis by microscopy, lithological composition of an ore, and on-line analysis of flotation froth etc. In all cases the analysis is performed on a two-dimensional basis whereas the information is required on a three-dimensional (volumetric or weight) basis. In most cases, an area particle distribution is first obtained, and then a complex stereological transformation is used to obtain the required weight particle distribution. In this paper a simpler approach is presented. The procedure was developed from the well-known equation for calculating weight distribution from measured surface distribution, adapting the Heywood equations on shape factors, and establishing a thickness model. The new procedure has been experimentally tested using samples from seven different lithologies present in Andina copper ore. Good results have been obtained for estimating granulometric distributions and lithological compositions. It is concluded that this procedure constitutes a simpler, yet satisfactory approach.In the mining industry, many material features may only be calculated if an image analysis method is utilized. Many applications have been presented in relevant literature. These include the size analysis of open-pit muckpiles ( In all cases the analysis is performed on a two-dimensional basis whereas the information is required on a three-dimensional (volumetric or weight) basis. In most cases therefore, an area particle distribution is first obtained and subsequently a complex stereological transformation is used to calculate the required particle distribution by weight. Several methods to convert data from sections or projected areas, based on stereology, have been proposed ( This paper presents a simpler approach for estimating particle distribution by weight from area measurements, based on the well-known transformation from surface to weight distribution and previous work done by the authors ( Rock samples taken from the CODELCO––Andina Copper Mine were used to test the new method. Pictures of randomly chosen rocks were taken with a digital photographic camera (Sony MVC-FD95). For more realistic cases where rocks touch and stack on top of one another, a digital pre-processing and segmentation procedure would have to be used in order to isolate individual rocks in a sample, as was presented elsewhere ( In order to process the images it was necessary to develop image analysis software for measuring the principal rock dimensions. This software was developed in Matlab R12 with an Image Analysis toolbox. In sequencing the image processing, the colour image of each particle was captured against a black background. The original image was transformed to grey levels, then filtered for homogenizing purposes and transformed to binary images. The final image presented the rock in white against the black background. From this black and white image the software determined area, perimeter and other rock dimensions, by counting the corresponding pixels. A known dimension in centimetres and its measurement in pixels allows the scaling from pixels to centimetres or squared centimetres. The scaling procedure was checked with known patterns (rectangle, triangle, circle and polygon). The other dimensions calculated by the software were: Maximum length: the maximum distance between two pixels on the perimeter. Maximum breadth: the maximum distance, perpendicular to the maximum length, between two pixels on the perimeter. Mean breadth: the average of all distances perpendicular to the maximum length, between two pixels belonging on the perimeter. Maximum diameter: the maximum distance, passing through the centre of mass of the rock image, between two pixels on the perimeter.  Andina ore is made up of several types of rock which can be grouped into seven lithological classes as follows: Turmaline Breccia, BxT Other Breccias, BxTo Porphyritic Dykes, PDL Dacitic Diatreme, CHDA Granodiorites, GDCC Andesite, AN Riolitic Diatreme, CHRiol Initially 70 rock samples of −7.6 cm As explained above, for each lithology, the first size class ( In a real application, the thickness of each rock cannot be determined by image analysis, because the rock is almost always in its maximum stability position. To overcome this limitation, each rock was artificially placed perpendicular to its maximum stability position and its picture was taken. The idea was to use the experimentally determined thicknesses to build a model which would calculate thickness as a function of other measurements obtained from the image of each rock in its maximum stability position. The existence of a physical relationship between the dimensions of a given particle has already been proposed. According to Euler’s Law, some characteristics of a particle, such as its faces, vertices and edges, are related to each other. Additional direct relationships, specific to comminuted particles, between the number of faces, vertices and edges, have been proposed by The model structure was developed in accordance with a stepwise regression method ( The list of candidate components for the thickness model was composed of single measurements (6) and combined measurement components (30). The single candidate components were:       The other 30 components were combinations of these single measurements with the proviso that each combination must have the same length unit as the thickness. To establish possible models, only part of the experimental data was used, either from series A or series B. The remaining data was used for model validation. Six possible models were found and compared in terms of goodness of fit and the standard deviation of each model during validation. The model presented in Eq.  As can be seen in Based on the procedure for calculating a weight distribution from a surface distribution ( mass fraction of particles belonging to size class “ ratio between volume and surface area shape factors, corresponding to particles belonging to size class “ ratio between surface and projected area of particles belonging to size class “ density of particles belonging to size class “ average diameter of particles belonging to size class “ projected area fraction of particles belonging to size class “ number of size classes considered. number of lithological classes considered. The terms in Eq. The volume shape factor of a sample can be experimentally determined as follows: The density values were determined using picnometry, and the volumetric shape factors were calculated using Eq. A rigorous analysis of shape factors was carried out by Heywood ( Using Eqs. The length and breadth measurements, together with the thickness model estimation, can be used in order to calculate The surface area ( Combining Eqs. By analysing the results of the parameter estimation procedure using statistical methods, it was found that both It is possible then, to use Eq. Experimentally measure Determine the ( Determine the ( Determine Determine The new procedure was tested experimentally by estimating the granulometric distributions and lithological compositions of 10 samples. For all these tests, only series A was used as it represents the most typical case for the mining industry. The same procedure could be applied to series B with the same results expected, since the only difference between the two series was the different For some tests, a granulometric analysis was performed using a single lithological class in each case, to determine the experimental size distribution by weight. After the image analysis of each sample had been completed, the proposed procedure was applied. Both the experimental and estimated granulometric distributions by weight for one of the lithologies tested (BxT) are presented in In another test, a lithological composition analysis was performed, using a single size class ( A final test was performed using an artificially-prepared sample with rocks representing all the lithological classes, as well as five size classes. The new procedure was applied in order to estimate the mass distribution of all rocks in the 35 classes from the image analysis (simultaneous lithological composition and granulometric analysis).  Finally, to illustrate the quality of the procedure, the results of all the experimental tests are presented in A model of the ratio of volume and surface area shape factors was determined using the Heywood equations for A thickness model was established by stepwise multi-variable regression analysis. The thickness model is composed of combined measurements (Eq. The proposed procedure was successfully tested using samples from seven lithologies corresponding to Andina copper ore. Ten different tests were carried out. In some of these, a single lithological class was used to determine the granulometric analysis. In these cases, the estimation proved to be good with an average MSR of 1.6%. In another test a single size class ( Good results were obtained using the procedure developed for estimating granulometric distributions and lithological compositions. The experimental results of all tests gave ( This method could be useful for applications in an industrial plant. The procedure can be generalised but the models parameters The authors express their thanks to CODELCO–Andina Division for their valuable contribution.