Colloidal gas aphrons (CGAs) are micron-sized gas bubbles produced by stirring surfactant solutions at high speed. A single CGA dispersed in water is composed of a gaseous inner core, surrounded by double water-soapy layer. CGAs have large interfacial area per unit volume and exhibit relatively high stability. These characteristics make CGAs very suitable in flotation systems. Early work on CGA has shown that it has considerable potential in the field of solvent extraction. While the area of application is very broad, is has been used for the flotation of biological products such as microbial cells, removal of ash-forming materials from coal, waste water processing, etc. In this paper, the flotation of magnesium hydroxide (particle size 2.3–9μm) and polystyrene (particle size 24–300μm) by CGAs has been studied. The effect of particles size on removal efficiency was analyzed. There is an optimum particle and bubble size that will give high removal efficiency. The effect of surfactants type and surfactants concentration on removal efficiency has also been investigated. Results of more than 100 experiments show that CGAs made from ionic surfactants (HTAB, SDBS) is more efficient for the removal of fine particles than that generated from non-ionic surfactant (Tween 20). High removal efficiency can be obtained at surfactant concentration approximately equal to the critical micelle concentration (CMC). Yields higher than 50% of magnesium hydroxide and 97% of polystyrene are reached at surfactant CMCs.Colloidal gas aphrons (CGAs), as defined by Sebba, are microbubbles (10–100 Save and Pangarkar Flotation of fine particles by using colloidal gas aphrons (CGAs) is an extremely complex physicochemical process. The number of variables which can affect flotation performance is very large and may be classified broadly into the physical and the chemical. Particles size and properties play a vital role of separating the fines from the aqueous phase, which ultimately leads to their removal. It is obvious that the size of the particles would be intimately linked to the removal process. Therefore, particle size is one of the important physical variables determining the flotation efficiency. Flotation is a process in which particles are removed selectively from suspensions in water by attachment to rising bubbles. As the bubbles rise through the liquid they contact particles either by collision or by Brownian diffusion, depending on particle size. There have been various studies that have shown that the kinetics of fine particle flotation is affected by particle size. Yoon and Lutterell This paper presents the effect of polystyrene particle size (24–300 CGA suspensions were generated by using anionic surfactant of sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate (SDBS), cationic surfactant of hexdecyltrimethyl ammonium bromide (HTAB) and non-ionic surfactant of Tween 20. SDBS is a salt of dodecylbenzene sulfonic acid with a mean diameter of 88 Fine particle suspensions of magnesium hydroxide and polystyrene were made with constant concentration of 100 Different specimens of polystyrene and magnesium hydroxide particles were analyzed for size range and mean diameter using particle characterization system (Malvern Mastersizer). CGAs were generated using methods as references More than 100 experiments were performed in glass column of 100 In order to study the effect of surfactant concentration on removal efficiency of fine particles, suspensions of Mg(OH) Removal of suspended particles from an aqueous solution by CGA treatment can occur by two different mechanisms. One mechanism is by “bubble-entrained floc-floatation” in which relatively large particles are floated up by the buoyant action of a myriad of small bubbles. The principal associated with the use of CGAs suspensions in this mechanism was their small bubble size and its high stability. The structure of CGAs as proposed by Sebba In order to determine the optimum particle size at which high removal efficiency of particles from suspension can achieved, a series of experiments were conducted by using different kinds of surfactant with different concentrations. The results of these experiments presented in The results in Based on the results of this research on flotation of fine particles of magnesium hydroxide and polystyrene by using CGA generated from cationic, anionic and non-ionic surfactants, the following specific conclusions can be drown: Flotation of fine particles by using of colloidal gas aphrons is an extremely complex physicochemical process. Flotation of fine particles of magnesium hydroxide and polystyrene has no any charge relationship. Uncharged particles can be floated by CGAs, which had been made using surfactant of any charge or no charged surfactant. High removal efficiency can be obtained at surfactant concentration approximately equal to the CMC. Small bubbles will not be able to provide sufficient buoyancy to lift large solid particles. For particular separation problem, there will be an optimum particle and bubble size that will give high removal efficiency. This research was carried out under Grant No. 29836130 of the National Natural Science Foundation of China in the State Key Laboratory of Chemical Engineering of Tsinghua University, Beijing, PR China. The authors gratefully acknowledge these grants. The authors also wish to express their thanks to the Ministry of Education, the People's Republic of China, for providing a research studentship for E.H.A. Mansur.