The most effective method for stimulating unconventional reservoirs is using properly designed and successfully implemented hydraulic fracture treatments. The interaction between pre-existing natural fractures and the engineered propagating hydraulic fracture is a critical factor affecting the complex fracture network. However, many existing numerical simulators use simplified model to either ignore or not fully consider the significant impact of pre-existing fractures on hydraulic fracture propagation. Pursuing development of numerical models that can accurately characterize propagation of hydraulic fractures in naturally fractured formations is important to better understand their behavior and optimize their performance.
                  In this paper, an innovative and efficient modeling approach was developed and implemented which enabled integrated simulation of hydraulic fracture network propagation, interactions between hydraulic fractures and pre-existing natural fractures, fracture fluid leakoff and fluid flow in reservoir. This improves stability and convergence, and increases accuracy, and computational speed. Computing time of one stage treatment with a personal computer is now reduced to 2.2min from 12.5min than using single porosity model.
                  Parametric studies were then conducted to quantify the effect of horizontal differential stress, natural fracture spacing (the density of pre-existing fractures), matrix permeability and fracture fluid viscosity on the geometry of the hydraulic fracture network. Using the knowledge learned from the parametric studies, the fracture–reservoir contact area is investigated and the method to increase this factor is suggested. This new knowledge helps us understand and improve the stimulation of naturally fractured unconventional reservoirs.cross sectional area (ft formation volume factor (RB/STB) compressibility of water (psi extended distance (ft) fractions of fracture half-length (fraction) shear modulus of rock formation (psi) fracture gross height (ft) fracture height (ft) permeability in the x, coefficient of friction (frictional) relative permeability (md) fracture length (ft) fluid pressure in the fracture (psi) fluid injection rate or flowrate of each grid block (bbl/min) solution gas-oil ratio (SCF/STB) distance along the fracture (ft) water saturation (dimensionless) tensile strength of the rock (psi) flow velocity at the tip of fracture (L/T) fracture width (ft) Average fracture width (ft) volumetric conversion factor (dimensionless) transmissibility conversion factor (dimensionless) fluid viscosity (cp) Poisson’s ratio (dimensionless) fluid density (lbm/ft far-field effective stresses (psi) minimum horizontal principal stress (psi) maximum horizontal principal stress (psi) normal stress acting on the NF plane (psi) stress acting parallel to the NF (psi) porosity (dimensionless) gravity of phase (psi/ft) In recent years, development of shale gas reservoirs (organic-rich gas bearing shale formation) has become a more important means of accessing fossil energy resources. The key to that development is to stimulate these low-permeability reservoirs with successful and effective fracture treatments. In addition to field pilot studies, numerical modeling of the hydraulic fracture process is vital means of in improving understanding and improving effectiveness of fracture treatments in gas shales. Robust modeling of fracture propagation requires an integration of fracture fluid flow mechanics, particle transport, rock mechanics, petrophysics and fluid flow through porous media. Rock properties include 3 dimensional Young’s modulus, shear modulus and Poisson ratio, tensile strength, fracture toughness, 3 dimensional in situ stresses, etc. Fracture fluid properties of interest include rheological models, viscosity, density, leakoff behavior, proppant transporting capacity, etc. which may be pressure, temperature, and shear rate dependent. In reservoirs with natural fractures, the opening fractures control fluid flow paths such that the production mechanism in naturally fractured reservoirs is significantly different from that in conventional reservoirs. These natural fractures may close as the reservoir pressure drops, which also influences the growth and final geometry of hydraulic fractures that serve to enhance production ( Numerous authors have investigated fracture propagation behavior in naturally fractured reservoirs both experimentally ( Fracture fluid leakoff impacts the reservoir significantly such that fracture-to-matrix flow needs to be captured into the hydraulic fracturing model. Formation damage or the impact of fracture fluid leakoff may be classified as damage inside the fracture and damage inside the matrix ( The economic viability of many unconventional gas developments hinges on effective stimulation of extremely low-permeability rock. In most cases, economic production is possible only if a very complex, highly nonlinear fracture network can be crated that effectively connects a huge reservoir surface area to the well bore ( Hydraulic fracturing simulators, especially for naturally fractured reservoirs, usually contain large complexity so that the solution method is not often computationally time efficient. Large heterogeneity of the properties in a solution domain generates stability and convergence problems such that required simulation time increases dramatically. Warren and Root proposed a methodology for capturing flow in such heterogeneous systems in a time efficient way; the proposed method was referred to as Dual-Porosity Modeling ( The goal of this paper is to develop a model that is capable of simulating fracture propagation and reservoir property changes simultaneously in unconventional naturally fractured reservoirs. This model will then be exercised to conduct a series of parametric studies on the final hydraulic fracture geometry to investigate the sensitivity of key fracture network characteristics to those parameters. This methodology is intended to help researchers and engineers develop similar models to optimize the engineering processes and hydraulic fracture treatment in field. A new coupled hydraulic fracture model is presented that simulates propagation of complex fractures in a formation with pre-existing natural fracture. The fully coupled model of fluid flow in the fracture network and the elastic deformation of the fractures are brought together with another fully coupled model of fluid flow in the fracture and matrix through stationary and dynamic (moving) fracture/matrix grid system. In this way, the model takes into consideration the mutual influence between dynamic fracture propagation and the fluid flow across the entire domain (fracture and matrix). A numerical method has been used to solve both sets of governing equations (reservoir fluid flow and fracture propagation equations). Using an iterative procedure, pressure changes inside the matrix and fracture, change of principal stresses and fracture propagation boundaries (fracture length and width) are calculated in each time step during and after the fracture treatment. The interactions between hydraulic and natural fractures are also integrated into the model. In this section, we detail the methodology to build this coupled, 2-diemnsional numerical model for simulating dynamic hydraulic fracture propagation, its interaction with existing natural fracture, and fracture fluid leakoff in unconventional reservoirs. The modeling starts with the construction of a grid system. In order to include all of the relevant physics, such as natural fracture effect on the fracture propagation, fluid leakoff, and reservoir fluid flow an advanced gridding system is employed. A moving coordinate system is developed to discretize the fracture domain. In the fracture domain, stationary coordinate and moving coordinate are both employed to capture the interaction between natural fracture and hydraulic fracture and dynamic fracture propagation. When fracture propagates, moving coordinates will move dynamically toward the neighboring stationary coordinate. Reaching that neighboring stationary coordinate triggers examination of interaction criteria and the moving coordinate at that stationary coordinate will be activated to move toward the direction prescribed according to the interaction criteria. Using this dual-porosity and moving coordinate approach, simulation time can be reduced dramatically compare to the single porosity approaches proposed by The fluid flow model is describes 2-dimensional flow of a single slightly compressible or compressible fluid. The equation for flow inside the fracture branch can be expressed using Newtonian fluid model ( Darcy’s law for single-phase matrix-to-matrix flow may be substituted into the mass-conservation equation (Eq. Fracture fluid leakoff is integrated as modifying the boundary of the reservoir block which is associated with the fracture. The source term This leakoff model generally follows the theory of pressure-dependent leakoff using boundary condition approach of the dual-continuum concept ( Fracture-width theories are based on the assumption that the fracture surface deforms in a linear elastic manner. This seems justified because of the usually large in situ prestress, on which only small additional stress systems are superimposed (with the exception of the fracture tip area). For plan-strain conditions, England and Green derived an equation for the width of a line crack between Mechanical interaction between the hydraulic fracture (HF) and the natural fracture (NF) is incorporated using Renshaw and Pollard’s method (1998). The criterion is given as An explicit method is used to propagate the fracture tips. The algorithm first finds all the fracture tips and initiated tips that satisfy the criterion describes in Eq. The tip with the highest velocity is extended by a prescribed distance At any given timestep, the created hydraulic fracture network is represented by connected fracture elements and coordinates. New elements and coordinates are activated (joins fracture) as described in the discretization section. Multiple element and coordinates can be activated in a single timestep as multiple tips are propagating and initiated. Each step of the simulation starts with extending the tips of the fracture branches. At the fracture tip, the following boundary conditions are satisfied: Using the fracture pressure and the timestep calculated from the incremental total fracture volume as an initial guess, coupled dual continuum model using boundary condition approach, combination of Eqs. To check the validity of this model, it is compared with the PKN analytical solution. Using the same input values: injection rate We have developed and validated fully coupled model of complex hydraulic fracture propagation that can generate fracture network in a naturally fractured shale gas reservoir. Therefore, our coupled model will be used to investigate the impact of pertinent factors on ultimate fracture geometry, such as horizontal differential stress, natural fracture spacing, fracture fluid viscosity and matrix permeability. Numerical experiments and analysis are documented as follows. In Section ‘Effect of horizontal differential stress (σH,max In Section ‘Effect of natural fracture spacing’, we conducted a study that quantifies the impact of natural fracture spacing on the fracture network. The density of the natural fracture were changed through spacing the pre-existing natural fractures by 1 In Section ‘Effect of fracture fluid viscosity’, the effect of fracture fluid viscosity is evaluated by performing several simulations using different viscosities that are widely used during slickwater fracturing. In Section ‘Effect of matrix permeability’, the effect of matrix permeability is evaluated by performing several simulations using different matrix permeability. In Section ‘Fracture–reservoir contact area’, the results from above are analyzed in terms of the fracture–reservoir contact area ( All parametric studies are performed using the input values listed in The effect of stress anisotropy is investigated in this study. Input parameters are shown in  If we take a closer look of The pressure profile in the reservoir corresponding to the fracture fluid leakoff is illustrated in  The effect of natural fracture spacing is investigated in this section. Initial input parameters shown in  In a dense system, a fracture tip may not extend faster because the energy is released in higher rate to the connected fractures. In other word, in a unit length of a fracture branch, denser system has more branched fractures that take away the energy to extend. This can be observed in The viscosity of the fluid contributes to the fluid pressure calculation such that different viscosity results distinct final fracture network. The result of final fracture geometries is depicted in The fracture efficiency is defined as the ratio of created fracture volume and injected fluid volume and it indicates that Case 3.1 has the lowest efficiency at the end of the treatment. All cases started out with same efficiency but Case 3.1 is losing fracture fluid to the matrix much faster ended with the lowest fracture efficiency. Matrix permeability is a critical factor that contributes to the fracture fluid leakoff further to the fracture geometry as described in previous section. This effect is carried by evaluating four different matrix permeabilities (10  From Fracture–reservoir contact area is one useful indicator of the effectiveness of a fracture treatment. It is the area through which hydrocarbon resource is extracted through, so it is important to have large contact area to recover more resource in common hydraulic fracture treatments.  In The comparison between If fluid viscosity is increased to 50 The similar comparison is made for Case 4.4 as shown in The injection rate of the fracture fluid also significantly contributes to the change of fracture–reservoir contact area. Case 4.4 is evaluated with different injection rate (pumping rate) of 50 From the investigation, we can conclude that, in order to maximize the fracture–reservoir contact area, it is better to use less viscous fracture fluid with smaller pumping rate for the treatment. The final fracture–reservoir area at the end of the treatment is illustrated in Our new hydraulic fracture propagation model is fully coupled geomechanical deformation and fracture flow in a dual porosity system. Using the boundary condition approach, dual porosity model simulates facture-to-matrix flow (leakoff), with fracture flow model linking the two coupled models. This model is capable of simulating propagation of hydraulic fractures into a formation with pre-existing natural fracture. Dynamic change of reservoir pressure due to the fracture flow leakoff is also captured in the model. In addition, separation of domain into fracture and matrix domain and use of moving coordinate approach reduces simulation time compare to single porosity approach such that complex fracture network can be simulated with time efficiency. The parametric study using the model shows that horizontal differential stress, natural fracture spacing, fracture fluid viscosity and matrix permeability play critical roles in creating fracture network complexity. Key findings are: Decreasing horizontal differential stress can change the induced-fracture network from sharp elliptical shape to radial shape. Increased natural fracture spacing results in larger hydraulic fracture network but the intensity and complexity of the network decreases dramatically such that the quality of fracture network within SRV may be weakened. Higher viscosity yield dense fracture network with relatively shorter and thicker fracture branches. Increase of matrix permeability results in an exponential decrease of fracture efficiency and a small fracture network in both Fracture–reservoir contact area may be enlarged by use of less viscous fracture fluid with small pumping rate such that the size of final fracture network increases. This project was funded by the Department of Energy, National Energy Technology Laboratory, an agency of the United States Government, through a support contract with URS Energy & Construction, Inc. Neither the United States Government nor any agency thereof, nor any of their employees, nor URS Energy & Construction, Inc., nor any of their employees, makes any warranty, expressed or implied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or represents that its use would not infringe privately owned rights. Reference herein to any specific commercial product, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise, does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United States Government or any agency thereof. The views and opinions of authors expressed herein do not necessarily state or reflect those of the United States Government or any agency thereof.  The authors acknowledge the support provided by all editors and reviewers for this paper. As part of the National Energy Technology Laboratory’s Regional University Alliance (NETL-RUA), a collaborative initiative of the NETL, this technical effort was performed under the RES contract DE-FE0004000.