Respirometry was used to reveal the mechanisms involved in aerobic biological sulfide oxidation and to characterize the kinetics and stoichiometry of a microbial culture obtained from a desulfurizing biotrickling filter. Physical–chemical processes such as stripping and chemical oxidation of hydrogen sulfide were characterized since they contributed significantly to the conversions observed in respirometric tests. Mass transfer coefficient for hydrogen sulfide and the kinetic parameters for chemical oxidation of sulfide with oxygen were estimated. The stoichiometry of the process was determined and the different steps in the sulfide oxidation process were identified. The conversion scheme proposed includes intermediate production of elemental sulfur and thiosulfate and the subsequent oxidation of both compounds to sulfate. A kinetic model describing each of the reactions observed during sulfide oxidation was calibrated and validated. The product selectivity was found to be independent of the dissolved oxygen to hydrogen sulfide concentration ratio in the medium at sulfide concentrations ranging from 3 to 30 mg S L−1. Sulfide was preferentially consumed (SOURmax = 49.2 mg DO g−1 VSS min−1) and oxidized to elemental sulfur at dissolved oxygen concentrations above 0.8 mg DO L−1. Substrate inhibition of sulfide oxidation was observed (
                        
                           
                              K
                              
                                 i,
                                 
                                    S
                                    
                                       2
                                       −
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                      = 42.4 mg S L−1). Intracellular sulfur accumulation also affected negatively the sulfide oxidation rate. The maximum fraction of elemental sulfur accumulated inside cells was estimated (25.6% w/w) and a shrinking particle equation was included in the kinetic model to describe elemental sulfur oxidation. The microbial diversity obtained through pyrosequencing analysis revealed that Thiothrix sp. was the main species present in the culture (>95%).chemical reaction order (dimensionless) chemical reaction order (dimensionless) chemical reaction order (dimensionless) dissolved oxygen concentration (mg O equilibrium oxygen concentration (mg O maximum ratio of intracellular sulfur stored to biomass (mg S mg ratio of intracellular sulfur stored to biomass (mg S mg sulfide inhibition constant (mg S L mass transfer coefficient for oxygen (min affinity constant for oxygen (mg O affinity constant for sulfide (mg S L shrinking kinetic constant for elemental sulfur oxidation (mg substrate switch constant (mg S L affinity constant for thiosulfate (mg S L rate constant for thiosulfate production under abiotic conditions kinetic constant for thiosulfate production under biotic conditions maximum specific growth rate (h energetic correction factor to describe growth on thiosulfate endogenous oxygen uptake rate (mg O exogenous oxygen uptake rate (mg O Polyhydroxy-butyrate biological sulfide oxidation rate (mg S L biological sulfur oxidation rate (mg S L biological thiosulfate oxidation rate ( thiosulfate production rate under abiotic conditions ( thiosulfate production rate under biotic conditions ( sulfide concentration (mg S L sulfate concentration (mg S L sulfate concentration in the outlet flow of the CSTR (mg S L sulfate concentration in the inlet flow of the CSTR (mg S L model parameter to be estimated through minimization Total dissolved sulfide concentration (mg S thiosulfate concentration (mg S L biomass concentration in the outlet flow of the CSTR (mg VSS L biomass concentration in the inlet flow of the CSTR (mg VSS L weighting coefficient biomass concentration (mg VSS L biomass growth yield using sulfide as substrate (mg VSS mg biomass growth yield using elemental sulfur as substrate (mg VSS mg biomass growth yield using thiosulfate as substrate (mg VSS mg Desulfurization of biogas under aerobic conditions using biotrickling filters (BTFs) has been demonstrated as an efficient and environmentally friendly process to upgrade biogas ( In order to gain insight in the factors that determine which products are formed during sulfide oxidation enabling process optimization, a rigorous mathematical model describing desulfurization in a BTF is needed. The model can be applied to optimize the operational conditions of a desulfurizing BTF by avoiding elemental sulfur accumulation ( Kinetic and stoichiometric characterization of SOB have been successfully conducted by Flowing gas-Static liquid respirometry (LFS), which is based on monitoring the dissolved oxygen (DO) concentration when a pulse of substrate is added to the respirometric vessel while air is continuously supplied to the liquid phase. At the end of the test, the initial dissolved oxygen concentration is recovered, once the substrate is completely depleted. The successful application of the LFS method is largely due to the high sensitivity associated with DO monitoring ( Many authors have characterized suspended SOB but there is no clear agreement about the processes occurring or the kinetic equation to describe sulfide oxidation and elemental sulfur production and consumption rates. Most authors consider simple Monod or Haldane equations to describe limitation or substrate inhibition by sulfide, respectively ( A sample of biomass was extracted from a lab-scale aerobic desulfurizing BTF ( Mineral medium and dissolved sodium sulfide were fed separately to avoid reactions between sulfide and metallic ions in the mineral medium (trace elements). A flow of 7.9 mL h The liquid phase of the CSTR was daily sampled to analyze sulfate, thiosulfate, sulfide and volatile suspended solids (VSS). Moreover, biomass samples from the inoculum as well as at the steady-state were taken from the reactor to verify microbial diversity preservation by pyrosequencing analysis. The Y H The stripping of sulfide was characterized using nitrogen gas to avoid any chemical oxidation of sulfide that could contribute to sulfide removal from the liquid phase. The conditions and the mineral medium set to perform the abiotic tests were those used in biotic tests. A buffered mineral medium (50 mM P-Phosphate at pH = 7) with NH Chemical sulfide oxidation tests were performed by using an air flow of 50 mL min LFS respirometry was used in order to study the mechanisms of sulfide oxidation under aerobic conditions and to identify the kinetic parameters. Two biotic tests ( Sulfate and thiosulfate concentrations were analyzed by ion chromatography with conductivity detection using a Dionex ICS-2000 equipment. Biomass concentration was determined according to Standard Methods ( A kinetic model was developed based on the data obtained in respirometric tests and using mathematical terms typically used in activated sludge models as Monod-type or competitive inhibition-type equations ( The volumetric rate of sulfide oxidation to elemental sulfur and thiosulfate was described through Eq. Thiosulfate is chemically produced as an intermediate compound during sulfide oxidation under abiotic conditions (r Elemental sulfur is the most important intermediate during biological sulfide oxidation. In Eq. DO was modeled taking into account sulfide, thiosulfate and elemental sulfur biodegradation and the corresponding stoichiometric coefficients from the biological reactions. Eq. Kinetic parameters were estimated by fitting the experimental data to model predictions. The fitting method was based on seeking the minimum value of the objective function (Eq. All calculations were implemented in MATLAB 7.7 (Mathworks, Natik, MA) using the function The confidence intervals of the estimated parameters were assessed through the Fisher Information Matrix (FIM) method. This method is a proven tool that accurately provides confidence intervals for kinetic parameters and allows evaluating the sensitivities of parameters and the quality of estimations ( The operational performance of the CSTR in which the SOB culture was cultivated is shown in Considering the biomass growth yield calculated, the stoichiometry of the overall oxidation reaction was obtained (Eq. In Mass transfer coefficient (k Chemical oxidation of sulfide has been studied by many authors ( From the kinetic values estimated it was concluded that, given the biological sulfide oxidation rates typically found, the contribution of chemical sulfide oxidation could be neglected. Respirometric profiles obtained from experimental tests were previously studied in order to elucidate which the mechanisms of the process were. In this way, from a single test (Test C-4, Since the abiotic test showed that a much lower amount of thiosulfate was chemically produced compared to that produced in test C-4 ( The stoichiometry of the process was identified using the profile shown in A biomass growth yield of 0.016 mol VSS mol A higher biomass growth yield was obtained from elemental sulfur oxidation to sulfate (0.057 mol VSS mol The kinetic model was calibrated using tests C-1 to C-4 which, as mentioned in Section Results demonstrate that sulfate data from off-line monitoring are not as sensitive as DO data for proper calibration of kinetic models. Regarding to the variation of kinetic parameters between tests, As presented in The SOB obtained from the BTF presented high affinity for oxygen, sulfide and thiosulfate according to K Regarding the substrate preference, no correlation between the O As can be observed in The kinetic model was validated in respirometric test V-1. In As can be observed, the DO profile was not perfectly described despite sulfate, thiosulfate and OUR profiles were properly fitted with the calibrated model. Overall, results provided a satisfactory description of the system, indicating that the model can be included in a general model describing aerobic desulfurization in a BTF. However, the kinetic constant related to elemental sulfur oxidation requires to be calibrated in each particular case probably because the elemental sulfur that is being formed inside the cells has different speciation, which affects directly the oxidation rate. Further investigation to find a mathematical equation describing better this biodegradation process is warranted. Respirometry was demonstrated to be a powerful tool for assessing the mechanistic and kinetic properties of biological sulfide oxidation. Here we used respirometry to characterize SOB obtained from a desulfurizing BTF. The proposed mechanisms describing aerobic sulfide oxidation explained the intermediate production and consumption of thiosulfate and elemental sulfur. The kinetic model proposed was properly calibrated with experimental data. Several kinetic parameters were estimated, together with their confidence intervals, from the calibration. These parameters were further used to validate the model with an additional respirometric test under different experimental conditions. Regarding the characterization of elemental sulfur oxidation, it was concluded that more research is required since the intracellular particles size and the variations in elemental sulfur speciation probably affected the kinetics corresponding to its oxidation. This research provides knowledge relevant for the application of sulfide oxidation processes, which is essential to improve the operation of aerobic desulfurizing BTFs from which the biomass is extracted. In addition, the results obtained in this work also provide fundamental background to aerobic sulfide oxidation processes occurring in the treatment of wastewaters containing sulfide as, for example, these generated from anaerobic treatment of sulfate-containing wastewaters. The The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at