Explant cultures of adult human trabecular bone fragments give rise to osteoblastic cells, that are known to express osteoblast-related genes and mineralize extracellular matrix. These osteoblastic cells have also been shown to undergo adipogenesis in vitro and chondrogenesis in vivo. Here we report the in vitro developmental potential of adult human osteoblastic cells (hOB) derived from explant cultures of collagenase-pretreated trabecular bone fragments. In addition to osteogenic and adipogenic differentiation, these cells are capable of chondrogenic differentiation in vitro in a manner similar to adult human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal progenitor cells. High-density pellet cultures of hOB maintained in chemically defined serum-free medium, supplemented with transforming growth factor-β1, were composed of morphologically distinct, chondrocyte-like cells expressing mRNA transcripts of collagen types II, IX and X, and aggrecan. The cells within the high-density pellet cultures were surrounded by a sulfated proteoglycan-rich extracellular matrix that immunostained for collagen type II and proteoglycan link protein. Osteogenic differentiation of hOB was verified by an increased number of alkaline phosphatase-positive cells, that expressed osteoblast-related transcripts such as alkaline phosphatase, collagen type I, osteopontin and osteocalcin, and formed mineralized matrix in monolayer cultures treated with ascorbate, β-glycerophosphate, and bone morphogenetic protein-2. Adipogenic differentiation of hOB was determined by the appearance of intracellular lipid droplets, and expression of adipocyte-specific genes, such as lipoprotein lipase and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ2, in monolayer cultures treated with dexamethasone, indomethacin, insulin and 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine. Taken together, these results show that cells derived from collagenase-treated adult human trabecular bone fragments have the potential to differentiate into multiple mesenchymal lineages in vitro, indicating their developmental plasticity and suggesting their mesenchymal progenitor nature.Cultures of collagenase-treated adult human trabecular bone fragments are considered to be a reliable source of adult human osteoblastic cells (hOB) The emerging discipline of tissue engineering and a need for a source of adult cells, which under controlled conditions can develop into distinct phenotypes, provided new impetus for evaluating the developmental potential of various adult cell types. Given that the cells derived from trabecular bone have been shown to form new bone and cartilage in vivo In this study we have investigated the in vitro potential of adult trabecular bone-derived hOB to differentiate into chondrogenic as well as osteogenic and adipogenic lineages. For the sake of comparison, we have employed culture methods similar to those previously described for adult human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal progenitor cells All chemicals were purchased from Sigma Chemicals (St. Louis, MO, US) unless otherwise stated. Trabecular bone fragments were obtained from the femoral head of patients (two females aged 42 and 58 years, and two males aged 47 and 54 years) undergoing total hip arthroplasty, with approval by the Institutional Review Board. None of the patients had a history of osteoporosis or avascular necrosis. Explant cultures were prepared based on a protocol first described by Robey and Termine For chondrogenic differentiation, cells were plated as high-density pellet cultures in a chemically defined, serum-free DMEM (BioWhittaker, Walkersville, MD, US) as described previously For osteogenic and adipogenic differentiation, cells at the density of 1.5×10 Chondrogenic high-density pellet cultures were rinsed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS), fixed in 2% paraformaldehyde, dehydrated in ethanol, infiltrated with isoamyl alcohol and embedded in paraffin. Sections of 8 μm thickness were obtained through the center of each pellet and mounted on microscope slides. The sections were then stained with haematoxylin-eosin, Alcian blue or picro-Sirius red as described previously Total cellular RNA was extracted with Trizol reagent (Gibco BRL, Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY, US). For efficient RNA extraction from high-density pellet cultures, they were first briefly homogenized in Trizol reagent. The isolated RNA samples were converted to cDNA using random hexamers and Superscript II RNase H-Reverse Transcriptase (SuperScript First-Strand Synthesis System, Gibco BRL, Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY, US), and then amplified by PCR using AmpliTaq DNA Polymerase (Perkin Elmer, Norwalk, CT, US) and gene-specific primer sets listed in After 3–4 h of collagenase treatment, the surface of the bone fragments appeared devoid of cellular material and soft tissue components as observed by light microscopy ( All high-density pellet cultures, formed by centrifugation, detached spontaneously from the bottom of polypropylene conical tubes within 24 h and were further cultured in suspension in a chemically defined, serum-free medium with or without TGF-β1. Over the 3 week culture period, pellet cultures treated with TGF-β1 increased in size, while omission of TGF-β1 prevented any size increase of the pellets (compare size in Confluent monolayer cultures treated for 10 days with the osteogenic supplements, ascorbate, β-glycerophosphate and BMP-2, showed a marked increase of ALP-positive cells ( Pre-confluent monolayer cultures of cells migrating from trabecular bone fragments served as a control population for gene expression analysis. These primary cells cultured without differentiation-stimulating agents showed the expression of In this study, we have investigated the developmental potential of cells derived from adult human femoral trabecular bone, namely their ability to differentiate in vitro into cell types representative of chondrogenic, osteogenic and adipogenic lineages. Our results showed that cells derived from collagenase-treated trabecular bone fragments differentiated in vitro into these three examined mesenchymal lineages when cultured in defined conditions similar to those previously described for adult human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hMSC) A number of cell culture models are currently in use for the study of adult human primary osteoblasts, including osteoblast precursor cells originating from bone marrow Interestingly, the predominant cell type in our explant cultures had an elongated, fibroblast-like morphology and, either in initial or post-confluent cultures, did not spontaneously acquire a more polygonal morphology, considered by some investigators to reflect a more “mature” osteoblast-like phenotype To assess the in vitro developmental potential of hOB, we used a similar approach to that previously described for adult hMSC In our study, we have shown that chondrogenic differentiation of hOB can be achieved in high-density pellet cultures in a serum-free, chemically defined medium containing TGF-β1. The size of TGF-β1 treated pellets increased over the 3 week culture period and, as previously shown for adult hMSC In monolayer culture, osteoblastic differentiation involves a programmed developmental sequence, which is characterized by an early proliferative stage, followed by extracellular matrix development and maturation, and matrix mineralization. During this process, ALP expression and activity progressively increase, then decrease when mineralization progresses. The cells also upregulate expression of several osteoblast-related genes such as Furthermore, our results also showed that treatment of hOB monolayer cultures for 2 weeks with the adipogenic supplements, dexamethasone, IBMX, insulin and indomethacin, resulted in their conversion to adipocytes, as evidenced by the appearance of cells containing intracellular lipid droplets and gene expression of In our follow-up studies, immortalized primary hOB cells derived from collagenase-pretreated adult human trabecular bone fragments were used to derive two representative clonal subpopulations, staining weakly and strongly for ALP. Analysis of their differentiation potential showed that both clonal cell lines shared osteoblastic characteristics, but differed in their osteochondral potential, although they were equally capable of adipogenic differentiation The authors wish to thank Genetics Institute for kindly providing recombinant human BMP-2. This study was supported in part by NIH Grants AR 39740, AR 44501, AR 45181, CA 71602, DE 11327 and DE 12864. U.N. was supported by a postdoctoral fellowship from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG), Germany, Grant No. 37111. R.T. is supported by a research fellowship from the NIH (R25 CA 69277). This work was presented and received the New Investigator Recognition Award at the 47th Annual Meeting of the Orthopaedic Research Society, February 2001.