This study elucidates the effect of fluctuating soil moisture on the co-metabolic degradation of atrazine (6-chloro-N2-ethyl-N4-isopropyl-1,3,5-triazine-2,4-diamine) in soil. Degradation experiments with 14C-ring-labelled atrazine were carried out at (i) constant (CH) and (ii) fluctuating soil humidity (FH). Temperature was kept constant in all experiments. Experiments under constant soil moisture conditions were conducted at a water potential of −15kPa and the sets which were run under fluctuating soil moisture conditions were subjected to eight drying–rewetting cycles where they were dried to a water potential of around −200kPa and rewetted to −15kPa. Mineralization was monitored continuously over a period of 56d. Every two weeks the pesticide residues in soil pore water (PW), the methanol-extractable pesticide residues, the non-extractable residues (NER), and the total cell counts were determined. In the soil with FH conditions, mineralization of atrazine as well as the formation of the intermediate product deisopropyl-2-hydroxyatrazine was increased compared to the soil with constant humidity. In general, we found a significant correlation between the formation of this metabolite and atrazine mineralization. The cell counts were not different in the two experimental variants. These results indicate that the microbial activity was not a limiting factor but the mineralization of atrazine was essentially controlled by the bioavailability of the parent compound and the degradation product deisopropyl-2-hydroxyatrazine.Pesticides are favourably degraded by microorganisms in soil ( In laboratory experiments, a soil water potential of −15 In contrast to the upper cited literature, the following findings would suggest a potentially higher bioavailability and degradation of pesticides under FH conditions. The aim of the present study was to further elucidate the impact of FH conditions on pesticide bioavailability, pesticide degradation and pesticide mineralization in an agricultural soil. The pesticide selected for this study was atrazine (6-chloro-N The soil material was a humic cambisol from an agricultural field (Kelheim; latitude 48.917°, longitude 11.867°, altitude 348  Atrazine degradation experiments were carried out in an aerated closed laboratory system as described previously ( For CH conditions the incubation vessels were placed in the dark at 20 For experiments with FH conditions, the incubation vessels were placed in the dark at 20 From the collected 0.1 After every two rewetting cycles, exactly 14  After centrifugation the same soil aliquots were extracted with methanol in an accelerated solvent extractor (ASE 200, Dionex, Idstein, Germany) at 90 The concentrated methanolic soil extracts were dissolved in 250 For residue analysis 20 After ASE, soil material was dried and homogenized intensively. Three aliquots of each soil sample were filled into combustion cups and mixed with 3–4 drops of saturated aqueous sugar solution to guarantee a complete oxidation of the For extraction of bacterial cells from soil, the following solution was used: 0.1 For statistical data analyses, the program package SAS 9.1 was used to set up regression models for trend analyses with procedure REG. Time varying treatment effects were modelled as main effects, eventually adjusted for interaction of independent treatment variables with time (days). For ordinary or inverse-variance weighted mean value comparisons, procedure TTEST was used. (SAS Institute Inc: SAS/STAT User’s Guide, Version 9.1. Cary NC: SAS Institute Inc.; 2003). In the CH experimental set up, the soil water potential was kept constant at −15 The cumulative mineralization at the end of the investigation period of 56 d was relatively low for both, CH and FH ( For a further explanation of the mineralization behaviour of atrazine, every two weeks four replicates were sampled and analyzed for atrazine and its transformation products (see Section 2.3.3). At each sampling time, mass balances were established. The recoveries were quite good and ranged between 96.1% and 96.6% of the applied To elucidate the degradation pathway and to identify the factors that govern the mineralization of atrazine in soil humic cambisol, the amounts of extractable atrazine, atrazine metabolites, NER, and the mineralized atrazine were compared at the four sampling points (days 14, 28, 42 and 56). Several significant correlations could be identified. As can be seen from Since the NER formation was apparently retarded in variant FH, more atrazine was potentially available for other processes, like mineralization. In fact, the FH variant showed higher mineralization than the control: in Atrazine is stepwise degraded until it is finally mineralized. In methanol extracts and in PWs we found the degradation products DIA, DEA, and OH-DIA ( Depending on the extraction procedure we found significant correlations (i) for total atrazine and total DIA in CH ( N-dealkylation of s-triazines is an important degradation pathway in many microorganisms, and The intermediate product DIA was compared with the amount of mineralized atrazine. For each 14-d sampling interval, the individual 14-d-mineralization-rates were calculated for both variants; for this purpose the measured Most of the above calculated correlations were conducted with total residues of atrazine and DIA in methanol extract plus PW: these total residues represent the potentially available atrazine and DIA residues. Since we found a significant correlation between DIA and pesticide mineralization, and since microbial degradation occurs preferably in the water phase, we analyzed the relationship between the metabolites in PW and mineralized atrazine. Here we found a significant correlation ( From the detected correlations we suggest that the pathway ATRAZINE – DIA – OH-DIA is an important route in the breakdown of atrazine in soil humic cambisol. Although we could not elucidate the complete pathway of atrazine degradation in this study, we could identify the main intermediate products, which play an important role in the mineralization of atrazine in this soil. There were no significant differences in the cell counts for the constant and fluctuating water regimes ( In the soil with FH conditions, higher residues of atrazine were detected, indicating a higher bioavailability of atrazine under such conditions. At the sampling day 14 (T14) a 10–20-fold higher atrazine concentration was detected in the PW fraction as compared with the later sampling times ( In literature it is reported that drying–rewetting cycles lead to higher sorption, lower bioavailability, and lower biodegradation of organic chemicals caused by soil structure modifications, which favours pesticide adsorption and/or impedes desorption ( In our study soil water potential and thus soil water content was varied during the drying–rewetting processes ( The increased co-metabolic mineralization of atrazine in soil humic cambisol under FH conditions was due to a higher bioavailability of atrazine and its metabolites under these conditions. The method of We thank the Helmholtz Zentrum München for providing the facilities and consumables for this study. We are also grateful to DAAD for the scholarship granted to Anastasiah Ngigi that enabled her to be part of the team in this study.