Abstract
                  The effectiveness of cement additives with and without chloride on the fluidity and the strength development of Portland cement was compared by using statistical full factorial design. The experimental results show that the cement additive containing CaCl2 and Ca(NO3)2 can enhance early strength of cement significantly. However, Ca(NO3)2 is less effective than CaCl2 even if it is combined with other organic chemicals such as alkanolamine and saccharide. No significant difference is found between CaCl2 and Ca(NO3)2 influencing the fluidity and 28 d strength of cement. The fluidity is determined by saccharide and its interaction with triisopropanolamine. The 28 d strength enhancement is determined by triisopropanolamine. The fluidity as well as the mechanical performance of treated cement can be significantly improved by combining Ca(NO3)2 with TIPA and saccharide.Cement additive, which is evolved from grinding aids, is a special chemical agent that is used to intergrind with clinker to increase the grinding efficiency of ball mill and to improve the performance of finished cement [ The full factorial design was used in this study to present a laboratorial evaluation on the effectiveness of cement additives containing alkanolamines, saccharide and chloride or non-chloride accelerators on the fluidity and strength development of Portland cement. The functions of each component of additives were well discussed by Pareto chart, contour plot and statistical two-way ANOVA. A 52.5R cement was used and analyzed by X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (XRF). The mineral composition of cement was determined by Bogue calculation. Mineral phases of the cement were also identified by X-ray diffraction (XRD) with a Thermo ARL X'TRA in Bragg Brentano geometry (Cu radiation, λ=0.154 06 nm) in the range of 10°<2θ<70°, with step interval of 0.02° (2θ) and fixed scanning rate of 0.5 (°)/min. The mineral and chemical compositions of cement are listed in In Since the effective Cl The influences of accelerators (CaCl2 and Ca(NO3)2), alkanolamines (TEA and TIPA), and saccharide on performance of the treated cement were evaluated by fluidity and mechanical tests. The cement mortar was prepared according to GB/T 17671. Fluidity test was conducted according to the China National Standard of GB/T 2419—2005. After the fluidity test, all the mortars from both mixing bowl and jolting table were cast into the mould on the vibrating table for preparing the specimen of strength test. To avoid the impact of moisture fluctuation from curing chamber, the surface of cement mortar was covered by a piece of waterproof membrane immediately after it was consolidated. The mould should be kept in the moist air chamber with curing temperature of (20±1) °C and with relative humidity of (95±2)%. The membrane should not be removed during the first 24 h initial curing. Demoulding should be done after initial curing to obtain the hardened specimens. The specimens were submerged vertically in water at (20±1) °C until compulsory ages for strength test (3 d and 28 d). In addition, 1 d compressive strength of the specimens was also tested since it is an important criterion to evaluate the early performance of the treated cement. The full factorial design is used for experimental studies, in which two or more factors are involved, and all possible combinations of two-levels across all factors will be taken into account for each experimental unit. All the effects of factors on the response variables, as well as the effects of possible interactions between factors on the response variables are studied [ The accelerator was set as categorical factor since it contained CaCl2 and Ca(NO3)2 and their dosages were fixed at 1×10 The influences of accelerators, TEA, TIPA and saccharide were studied by full factorial design. The chemical combinations are presented in Items with p-value less than 0.10 in By judging whether the factor bars extend the reference line (determined by alpha level) or not, the significant chemical favoring the fluidity of fresh mix is saccharide as well as its interaction with TIPA, while the accelerator effect was insignificant, as shown in  The results in  The effectiveness of the cement additives containing chloride and non-chloride accelerator on the performance modification of Portland cement was studied and compared by means of statistics. Based on the full factorial design, neither CaCl2 nor Ca(NO3)2 impact the rheological property of the treated cement. The fluidity of the cement mortar is mainly improved by saccharide and its interaction with TIPA. In the absence of saccharide, TIPA is not effective even it is at the maximum dosage. However, TIPA can strengthen the effect of saccharide at high level addition ( In general, alkanolamines are used in comminution process for the purpose of reducing agglomeration of cement particles. Actually, they also influence the hydration of treated cement. The hydration of cement in the presence of alkanolamines was studied by many researchers. However, some of the findings were different or even contradictory. AGGOUN et al [ On the other hand, Ca(NO  The full factorial design indicating the strength enhancement on 1 day and 3 days is determined by the type of accelerators. Cement additives with CaCl2 and Ca(NO3)2 can enhance the early strength of cement significantly (1 d and 3 d), and CaCl2 is more effective. The type of accelerators is no longer important to the strength development of cement on 28 d. The 28 d strength improvement is governed by TIPA. A 2×10 The accelerator type does not influence the fluidity significantly. The fluidity of the cement is improved by the saccharide and its interaction with TIPA, which can be described as the fact that the addition of TIPA strengthens the effect of saccharide. The proper combination of Ca(NO