This study investigates the effect of using mechanical activation on the extraction of zinc from sphalerite in an alkaline solution containing lead carbonate. The combined mechanical activation and chemical leaching in a single operation (mechanochemical leaching) is found to be more effective in comparison with the separate mechanical activation and subsequent chemical leaching. A novel hydrometallurgical process for recovering Zn from sphalerite in alkaline solution via chemical conversion with PbCO3 was developed in this work. In the stirred ball mill, the S originally present in sphalerite can be converted into PbS, while the Zn can be converted into Na2Zn(OH)4 in the alkaline solution in presence of PbCO3. And then, the Pb in PbS deposited in the leach residues can be converted into PbCO3 again in the Na2CO3 solution. It was found that over 86% of Zn can be extracted from sphalerite when the leaching process is operated in 6mol/L NaOH solution at 90°C with PbCO3 as additive, and stainless steel ball of 5mm diameter as activation medium, the mass ratio of ball to raw materials of 30:1, Pb/ZnS of 0.9:1.Sphalerite is the principal zinc mineral that produces zinc from ores. The conventional method of extracting zinc from sphalerite is the roast–leach–electrowin process. The obstacle for this process is the generation and emission of SO The alkaline leaching–sulfide separation–electrowinning process to extract zinc from oxidized zinc ores or wastes is considered to be cost-effective, simple and easy to be operated and managed, for the impurities such as Fe, Cu, Cd, Co, Ni, etc can hardly be leached out in alkaline medium and its lower electricity consumption in electrowinning compared with acidic electrowinning ( Our previous research results showed that the zinc in fluorescent grade zinc sulfide can be extracted in NaOH solution with lead carbonate as additive, and the lead sulfide in the leach residues can be converted to lead carbonate by reacting with sodium carbonate solution using air as the oxidizing agent, and then the lead can be recycled in the whole process by dissolving the lead carbonate in NaOH solution ( The mechanical activation of minerals represents nowadays an important contribution to different fields of solid processing technology. It is a high energy ball milling process where the particles undergo repeated fracturing and cold welding during collisions either between balls or ball and inner wall of mill container ( The aim of this study is to investigate the effect of using mechanical activation on the extraction of zinc from sphalerite in alkaline solution containing lead carbonate. The investigation was carried out on a sphalerite sample from Gejiu City of China. The average composition of the sphalerite is given in The diffraction maximum of sphalerite is narrower than that of fluorescent grade zinc sulfide, which proved that sphalerite is more stable than fluorescent grade zinc sulfide. Two modes of leaching were studied, the separate mechanical activation and subsequent chemical leaching is applied in the first mode and compared with the combined mechanical activation and chemical leaching (mechanochemical leaching) in the second mode. Mechanical activation tests of sphalerite were carried out using three mills: vibratory, rolling mill and stirred ball mill under the following conditions: stainless steel balls or corundum balls of 2–6 Leaching experiments of sphalerite mechanically activated were carried out in a flask placed on a thermostatically controlled magnetic stirrer under the following conditions: lead carbonate as additive; phase ratios (v/w), 25:1; Pb/ZnS molar ratios 0.9:1; NaOH concentration, 6 Since vibratory and rolling mill are difficult to operate, mechanochemical leaching was performed in a stirred ball mill under the following experimental conditions: stainless steel balls or corundum balls of 5 Zinc and lead were determined in the extract after chemical or mechanochemical leaching. After sampling, the pulp was centrifuged and the clear liquid phase was diluted and subjected to analysis by ICP-AES. The leaching efficiencies of zinc were calculated according to the following equation: The solid phase was also analyzed by dissolution using standard methods and subsequent application of ICP-AES. The leaching test results of mechanically activated sphalerite by different mills are showed in Comparative studies have been performed with mechanochemical leaching and chemical leaching of non-activated samples ( The enhancement of leaching reaction due to mechanical activation is attributed to increased specific surface area, enhanced surface reactivity and the changes in crystalline structure during the mechanical activation of sulfide minerals ( During mechanical activation, the crystal structure of a mineral is usually disordered and generation of defects or other metastable forms can be registered. These effects are not stable and have different relaxation times ( XRD pattern of the leach residue was given in In the stirring milling processing, the energy is supplied by the turning of the stirrer. Therefore, different rotational speed supplied inequable energy, which significantly affected the reaction speed of the mechanochemical leaching. The effect of rotational speed on the zinc extraction was shown in The effect of grinding media (stainless steel balls and corundum balls) on the zinc extraction from sphalerite was shown in Mechanical activation has a positive influence on the alkaline leaching of the sphalerite. By comparison with the separate mechanical activation and subsequent chemical leaching, the combined mechanical activation and chemical leaching (mechanochemical leaching) is more effective. A new, cleaner hydrometallurgical route for recovering zinc from sphalerite ores has been proposed. The zinc in sphalerite can be extracted by mechanochemical leaching in NaOH solution with lead carbonate as additive, and the lead sulfide in the leach residues can be converted to lead carbonate by reacting with sodium carbonate solution using air as the oxidizing agent, and then the lead can be recycled in the whole process by dissolving the lead carbonate in NaOH solution. Over 86% of zinc can be extracted from the sphalerite. The authors gratefully acknowledged the financial support from the