Hexavalent chromium is a potent carcinogen, while phosphorus is an essential nutrient. The role of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) in the uptake of P is well known and was also reported, at low levels, for Cr. However, it is unclear whether the uptake of Cr can impact the short-term uptake dynamics of P since both elements have a similar chemical structure and may thus potentially compete with each other during the uptake process. This study investigated the impact of Cr(VI) on short-term P uptake by the AMF Rhizophagus irregularis MUCL 41833 in Medicago truncatula. Bi-compartmented Petri plates were used to spatially separate a root compartment (RC) from a hyphal compartment (HC) using a whole plant in vitro culture system. The HC was supplemented with Cr(VI). Chromium(VI) as well as total Cr and P were monitored during 16 h within the HC and their concentrations determined by the end of the experiment within roots and shoots. Our results indicated that the uptake and translocation of Cr from hyphae to roots was a fast process: roots in which the extraradical mycelium (ERM) was exposed to Cr(VI) accumulated more Cr than roots of which the ERM was not exposed to Cr(VI) or was dead. Our results further confirmed that dead ERM immobilized more Cr than alive ERM. Finally our results demonstrated that the short exposure to Cr(VI) was sufficient to stimulate P uptake by the ERM and that the stimulation process began within the first 4 h of exposure.Arsenic, Cadmium, Chromium, Copper, Lead and Zinc are amongst the most common potentially toxic elements (PTE's) accumulated in the surroundings of industrial sites ( Chromium is used in several industrial processes (e.g. leather tanning, alloy and stainless steel production, pulp and paper production, wood preservation) ( Chromium(VI) uptake and accumulation by plants and microorganisms has not been completely elucidated. In some plants (e.g. Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) are soil fungi that develop symbiotic associations with most terrestrial plants ( Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi have been found in Cr(VI) polluted soils ( The experiment was conducted  At the start of the experiment (time 0), 600 μl of the MSR medium was collected in the HC of each Petri plate, 300 μl for analysis of Cr(VI) and 300 μl for analysis of total Cr and P. This procedure was repeated every 2 h during 16 h. Chromium(VI) concentration was determined within 4 h after sampling to avoid Cr reduction-oxidation processes ( At the end of the experiment, shoots, roots and mycelium were collected. Roots and shoots dry weights (RDW and SDW, respectively) were determined after drying for 48 h at 80 °C. Fifty mg of the dried roots were separated for analysis of total Cr and P. The remaining dried roots were re-hydrated for 48 h in deionized water before staining and evaluation of AMF root colonization. The area of mycelium in the HC was also determined. The mycelium was then harvested, washed with deionized water and stored at 4 °C for analysis of total Cr and P and succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) activity. Fifty mg of dried roots from the RC were grinded and incinerated at 500 °C for 3 h. The minerals were subsequently extracted by incubation in 2 ml of HNO Approximately 80% of the fresh mycelium of Roots were sampled, stained with ink ( Twenty root fragments were mounted on microscope slides and examined under a compound microscope (Olympus BH2, Olympus Optical, GmbH, Germany) at 20–40 X magnifications. The frequency of root colonization (%F) was calculated as the percentage of root fragments that contained either hyphae, arbuscules or vesicles/spores. In addition, the intensity of root colonization (%I) was estimated using different intensity classes (<1, 1–10, 11–50, 51–90, >90), and the results expressed as a percentage as follows: (v + 5w + 30x + 70y + 95z)/(v + w + x + y + z), where v, w, x, y, z are the number of root fragments in each class (adapted from The area of the extraradical mycelium (ERM) covering the HC was traced using a transparent plastic sheet placed on the bottom of the Petri plate and the area in the HC covered by the ERM traced on this sheet ( Approximately 20% of the fresh mycelium from the HC was incubated overnight at room temperature in a solution of 0.25 M sodium succinate, 0.05 M Tris-HCI (pH 7.6), 0.5 mM MgCl and 1 mgml All the analyses were conducted using INFOSTAT ( Whatever the treatment, no significant differences were observed in RDW and SDW of the The concentration of Cr(VI) in the HC decreased between time 0 and 16 h in presence (HC The concentration of P in the HC decreased between time 0 and 16 h in presence as well as in absence of Cr (VI) in the HC ( Linear correlations analyses were conducted between ERM area and concentrations of Cr(VI), total Cr and P in the HC of HC At the end of the experiment, Cr concentration in the ERM of the AMF was evaluated. In the HC Chromium concentration was significantly higher in the root tissues of the plantlets in the HC Chromium is a major pollutant in soils surrounding industrial sites. Its uptake by AMF and subsequent transport to plants and immobilization in intraradical fungal structures have been recently reported ( Chromium (VI) in the HC decreased within the 16 h of observation in presence of alive as well as dead ERM (i.e. after addition of formaldehyde, demonstrated via the absence of SDH activity). To the contrary, no decrease was noticed in total Cr. In absence of ERM, no decrease was observed either in Cr(VI) and total Cr (data not shown). These observations suggested a reduction of Cr(VI) into Cr(III) rather than an uptake/adsorption by the ERM. According to the amount of Cr(VI) and total Cr remaining in the HC, it could be suggested that between 4% and 16% of Cr(VI) was reduced to Cr(III) in presence of alive and dead ERM, respectively within the 16 h of exposure to the PTE. This finding is in agreement with the results of Chromium was adsorbed by alive and dead hyphae. Total Cr concentration per mg of fresh ERM was 2.5 times higher in the HC The total amount of Cr(VI) immobilized by alive and dead ERM was similar, approximately 0.5 μg per treatment. This observation explains why no differences were detectable in Cr(VI) and total Cr concentration in HC liquid media between HC Chromium concentration in the roots was significantly higher in the treatment with alive ERM exposed to Cr as compared to the treatments without Cr or dead ERM (in the pre-treatment with formaldehyde). This suggested that Cr was already actively translocated to the roots via the ERM within the first 16 h of the experiment. Chromium translocation to the roots via the ERM was earlier reported by The presence of Cr(VI) in the HC was accompanied by a significant decrease in P concentration with time (from 0 to 16 h) in this compartment. This process was an active mechanism since P concentration in HC did not vary in presence of formaldehyde, as earlier demonstrated ( The observation that the presence of Cr(VI) increased P uptake could be related with the role as an intracellular detoxification pathway proposed for poly-phosphates (poly-P). It has been suggested that poly-P act as an intracellular detoxification pathway in ectomycorrhizal fungi (ECM), since it can bind metal cations such as Cr(III) ( The increasing P uptake in presence of Cr(VI) did not result in a significant increase in P concentration in the root system. Probably the time of exposure to Cr(VI) was limited (16 h) in comparison with the duration of culture of the plants in the growth medium (i.e. 3 months). Nevertheless, in the long-term, it could be expected that intraradical AMF store larger amount of P when exposed to Cr(VI) and could represent a P sink available to host roots since there is an equilibrium between precipitation and dissolution. A longer experiment to confirm this hypothesis should be envisaged in the future considering the possibility that P dissolution may release the Cr that had been sequestrated. Phosphorus concentration in plant tissues was significantly different in the HC In this study, we reported for the first time on the impact of the ERM of an AMF ( This research was supported by