Copper and iron dissolution of Zijinshan low-grade copper sulfide ores was investigated in ore-packed columns. At 60°C and pH1.0, 37.1gFe(III)L−1 permitted effective copper dissolution and inhibited the activity of iron-oxidizing microorganisms. At 30°C, microorganisms stimulated Fe(II) and pyrite oxidation, resulting in 85 and 54% of copper and pyrite extraction yields, respectively. Bacteria belonging to the genera Acidithiobacillus and Leptospirillum were dominant as observed by real-time PCR assay. Aeration and inoculation of columns were not necessary. Solutions had a higher pH of 1.7 in the columns operated without recirculation. Under these conditions, copper extraction was not affected and Fe(III) precipitated as jarosite, indicating a novel method for iron control in Zijinshan copper mine.Since the 1990s, heap bioleaching has been extensively applied for processing low grade copper ores (e.g. chalcocite and covellite) in numerous commercial plants worldwide ( Temperature is a key parameter for bioleaching processes. Increased temperature significantly enhances chalcocite and covellite dissolution rates ( Due to the low amount of acid-consuming gangue and high content of pyrite in the minerals, Zijinshan copper heap bioleaching plant successfully achieved high copper recovery without aeration and extra inoculation, operating under extreme conditions that are unsuitable for most acidophilic microorganisms ( The present study aimed at investigating the copper leaching mechanisms in the Zijinshan copper heap bioleaching plant. Column experiments were set up in order to evaluate the effects of abiotic and biotic conditions, different irrigating solutions, temperature, solution recirculation and inoculation of indigenous enrichment cultures. Iron leaching was also investigated in order to provide useful information for the optimization of Zijinshan copper mine operation. Columns were packed with ore from Zijinshan copper mine which mainly contained digenite, covellite, chalcocite, pyrite and alunite (  Columns C1–C5 were directly inoculated with original or diluted raffinate, whereas column C6 was inoculated with microbial cultures enriched from Zijinshan copper mine ( Approximately 10 All columns were operated without aeration. pH, Eh, Cu and Fe concentration were periodically monitored in the column effluent throughout the tests. Columns (C1–C6) were temporarily stopped 5 times during the leaching tests, and each time all the ore (approximately 10 Real-time PCR assay was used to quantitatively investigate representatives of the microbial genera previously shown to be present in Zijinshan raffinate ( Eh (Pt electrode against an Ag The ore samples taken from the columns were ground to a particle size smaller than 0.074 The need to analyze copper and iron extractions using both solution and residue analyses was mainly attributed to the difficulty of calculating the recirculating solution volumes and copper losses occasionally. Residue analyses were performed to assess the final copper and iron extraction yields under different leaching conditions, as reported by   At 30    Pyrite leaching performance was of major importance, contributing to acid and iron accumulation in Zijinshan copper mine. Pyrite oxidation was very similar at both 30 and 60  In order to investigate the microbial communities in the columns at suitable and extreme conditions for most mineral processing microorganisms, real-time PCR assays were used to describe and quantify the microbial diversity in columns C1 (30 The present study demonstrated that copper sulfide ore dissolution mainly occurred via ferric iron leaching at Zijinshan copper mine. At 60 The authors thank the