The phenomenon of particle segregation during epoxy block preparation for characterisation studies by optical or SEM microscopy, and its potential detrimental effect on the results of such characterisation, is well known. However, the absence of a proper study showing the possible scale of errors caused by it, and the existing belief that in certain circumstances the effect can be neglected, result in the continuing practice where important characterisation is performed using traditional horizontally sectioned epoxy blocks.
                  This article presents the results of optical image analysis of the particle segregation effect during epoxy block preparation for different size fractions of iron ore fines using the CSIRO Mineral4/Recognition4 software. The differences in mineral abundances and liberation characteristics for different horizontal layers of vertical sections of epoxy blocks were analysed. Also the effects of particle layer thickness, epoxy block mixing techniques and the relative ratio of the iron ore sample to the epoxy during initial specimen preparation were investigated and discussed.
                  The work performed shows that the difference between layers in the epoxy block due to density segregation can be unacceptably high for iron ore samples and, similarly, to any ore samples with significant density differences between particles of different texture. The traditional block preparation technique, with its random selection of the analysed horizontal layer, can therefore result in large errors in estimation of mineral abundances, mineral liberation and textural classification characteristics. It is suggested that vertical sections of epoxy blocks are used for image analysis where significant density difference between particles is suspected.Optical and electron microscopy are widely used for the characterisation of different mineral deposits. In modern mineral production crushing and grinding of ore to smaller size particles (less than 4–5 mm) is a very common procedure during mineral beneficiation. Small aliquots of such crushed ores are used for generating representative ore samples for the characterisation of deposits and understanding potential routes for further ore beneficiation, e.g. magnetic separation, de-sliming, flotation etc. For the purpose of microscopy characterisation, the process of sampling, which begins with the actual collection of the ore material for the preparation of representative blocks or sets of blocks with polished surface exposing cut particle sections, is the most critical part of the whole procedure. If during sampling or at the further stage of block preparation there are intrinsic, systematic errors, the final characterisation result will have an even larger error due to the other random errors involved. During the standard procedure of block preparation for ore fines/particles characterisation, which can vary slightly between laboratories, a small aliquot of ore fines/particles is mixed in the casting mould with liquid compounds such as epoxy resin and hardener. To assist in the complete impregnation of particles and the removal of air bubbles from the epoxy the samples are then placed in a vacuum chamber, and two to three cycles of vacuuming and compression are applied. The samples are then transferred to a pressure vessel or curing oven. The label identifying the sample can then be put onto the bottom of the block, and then extra epoxy is added in order to achieve a certain thickness of the final block that is suitable for grinding and polishing. After the additional epoxy has hardened, the epoxy block is separated from the mould. The block is then turned over, so that the bottom surface, where ore particles have settled in a layer, becomes the top surface of the block, as this is the orientation required for ore characterisation. (The terms “top” and “bottom” of the epoxy block throughout the paper will be referring to this new orientation, the reader should remember that the actual settling occurs in the opposite direction). Finally, the top of the block is slightly ground and polished to achieve an optically flat, high quality surface without scratches or mineral pull-outs. During mixing of the particles with liquid epoxy resin (where they are subject to shear forces and gravity) and further during settling down in the epoxy, the particles segregate by density, size and possibly shape. The effect of particle segregation within epoxy blocks has been known for a long time. It is generally understood that the concentration of heavier, denser particles near the top of the block is higher than near the bottom or in the middle of the particle layer, and, vice versa, the concentration of lighter, less dense particles is higher in the bottom of the particle layer (see  Researchers working with automated scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) imaging techniques such as QEMSCAN ( Even though the detrimental effects of particle segregation on ore fines characterisation are well known and some techniques to reduce particle segregation effects have been proposed (e.g. utilisation of vertical sections – This paper attempts to fill that gap and investigate the particle segregation effect by analysing the segregation of different size fractions of iron ore fines in vertical sections of polished blocks with different particle layer thicknesses. The effects of the mixing procedure and the ratio between ore sample and epoxy are also discussed. To study the segregation effect, vertical sections of epoxy blocks for three size fractions of a hematitic-goethitic ore were prepared. During sample preparation, the +25 µm and −25 µm fractions were separated via wet sieve screening, and the +25 µm fraction was dry screened via sieve sizing. The –25 µm size fraction obtained after dry screening of the +25 µm part of the sample was added to the initial −25 µm fraction. Later, the size fractions CS1-CS5 were obtained by cyclosizing the −25 µm feed through five consecutive small hydrocyclones with consecutively reducing cut size. Two size fractions from the +25 µm fraction were chosen for the study: −150+106 µm and −38+25 µm. One size fraction was chosen from the −25 µm fraction, namely, the CS5 fraction which had an average particle size of 10.2 µm ( To obtain vertical sections, the epoxy blocks were initially produced according to the traditional procedure. However, after curing in the oven each epoxy block was separated from the mould and cut vertically, then one or both halves were impregnated in another epoxy block with the cut edge facing the top of the new block (see Sample imaging was performed using optical microscopy in reflected light, and image analysis software Mineral4/Recognition4 developed by the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) ( Density segregation can be directly observed in the two size fractions shown in The effect of segregation in each size fraction was studied with two types of layered samples, “thin” and “thick”, where the amount of sample used for preparing the “thin” section was significantly less than that for the “thick” section. The image size and magnification for each fraction were chosen based on particle size.  For the “thick” sample ( In the “thin” and “thick” blocks prepared with the −38+25 µm size fraction ( In this example, the “thin” sample was fully covered with 3 layers of images, while the “thick” block section by 28 rows of images, of which 5 layers (Top - rows 2 and 3, Top Middle - 8 and 9, Middle – 14 and 15, Middle Bottom – 20 and 21, and Bottom - 26 and 27) were selected for the analysis. The very top and very bottom rows of images (1 and 28) were not included as not all images in those rows contained enough particles due to the curvature of the original block surface (see for example However, for the −150+106 µm size fraction (“thick” sample), a steady reduction of the number of particles per layer towards the bottom was not observed. Excluding the very top and the very bottom rows from consideration (as discussed above) and using twice the number of particles in the other rows of the Top and Bottom layers instead, the numbers in the layers are: Top - 2118, Middle Top - 2242, Middle Bottom – 2169, and Bottom - 2186. There is no obvious trend. The difference in the number of particles in different layers from top to bottom in the −38+25 µm size fraction is due to the particles being not heavy enough to settle quickly so they continue to settle when the epoxy has partially hardened. They are also not heavy enough to be packed densely at the bottom of the epoxy block. In comparison, the larger particles from −150+106 µm size fraction settle quickly before the epoxy hardens significantly and are packed densely at all levels.  From the observations above, it could be expected that the effect of particle segregation would be even higher for the CS5 fraction compared to coarser fractions, while in fact it is not ( For the CS5 fraction the difference in hematite abundance between the top and bottom layers for the “thin” sample (2.65%) is slightly higher than that for the “thick” sample (2.17%). This is again attributed to the consequence of two factors discussed before: the higher amount of excessive epoxy in the “thin” sample and the more efficient segregation in the thin layer. To better understand the effect of excessive epoxy (or the ratio of epoxy:sample), iron ore fines from the −250+150 µm size fraction were used. In the “less epoxy” case the amount of epoxy was just enough for efficient mixing the sample. The thickness of the layer of fines in the block was around 3 mm. For the “more epoxy” sample, the same amount of iron ore fines was used, but the amount of epoxy was approximately three times larger than used in the “less epoxy” sample. The distributions of minerals for both samples are given in This exercise clearly demonstrates that in order to reduce particle segregation, the amount of epoxy during block preparation should be reduced as much as possible if standard (that is, not vertically sectioned) blocks are used for analysis. There is a widespread practice of performing the mixing in an “eight-shape” pattern during block preparation. It is assumed that circular mixing can cause particle segregation in the horizontal direction, that is, heavier particles will preferentially concentrate at the outer edges of the block and lighter particles in the middle. To study this effect a block using the −250+150 µm size fraction was prepared by circular mixing, and then its edge and middle areas were imaged separately. The exercise did not demonstrate any significant difference between mineral abundances for the middle and the edge parts of the block ( If the mineral composition measured in selected layers of epoxy blocks is different due to the segregation, then the mineral liberation characteristics measured for those layers will also be affected ( Similarly, the liberation classes with a higher hematite proportion are more abundant in the top and less in the bottom layer. The distribution of liberation classes between layers for minerals with densities closer to the average sample density is closer to the distribution of these minerals in the whole sample. Nonetheless the differences are still significant and crucial for accurate prediction of downstream processing performance ( The best way to observe the segregation of different particles by density in different layers is to perform automated textural classification of each layer by use of the Recognititon4 software. ( In general, we can see that textural abundances in individual layers are sometimes significantly different from each other and from the abundances calculated for the whole section. The implications are that using traditional non-vertically sectioned blocks can result in significant errors in mineralogical and textural characterisation of samples. To obtain mineral abundance, mineral liberation and textural characterisation information for iron ore fines sample, epoxy blocks with an aliquot of such sample are prepared. It is much easier to prepare blocks using the standard routine, which only requires grinding and polishing the epoxy block surface to which the fines settled during block preparation. There is some understanding that due to the difference in particle density some segregation happens during block preparation, so for better results vertical sections of the blocks should be studied, which is of course more expensive and time consuming as the samples need to be mounted a second time. However, there also is a belief that for small particles less than 50 µm in size or for thin layers the effect of particle segregation is negligible. To study the actual effect of particle segregation in epoxy blocks on mineralogical and textural characterisation, vertical sections of epoxy blocks embedding different iron ore fines size fractions were prepared and imaged. The effects of sample and epoxy amounts on particles segregation were also studied. All image collection and analysis was performed with CSIRO’s automated optical mage analysis software Mineral4/Recognition4. The study based on iron ore fines segregation clearly showed that utilisation of standard (non-vertically sectioned) blocks for ores with significant difference in particle densities can result in unacceptably high errors. That was established for a broad range of particle sizes, as the samples used for the study varied in size from 10 to 250 µm. The study also showed that particle segregation in thin layers is even higher than in the thick ones. In order to reduce segregation caused by shear forces during mixing and gravity settlement over time, the amount of epoxy mixed with the sample should be kept to the practical minimum. To avoid the effect of segregation on mineral abundance, mineral liberation and textural characterisation information it is recommended to image vertical sections of the blocks prepared using the standard routine. It is understandable that the cost of performing the extra mounts for vertical block preparation is higher than for normal block preparation, and therefore the technique may be not attractive to the clients of the analytical laboratories. However if novel techniques are adopted, for example, the single step If selective imaging is performed over a vertical section of the sample, even equidistant imaging of layers cannot prevent errors due to the non-uniform gradient of mineral abundances and the changes in particle number density. Therefore, it is suggested that the whole span of a vertical section should be taken into account. The work showed that there is no significant variation horizontally between the centre and the edge of the block, even for circular mixing. Therefore, if the amount of particles in the full vertical section is excessive for analysis purposes, the analysed part of the section can be limited horizontally. However, the whole vertical span of the horizontal part of the block section should be included. It is probably still safer to choose exactly half of the section horizontally to twice reduce the number of particles, and to perform the work requiring more significant reduction within such a half-section, avoiding the very edges and centre of the block. The research also showed that textural characterisation of samples gives the deepest understanding of the segregation process and allows the researcher to track the deportment of particles of different texture and density within the block. The authors wish to thank the staff of the CSIRO Carbon Steel Futures group for valuable suggestions and help during this work. We would also like to express our acknowledgments to CSIRO internal reviewers Mark Pownceby and Mike Peterson for their useful corrections and comments.