With today's powerful process simulators, there is no apparent need for students to elaborate detailed material and heat balances for specific plant flow sheets. However, many academic and practical benefits result from this exercise. Firstly, it allows the students to visualize the workings of the entire plant and to grasp the importance of the variables of each unit operation on the overall performance of the proposed scheme. When the balances are programmed in a PC worksheet (e.g. Microsoft EXCEL™), the detailed contents of each flow stream are calculated, allowing the students to better understand the interactions between equipment. Industry could employ the “products” of this activity as training tools and in the evaluation of water balances and detection of possible impurity buildups. Two plant balances are presented: galena leaching with ferric chloride brines and precious metals leaching with ammonium thiosulfate.As university professors, we usually administer information in little parcels and at the end of the undergraduate degree program, we expect the students to magically assemble the entire puzzle. We are eternally astonished that our students, the products of our unselfish sacrifices, after hours and hours of explaining, are unable to grasp the global concept of a plant, hydrometallurgical or chemical. When we mention water balances or impurity accumulation, it would appear that we are speaking in another language or at best to liberal arts students. So we think back: all of these students have passed courses, and very difficult ones, in reactor design, hydrometallurgy and/or separation processes, and some with high grades. Now, despite the fact that they are able to tackle the most abstract of concepts, they are unable to integrate these into a simple flow sheet. Where did we go wrong? Actually, one of our problems is that we usually show the students the trees expecting them to describe a forest. In the present article, a description is given of how simple mass and energy balances of entire processes can be used at various levels of undergraduate education to help assimilate and amalgamate the information packages received as part of a traditional engineering curriculum. Several useful approaches are demonstrated and, at the end of the article, two examples of hydrometallurgical plants are shown. There are many virtues in constructing an old fashioned flow sheet, starting with describing the function of each equipment and identifying the qualitative composition of each stream. When pieced together, the student can quickly recognize on a global scale where each component enters the flow diagram and its probable exit points. In this way, it is illustrative to proceed component by component, beginning with the primary ones, such as water and the desired metal, and working down through the secondary products. Many times, it is in this early stage that the students detect possible accumulation problems. In When there are several phases, it is wise to elaborate separate tables for each phase, including entrained liquids. For instance, for liquid–solid separations, such as in filters or thickeners, a wet solid phase is produced, containing frequently a substantial amount of dissolved substances. Perhaps one of the simplest principles that seems to enormously confuse the students is the fact that the liquid compositions of the entrained liquid (that exits with the solid) is the same as that of the separated liquid stream. This would be the case for liquid stream 5 and the entrained liquid in stream 4 of the figure, as well as the liquids of streams 8 and 9 and those of streams 11 and 12. It is very important to illustrate this point very early in the undergraduate program because it forms one of the precepts of separation efficiency. The next step usually involves mass tables, or mole tables when there are reactions involved, for each equipment item. The procedures involved are quite conventional and do not need further description. However, it is interesting to emphasize that it is here that concepts, introduced in other courses, may be integrated. For instance, exit stream compositions, and therefore material balances, can involve the principles of thermodynamics (product solubility, gas phase humidity, reaction conversion, liquid–liquid equilibria, osmotic pressure, etc.) and of separation processes (mass transfer considerations). In general, once the material balance is finished, the energy balance is usually quite straightforward for hydrometallurgical plants since they do not normally involve reactions near equilibrium (interdependent material and energy balances). Perhaps, the only real area of difficulty is property estimation (e.g. heat capacities (Cp's) and enthalpy changes (Δ The one area that deserves special attention is how to deal with recycles because major difficulties, from a student's point of view, are usually encountered when a plant has one or more recycle circuits. For that reason, the next section is dedicated exclusively to this type of flow diagrams. Recycles have become an important part of mineral processing, in order to optimize reagent consumption and pollution control. However, material and energy balances for diagrams with recirculation can become tricky, especially since steady-state stream compositions for many components, such as impurities, are unknown. The problem is: how much (water, reagents, products or impurities) is being recycled? According to the concept which needs to be demonstrated, either of the two procedures can be used. Each may be considered at different points in an undergraduate program. Certainly, a more simple approach is that of Successive Cycles or Start-Up, where, initially, the mineral is treated with fresh solution and the recycle is not considered. From this point of view, the student should observe the progressive impurity buildup when the second and following cycles are calculated. However, there are so many numbers involved (the concentration of each component in each flow stream) that the students may become lost in the sea of information. In these cases, it is important to guide the student to the important characteristics and to point out the dynamic nature of the stream compositions. For instance, product purities and reagent loss should be calculated for each exit stream that contains solids with entrained liquids and, of course, purges. With each cycle, changes in impurity composition should be related to product purity. In some cases, impurities do not build up indefinitely, but arrive at some calculable limit (e.g. solubility). In these cases, maximum concentrations in the liquid phase may be built into the model and the residual amount of the component must report to the solid phase. The balances reach steady state when the changes in composition with each cycle are minimal, having reached a pre-established tolerance. The steady-state approach is conceptually simpler, but requires a higher degree of maturity. Since the quantity of recycled material is not previously defined, each recycled component must be declared an unknown and carried as a variable throughout the balancing process. This seems to be terrible for an undergraduate student, who is used to solving all the variables in each unit operation before moving on to the next. Conversely, with the steady-state method, each new variable must be placed in terms of the quantity or concentration of the recycled components. However, it is quite difficult to convince a weary student that all his/her problems will be solved when he/she gets around to the recycle again. Students usually gain confidence after performing several of these balances. In general, the steady-state approach is superior because it allows students to immediately visualize potential problems with impurity buildups, product contamination and water balances. It can be compared to having a helicopter view of the plant operation as opposed to observing its operation by walking from one equipment item to another. Again, in this case, reagent and product loss in entrained liquids and purges should be calculated in order to place in cost perspective a certain set of operating conditions. After many years of having the students perform the balances on paper, it is time to upgrade to the Twenty First Century. It is far superior, and not much extra work, to “program” the plant balances into a spreadsheet, such as Microsoft EXCEL™, or a formal programming language, such as Microsoft VISUAL BASIC™, FORTRAN or C. Once this is finished, the students can use their balances as they would a simulator, trying out other operating conditions (% purge, % solids, % reagent in excess, % humidity in solids, temperatures, etc.) to observe the effects of these on product purity or costs. The great difference between elaborating their own models and using canned ones is that, in the first case, they usually show more interest in understanding why certain variables affect the end product. These models are also excellent training tools for the industry, since they allow the operator to observe the consequences of modifying or “playing” with normal operating conditions. In general, the elaboration of material and energy balances, even for a relatively simple flow diagram, becomes somewhat time consuming and one student is apt to make a mistake or two. Additionally, a large dose of brainstorming is usually helpful and necessary. For that reason, and as a long-term learning experience, it is preferable that students work in teams of two. Groups of more than two are usually inefficient because balance elaboration does not lend itself well to division of labor. The plant should not be analyzed in parcels, but rather as a whole. Of course, it is always helpful that the professor and/or teaching assistants have an open attitude toward sharing their experience, instead of adopting the “swim or sink” approach to education. Normally in courses, much more emphasis is placed on the fate of the desired component, while that of the impurities is relegated, at best, to the back burner. Most students are surprised at the steady-state impurity levels when there is no specific removal process. The simple rule is: what goes in must and will come out and maybe not in the most convenient places. Balances show them this principle. In the next section, material balances are shown for two different hydrometallurgical flow diagrams. For both cases, the processes have not yet been implemented on an industrial scale; however, balances permit the detection of possible operating difficulties. This systems represents a possible alternative to sulfide concentrate cyanidation. The flow diagram ( In this system, the following reactions take place: Leach Cementation A novel aspect in this flow diagram is the introduction of reverse osmosis to concentrate the wash streams. Without this stage, it would be very difficult to reach a satisfactory water balance: water entering in the reagent make-up (3) and wash streams, (23) and (24), is balanced mainly by the tails outlets, (11) and (17). By using reverse osmosis to obtain recycle water, fresh water requirements are greatly reduced and less precious metal values are lost to the tails. In this diagram, the following operating conditions are set by the user: Flow rate of mineral (1) Concentration of silver sulfide and gold in the mineral % solids in the reactor Initial concentrations of reagents (thiosulfate, cupric sulfate and ammonia) % conversion of both gold and silver in the leach Fraction of the solids and the liquid which reports to the thickener overflow (6) Fraction of entrained liquors in the filter cake and in the tails, (8), (11), (13) and (17) Multiplicity of wash water entering the wash stage [(10) and (15)] with respect to entrained liquid in the filter cake % copper in excess used in the cementation (26) % conversion of the precious metals in the cementation Fraction of thiosulfate destruction in the process % of salts (CuSO With this information, the component flows in each stream are determined. Additionally, by changing any of the above values, the ultimate recovery of the precious metals is calculated and may be compared with that of other operating conditions. Balancing the leach solution recycle loops and the wash water recuperation circuits constitutes an excellent learning experience. In the 1970s, an initial version of this process was presented by the U.S. Bureau of Mines ( The flow diagram may be observed in After exiting the reactor (2), the solid (4) is separated from the liquid and sent to a wash stage to recuperate as much entrained lead and reagents as possible (6). The liquid phase (3) is then treated with metallic lead (8) to cement any silver ions that may have been simultaneously leached. The resultant pregnant liquor (10) is directed to a crystallizer, where the temperature is lowered in order to provoke the precipitation of lead chloride, the desired product of this process (11). After the crystallizer (12), a part of the stream is purged (18) in order to avoid impurity (zinc) buildup in the circuit. The resultant stream is jointed with the wash water and sent to the regeneration column, where chlorine gas (15) is used to reoxidize the ferrous chloride, produced in the leach, to ferric chloride. The solution is then heated to approximately 100 °C, made up to its original composition and recycled back to the leach reactor. As may be observed, several potential economic problems are inherent in this process. The first is the tradeoff between impurity buildup, zinc in this case, and reagent and product loss in the purge. In order to reduce the first, the latter necessarily increases, with the collateral costs of treatment to meet environmental standards. The second problem is the fact that large volumes of process liquor must be heated to 100 °C and then chilled to near room temperature. This large energy expenditure is in addition to that needed to crystallize the product. Another complexity of this process is the corrosive nature of the reagents, but this is the subject of another type of analysis. For this processing scheme, the following operating conditions are set by the user: Flow rate of mineral (1) Concentration of galena (PbS), sphalerite (ZnS) and acanthite (Ag % solids in the reactor (due to solubility considerations, this should not exceed 10%) Initial concentrations of reagents, FeCl % conversion of lead, zinc and silver in the leach Fraction of entrained liquors exiting with the produced solids [(4), (7), (9) and (11)] Multiplicity of wash water entering the wash stage (5) with respect to entrained liquid in (4) % lead in excess used in the cementation (8) % conversion of the silver in the cementation (1). Solubility of lead chloride in the leaching liquor at 25 °C (this may be found in the literature Fraction of stream (12), which is to be purged (18). Several assumptions have been made in the process: (i) a filter is used to separate the solid residue from the liquid and, for that reason, there is no solid in (3) and (ii) the regeneration is assumed to occur with 100% efficiency. Once the balances are completed, the students very quickly realize the large negative effects of impurity buildup. When the quantity and conversion of zinc are not extremely low, its accumulation in the circuit is unacceptable, affecting the lead chloride product purity. When the purge is increased to control the impurity buildup, important amounts of lead, ferric and sodium chlorides are lost. This leads to conclusions regarding how convenient it is and how to process certain galenas (concentration and reactivity of its sphalerite, time in the reactor, etc.). The points illustrated above are only a few of the many teachings that can be extracted from plant material and heat balances. However, the most important didactic aspect is by far the concept of integration that students learn by elaborating their own balances. In engineering practice, material and energy balances should be, and generally are, a preamble to any design effort. Their elaboration requires the awareness of the concept of interdependence within the plant. Incorporation of this experience into the undergraduate degree program at various levels allows the transmission of this principle and helps the students gain confidence in their own abilities. The author would like to thank the following chemical engineering undergraduate students who were responsible for the elaboration of the two material balances shown in the case studies: Alejandro Alonso-Gómez, Rodrigo Lobo-Lapidus, Israel Peralta-González and José Alejandro Piedras-Pérez.