In the past 30 years, much progress has occurred in the treatment of facial injuries with regard to classification, treatment options, timing, and technique of reductions of both the bone and soft tissue. Treatment planning options are numerous, and patient-specific implants and computerized plans are used more frequently. Facial injuries now benefit from refined classifications, which incorporate outcome data, which then cycle refinement of the classification and treatment options, producing a recurring cycle of continuous treatment improvements. Since all disease occurs in patterns, recognition of the patterns of facial injuries allows the use of specific algorithms for management of the various categories, which include minimal, intermediate, and severe injuries to each anatomical portion of the facial skeleton. The recurring process of diagnosis, treatment, and outcome analysis yields progressive changes and improvements to both the taxonomy and thereby the future treatment algorithms, perpetuating the recurring cycle of improvement. Practically, division of the face by functional parts creates an anatomical treatment algorithm organized on “CT-based fracture classification” The papers cited Frontal bone (supraorbital and frontal sinus areas) Upper midface (zygomas and nasoethmoid) Lower midface and occlusion Mandible (horizontal and vertical sections) Within each of the four areas, each section may be classified as minimally, moderately or severely displaced, and therefore treated with (a) no or (b) minimal open reduction, (c) a standard open reduction, or (d) an extended open reduction. The latter is reserved for the most comminuted and displaced fractures requiring multiple and complete exposures for alignment and fixation at all buttress articulations of a particular anatomical area. For the zygomatic portion of a panfacial fracture, it could be so minimally displaced that no reduction would be necessary. More frequently, the standard minimally displaced zygoma (incomplete or “greensticked” at the zygomaticofrontal suture) could be approached by inferior alone approaches at the zygomatic buttress and inferior orbital rim. For the standard displacement, a more complete set of anterior incisions, the “anterior alone” approaches of the lower midface gingival buccal sulcus and upper/lower eyelid incisions, allows complete exposure and fixation of all anterior zygoma buttress articulations. The severely comminuted zygoma would require the anterior complete exposure plus the zygomatic arch (anterior and posterior exposures) via a coronal incision for reduction and fixation at each zygomatic buttress and within the orbit laterally and inferiorly. Similarly, for the nasoethmoid area, The approaches and degree of fracture displacements would be summed over all the anatomical areas of fracture in the patient, permitting a comprehensive treatment plan for all areas to be developed for what is necessary in each area, and then an order of treatment is developed for the entire case, linking and sequencing the anatomical areas by a plan which combines segmental reductions. In this way, the treatment is the least (but still maximally effective) for each anatomical area according to the procedures necessary for each component of the fracture. Such approaches were first described in an article about “CT-based fracture treatment”. Generally, my preference, if no neurosurgical urgency is present, is to begin with stabilization of the occlusion by reduction of the split palate and mandible alveolar fractures, and then to address the vertical and horizontal mandible. Or if one needs to begin in the frontal bone because of simultaneous brain injury, the frontal bone is reduced after defunctionalizing the frontal sinus; perhaps first using wires for temporary positioning, and then proceeding to rigid fixation after the multiple areas of reduction required are confirmed as accurate. Then, the upper midface could be reduced and stabilized, then completing the reduction of the lower face, then linking the upper and lower face at the Le Fort I level. Several comments about the soft tissue bear repeating: Every facial fracture has an injury to the soft tissue, and it may be minimal, moderate or severe. How the soft tissue responds (and therefore the ultimate quality and the position of the soft tissue) depends on when and what you do to the bone, and whether or not the soft tissue can respond by healing and remodeling over a precisely reconstructed bony facial skeleton. The early bone reduction and the repair of the incisions and refixation of the soft tissue to a reduced skeleton become the method of “treatment” of the soft tissue, the “soft tissue reduction”. Timing and facial fracture management: Since the soft tissue has an initial injury, it makes good sense to confine the incisions and dissection and repair to this initial injury period, rather than to create a second soft tissue injury with the definitive reduction in the vulnerable period of soft tissue healing 1–2 weeks after the initial soft tissue trauma. While many isolated, simple fractures may be operated on at any time after the injury with little compromise in the ultimate soft tissue quality, true high-energy facial injuries begin to develop soft tissue scar and contracture immediately from the time of the initial injury, and the soft tissue becomes stiffened, thicker, discolored, and less pliable with each day of initial healing. Soft tissue contracture and stiffness develop in the shape of the underlying displaced bone fracture. Making reduction incisions and dissecting in the “vulnerable period” 1–3 weeks after the initial injury creates a second set of soft tissue injuries from the surgery, further damaging the soft tissue, whereas confining the incisions to the initial injury period isolates the two soft tissue injuries to a single reaction where the soft tissue reacts to a single insult, yielding the best result one could achieve in terms of soft tissue quality and position. Dehiscence and displacement of soft tissue: The layered closure of incisions prevents soft tissue dehiscence. Reattaching the repaired soft tissue to the facial skeleton places the soft tissue correctly over the reconstructed and realigned facial skeleton, allowing the soft tissue to heal in the correct position and with the correct contour. The shape and position of the bone are the pattern for the remodeling and repair by internal scar of the soft tissue injury. In some cases, such as the nasoethmoidal orbital area, placing soft tissue bolsters over the soft tissue pressing it against the maxilla and the lateral nose keeps the tissue aligned to the repaired facial skeleton over the complex contours and angles of the central upper midface area, prevents hematoma (minimizing excess fibrosis and thickness of soft tissue), and keeps the soft tissue stretched to length over the entire curving surface of the anatomically reduced bone. These several considerations create a comprehensive plan for treatment of any facial injury, both for the bone and for the soft tissue. Of course, immediate bone grafting and microvascular flap transfer may be added where necessary to replace critical missing areas of the facial skeleton and soft tissue. Mismatched cutaneous soft tissue islands from microvascular transfer may be removed secondarily by serial excision or standard facial cutaneous flap reconstruction, covering the mismatched soft tissue added with a contoured area of soft tissue with matching cutaneous color. So read on, enjoy, and benefit from the mastery of experienced practitioners who are ready to assist you with these difficult problems.