Estimation of the cutting forces acting on a disc cutter while cutting rock has been used for cutterhead design and performance prediction of tunnel boring machines (TBMs) and various other mechanical excavators. The cutting forces are the result of the pressure in the contact area between the disc cutter and rock surface. This paper presents the result of direct measurement of pressure in this contact area and observed pressure distribution patterns when cutting various rock types. The results show that the pressure within the contact zone is more concentrated, and the actual pressurized area is smaller, than the size of the contact zone that has been assumed by previous models. The measurements also show that there are areas of no pressure within the theoretical contact zone both in front of the highly concentrated pressure zone and behind it. This indicates that the peak stresses within the cutter ring are higher than normally expected, and explains the reason for some observed behavior of various disc cutters in the field.Cutting of rock with mechanical tools has become more prevalent in various underground and surface operations due to the trends for mechanization and increased utilization of mechanical excavators in mining and civil projects. In hard rock applications, the most efficient and most popular cutting tool is single disc cutters. Disc cutters are used frequently on different types of hard rock machines and have become the standard tools on hard rock TBMs. As such, estimating the forces for cutting a certain type of rock with disc cutter is an essential part of TBM cutterhead design and performance prediction. The estimated cutting forces can be utilized for different purposes and providing an accurate force estimates depend on the level of understanding of the cutting process. The process of crushing of the rock under an indentor or a cutting tool is a very complex phenomenon and has remained one of the fields that is not well understood. This is mainly due to limited measurements that can be and have been made within the pressure bubble or crushed zone, which develops directly underneath the cutter and controls the process of rock breakage. Very few direct measurement of pressure distribution in the crushed zone has been made. The study of pressure profile in the indentation tests under a spherical indentor by Gertsch While some headways has been made in recent years in simulation of the rock cutting with numerical models such as discrete element or finite element methods, these models do require a reality check, which is direct measurement of stresses under the cutting tool for verification. The application of the numerical analysis methods based on continuum media for solving this problem has had very limited success so far, owning to the disintegration of the rock particles which undermines the basic assumption of most of these methods, that is the continuity of the media. This limit has been partially addressed by some of the recent improvements in FEM models by introducing the capability to simulate failure within the rock Meanwhile, discrete element analysis (DEA or DEM) is almost a natural choice of numerical modeling when it comes to rock fragmentation since it allows for separate bodies to be attached and separated and thus allows for modeling a crack growth. The simulations of rock cutting by DEA models have been very intriguing and seem realistic. Examples of simulation runs by PFC and PFC3D for rock cutting show the potentials of this approach Magnitude and composition of the cutting forces on a single disc is a function of many parameters such as rock type and its mechanical characteristics, planes of weakness and discontinuities, geometry of the disc, spacing between the cuts, depth of penetration, and machine specifications. There have been many studies of rock cutting forces acting on disc cutters in various rock types and models for prediction of these forces for various end purposes. This paper will review the background of rock cutting process by disc cutters and the basic theories behind the existing models and force estimation formulae. The efforts made to measure the pressure in the rock-disc contact area and the results of the measurements will be discussed. Finally an equation for estimation of cutting forces acting on disc cutters will be offered. The highlight of the study, which is the measured pressure distribution in the contact area between the disc and rock surface, will be presented and its practical implications are reviewed. Detailed information and all background data for this study can be found in Disc cutters have been in use for number of years, but the major practical use of the disc cutters go back to its application on a TBM in mid 1950s. Through the years there has been a series of improvements in the profile and bearing capacity of the discs. The most common disc cutters used on TBMs today is the 432 Many researchers have worked on the issue of rock cutting with disc cutters over the past few decades. The focus of the work ranged from the simple indentation of discs into the rocks to evaluate rock brittleness, to estimating cutting forces for cutting rock with certain mechanical properties. Examples of the works on indentation process goes back to early researchers The studies on the rock cutting with disc cutters were primarily conducted by running full scale tests in the laboratory using actual disc cutters on linear or rotary cutting machines. This includes the work by Ozdemir et al. Rostami The review of available literature shows that there is substantial amount of research on estimation of the cutting forces acting on disc cutters in various rock types, but not much work on the measurement of contact pressures between the disc cutter and rock and current paper is an attempt to address this issue. The process of indentation of a cutting tool into the rock starts with the development of a pressure bubble or crushed zone under the tool. This zone transfers the cutting forces to the rock and comprises a fine powder immediately adjacent to the tool, which quickly transitions to coarse grains and to the fractured surrounding areas and ultimately to the body of the rock. Study of the crushed zone is important in that the dust generated in the process of rock cutting is primarily the result of formation of this crushed zone. Therefore, the smaller the crushed zone, the better it is from the dust generation viewpoint. Obviously, creation of finer particles takes more energy, thus smaller volume of crushed zone is also preferred from cutting efficiency point of view. Moreover, the crushed zone and distribution of the pressure within this zone determines the magnitude and direction of the cutting forces. Rostami In the initial studies, the contact zone or contact area between the disc cutter and rock surface was estimated based on available theories and cutting geometry as shown in As shown in this figure, various functions can be considered to represent pressure distribution in the contact zone. Most researchers have used a linear increasing pressure profile in this zone However, while the assumption of a given contact area and a more uniform pressure distribution could provide a better fit for rolling coefficient measurements, it failed to meet the boundary conditions at both end of the contact zone. In other words, it is not logical to have high pressures at the starting point of contact between the disc and the rock surface in front of the disc, nor at the point of departure of the disc from the cut surface. Thus the magnitude of pressure at boundary conditions had to be zero and gradually raising to a peak somewhere in the middle of the contact zone as shown in To verify the pressure distribution within the contact zone and develop a function to estimate magnitude of pressure at given points in this area, a testing program was devised. The testing included installation of a series of strain gages on the disc cutter to sense the load distribution on the contact zone as these gages approached, entered and departed from this zone. The assumption was that the interpretation of the collected signals from the gages during the cutting process will allow for identification of the pressure distribution in this zone. This assumption was indeed challenged in many levels as the experimental program proceeded and subsequent data analysis presented many unanticipated difficulties. To measure the pressure distribution within the contact zone, it was deemed necessary to instrument a disc cutter. This was due to the fact that making such measurements in the rock was not possible because of creation of cracks that would compromise the continuity of the medium in which the measurement was to take place. Thus the only logical choice was to measure stress variations within the disc, as close to the tip of the cutter blade as possible, since the disc would be continuous and behave linearly as the cutter rolled over the rock surface. For this purpose a disc cutter made available by the Robbins Co. was used in the testing program. The selected cutter was a so called “Dura-Cutter” or a “long-neck” constant cross section disc cutter. The main characteristic of the selected cutter is extended length of the blade with more or less constant thickness as can be seen in To measure the stresses within the disc blade, a series of strain gages were installed near the tip on both sides of the blade. Strain gages used for this purpose were model CEA-06-125WT-350 manufactured Vishay Measurement installed on the blade using M-Bond 610 and cured of two hours at 150 Analysis of anticipated stresses within the disc blade caused by a given force at certain location on the blade tip was performed to develop the force-strain variation or an “influence” function. This allowed determining the amount of strains anticipated from a given load placed at certain angular distance from the center of the strain gage. The analysis included closed form solution, as well as numerical modeling by finite element software program ALGOR. The theory behind the analysis of measured signals to back calculate the original pressure or load distribution that was imposed on the disc blade in the contact zone was basically the principal of superposition. This simply means that if a series of loads were to be applied on the tip of the blade at known locations, the strain measured at a certain location on the blade (e.g., the center point of strain gages) are the cumulative strains caused by each individual load ( In this analysis, there are certain control parameters, including the cutting forces expressed in terms of normal and rolling forces. The relationship between the cutting forces and the pressure or load distribution in the contact area can be expressed as follows: The other control parameter is the measured signal which can be related to the load distribution through the following equation: Given the form of the influence function, the coefficient matrix would look as follows: The implication of this setting was that the load distribution could be broken to a finite number of locations, in this case nine components, to see the snap shot of load distributions at given point in time, if the impact of load distribution on all 9 gage locations were to be analyzed at the same time. The alternative approach was to use the data from the same gage at certain time intervals as it approached the contact zone and passed through it. The implication of the second setting was that the load distribution must have stayed constant to allow the subsequent analysis. In this case the data interrogation rate could be set to pick up certain number of samples within the given time span to match the number of load distribution components for the coefficient matrix to be Obviously, the load distribution is constantly changing as new cracks develop and crushed zone undergoes loading and unloading cycles. The objective of the analysis using the later setting was to be able to determine an average load distribution system that could allow for understanding the general load distribution that could yield the average normal and rolling forces in that period of time. However, the actual conditions did not lend itself to application of either of these methods and a different analysis had to be developed for subsequent data analysis as will be explained later. After installation of the instrumented disc cutter on the linear cutting machine (LCM) and calibration of the system for each individual gage set, as well as machines triaxial load cell, the full scale trials commenced. To verify the response of the system, a steel plate was cast on top of the sample box and instrumented disc was rolled over the steel plate to see the response of the system and the gages to the point contact between the cutter blade and the steel plate. With the verification of the system response as a whole, the full scale rock cutting tests using the instrumented disc cutter was commenced. The testing included three different rock types and cut spacing and penetration as summarized in  Once the recording of the forces and gage responses were available, a program had to be devised to look at the various load distributions that could generate the recorded signals. The idealized theoretical approach through the use of commercial solvers to solve the systems of equations indicated in Eq. As a result, other approaches were examined to seek a solution for this problem. This included singular value decomposition, wavelets, and application of various solvers, where none could offer a sensible solution and reasonable load distribution. Thus a different approach was used to analyze the data and that was approximation method. In this scheme, the signals from various gages were superimposed using the position pointer in the data columns, and averaged over the span of the time series used to evaluate the signals. This was practically performed by snapping the data sets for each gage in the vicinity of the contact zone and super imposing the signals relative to a reference point for a given time span, and averaging the values of measured signals for every given time steps. The data sampling rate was 2000 Yet the average signal could not be processed through the said equation system and generate an “average” load distribution for the rock type. To address this issue a reverse calculation approach was used. In this approach, a series of known load distributions were defined and the resulting gage signal response was calculated. Then these calculated responses were compared with average signals from measurements to see which pre-determined load distribution could generate an output signal with minimal differences with the measured signal. The pre-determined load distribution systems were then given a case number and the top ten closest distribution cases to the measured signal was recorded for each cut line. Then a statistical program was used to seek the highest number of occurrence or selection of the load distribution cases for the entire test based on frequency and rank of the case. This method was considered to allow for approximation of a reasonable load distribution that could mimic the average load distribution in the contact zone. The magnitude of the resultant forces for each case could be compared with that of measured average cutting forces to derive the correct magnification of the pre-determined distribution that could match the actual force measurements. The pre-determined loading cases included a series of different load distribution scenarios including a uniform distribution (rectangles), linear distribution with peaks varying from one end to the other, exponential distribution, power function, etc. Since the span or distance between the beginning and end of the loading points was unknown, the algorithm started from a set with only five loading points (1.25  The actual calculations and analysis were performed in a MathCad code controlled by an Excel spreadsheet through dynamic data exchange (DDE) program. The program opened the data files and used proper calibration factors to determine the cutting forces and gage output signals. The result of the analysis including the average/min/max cutting forces, standard deviation, specific energy, rolling coefficient, and top ten best matches in load distribution was reported back to Excel sheet and recoded for each line. This process was repeated for all the lines in the test for each rock type and penetration value. Then the statistical analysis was performed to identify the loading scenario that best represented and matched the measured strain gage signals. The result of the testing and subsequent analysis was very interesting and eye opening. While the cutting forces were following the anticipated trend ( The alignment of the resultant forces from the assumed predetermined load distribution with that measured cutting forces by the LCM load cell (based on the rolling coefficient or ratio of rolling “  The implication of this finding is rather important. First it invalidates the initial assumptions about the size and extent of the contact zone. Second, it shows that the stresses within the ring are more concentrated than initially assumed. In fact some of the observations in the field of cutter rings mushrooming or getting loose on the hub could be a good evidence of this phenomenon. In these cases, the cutter ring was designed for an average stress in the contact area where the actual stresses were in fact higher due to loading area being smaller than the theoretical contact zone. These observations open the door to the new interpretations of the cutting process. The no loading zone in front of the disc could simply be justified by creation of the chips ahead of the disc as the area of high pressure is created and the wave, however slowly, moves forward. The actual cutting/crushing occurs in a zone where the disc engages the rock and starts the penetration phenomenon by creation of the pressure bubble. The pressure increases to a peak, and so is presumably the depth of the crushed zone, and gradually decreases as the pressure of the crushed zone is relieved by creation of the chips on the sides or the movement of the fine particles towards the back, where there is no pressure. Hence, the flow of the fines towards the back of the disc in the area directly underneath the disc forms a none- loading area in this zone. The findings of the experimental program and testing did not lend itself to develop a new model for estimation of the cutting forces since there are too many unknowns at this stage to allow for development of a general model. This includes the shape, magnitude, and location of the loading zone as well as the impact of rock properties on the pressure within the crushed zone. Thus, to address the need for development of a simple formula for estimation of the cutting forces acting on disc cutter in different rock types, a different approach was taken. For this purpose, a database of rock cutting forces which was initially developed by The rolling forces can be estimated by using the rolling coefficient, which is the ratio of rolling to normal forces, as follows: In order to estimate rolling coefficient, there are several reliable formulations. For example: As noted before, this formula has been in use for over a decade with reasonable degree of success and more detailed information on the use of the cutting forces for TBM cutterhead design or performance predictions can be found in Rostami Direct measurement of the pressure or load distribution within the contact zone between disc cutter and rock has proved that the actual loading zone is smaller than the anticipated or theoretical contact area. This indicates that higher stresses could be experienced in this zone, beyond what was previously expected and used in many of the models. Much more work needs to be done to fully understand the behavior of rock in the crushed zone and surely additional measurements are needed on different cutter profiles and rock types to allow for development of a coherent theory for the development of the crushed zone, its shape and load distributions, and its relationship with various rock properties. However, it seems like the simpler formulas can still be used to estimate the cutting forces for practical uses. With so many parameters to define the shape, extent, location, and magnitude of the components of the load distribution, it is unlikely that the true load distribution configuration within the contact area can be used for estimation of cutting forces in near future. Meanwhile, study of the load distribution in the contact area can be used for refining the numerical modeling of the cutting process and for development of more efficient disc cutter profiles. The author acknowledges the efforts and guidance Dr. Levent Ozdemir who has served as academic advisor for completion of this study as part of a PhD thesis at the