This contribution documents, using the example of the Gulf of Mexico large marine ecosystem (GoM) LME, how mass-balance, trophic (‘Ecopath’) models can be synthesized into a single integrated, spatially explicit model, from which various inferences on the ecological functioning of, and fisheries impacts on an LME can be drawn. The 10 component models used here covered inshore subsystems (lagoon, coral reefs), shelves, the open waters of the GoM, both in Mexican and US waters, and the GoMs Central Gyre, and were integrated using the Ecopath with Ecosim software. The main features of the synthetic trophic model resulting from this integration are presented, along with several time dynamic (Ecosim) and spatial simulations (Ecospace). Jointly, their results suggest the GoM to be rather robust as a whole, although continued increases in fishing effort, especially by bottom (shrimp) trawlers, will have serious impacts, reverberating through the entire shelf subsystem.Fisheries are in crisis worldwide, while their impacts upon the ecosystems in which they are embedded are increasingly being seen as the major force impacting change by affecting productivity, and even continued existence ‘Ecosystem-based fisheries management’ (EBFM) has been proposed as an alternative approach This is one of the reasons, given widespread interest in a transition towards EBFM, for the construction of the trophic model of ecosystems by fisheries scientists, an activity that has led to many pertinent publications in the last decade (see contributions in Before the ascent of mass-balance trophic (‘Ecopath’) models, only few attempts had been made to model entire LMEs. The most influential among these attempts was the North Sea model of Another influential approach toward LME modelling was the work documented in The ease with which Ecopath models can be constructed, notably from data extracted via a specially programmed change by pre-programmed routine of FishBase The other approach, documented here, is to combine component models into a single Ecopath model of an LME, as described for the Gulf of Mexico (GoM) by The GoM is located between tropical and subtropical North Atlantic latitudes, and includes a wide variety of marine habitats. As one of the 64 LMEs defined by  The methodology used for this contribution follows identification of area and period to be covered; definition and parameterization of ecosystem functional groups; model balancing and verification; analysis of model features and behaviour (i.e., policy exploration). Step 1 led to the identification of the following geographical limits: from Cabo Catoche in Yucatan to Punta Perpetua on the Western end of Cuba, and from Bahia Santa Clara, in Norwestern Cuba to Long Sound in Florida Bay ( The 10 trophic mass-balance (Ecopath) models used here are summarized in Step 2 involved identifying functional groups which would represent a compromise between the need for parsimony vs. the need to consider the many distinct groups included in the local models, to represent major ecosystem types, and to consider important top predators such as seabirds and marine mammals, often ignored in local models. This led to a compromise of 40 functional groups: three primary producers (benthic producers: inshore phytoplankton, offshore phytoplankton); two non-living groups (detritus and discards); eight herbivores and/or detritivores (mainly invertebrates, including planktonic and benthic forms, the latter ranging from meio- to macrobenthos), and 29 other consumers, including turtles, seabirds and two marine mammal groups. The 597 species of fish occurring in the GoM (see The master equation of Ecopath, for each functional group The parameter estimates ( The catches ( Step 3, i.e., solving for the unknowns (generally the EE Once an initial set of parameters were available, the model was balanced, mainly by adjusting the Validation of the model here mainly consisted of examining the stability of its behaviour in time and space, using Ecosim and Ecospace, respectively. These test runs led to minor parameter adjustments for a few functional groups. Ecosim uses the master equation: Ecospace is parameterized in a similar fashion, but runs an Ecosim model in each of its spatial cells, while allowing movements of functional groups between cells Step 4 consisted of running various exploitation scenarios using Ecosim, presented below along with their key results.  The total system throughput The mean path length in the GoM model, i.e., the average number of groups that a flow passes through, calculated as the total throughput divided by the sum of the exports and the respiration The calculated transfer efficiencies between trophic levels are 15.1% from trophic level I to II, 13.5% from II to III, 9.6 from III to IV and 7.5% from IV to V. Here again, we observe intermediate values, as Fisheries catches in the GoM correspond to a flux of 1.6 We abstain from presenting more system characteristics, as those given here suffice to illustrate the various inferences that can be drawn from a food web such as presented here. (Details on the construction of the model, and its various features, are available online at The model presented above is dynamically stable, as established by running it with Ecosim and Ecospace. Specifically, the response of its functional groups to increases in fishing mortality by various fleets through Ecosim corresponds to what may be expected of an ecosystem of this type (see As shown in Moreover, strong coupling between inshore and offshore strata is evident in the system: the biomass of inshore resources does not increase substantially, even under low fishing pressure, if fishing pressure and/or predation in offshore waters remain high. This suggests a recruitment failure due to the offshore fisheries decreasing the biomass of reproductive adults. Recent developments in the EwE software (see The work reported here was adapted from a Master thesis of the first author, written under the guidance of the second, submitted to the Department of Zoology, University of British Columbia, and funded by the International Council for Canadian Studies and Mexico's CONACyT. The first author thanks the many colleagues and faculty members who have helped her, notably Dr. V. Christensen and C. Walters at UBC and Drs F. Arreguin-Sanchez, J. Browder and S. Manikchand-Heileman. The second author acknowledges support from the Pew Charitable Trust trough the