This work describes the study of sunset yellow (SY) dye degradation based on the heterogeneous electro-Fenton (EF) process, where Fe3O4 NPs were used as heterogeneous catalysts. The electrochemical system used was an undivided electrochemical cell with single compartment and a gas diffusion electrode (GDE) was used as a working electrode. The SY dye samples were analyzed by UV–vis spectrophotometry, high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and total organic carbon (TOC). Fe3O4 NPs were synthesized by co-precipitation method and characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and N2-physisorption analysis. For the Photoelectro-Fenton (PEF) process, the concentration decay of SY dye was 80 and 99 % in the presence of 0.1 mol L−1 Na2SO4 and 0.13 mol L−1 NaCl respectively. The results of TOC removal, showed that ∼50 % of mineralization was achieved at 90 min. For the solar Photoelectro-Fenton process (SPEF) there was high catalytic yield, i.e., 98.7 % of color removal, 100 % of concentration decay and 71 % of TOC removal at 90 min. of electrolysis. The Fe3O4 NPs stability was confirmed after eight consecutive degradation cycles, showing that there is no loss of catalytic activity at the end of the last cycle. The results obtained by XRD analysis showed that there was no structural alteration in the crystallography of the NPs after 5 h of degradation in both electrolytes. There was no dissolution of Fe2+ ions at the end of electrolysis when the SY dye was subjected to the degradation by EF, PEF and SPEF processes.The inappropriate effluents discharge from several sources into water has become a concern, since various classes of pollutants such as, pesticides, by care products, textile and food dyes may be present in their complete form or as by-products [ Textile and food industries stand out for the wide range of additives and contaminating compounds that are used throughout all process stages, and often the dyes are the main constituents of this waste, and have carcinogenic, mutagenic and toxic effects [ Most of the used synthetic dyes belong to the azo group (N Several methods used for the dye removal processes are physical and have as main disadvantage the formation of sludge that are discarded at the end of the process [ In order to increase the efficiency of wastewater treatment that containing dyes, the Advanced Electrochemical Oxidation Processes (AEOP) [ AEOPs are based on the H In the development of an indirect electrooxidation methodology for dyes, there is great interest in the cathodic reduction reaction of O Based on the H However, the use of metal oxides based on iron, In this context, searching for increasingly effective methods for the organic compounds remediation, this work studies the electrochemical degradation of the Sunset Yellow (SY) (C.I. 15985) dye using a gas diffusion electrode (GDE) by EF, Photoelectro-Fenton (PEF) and solar Photoelectro-Fenton (SPEF) process using Fe The synthesis of Fe Characterization of Fe The N The determination of the NPs morphology was performed by an Electron Transmitting Electron Microscope (TEM) Fei Tecnai G2 F20 HRTEM. The electrolytes studied for the electrochemical production of H The GDE with geometric area of 20 cm The study of H The quantification of electrogenerated H For the study of SY dye (Sigma Aldrich > 85 %) electrodegradation, 350 mL of 100 mg L The SY dye electrodegradation was performed by different combinations of processes: (i) UVA irradiation only (photolysis), (ii) H For the study of color removal, the measurements were performed on a Varian Cary-50 UV–vis spectrophotometer, and the follow-up at the absorbance decay was at 480 nm. The monitoring of SY concentration decay was studied by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and the experiments was performed in a Shimadzu LC-20AT coupled with a model SPD-20A UV detector and a Phenomenex Luna C18 column (250 × 4.6 mm i.d.). The isocratic elution mode was used and the mobile phase was a mixture of 5:95 (v/v) H Total organic carbon (TOC) were carried out at the final of each degradation process, in order to study the rate of dye mineralization. This study was performed on a Shimadzu model TOC-VCPN PC-controlled TOC analyzer. In order to verify any residual amount of Fe In order to verify the catalytic stability and reuse of the Fe XRD patterns of Fe It is verified that there is the presence of a single crystalline phase, and can be attributed to the cubic spinel (JCPDS #19-0629). The face-centered cubic structure (  The SSA value is higher than other studies [ The morphology and composition of the Fe Initially, LSV (Supplementary material, Fig. S1) was performed to evaluate the different ORR secondary reactions that interfere in the H For the study of H It was possible to observe that a higher H In the presence of 0.13 mol L It is noteworthy that the rate of H The H In order to know the kinetics of the H It is important to emphasize that the kinetic study by a zero pseudo-order process is due to a limitation of the mass transport process since the electrochemical cell configuration is the type single compartment. In this case, O In order to verify the energy consumption ( The In this work, the The current efficiency was also studied ( Given the results presented in The study of color removal was evaluated by absorption bands decay in the UV–vis spectrophotometry (λ=480 nm) obtained during the SY dye degradation. The color removal was calculated according to absorbance at time The photocatalytic process was not efficient, presenting only 10.5 % of color removal. However, this process must be taken into account when applied in conjunction with other AEOPs [ It is noteworthy that in this type of degradation, occurs the formation of For the degradation using only H For the heterogeneous EF and PEF processes in the presence of 0.1 mol L Sharma et al. [ It is noteworthy that in the presence of Cl When compared in the two electrolytic media studied, a large difference to color removal is observed, occurring a drastic decrease in 15 min. (99 % in Cl For the electrochemical system using GDE as the cathode, the EF and PEF processes were efficient, since the continuous regeneration of Fe From the color removal data, the apparent kinetic constant ( The highest values of In order to monitor the concentration decay during the degradation, HPLC analyses were performed, and this study was evaluated by SY concentration at initial and  Considering the reactivity of the EF and PEF processes, the Fe According to Matta et al. [ There was an increase of 24 % in the catalytic activity of the Fe It is worth mentioning that all reactions stages of the heterogeneous EF process are based on the equilibrium reaction related to the Fe For the kinetic study to concentration decay, the On the other hand, the PEF process in the presence of Cl In order to verify the complete removal of the SY dye, exhaustive electrolysis was performed in presence of 0.1 mol L The study of the SY dye mineralization when subjected to the electrochemical treatments was carried out by the total organic analysis and the TOC removal for the degradation processes at 90 min. of electrolysis are shown in The degradation by photolysis process, anodic oxidation and H However, the effect of the electrolyte on dye degradation in the Fenton-based process should not be ignored, since in the presence of Cl It is important to use Fe Considering that the SY molecule was completely mineralized to CO The maximum MCE was achieved to PEF process at 90 min. of reaction, obtaining 48.5 and 57.1 % in presence of SO Energy consumption ( For the EF and PEF degradation processes in the presence of SO In this study, the SY dye degradation was performed only in the presence of SO From Fig. S5, regarding the SPEF process, a substantial decrease in absorbance is observed during the degradation. This is caused by the intense solar irradiation supplied to the system, since the power of this source is significantly higher than UVA lamp used in the PEF process.  The degradation processes kinetics were evaluated according to the linear profile, and the data obtained are shown in The study of the mineralization efficiency was evaluated, and for the SPEF process, the TOC removal was 71 %, while for the solar photo process and H For the MCE study, there was a high efficiency at the end of the process when compared to the PEF process. Probably this higher rate can be related to the high action of the oxidant species produced in the reaction, and the efficient role of the According to the EC data shown in In order to verify the catalytic stability of the Fe Saleh et al. [ In addition to verifying the NPs stability, dye degradation experiments were carried during 5 h by PEF process. After it, the Fe Test for detection of residual Fe He et al. [ In this work was demonstrated that the H All authors participating in this work made important contributions to the acquisition, analysis and interpretation of the data obtained in the studies of SY dye degradation. We also declare that all authors participated actively and critically in the writing and review of the manuscript. All authors provided critical feedback and contributed to the format and analysis of the data shown in the manuscript. The authors have participated in all step of manuscript, since design, analysis up to interpretation of the data. Have no conflict of interest. In addition, this manuscript has not been submitted to, nor is under review at, another journal or other publishing similar. The authors acknowledge the financial support provided by the Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: