A series of Toxicity Identification Evaluations (TIEs) to identify the cause(s) of observed toxicity to Ceriodaphnia dubia have been conducted on a hard rock mining effluent. Characteristic of hard rock mining discharges, the effluent has elevated (∼3000mgl−1) total dissolved solids (TDS) composed primarily of Ca2+ and SO4
                     2−. The effluent typically exhibits 6–12 toxic units (TUs) when tested with C. dubia. Phase I and II toxicity identification evaluations (TIEs) indicated Ca2+ and SO4
                     2− contributed only ∼4TUs of toxicity, but this was likely an underestimate due to problems with simulating the supersaturated CaSO4 concentrations in the effluent. Treatment of the effluent with BaCO3 to precipitate Ca2+ and SO4
                     2− revealed that these ions contribute ∼6TUs of the observed toxicity, but the remaining source(s) of toxicity (up to 6TUs) remained unidentified. Subsequent investigations identified thiocyanate (SCN−) in the effluent at 100–150μM. Toxicity tests reveal that C. dubia are sensitive to SCN− with an estimated IC25 of 8.3μΜ for reproduction in moderately hard water suggesting between 12 and 18TUs of toxicity in the effluent. Additional experiments demonstrated that SCN− toxicity is reduced in the high TDS matrix of the mining effluent. Testing of a mock effluent simulating the major ion and SCN− concentrations resulted in 10.4TUs, suggesting that Ca2+, SO4
                     2− and SCN− are the three toxicants present in this effluent. This research suggests SCN− may be a more common cause of toxicity in mining effluents than is generally recognized.This paper describes the procedures and results of a toxicity identification evaluation (TIE) performed on a lead–zinc mine with onsite milling operations. Typical of lead–zinc mining and milling operations, this facility crushes ore and subjects it to a chemical flotation process to extract Pb and Zn, with the remaining tails being deposited in an impoundment. All mine drainage water and mining impacted water are also collected in the tailings impoundment. Mining activities accelerate the naturally occurring oxidation of sulfide minerals such as pyrite (FeS The mine is required to conduct whole effluent toxicity (WET) testing as part of it NPDES permit. During periods of discharge, the mine conducts monthly chronic WET tests with Toxicity identification evaluations are a series of experimental manipulations used to either remove or render biologically unavailable various classes of toxicants that might occur in an effluent. The toxicity of the manipulated effluent is then compared to the baseline toxicity of the effluent. A reduction in toxicity resulting from the experimental manipulations relative to baseline suggests that the targeted class of toxicants is contributing to observed toxicity. Subsequent experiments can then be conducted to identify the specific toxicant(s) within that class that are causing toxicity. The USEPA has developed a formalized series of procedures for conducting these types of studies ( All testing was conducted in an environmental chamber maintained at 25±1 All testing with Initial experiments generally followed standard Phase I TIE procedures as outlined in As presented later, Phase I TIE results suggested that the primary source of toxicity was likely related to the high ionic strength of the effluent. Phase II TIE experiments focused on testing this hypothesis. For each test, the IC25 was determined and compared to the results from a baseline test on the mine effluent. First, a test was performed in which the ionic composition (Na Results from the Phase II TIE suggested that elevated TDS, particularly Ca In an initial experiment, we attempted to create a simulated effluent with supersaturated CaSO In a second experiment, an amount of BaCO A third test was conducted to determine the chronic toxicity of Ba Finally, we evaluated whether any ionic imbalance in the effluent after treatment with BaCO During the above experiments, analysis of the effluent anion composition by ion chromatography revealed an unidentified peak in the chromatogram. Discussions with environmental staff at the mine suggested that this peak might be thiocyanate (SCN Two experiments were conducted to evaluate SCN Cations and anions were measured using atomic absorption (Varian SpectrAA 220FS) and ion chromatography (DIONEX DX-120), with the exception of bicarbonate, which was measured using a total CO The IC25 is the standard statistical endpoint used under the NPDES permitting system in the United States and so was used as the statistical endpoint throughout this study. The IC25 (and 95% confidence limits) were estimated using linear regression techniques (linear interpolation or probit analysis, as appropriate to the data). All analyses were performed on measured test concentrations. In TIEs, the contribution of multiple toxicants to the overall toxicity is often accounted for in toxic units (TUs), which is defined as 100 divided by the statistical endpoint of interest (IC25 in this case). For example, an effluent with an IC25 of 10% would have 10 Test temperature was maintained at 26±1 In the baseline test, the mean number of neonates per female was 18.8, 7.9 and 0 in the control, 50% and 100% effluent, respectively. None of the standard TIE treatments were effective at reducing toxicity in 100% effluent, although a small reduction in toxicity was observed for the cation/anion exchange treatment with 2.2 neonates per female produced ( Attempts to simulate and modify the ionic composition of the effluent were of limited success particularly with respect to Ca The estimated IC25 (95% CI) in the baseline effluent was 22.5% (4.4–33.4%), while both the simulated effluent and simulated effluent with Mg Attempts to create a supersaturated CaSO Assessment of baseline effluent toxicity resulted in an IC25 (for reproduction) of 17.8% effluent while the simulated effluent had an estimated IC25 of 24.5% effluent. BaCO The toxicity test of SCN Results from the Phase I TIE revealed only the C-18 SPE and cation/anion exchange treatments significantly reduced effluent toxicity ( The Phase II TIE focused on the hypothesis that elevated Ca At the completion of the Phase II TIE, both the analytical chemistry and TIE manipulations generally supported the hypothesis that elevated Ca We were only able to increase the CaSO We also simulated the ionic composition of the BaCO Although the IC25s for the BaCO Given these differences in dose response, it seemed likely that one or more additional toxicant(s) besides CaSO In analyzing the effluent ionic composition during the BaCO Results from a 7-d toxicity test with SCN The exact mechanism by which the ionic composition of the effluent protects against SCN Results from this study highlight the difficulties in conclusively demonstrating the causes of toxicity in high TDS effluents as has been previously described ( Importantly, this study is the first to demonstrate the chronic sensitivity of This study was funded by a research grant from Teck Cominco Alaska.