The origin of heavy Fe isotope compositions in high-silica (>70wt% SiO2) igneous rocks remains a highly controversial topic. Considering that fluid exsolution in eruptive rocks is more straight-forward to constrain than in plutonic rocks, this study addresses the problem of Fe isotope fractionation in high-silica igneous rocks by measuring Fe isotope compositions of representative rhyolitic samples from the Neoproterozoic volcanic-sedimentary basins in southern China and the Triassic Tu Le Basin in northern Vietnam. The samples show remarkably varied δ56FeIRMM014 values ranging from 0.05±0.05‰ to 0.55±0.05‰, which is among the highest values reported from felsic rocks. The extensional tectonic setting and short melt residence time in magma chambers for the studied rhyolites rule out Soret diffusion and thermal migration processes as causes of the high δ56Fe values. Effects of volcanic degassing and fluid exsolution on bulk rock δ56Fe values for the rhyolites are also assessed using bulk rock geochemical indicators and Rayleigh fractionation models, and these processes are found to be insufficient to produce resolvable changes in Fe isotope compositions of the residual melt. The most probable mechanism accounting for heavy Fe isotope compositions in the high-silica rhyolites is narrowed down to fractional crystallization processes in the magma before rhyolite eruption. Removal of isotopically light Fe-bearing minerals (i.e. ulvöspinel-rich titanomagnetite, ilmenite and biotite) is proposed as the main cause of Fe isotope variation in silicic melts during magmatic evolution. This study implies that crystal fractionation is the dominant mechanism that controls Fe isotope fractionation in eruptive rocks and Fe isotopes could be used to study magmatic differentiation of high-silica magmas.Iron is a major polyvalent metal that plays a key role in a variety of magmatic and mineralizing processes on Earth. The usefulness of Fe isotopes as Previous studies on heavy Fe isotope signatures of high-SiO In this study, we investigated the Fe isotope systematics of representative high-SiO The South China Block (SCB) consists of the Yangtze and the Cathaysia blocks. It is separated from the North China Craton by the Qinling-Dabie Orogen to the north, from the Songpan-Ganzi Block by the Longmenshan Fault to the west, and from the Indochina Block to the southwest by the Song Ma suture ( In addition to the above two volcanic-sedimentary suites that are related to Neoproterozoic extension in the SCB, a third suite of high-silica volcanic rocks was selected from the Triassic Tu Le Basin of northern Vietnam ( Major-element compositions of the samples from the Suxiong Formation and the Tu Le Basin were analyzed using an X-ray fluorescence spectrometer (XRF) at ALS Chemex (Guangzhou). Analytical precision (RSD) is 1–3% for elements with content above 1 wt% and is better than 5% for elements with contents below 1 wt%. Trace-element concentrations were determined by inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) at Nanjing FocuMS Technology Co. Ltd., with analytical precision better than 5% for trace elements with concentrations >50 Sample preparation was undertaken at State Key Laboratory for Mineral Deposit Research, Nanjing University, where all chemical procedures were performed in a clean room with laminar flow hoods and HEPA filtered air. Deionized (18.2 Iron was separated from matrix elements by anion exchange chromatography using 0.2 Iron isotope ratios were measured using a Thermo Fisher Scientific Neptune Plus MC-ICP-MS at State Key Laboratory for Mineral Deposit Research, Nanjing University. The instrument was running at “wet-plasma” mode using a 100 Iron isotope compositions are reported as δ Accuracy of Fe isotope measurements was confirmed by repeated measurements of reference samples and geostandards that were treated as unknowns with the rhyolite samples. δ The δ Previous experimental studies suggested that temperature gradients imposed on silicate melt can lead to Fe isotope fractionation, with enrichment of heavy and light isotopes occurring at the cold and hot ends of the melt, respectively ( Thermal migration can produce the compositional trends observed in silicic rock series. For example, Silicate melts may contain up to a few weight percent of dissolved volatiles, in which H Lithium is a fluid-mobile element and its isotopic fractionation is observed during fluid-rock interaction (e.g. Different from the study of Although geochemical indicators rule out extensive fluid-melt/rock interaction, volcanic degassing did occur to the rhyolites upon eruption, and its influence on Fe isotope budget of the rhyolite needs to be quantified. Fe isotope exchange between melt and exsolved vapor during volcanic degassing can be modeled using a Rayleigh fractionation equation: The negative Fe isotope fractionation factor between fluid and melt indicates that magma degassing will produce high δ D The results of magma degassing modeling show that δ Because Soret effect, thermal diffusion and volcanic degassing are all unlikely to be responsible for the large Fe isotope variations observed in the rhyolitic rocks as discussed above, magmatic differentiation and partial melting are left as the two remaining possible mechanisms. Fractional crystallization of minerals plays a key role in magma evolution towards high-SiO It is crucial to know which mineral is dominant in controlling Fe isotope fractionation for a certain melt. Whole-rock δ Amphibole and titanite are the other possible phases that can separate from silicic magmas by fractional crystallization, and partitioning of light Fe isotopes into these phases in combination of fractional crystallization theoretically could produce enrichment of heavy Fe isotopes in evolved melts. It should be noted that amphibole and titanite have higher distribution coefficients for middle REEs than light REEs and heavy REEs (e.g., Based on the above discussions, the possible minerals for producing high δ The integrated Fe isotope fractionation effects of these minerals can be estimated using a Rayleigh fractionation model based on Eq. The variation in modeled fractionation factors in Consequently, we conclude that partitioning of light Fe isotopes into Fe-Ti oxides (ulvöspinel-rich titanomagnetite, ilmenite) and biotite in combination with the subsequent separation of these minerals by fractional crystallization from magma best explains the observed heavy Fe isotope compositions in high-silica rhyolites. Based on the discussions above, crystal-liquid separation (fractional crystallization) is the most likely mechanism for explaining the high δ Generation of crystal-poor high-SiO At 50–60% crystallization, the interstitial melt is rhyolitic and no more than 70–80% of the interstitial melt can be extracted ( Mechanisms of Fe isotope fractionation in high-SiO This manuscript benefits from constructive reviews from Adriana Heimann, John Foden, and an anonymous reviewer. We also thank Dr. Fangzhen Teng for his editorial handling and constructive comments. This work was financially supported by the State Key R&D Project of China (2016YFC0600203) and National Natural Science Foundation of China (41472049) to XLW, and “1000-talents program” of China to WL. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 