A reliable and practical method for characterizing refuse-derived fuels (RDF) with respect to greenhouse gas-relevance (or biomass content) is required by industries and waste management companies. As RDF usually consist of a variety of materials with different physical properties, sampling and sample preparation may represent crucial steps with regard to reliable analysis results. This is particularly valid for analytical methods, which rely on only small test specimens (centigrams), such as the adapted Balance Method (aBM). The aBM was recently developed by the authors and is based on elemental analyses (CHNSO). The investigations focus on elaborating an appropriate sample preparation for the aBM. To this end, two RDF model mixtures are generated out of paper, cardboard and different plastics, and comminuted down to a grain of size of <0.2mm using two differing mills as finishing step. The results of the aBM (applied for 52 samples) show that the performance of the method in terms of trueness and variation is competitive relative to standardized methods. Deviations between the determined value and the theoretical biogenic mass fraction are below 4.5%rel (at a probability of 95%). Furthermore, the standard deviation for both mixtures is below ±3.0%rel. A nested variance component analysis indicates that the last milling step and the step of drawing the test specimens for analysis contribute most to the observed variability. A consecutive application of two types of mills as a finishing step prior to analysis is proposed in order to facilitate a sufficient grinding of plastics as well as of cellulose fibers.Energy recovery from wastes and refuse-derived fuels (RDF) has become of increasing importance for energy-intensive industry branches such as cement manufacturing. In Austria this development has been strongly facilitated by the implementation of the landfill directive in 2009, which bans the disposal of waste with a total organic carbon content larger than 50 Both producers and users of RDF are interested in reliable and cost-effective methods for characterizing the fuel in terms of greenhouse gas-relevance. Until now, three methods to determine the biomass content in SRF have been described in the standard EN 15440:2011 However, waste materials are typically strongly heterogeneous with respect to their physical properties and texture and thus, different steps during sampling, sample processing, and analysis can be critical factors for a reliable analysis result Hence, the aim of the investigations presented in this paper is to elaborate an appropriate sample preparation procedure in order for the adapted Balance Method (aBM) to achieve highly reproducible results. In particular, the following aspects are addressed: Determination of the reliability of the aBM in terms of accuracy and precision (by means of predefined RDF model mixtures) Evaluation of the influence of different sample preparation steps on the final result of the aBM (hierarchical experimental set-up) Identification at which layer of the analysis procedure (different sample conditioning steps and chemical analysis) most of the efforts should be concentrated in order to avoid/minimize potential errors Identification of approaches for optimizing the conditioning procedure (comparison of different milling strategies). Within the framework of the present study the biomass content of two predefined material mixtures with different composition and different heterogeneity is determined using the adapted Balance Method (aBM) ( The adapted Balance Method (aBM) relies on the distinctly different chemical composition of water-and-ash-free biogenic and fossil organic matter, where fossil in this context is understood as materials produced out of crude oil, natural gas or coal. The necessary input data for the calculation are derived from elemental analyses (CHNSO). Additional data on the chemical composition of the water-and-ash-free biogenic and fossil matter are required, which can be derived from literature or from separate analyses of pure biogenic and fossil organic matter present in the fuel (see For the preparation of the two predefined RDF model mixtures, the following biogenic and fossil materials are used: Biogenic materials: cardboard: packaging, double walled paper: 80 Fossil materials: high-density polyethylene (HD-PE): laboratory grade HD-PE bottles, 250 polyethylene terephthalate (PET): cleaned PET-bottles without label, 237 extruded polystyrene foam (PS): insulation boards, Austrotherm GmbH. All chosen materials are usually represented in RDF made out of municipal solid waste and commercial waste in a high proportion Based on the share of the biogenic and fossil materials and their ash content (as determined by analyses), the theoretical biomass fraction for the mixtures is calculated on a water-free (wf) and water-and-ash-free (waf) reference basis (equations are given in the Supplementary material, Eqs. A.1 to A.4). For the CHNSO elemental analysis a final sample size of only a few centigrams is required. Thus, different sample preparation steps (comminution, partitioning) are necessary. The sample preparation is carried out in accordance with the Norm EN 15413:2011 The material mixtures undergo the sample comminution and segregation steps as outlined in Once the < For mixture I (two-component mixture) the < The splitting steps at each layer of comminution finally result in 16 analysis samples of mixture I (8 UCM-samples, 8 Cryomill-samples) and 36 samples of mixtures II (18 UCM The “pure” biogenic and fossil materials (paper, cardboard, HD-PE, PET, PS) are also comminuted down to < For each analysis sample (Layer (4)) the water content and ash content is analyzed in duplicate and in accordance with EN 15414-3:2011 The water-free (dried at 105 The total oxygen content TO is determined using an Elementar Vario EL instrument (Elementar Analysensysteme GmbH, Hanau, Germany). The analysis is based on the pyrolysis of the sample at 1150 In addition, the ignition residue of each test sample treated in the muffle oven is analyzed for its elemental composition to appraise the total inorganic content of carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, sulfur and oxygen. The values measured are converted according to Eq. Statistical tests are carried out in order to evaluate differences between data sets regarding their central tendencies (means) and variances. All tests are carried out using the program R (Version 3.0.2) Shapiro test: test for normal distribution (required to decide which subsequent statistical test, e.g. Levene test: test for homogeneity of variances (required to decide which subsequent statistical test, e.g.  Welch-Test: test for differences in means from two populations; applied when there is evidence that the variances of the data-sets are unequal Kruskal-Wallis test: test for differences in multiple means (non-parametric test); applied when there is evidence that the variances of the data-sets are unequal and the data are not normally distributed. For all statistical tests a level of significance of 0.05 is used. The overall trueness of the investigations achieved is estimated by applying statistical tests to the relative deviation from the theoretical value of all samples analyzed (52 in total). Critical factors for a reliable determination of the biomass content in heterogeneous wastes and RDF include sampling, sample preparation and the chemical analysis itself. All steps are associated with errors and contribute to the variation observed for the final results. The total variance of replicate samples can be used to estimate the overall quality of the whole analysis (including sample conditioning). However, to find the cause for the scattered analyses data, the hierarchy of the variation's sources has to be investigated The variance component analysis (VCA) assumes that the variance of the results reflects the sum of the variances of all influencing factors and allows the total variation measured to be attributed to the single processing steps. A nested VCA, based on Hartung (1991) Input of the variance component analysis (VCA) are the results after applying the adapted Balance Method, namely the parameter “Biogenic mass fraction” As outlined in The variance components per layer are calculated as summarized in Negative estimators for The sum of squares for each layer add up to the total sum of squares SS The results are presented as variance components ( In order to test for significant differences between samples after each preparation step, F-values (F The biomass content (biogenic mass fraction) of the prepared RDF model mixtures is determined by deploying the adapted Balance Method based on elemental analysis. The theoretical (true) value The calculated biogenic mass fractions The variation of the observations for the biogenic mass fraction  The mean deviation from the theoretical biogenic mass fraction (calculated as relative standard deviation) is lower for samples of mixture I (1.0–1.7%rel) compared to samples of mixture II (3.0–3.4%rel). This may partly be attributed to the lower biomass content of mixture II (absolute deviation is related to a lower mean), but also indicates that a higher complexity in terms of composition of the material mixture is more susceptible to changes in composition during sample preparation (mixture II contains a more heterogeneous material). Significant differences in the variation of the results are observed when comparing samples of mixture I processed with different mills ( The diverse variances for samples with different final preparation steps are attributed to unequal grain size distributions within the analysis samples. When applying the UCM, cellulose fibers of paper and cardboard material in the mixtures are not completely destroyed and tend to agglomerate to particles larger than the desired 0.2 Comparing the results of the chemical analysis with the respective biomass content calculated via aBM demonstrates the distinct dependency of the biomass content on the elementary content of TOC, TOH and TOO (see Supplementary material: Fig. F.1 and F.2). Higher contents of organic carbon and organic hydrogen and lower contents of organic oxygen inevitably result in lower contents of biogenic matter and vice versa. In order to assess the impact of each preparation step on the variation observed for the final results, a variance component analysis (VCA) as a nested design is conducted based on equations in Looking at the results for mixture I, the last milling step Layer (3) adds the most to the overall variance for UCM-samples as well as for Cryomill-samples (relative variance components for Layer (3) 48.6% UCM-samples; 50.9% for Cryomill-samples). The The first mixing and milling steps Layer (1) and Layer (2) appear to not add significant variation to the final result (with The variance component of Layer (4) of the Cryomill-samples suggests that the results after the subsampling step do not differ significantly from each other ( The visually observed phenomenon of fiber agglomerations after UCM-milling is assumed to add heterogeneity to the analysis samples, which is reflected in the results of the VCA. The results of the VCA for the conditioning and analysis of the five-component mixture II are summarized in Nevertheless, the initial mixing and splitting may represent a sensitive step for sample preparation, especially when more complex mixtures are concerned, but no distinct conclusions can be drawn as only two replications have been done at this layer. For both mixtures a significant share of the overall variation originates from Layer (4), which represents the subsampling step where small specimens are drawn from the analysis sample to be fed into the elemental analyzer. The significantly lower absolute magnitude of the variance component of Layer (4) for UCM Comparing the variance components σ Overall, the coefficients of variation (CV) of both mixtures are below 3% for all layers, which is regarded as a promising result and shows the general suitability of the sample preparation method applied in conjunction with the aBM. Previous studies conducted by Fellner et al. (2011) With respect to the repeatability, the obtained results indicate slightly lower variations (± 3%rel) compared to values in the literature (< ± 5%rel Reported relative standard deviations of the biomass content for (real) refuse-derived fuels characterized by the selective dissolution method vary by ± The investigations conducted on two refuse-derived fuel (RDF) model mixtures (2-component and 5-component mixtures with 75.5 and 55.9% biogenic content, respectively) demonstrate the feasibility of the adapted Balance Method (aBM) for determining the biogenic mass fraction in heterogeneous material mixtures. At a probability of 95%, the calculated values deviate < In addition, a high level of repeatability for the analysis (including the sample preparation) is also proven as the relative standard deviation for the biogenic mass fraction of all samples analyzed is below ± A small but significant effect of the sample preparation method chosen on the trueness and on the variation of the final results is observed when comparing samples comminuted with different mills. The biogenic mass fraction tends to be underestimated when the Cryomill is applied (up to minus 2.3% rel). The significant difference in standard deviation when different mills are compared is explained by the higher heterogeneity of the UCM-finished samples, which may be attributed to the agglomeration of fibers to bigger particles than the desired grain size of 0.2 The nested variance component analysis (VCA), which was already applied in previous studies for heavy metal data in waste incineration residues The lowest added variation due to milling and subsequent sampling for analysis is observed when the final preparation consists of a milling step by means of an UCM followed by a grinding process via Cryomill. This confirms findings from Smidt et al. (2008), who concluded on an improvement of reproducibility of analysis results for municipal solid waste when two mills with different working principles are applied in association In general, the choice of appropriate conditioning steps for the adapted Balance Method, should be based on the expected qualitative composition of the waste or RDF to be analyzed (for example, a rough approximation of the share of plastics and paper by visual inspection) together with the desired precision of the final result. Material mixtures with a high fraction of paper or cardboard primarily call for an adequate destruction of cellulose fibers (which, for example, a Cryomill is capable of) to avoid particle agglomeration. A further milling step (utilizing, for example, an UCM) to ensure a certain grain size for plastics might be practical when a high precision (error As the performance of the mills applied appears limited, a combination of both types of milling processes (high-speed rotor mill, mixer mill) is proposed in order to facilitate a sufficient grinding of plastics and cellulose fibers to a grain size below 0.2 The authors would like to acknowledge the funding of the present study, which was provided by the Federal Ministry for Transport, Innovation and Technology (bmvit) and the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at