Using bibliometric analysis combined with information visualization analysis, this paper aims at investigating the global characteristics and trends of research on ceramic membranes. According to the 3697 publications from 1998 to 2016 in Science Citation Index Expended, this study was conducted from five major aspects, including basic growth trends analysis, countries/ territories and institutions analysis, categories and journals analysis, keywords analysis, and citation bursts detection. This study revealed positive growth trends of the research on ceramic membranes. The most productive countries and institutions were both from Peoples R China, and the collaborations among countries and institutions were frequent worldwide. The result of categories analysis revealed that the major discipline groups of the research on ceramic membranes were distributed in chemistry, physics, material, and application. Water resource, energy, environmental science and food engineering were the main application fields of ceramic membranes according to the journals analysis. Furthermore, three keyword clusters were identified, indicating that the main research directions of the research on ceramic membranes included membrane filtration, oxygen permeation and the fabrication of ceramic membranes. Finally, the top 20 citation bursts with the maximum burst strength were detected, indicating that the research on oxygen separation and water treatment has been flourishing in recent years.Ceramic membranes are a type of artificial membranes fabricated with inorganic ceramic materials through specific processes. The traditional but important function of ceramic membranes is to realize the separation of substances. Relying on the trans-membrane pressure and pore size, when the fluid with multiple components pass the ceramic membranes, the target substance will be separated from others. In recent years, the function of ceramic membranes has been extended to substances transformation via coating some catalytic materials on the surface The characteristics and trends of the research on a discipline can be reflected from the information of related publications Bibliometric analysis is a method to analyze the literature information based on mathematics and statistics but avoid people reading extensive publications The aim of this study is to identify the characteristics and trends of the research on ceramic membranes based on bibliometric analysis combined with information visualization analysis. Using various analysis tools from different aspects, a comprehensive and multi-perspective summary of the research on ceramic membranes was given based the publications from 1998 to 2016. In more detail, the study was conducted from 5 main aspects according to the different analysis objects, including basic growth trends analysis, countries/territories and institutions analysis, categories and journals analysis, keywords analysis and citation bursts detection. The data collection was conducted on September 12th, 2017. Web of Science Core Collection was chosen as the source database, but only the publications recorded in Science Citation Index Expanded(SCI-E) from 1998 to 2016 were collected in this study. “Ceramic membrane*” was used as the topic keyword and then 3697 records were found. The 3697 full records and their cited references were downloaded as the raw materials for further analysis. Of all collected publication records, article (3052, 82.55%) is the most frequent publication type, followed by proceeding paper (474, 12.82%), review (133, 3.60%), meeting abstract (25, 0.68%) and others (13, 0.35%). The statistical data, such as the information of publications, authors, pages, citations, journals and categories, were calculated by Excel and HistCite The trends of the number of publications and average number of authors per publication are shown in According to the 3697 records collected, there were 75 different countries/territories that published their works on ceramic membranes in SCI-E from 1998 to 2016. It is noted that 70% of the countries/ territories published more than 10 works but 12% of the countries just published a single work.  The collaboration network between the top 20 most productive source countries is shown in The 3697 records collected are from 1962 different institutions. However, only 115 institutions had the publications more than 10, accounting for 5.86% of the total number of institutions. The top 20 most productive institutions are listed in Similar to the countries discussed in 3.2.1, the collaboration network between the top 20 most productive institutions is showed in To detect the locations of source institutions and the collaborative relationships in a geographic perspective, a global map was generated. As is shown in 89 kinds of web of science categories were identified from the collected records, however, only 23 of them included more than 20 publications. The top 20 web of science categories with the largest number of publications is showed in The 3697 collected records were originated from 522 journals, but only 58 journals contained more than 10 publications, accounting for 11.11% of the total journals number. The top 20 most productive journals are shown in 10195 kinds of keywords were found from the collected records, however, only 552 kinds of them appeared more than 10 times. Cluster 1(in red): this cluster mainly includes the keywords related to the topic of membrane filtration especially in water treatment, such as “ultrafiltration”, “microfiltration”, “filtration”, “nanofiltration”, “cross-flow microfiltration”, “membrane filtration”, “microfiltration membranes”, “reverse-osmosis”, “waste water”, “water”, “fouling” and “recovery”. Cluster 2(in green): this cluster mainly includes the keywords related to the topic of oxygen permeation, such as “oxygen permeation”, “partial oxidation”, “oxidation”, “mixed conductor”, “methane conversion”, “syngas”, “dense ceramic membrane”, “oxides”, “perovskite” and “membrane reactor”. Cluster 3(in blue): this cluster mainly includes the keywords related to the topic of fabrication, such as “fabrication”, “sol-gel”, “chemical-vapor-deposition”, “titania”, “alumina”, “silica” and “inorganic membrane”. The three clusters revealed the major research directions of the research on ceramic membranes. In order to give a deeper but accessible analysis of keywords, the three clusters were discussed below. The keyword “filtration” may be the core of cluster 1, revealing one of the main research directions of ceramic membranes. Membrane filtration is a process to separate the different components in liquid relying on the pressure difference across the membrane and suitable pore size in membrane The keywords “microfiltration”, “ultrafiltration”, “nanofiltration” and “reverse-osmosis” just shows four common membrane filtration technologies The appearances of “water” and “waste-water” reveals the main object applying membrane filtration technology. Compared with the traditional water treatment technology, ceramic membrane filtration technology has many advantages, such as no chemical addition, lower energy consumption, lower operation temperature, better selectivity and smaller floor area. Therefore, ceramic membrane filtration technology has been widely used in the water treatment. Nowadays, in addition to the seawater desalination, ceramic membranes have been widely used in the treatment of oily wastewater The keywords of “fouling” and “recovery” in this cluster reflected the research on membrane fouling, which is a unavoidable problem in the process of membrane filtration. Membrane fouling results from the particle deposition on the membrane surface or in membrane pores The keyword “oxygen permeation” is the core of this cluster, and almost all keywords in this cluster are related to this topic. Oxygen separation is a vital process for many chemical industries, and the basic target of this process is usually to obtain oxygen from air Some keywords in this cluster indicates the materials or types of ceramic membranes for oxygen separation, such as “dense ceramic membrane”, “mixed conductor”, “perovskite” and “oxide”. Dense ceramic membrane made from mixed ionic-electronic conductor (MIEC) is an excellent candidate for the oxygen separation from air because of the high electronic and ionic conductivity at elevated temperature The keywords “methane” and “methane conversion” may reveal the most important application area of oxygen separation membranes. Furthermore, the keyword “syngas” and “partial oxidation” indicates target product and approach of membrane conversion respectively which are in extensive research. Some ceramic reactors made from dense ceramic membranes integrated in catalytic materials can realize the oxygen separation and partial oxidation of methane to syngas in a single step The keywords “stability” and “permeability” may reflect the requirements for the performance of the ceramic membranes for oxygen separation. It is merited that oxygen permeability is an important indicator to evaluate the performance of ceramic membranes because of the production demand. However, in most of oxygen separation industries, the ceramic membranes have to tolerate high operating temperature and severe chemical potential gradients across the membranes The keyword “fabrication” is the core of this cluster, since most of the keywords in this cluster are relevant to the fabrication of ceramic membranes directly or indirectly. Because of the differences in materials and fabrication techniques, the ceramic membranes will exhibit various characteristics and the cost is different. Therefore, how to fabricate the ceramic membranes with high performance but low cost has been a hot topic for decades It is identified that the keywords “sol-gel” and “chemical vapor-deposition” appearing in this cluster are two common fabrication methods of ceramic membranes. More specifically, both of them are the popular modification techniques for the surface of ceramic membranes. The sol-gel process is a traditional but practical method for producing the ceramic membranes with small pore size and narrow pore size distribution The keywords “alumina”, “titania” and “silica” in cluster 3 revealed the most popular raw materials for the fabrication of ceramic membranes. Because of the great mechanical strength chemical resistance, alumina is widely used in the industrial production of porous ceramic membranes The most active area of research during a certain period can be revealed by citation burst, which is an indicator for the cited reference obtaining dramatic increase of citations during a period of time Group 1: The references in this group are related to oxygen separation, including #1, #3, #4, #5, #6, #8, #12, #15 and #16. Group 2: The references in this group are related to methane conversion, including #2, #10, #13, #14, #17 and #20. Group 3: The reference in this group is related to solid-oxide fuel cells, including #7. Group 4: The references in this group are related to water treatment, including #9 and #11. Group 5: The references in this group are related to the preparation and characterization of ceramic membranes, including #18 and #19. It is worth noting that topics of the five groups above are highly consist with the topics of three keywords clusters in 3.4, verifying the main research directions of ceramic membranes analyzed by keywords are reasonable. In order to analyze the evolutions of the five citation bursts groups, the citation histories of the top 20 references with the strongest citation burst are showed in Using the bibliometric analysis combined with visualization analysis, the research on ceramic membranes were summarized based on the publications extracted from Science Citation Index Expanded from 1998 to 2016. This study was conducted from five different aspects and a comprehensive and multi-perspective description of the research on ceramic membranes was presented. This paper can help the stakeholders to grasp the global characteristics and trends of the research on ceramic membranes. Moreover, this paper provided a unique combined analysis method, which can also be applied to analyze the global characteristics and trends of other research topic. According to the increasing number of publications and authors, the growth trends of the research on ceramic membranes were positive from 1998 to 2016. The most productive country and institution were both from Peoples R China. Peoples R China. USA, Japan, Spain and UK had the most intensive collaboration with other countries, and the maximum collaboration intensity appeared between Peoples R China and Austria. The source institutions were distributed in Europe most densely, but the publications from Africa were very rare, indicating the research are influenced by the economic level. The top 20 categories with the largest number of publications were classified into 4 major discipline groups, including chemistry, physics, material, and application. The top 5 most productive journals were The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support by the