The breakage of bonding between sand particles at a borehole wall usually precedes the borehole failure and it can be considered as a sign that the onset of the borehole collapse is imminent in granular formations. Detecting the particle detachment point and introducing an appropriate failure criterion will play a key role in borehole stability analysis. To investigate the influence of different factors on the initiation of particle debonding at the borehole wall, a series of new laboratory tests was designed and performed on synthetic poorly cemented sand specimens. The tests were devised to allow visual observation of the onset of dislodgment of particles from the borehole wall under various stress paths, for two different borehole sizes and various cement contents. In order to simulate the conducted laboratory tests on TWHC a series of numerical modelling has been conducted by discrete element method to estimate the stresses and strains at the borehole wall. The total strain energy up to the point of the observed particle debonding was calculated for each stress path and a failure criterion based on the total strain energy was introduced. The results showed that the particle detachment point at the borehole wall was reached both before and after the peak strength of the TWHC specimens depending on the stress path and cement content. Also, it was concluded that the stress path has a significant effect on the onset of the particle detachment. The introduced criterion based on absorbed strain energy will help to design more effective support systems for boreholes.Shallow depth boreholes with diameters ranging from 100 to 600 Number of researchers have utilised the thick-walled hollow cylinder (TWHC) specimens for studying the stability of man-made underground openings such as tunnels, boreholes and oil and gas wells. Alsayed The in situ stress state can be defined in terms of the principal stresses, According to Li, In general, a failure criterion based on potential (elastic) strain energy density can be described as The plastic strain energy density failure criterion has been suggested and implemented for predicting the failure behaviour of ductile materials by a number of researchers. Based on the site investigation conducted by Hashemi et al., A series of novel physical model experiments for the TWHC specimens was designed and conducted to investigate the failure mechanism of boreholes drilled through poorly cemented granular formations. Also, unconfined compressive strength (UCS) and triaxial tests were performed on solid cylindrical specimens to obtain the mechanical properties of prepared specimens. The Hoek cell, pressure automatic maintainer and dependent gauges were modified in order to apply and measure low range stresses (i.e. maximum 5 The components of the prepared poorly cemented sand specimens were designed to simulate the actual behaviour of the sandy formation at a drilling site in South Australia. Thus, the fabric and grading size distribution of specimens resembled the average of those for the samples collected from the drilling site. The optimum water content was measured to be 9.7–10.3% by performing a standard Proctor test and using standard compactor hammer. It should be mentioned that the dry density of the cemented sand and only sand grains was measured separately and results showed no significant difference between the results. A small delicate mixer (Kenwood, KM265) was utilised to ensure that sand grains, cement and water mixed perfectly in order to produce a homogeneous mixture. The total time frame from the start of mixing the slurry until sealing the moulds was strictly maintained between 30–40 Based on the previous studies on cemented sands The modified hollow cylinder test cell was prepared by applying some changes to a large Hoek triaxial cell into which a TWHC specimen of 63 Five different stress paths were applied to the TWHC specimens to investigate the effect of stress paths on the borehole stability in poorly cemented granular formations. Loading schedule was designed based on two approaches; (1) principal boundary stresses and (2) principal stresses at the borehole wall (See Eq. In the third stage of the test program (the fifth path), The difference between the first and fourth stress paths is in the initial step of the tests. In the first path, the magnitude of In general, the elastic strain energy density with respect to the principal axes for an elastic and isotropic body can be expressed as: On the other hand we have: Which: If the material failure is mainly controlled by a large plastic deformation process, the failure criterion should be defined as a plastic energy density failure criterion where the contribution of porosities in failure development is negligible in a given failure volume. Thus, Thus, After conducting further analysis of the camera recordings versus the obtained data, it was observed that the bonding breakage point did not occur at the peak stress. In this study, it was assumed that the dislodgement of sand particles at the borehole wall can initiate borehole instability and thus these points were detected during the experiments. A failure criterion based on the total potential and dissipative strain energy densities ( It should be mentioned that The results from laboratory tests on poorly cemented sand specimens showed that the stress-strain behaviour of this material is non-linear. Thus, linear analytical solution may not be used to calculate the principal stresses at the borehole wall (especially after the yield point). To approximate the stresses and strains at the borehole wall a numerical modelling analysis has been conducted in discrete element method (DEM) using PFC3D software. Particle Flow Code (PFC3D) is an advanced and multi-physics simulation software which models the movement and interaction of particles by DEM, and as described by Cundall and Strack The input parameters were altered until the response behaviour of the numerical samples matched that of the physical specimens. The corresponding parameters were then used in a PFC3D simulation of the TWHC test as the sample. The mechanical properties of synthetic specimens were determined by performing a series of triaxial tests on TWHC samples. The ductile bonding contact model was selected based on the cross verification of numerical and experimental test results for the particles and the initial normal stiffness of The bonding model properties also include tensile strength of It should be noted that the mentioned properties are the micromechanical properties of the simulated model which were used in the numerical analysis after the calibration process. The poorly cemented sand sample in PFC3D was represented as an assembly of spherical particles with density of The sample in the numerical model was loaded in a strain-controlled mode by specifying a given velocity (i.e. 0.07 Most of failure criteria introduced for boreholes have been suggested based on the peak stresses which were recorded in the stress-strain diagrams from laboratory tests or numerical models.  Bonding breakage between particles at the borehole wall occurs if the formation adjacent to the borehole is directly failed in tension or the aggregation of microcracks due to shear failure undergoes tension. Mogi As discussed in the previous section, the detached particle points at the borehole wall were detected for various stress paths, cement values and borehole sizes. Then, based on the method elaborated in The principal stresses and the total absorbed strain energy were calculated under the applied stresses at the boundary of the TWHC specimen. Since there was no supporting system deployed in the borehole, radial stress was considered to be zero in the current test program. The total strain energy was derived based on the stress-strain diagram in the vertical and lateral directions. The effective mean normal stress, Since in the laboratory tests the actual stresses and strains were measured at the boundary of the TWHC specimens by the load cell and strain gauges respectively, a special code was written to calculate the stresses and strains at the boundary of the synthetic sample model developed in PFC3D. The sample was loaded by specifying certain velocities to the relevant walls. Then stress and strain states of the sample were determined by another function. It implemented a procedure to compute and control the stress state in the sample during the test. For instance, in the first stress path the confining stress was kept constant by adjusting the radial wall velocity using a numerical servomechanism that was implemented by a separate function. A switch was defined to release the top and bottom walls to apply the deviatoric stress after reaching the hydrostatic stress condition. Several attempts were made to reach the elastic, plastic and failure behaviour of the numerical sample similar to the ones from the laboratory tests. The data from the numerical simulations were used to calculate the principal stresses based on each stress path (Eq.  In the third stress path, In order to compare the results from the second and third stress paths, the test data in the In order to compare the results from the first and fourth stress paths In the fifth stress path the TWHC specimens were subjected to Since the distortional strain energy is proportional to the octahedral shear stress, the Drucker-Prager failure model suggests that the failure of geomaterials would occur when the strain energy reaches a specific value that increases with the octahedral normal stress, The introduced strain energy criterion can be used for optimising the design of support systems such as polymers and drilling muds for boreholes drilled in poorly cemented formations. Based on the in situ stress state conditions and mechanical properties of underground formations at a drilling site, the strain energy required for viewing the onset of particle detachment can be derived from the presented energy diagrams. Then, the maximum allowable deformation ( Borehole stability analysis was performed based on the particle detachment point at the borehole wall. This point was detected during the test by a micro camera which was installed into the top platen of the modified Hoek cell. Numerical modelling was performed in PFC 3D to estimate the principal stresses and strains at borehole wall while applying boundary stresses. Then, the total strain energy per volume of material up to reaching the bonding breakage point was calculated for different applied stress paths for TWHC specimens. Recorded videos showed that sand dislodgment points were located both before and after the peak maximum principal stress ( For the first stress path, with an increase in the tangential stress the total absorbed strain energy per unit volume ( Despite of the remarkable influence of Comparison between the first and fourth stress paths showed that for a given confining pressure, the specimens in the first path showed more ductile behaviour as they were exposed to a higher level of lateral support in the initial stage of the test. This pressure was not high enough to induce damage to the borehole, and the total strain energy density was considerably higher for the first stress path than it was for the fourth path for a certain Results from simultaneously increasing the principal stresses (the fifth stress path) showed that the stability of the TWHC specimens increased significantly. This may be due to the increase of the reciprocated support at the borehole wall and the counteracting effect of the applied stresses. A near linear relationship was observed between the octahedral normal stress and the total absorbed energy as well. However, in terms of the obtained determination coefficients ( Using suggested strain energy criterion will help to optimise the design of support systems for boreholes in poorly cemented sands. This work has been supported by the