The photo-degradation process of the antiepileptic drug carbamazepine (CBZ) is studied under different conditions. Reactions were carried out under UV–H2O2, US–UV–H2O2 and US–UV–H2O2–Fe systems. An important synergistic effect between sonolysis and UV irradiation of 27.7% was quantified using the first order rate constants for carbamazepine degradation.
                  An empirical model that includes the scavenger effect was applied and found to reproduce both degradation and mineralization of CBZ satisfactorily.
                  Comparison experiments of scavenger-loaded conditions demonstrated that the carbamazepine photodegradation occurs mainly through a radical mechanism in two steps: during the first 10–15min, CBZ is completely degraded, whereas TOC barely changes, confirming that intermediates are not easy to mineralize. During this phase, dissolved oxygen (DO) remains in low values and the pair O2
                     
                        −/HO2
                     
                        
                      is an active contributor to CBZ degradation. Mineralization is low and the scavenger effect from 
                        
                     OH radicals is relatively high (k
                     scv
                     =0.0014min−1
                     mM−1). From that moment, intermediates are formed and 
                        
                     OH radicals are responsible for increased mineralization rate with a gradual decrease in the scavenger effect (k
                     scv
                     =0.0004min−1
                     mM−1).
                  Experiments performed under the US–UV–H2O2–Fe system proved the important contribution of 
                        
                     OH radicals. The maximum mineralization (93% in 35min) was reached for [Fe]=15ppm and [H2O2]=680ppm.
                  A study of the flow pattern inside the reactor showed that improvement in mineralization rate with US radiation cannot be attributed to a positive effect in mixing.Advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) have been used to efficiently degrade refractory organic pollutants present in water and wastewaters The use of high-frequency ultrasound has proved to be effective to remove organic contaminants There is a lack of information about the reaction mechanism of US in homogeneous solutions CBZ is a human pharmaceutical used for treating epileptic seizures and trigeminal neuralgia. It is also used “off-label” to treat bipolar depression, excited psychosis, and mania CBZ is also not removed by membrane bioreactors, which are frequently more effective at removing pharmaceuticals Since it is poorly removed during wastewater treatment, CBZ is commonly found in waste water treatment plant (WWTP) effluent around the world. Studies in Europe, Asia, and Canada have reported CBZ in effluent Although the apparent degradation of a pollutant may be relatively easy, a complete mineralization of recalcitrant intermediate by-products is hard to obtain at reasonable rate using ultrasound alone. Sonophotolysis consists of a combination of ultrasonic sound waves and ultraviolet radiation. A catalyst can also be added and used as an alternative water treatment method The aim of this research is (a) to study the effect of US during its use with other techniques, (b) to determine the contribution of each mechanism (mixing, radical reaction, …) to the overall degradation and mineralization kinetics and (c) to apply an empirical model including the scavenger effect to reproduce both degradation and mineralization processes. A study of the flow pattern in the reactor was also performed and used as a diagnostic tool for ascertaining the effect of ultrasound in mixing. CBZ (99%) was obtained from Acros. Analytical grade ferrous sulfate (FeSO4·7H All experiments were carried out at pH A 24 UV absorption spectra were determined using a UV–Vis spectrophotometer (HACH-LANGE, model DR5000). Total organic carbon concentration was determined using a TOC analyzer (Shimadzu TOC-5000A). Monitoring of the H Analysis of carbamazepine concentration was carried out by high-performance liquid chromatography with UV detection (HPLC–UV; Agilent Technologies 1100) in isocratic mode immediately after sampling. An Eclipse XDB-C18 column (5  The synergism between the UV process and the sonolytic one can be quantified using the pseudo first order degradation rate constants according to Eq. Different experiments were performed changing H The best results are obtained for an initial concentration of H In general, CBZ degradation can be written as: Data from the experiment with higher concentration of H Similarly, the same study was applied to TOC removal, obtaining a value of 0.0013 The main reactions involved in the sono-photodegradation are Before deriving the model, the following assumptions were made: the sonolytic and the photolytic processes follow pseudo-first order kinetics, CBZ degradation is mainly due to reactions Eq. the concentration of H The overall CBZ degradation (US/UV/H Therefore, Eq. A definite integral to solve CBZ concentration, Finally, the following solution is obtained: Similarly, Eq.  There are two stages clearly defined. During the first 10–15 According to literature A decrease in dissolved oxygen concentration indicates participation of competitive superoxide radicals in CBZ degradation (reactions Experiments with t-butyl alcohol It can be seen that an increasing concentration of t-butyl alcohol (from 2 to 100 Experiments with 1,4 benzoquinone 1,4 benzoquinone is a selective O Results in Indirectly, it also affects the hydroperoxide radical (HO In summary, during the first 15 To prove the contribution of Moreover, the fast mineralization stage starts earlier when increasing initial Fe(II) concentration. Thus, for concentrations higher than 10 However, an excess in Fe(II) reduces UV spectra Additional information about the mineralization process can be obtained from UV spectra at different reaction times ( The absorption of the solution at 234 It is known that simple benzene compounds show medium intensity multiplets around 254 As already commented above, the use of low-frequency ultrasound systems are controversial, since they may not yield enough In this work, a flow study has been made with and without ultrasound radiation using a dye as a tracer. Methylene blue was injected into the reactor and changes in color (variance) were monitored as a function of the position analyzing pixels using a self-developed software in Matlab.  These perturbations in flow patterns (obtained from analysis of color variance in pixels) can also be seen in The sonochemical destruction of CBZ may involve several reaction pathways. However, the null effect of mixing and the negligible generation of H  The photo-degradation process of CBZ was studied under different systems. An important synergistic effect between sonolysis and UV irradiation of 27.7% was quantified using the first order rate constants for carbamazepine degradation. An empirical model that includes the scavenger effect was applied and found to reproduce both degradation and mineralization of CBZ satisfactorily. Comparison experiments of scavenger-loaded conditions demonstrated that the carbamazepine photodegradation occurs mainly through a radical mechanism in two steps: during the first 10–15 Experiments performed under the US–UV–H A study of the flow pattern inside the reactor showed that improvement in mineralization rate with US radiation cańt be attributed to a positive effect in mixing Financial support from Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 