Zagros water conveyance tunnel (ZWCT) is a 49km tunnel designed for conveying 70m3/s water from Sirvan River southward to Dashte Zahab plain in western Iran. This long tunnel has been divided in 3 Lots namely 1A, 1B, 2. By November 2014, about 22km of the Lot 2 (with a total length of 26km) has been excavated by two double shield TBMs from two southern and northern portals. The bored section of tunnel passed through different geological units of 3 main formations of Zagros mountain ranges which mainly consist of weak to moderately strong argillaceous-carbonate sedimentary rocks. In this paper, the operating and as-built geological data collected during construction phase of the Lot 2 of ZWCT project was used to compare the calculated machine performance by empirical methods such as the Hassanpour et al. (2011), QTBM, NTNU, Palmstrom, and theoretical model of Colorado School of Mines or CSM. The predicted penetration rates were then compared with the observed field performance of the machine and the variations of predicted rates were examined by statistical analysis. The results showed that the site-specific model, which was based on TBM performance in similar formations can provide estimates closer to actual machine performance.In last two decades, many performance prediction models have been developed by various researchers to estimate penetration rate of hard rock tunnel boring machines (TBMs) in new tunneling projects. Some of the most important TBM prognosis models include CSM ( The current study is an attempt to compare the results of above mentioned prediction models, including Hassanpour et al., Palmstrom, NTNU, Q A wide variety of performance prediction methods and principles are used to estimate performance (penetration and advance rate) of a TBM in hard rock. Different models are used in different countries, contractors, engineers, and by various TBM manufacturers based on their experience and available information. Some of the methods are based mainly on one or two rock parameters (for instance uniaxial compressive strength and a rock abrasion parameter) while others are based on a combination of comprehensive laboratory, field and machine parameters. In general, methods for TBM performance prediction are classified in the following categories: Theoretical/Experimental models (based on laboratory testing and cutting forces). Empirical methods (based on field performance of TBMs and some rock properties). In this research, CSM model from first category and NTNU, Q Among the models presented in As can be seen in Zagros water conveyance tunnel with total length of 49 At southern portal of Lot 2, a TBM was launched from a 200 After encountering adverse geological conditions and dramatic reduction in TBM performance at beginning of the southern section, another TBM was mobilized and started to excavate the tunnel from northern portal in mid-2012. This machine has completed around 3 The area around the ZWCT2 project is located in Zagros zone, as one of the main geological and structural zones of Iran and in “simply folded” subzone. The main geological formations outcropped in the project area are Pabdeh, Gurpi and Ilam Formations. These are the major formations of the Zagros Mountain range which starts in northwest and extends to southeast of Iran. These formations are composed of a variety of carbonate and argillaceous rock units. Geological section in Due to considerable difference in engineering properties of the stratigraphic units, they can be considered as different engineering geological units. As shown in the geological section, due to folded structure of the formations, the geological units may be present through the tunnel alignment in different sections repetitively. Structurally, the area around the tunnel is moderately folded and gently faulted. As shown in Results of petrographic analyses show that considering mineralogy and texture, there are four main Lithotypes in tunnel alignment. These lithotypes include (1) Limestone, (2) Shaly limestone, (3) Limy shale and (4) Shale. Two first lithotypes are competent and more brittle rocks with developed joint systems and two others are incompetent rocks with plastic behavior and weathered features at outcrops. Main petrographic, physical and mechanical characteristics of these lithotypes are summarized in In this study, to determine drillability indices, 12 sets of Norwegian tests were performed by SINTEF laboratory on samples taken from different boreholes along tunnel alignment. Also a series of tests were performed using devices in a local laboratory. To investigate relationship between drillability indices and mechanical parameters of rock, some common rock mechanic tests (such as UCS, BTS…) were conducted on same samples used for drillability tests and results have been analyzed separately. Using these analyses drillability indices for each lithotype were estimated and summarized in In the course of tunneling, the machine encountered many extraordinary situations related to intrusion of hydrogen sulfide (H Groundwater conditions along the tunnel varies from dry to continued flow of water in carbonate aquifers. During construction wherever tunnel passed through Pabdeh and Gurpi formations, no major water inflow was observed. Groundwater condition along this parts of tunnel was “damp to wet” and infrequently “dripping”. In contrast, while entering the Ilam limestone, water inflow increased immediately and exceeded 100 As mentioned before, a double shield machine was selected for excavating the tunnel from southern portal. Main technical specifications of this machine are summarized in This study is focused on TBM performance for the first 14.8   As mentioned earlier, the main objective of this study was evaluation of accuracy of most common TBM performance prediction models in a given geological condition encountered at this site (Foliated, Jointed and blocky argillaceous and carbonate rocks). As the first step to achieve this goal, a database has been developed to record and organize collected geological and machine performance data. This database includes three main sections as follows: Operational and machine performance data measured or calculated in tunnel; As-built geological and geomechanical data; Results of performance prediction by different models. Each row in the database is related to an engineering geological unit identified along the tunnel and recorded and calculated parameters have been averaged for each unit. It should be noted that the data from first 5.3 First section of database includes parameters such as net boring time, length of the unit, and average of machine operational parameters (thrust, RPM, power and applied torque) through the unit. These parameters were obtained from daily operating sheets and TBM data logger. Also the most important performance parameters including average penetration per revolution, rate of penetration (ROP), field penetration index (FPI), and specific energy have been calculated and are recorded in Section Graphs presented in In Section   Based on data arranged in Sections  A summary of the statistical analysis performed on calculated rates and respective errors are presented in There are significant differences in the ROPs estimated using different prediction models. The NTNU and Palmstrom models show lower values than measured ones, while two models of CSM and particularly Q The results obtained from Q The results obtained from the original CSM model do not match the measured values, because this model has been basically developed for massive rocks with no significant fracturing. This study shows that this model needs modification by adding correction factors for jointing condition. In recent years, some researchers ( The results obtained from Palmestrom and NTNU models indicate relatively good matches with the actual results. These two empirical models apply rock mass parameters which are very important in boring process. Difference in geology of projects used in the original database of the models which was subsequently used for development of this method and the case study for this paper seem to be the weakness point of these models. As expected, among the studied models the best results obtained from Eq. To calculate the performance parameters of the machine using As an important conclusion, it must be emphasized that site specific prediction models are the best models for estimating TBM performance in a given project. This requires real time analysis of the machine performance and establishing a relevant site specific database to capture the ranges of variation and relationship between machine performance and geological units. This is due to the fact that machine related parameters are constant and as such, the variation in geological conditions along the tunnel can be singled out as the input parameter for the modeling. The downside of this approach is that the models developed in this manner cannot be used elsewhere. Using more comprehensive and established models should be considered when there is no track record of site-specific machine performance and for project design purposes. In such cases, it is recommended to use various models to observe the range of variations and sensitivity of these models to input parameters for the specific project under study. In this study, accuracy and validity of some common TBM performance prediction models were examined based on recorded machine performance from a long tunnel under construction in western Iran. Reliable data was available for 9.5 The main conclusion of this study is that, for selection of an empirical model to predict TBM performance in any case one should pay attention to the application range of the model and geological conditions that the original model is based on. This study indicated that the site specific models with similar geological parameters and machine specification, show best matches with actual TBM performance. In this case, as expected, the results of performance predictions by empirical equation developed from first 5.3