The objective of this work was to investigate the relationship between the froth characteristics, the system interfacial tension (IFT), and the efficiency of diesel oil removal by froth flotation under colloidal gas aphron (CGA) conditions. Branched alcohol propoxylate sulfate sodium salt (C14–15(PO)5SO4Na) as an extended surfactant, was used to form CGA and microemulsions with diesel oil. For the CGA studies, the effects of salinity, surfactant concentration, stirring speed, and stirring time were investigated in order to determine the optimum conditions of the CGA formation which were further used for the froth flotation experiments. The air bubble size measurement was carried out in order to correlate the air bubble size to the froth flotation performance. The results showed that the use of CGA enhanced the process performance of froth flotation in terms of both the removal and the enrichment ratio of diesel oil since CGA increased both froth formation and stability. The froth flotation column which was operated at an air flow rate of 0.30l/min with the feed solution prepared under non-equilibrium and the CGA conditions at 0.1wt.% C14–15(PO)5SO4Na, 3wt.% NaCl, with a stirring speed of 5000rpm and a stirring time of 5min, gave the highest oil removal of 97%.In most countries around the world, including Thailand, the demand for diesel oil is much higher than that for gasoline. This is because diesel oil provides more energy per unit volume than gasoline does Froth flotation is a surfactant-based separation process in which a surfactant is added to help the separation From previous work In order to solve the low froth stability of diesel oil systems mentioned in the previous work, colloidal gas aphron (CGA) was introduced in the present study, instead of adding SDS. The use of CGA was hypothesized to enhance the efficiency of froth flotation by increasing froth stability. CGA was first described by Sebba Therefore, in this study, CGA was applied for the enhancement of froth stability in the froth flotation operation, which was hypothesized for the improvement of oil removal efficiency. The effects of stirring speed, stirring time, surfactant concentration, and salinity on the CGA formation were studied in order to find the optimum conditions for the froth flotation experiment. The froth flotation performance and froth characteristics were correlated to the stability of CGA. In this work, branched alcohol propoxylate sulfate, sodium salt (C This experimental work was divided into five main parts. The first part was a phase study of microemulsions with diesel oil. The second was a study of CGA. The third was froth flotation experiments conducted at various air flow rates for three different feed solution conditions: (1) non-equilibrium without CGA; (2) equilibrium without CGA; and (3) non-equilibrium with CGA. For the fourth part, froth formation and stability experiments were conducted. In the last part, the air bubble size measurement was done in order to correlate the air bubble size to the froth flotation performance. For all experiments, the surfactant concentration and salinity were expressed as percentage by weight based on aqueous solution volume. A 5 A 5  The diesel oil removal can be calculated by the following equation: For the froth formation and froth stability experiments, 100 The measurement of froth sizes of the CGA sample was performed immediately after finishing stirring the surfactant solution at different conditions used to form CGA. In addition, the measurement of air bubble sizes was conducted in the same column that was used in the froth flotation experiments. Images of the air bubbles were taken by using a color video camera (Sony, SSC-DC58AP/1) connected to the optical lens (OPTEM). A light generation unit (Photonic, PL 3000) was used as a light source to obtain clear-cut images. In order to minimize the effect of the curvature of the column on the images taken by the camera, the point on the centerline of the column was used for taking the photographs at the position 1 From our series of previous studies The CGA experiments were carried out to investigate the effects of salinity, surfactant concentration, stirring speed, and stirring time at a constant diesel oil-to-surfactant solution ratio of 1:19. In this part, diesel oil removal and enrichment ratio were considered to be significant parameters to evaluate the performance of CGA. In addition, CGA stability, gas hold-up, and separation ratio were also used to determine the CGA performance. Salinity (ionic strength) has an important effect on CGA stability when CGA is generated using an ionic surfactant. As shown in    For the froth flotation experiments, both the effects of CGA and equilibrium time were investigated by preparing three different feed conditions; non-equilibrium without CGA, equilibrium without CGA, and non-equilibrium with CGA. The feed solution used in this study contained 0.1   Phase studies of microemulsion with diesel oil using C The Thailand Research Fund is acknowledged for providing a Royal Golden Jubilee Ph.D. Fellowship for Ms. Sunisa Watcharasing. The expenses for this research were mainly covered by The Advanced Research Scholar Grant from the Thailand Research Fund and the Research Unit of Applied Surfactants for Separation and Pollution Control under The Ratchadapisek Somphot Fund, Chulalongkorn University. The National Excellence Center for Petroleum, Petrochemicals, and Advanced Materials, under The Ministry of Education, is also acknowledged for providing all of the research facilities. Sasol North America Inc., Texas, USA, is acknowledged for providing the extended surfactant used in this research.