Background
                  Pull-out strength is a critical parameter to judge screw fixation in orthopaedic implants. However, the insertion torque is the main feeling in the hand of a surgeon relating to the strength of synthesis. The correlation between pull-out strength and torque is not completely understood. This creates uncertainty about the key-question: Should the torque be considered a valid parameter to judge the quality of fixation?
               
                  Methods
                  Using the ASTM F543 as reference, three screws differing only in pitch (1.5, 2.1, 2.8 mm pitches) were tested in three foam-block densities (10, 15, and 20 pcf). The correlation was investigated by assessing the role of density and screw geometry.
               
                  Findings
                  Torque was related to pull-out strength in all configurations (R = 0.979, P = 0.000). No difference in pull-out strength was found when screws were tightened to a range of 71.6%, SD = 7.6, of torque to fail (P > 0.05). Torque and pull-out strength were stratified according to density that influenced the two parameters up to 524% (P < 0.000). Pitch determined pull-out strength up to 33% (P < 0.000) while the 2.1 mm screw pitch showed the highest pull-out strength and torque in all configurations.
               
                  Interpretation
                  Insertion torque was demonstrated to be a valid parameter to judge the quality of bone under fixation and therefore, the strength of the synthesis. Surgeons should not tighten the screws to values approaching torque to fail to obtain the highest pull-out strength. Density was the main factor influencing pull-out strength and torque. Pitch is another parameter deciding screw holding capacity.Daily orthopaedic surgical practice involves the use of screws. The techniques of different plating systems and screw-fixations are based on different biomechanical properties but the weakest link in an implant is, always, the interface between screw and bone ( Compression plating and interfragmentary screws techniques are designed to provide absolute stability in simple fractures. It has been largely shown how stability and interfragmentary compression force applied in the site of fracture can lead to primary bone healing ( Where a wide comminution could limits the primary bone healing, Locking-plate and pedicle-screws are designed as internal fixators to bridge a specific anatomical site and bypass forces applied on it ( However, there is no way to test the POS during the surgery without afflicting the fixation. Another parameter, commonly described in literature, is screw insertion torque. This is the main feeling in the hand of surgeon during the insertion of a screw and it is easily measured; Several torque-meters are available in commerce. However, the ratio that relates torque and POS is not completely understood ( This question takes on even more importance considering that when torque rises over the tolerance of the bone to bear the axial force, it determines the breaking of the bone in contact with the threads. The failure of screw-bone interface is defined as screw-stripping and has been related to a large decreasing of POS ( Some authors ( The aim of this study was to better understand if torque could be a valid parameter to judge fixation strength by assessing the role of screw pitch and bone density. Three screws differing only in thread pitch were tested in three foam block densities. The first part of the study was to collect the values of torque to failure (TF) of the screws and their relative pull-out strength after stripping (POS-S). Secondly, the screws were implanted trying to avoid stripping and the values of torque and POS were collected. All screws were implanted by a trained orthopaedic surgeon blinded to block density and screw type. The correlation between POS and torque were analysed using a Pearson correlation. Differences between values were stratified according to density, screw pitch, or stripped/un-stripped screw and analysed with Student's The three titanium cannulated screws used for the study were each 100 mm in length, 7 mm in diameter, and characterized by a thread extension of 20 mm from the tip (Rondò, Citieffe, Bologna, Italy). The screws only differed in thread pitch; the thread pitches considered were 1.5 mm, 2.1 mm, and 2.8 mm for screws A, B and C, respectively ( Polyurethane foam blocks (Sawbone, Vashon Island, Washington) were used as bone surrogate. Synthetic blocks allow a researcher to minimize inter-specimens variabilities respecting the regulations ASTM F1839-08 ( Each block was free to move in the orthogonal plane because placed in a custom-made fixture ( While the load cell recorded the values of torque, screws were implanted until stripping occurred. Thus, the suspension plate, previously bound to the frame, was loosened and bolted to the actuator of the testing frame ( The tests were repeated according to the procedures above with the operator intentionally not stripping the screws during implantation. The values of insertional torque were again recorded. The screws were then extracted and the pull-out strength (POS) of the un-stripped screws recorded. The tests, summarized in When the operator was asked to implant the screws without stripping, a wide variability in peaks of insertion torque (71.6%, SD = 7.6, of TF of the same screws implanted in the same conditions) occurred. Of 54 insertion tests, the operator used torque higher than TF three times (5.5% of cases) with consequential screw stripping. This occurred once implanting screw A in 10 pcf block, once with screw B in 15 pcf block and once with the same screw in 20 pcf block These cases were excluded and POS were calculated on 51 implanted screws that were not stripped. No screw damage was detected. The collected values of torque and POS are report in A strong correlation ( The mean POS of screws A, B, and C increased between the low and medium density foam from 177.35 (SD = 28) N to 462.4 (SD = 62) N (+62%, SD = 13, P = 0.000). The mean POS again increased between the medium and higher density foam to 1020.3 N (SD = 137) (+475, SD = 13, According to the values reported in POS of Screws A, B, and C tested in each block-density was generally 87.8% ( The main finding of the study was when considering all configurations, the values of torque are proportionally related to values of POS ( Taking in consideration a single screw type in a single block-density at a time, we found screws tightened to values closer to their TF did not result in higher values of POS ( To our knowledge no other studies tested screws differing only by pitch in different densities. Several studies analysed the existing relation between the insertional torque and pull-out strength, but no consensus was found. The hypothesis that an increase in torque would not correlate with a commensurate increase in pullout strength was suggested by Inceoglu et al. (  Edward et al. ( The problem of stripping is largely known. In one study, up to 88% of plates had at least one screw stripped ( The second aim of this study was to investigate the roles bone-density and pitch play regarding POS and torque. According to our results, bone density is the most important factor influencing POS and torque. The screws implanted in the block mimicked normal cancellous bone (20 pcf) expressed POS up to 524% higher (P < 0.000) than screws implanted in blocks mimicking osteoporotic bone (10 pcf) (see “3.3. Comparable results were reported in literature. Amirouche et al. ( Otherwise, bone density is not a parameter that could be addressed at the time of surgery. The design of a screw is a parameter that could increase the strength of a screw-bone interface ( According to the results of this present study ( A finite element study published by From our results, we are unable to determine the best screw geometry. A broader range of densities and pitches would be needed. Considering osteoporotic bone, the opportunities to regain POS choosing the right pitch should be taken in consideration and further investigated. There were several limitations in this study. The use of the last generation synthetic blocks for biomechanical testing has been previously shown to replicate physiologic or near physiologic values of cancellous screws proprieties ( This study found a clear correlation between pull-out strength and torque of different screws tested in different densities. This suggests surgeons can rely on the insertion torque to judge the quality of bone under fixation and consequently the property of the synthesis. Density showed to be the main factor influencing the POS. Pitch is another parameter determining screw pull-out strength but at a limited extent and the optimal screw geometry should be better investigated. None.