This work focuses on a novel treatment process for Brazilian iron bearing fine tailings by rougher reverse column flotation assisted by high-intensity conditioning (HIC) with a new cationic collector in a conventional column cell (CCC) and in a modified three-product column (3PC). The samples (30–35% solids), corresponded to very fine (49% of the mass below 10 µm) and low-grade iron bearing tailings (40–43% Fe) collected from the thickened overflow of the desliming hydrocyclones. The objectives were to obtain two “concentrates” as feeds to future beneficiation processes; first, a non-floated product with a minimum grade about 48–50% Fe content (iron concentrate) and the floated material with a maximum grade of 15% Fe (named siliceous concentrates). Both goals were achieved due to the high selectivity of a chemical composite of amide-amines acting as a flotation collector/frother for the siliceous gangue particles. In addition, HIC was needed to enhance the flotation recoveries by improving capture by bubbles; without HIC, the mass being floated was very low (<10%). Best results were obtained by optimising the superficial flux parameters (Jsl, Jg and Jw) and residence time. Flotation in the 3PC led to purer siliceous concentrates with Fe grade lower than 10–12% Fe. Mechanisms involved were discussed in terms of mass transfer and interfacial phenomena. It is believed that the process has a high potential in the treatment of fresh iron tailings, a very old and relevant problem in the area.Millions of tons of iron bearing tailings are discarded yearly in Brazil, representing huge losses of valuable iron. These tailings are disposed of into dams or large ponds, becoming a problem to be safely managed due to instability of the slurries. The latter have led to disasters, polluting watercourses and reservoirs for water supply ( Moreover, after many years treating rich iron ore deposits, the mining industry faces the challenge to beneficiate low-grade complex ores and tailings, either fresh or dumped in dams. The treatment of iron ore tailings by flotation poses a challenge not only because the particles are difficult-to-treat ultrafines (<10 µm), but also because of the low momentum and high interfacial free energy of the particles. Thus, the main problems are the low probability of capture of particles by the bubbles, mechanical entrainment and entrapment, formation of dense froths and low process kinetics ( Herein, flotation was conducted in conventional column cells (CCC), which are known to have improved metallurgical performance, especially in the finest fractions. However, Yet, applications of these flotation cells for the treatment of iron ore tailings are mostly reported in academic studies. In the column flotation collection zone, the rising bubbles capture the hydrophobic particles and the froth zone is enriched with the aid of washing water ( Herein, this conventional column was compared with a modified column, named three-product column (3PC), which selectively separates the froth “drop-back” low-grade material. This modified column flotation cell has shown to be very efficient in the copper and gold tailings flotation ( The flotation of fresh tailings from a copper–gold site in this 3PC cell recovered more than 40% of the industrial copper losses and 25% of the gold losses ( According to many authors, the mechanisms involved in HIC appear to be, at least, the following: The turbulent conditioning augments the relative size of the particles via hydrophobic aggregation between the collector-coated fines themselves or along with the mid-size particles ( Improved reagent dispersion and enhanced collector adsorption ( Generation of smaller bubbles ( Particles surface cleaning ( The present study is an effort between industry and university to conceive a future process for handling dumped fresh iron tailings in Brazil. Herein, the objectives were to treat low-grade and very fine iron bearing tailings (40–43% Fe) by column flotation to obtain two products, which might serve as feeds for future beneficiation or recycling processes. The first (“iron concentrate”) corresponds to the non-floated product with at least 48% Fe content and the second (so-called “siliceous concentrate”) to the floated fraction with grades around 15% Fe. The iron concentrate would eventually feed high intensity/high gradient magnetic separation to yield pellet feed products with at least 62% Fe ( The flotation work was conducted comparing two column cells as a function of operating parameters, with and without HIC and with a brand-new engineered collector (Flotinor collectors from Clariant: Tailings samples were obtained from Brucutu Mine of Vale SA (São Gonçalo do Rio Abaixo – MG, Brazil) and corresponded to a low-grade ultrafine iron bearing tailings (40–43% Fe), collected from the overflow of the flotation desliming hydrocyclones after thickening. A sample of 150 kg was prepared after filtered, dried (at 23–30 °C), tumbled, quartered, weighed and stored in 2 kg aliquots for characterisation and flotation studies. Particles size distribution analysis ( The mineralogical composition ( Results show that the sample was very fine (approximately 50% of the mass <9 µm) with the iron-bearing particles predominantly in the ultrafine fractions, about 46% < 10 µm. Flotinor 16939 was the collector of the siliceous gangue (quartz and silicates). This reagent is a chemical composite of amide-amines, specially designed by Clariant ( Sodium hydroxide solution (NaOH 10% w/w, from Vetec) was employed for pH adjustment and the water supply from Porto Alegre (RS - Brazil) was used throughout the pulp preparation and column flotation. DowFroth™250 C, a frother from Dow®, was tested in the preliminary trials to explore its effect as an aid reagent in decreasing the bubbles size distribution in the column studies. The batch flotation standard tests were carried out in a laboratory D12 Denver flotation machine with 3 L of capacity, endowed with a manual scraper to remove the froth. The objective was to get some basic chemical and operating parameters for the column flotation study. The collector concentrations studied were 250, 500 and 700 g t The pulp with 40% solids by weight and pH adjusted at 9.5, 10.5 or 11 (monitored with an Analion TM pH meter model PM 608) was conditioned at 900 rpm for 2 min to allow collector adsorption. Then, the pulp was diluted to 20% solids by weight and flotation concentrates were taken at 1, 5 and 10 min using a manual scraper at intervals of 10 s. The volume in the cell was kept constant with NaOH/water, to ensure pH 10.5 constant. Samples (concentrates and tailings) were then filtered, dried, weighed and analysed for their total iron, alumina, and silica contents. Two different columns were studied; one named CCC or conventional column cell ( The 3PC was composed of i. A collection zone situated between the bubbler and the ore feed point; ii. The intermediate zone at an inflection upper tube connecting the collection tube with the froth and the drop back material; iii. The froth zone and iv. The drained froth bearing rejected particles (third product). The superficial rate of this third product was always similar to the froth washing superficial rate. This cell had two washing water inlets, one located on top of the froth (Jw1) and another at the inflection situated in the intermediate zone (Jw2). Dynamic sampling was performed after the feed flowed (Jf) at about 0.5 cm s The froth height was about 30 cm and the intermediate zone fixed at 55 cm height with an inflection of approximately 65–70°, located at 3.2 m column height. Details of the operation of the 3PC and results obtained in different minerals can be found elsewhere ( Firstly, a scrubbing stage was performed with 40% solids by weight, pH 10.5, without collector reagent using the baffled stator ( After conditioning, the solids content was adjusted to 20–25% solids by weight and transferred to a cylindrical tank (10 L) endowed with 4 baffles in the internal walls and an axial type impeller for pulp dispersion. The impeller speed was adjusted to 2200 rpm to keep the pulp dispersed and the flotation started by feeding the slurry at 2.66 m of the column with a peristaltic pump and injection of air in the flotation cell. The column flotation ran for 20 min as the stabilisation time (corresponding to 1.5 of the residence time in the column), and for 10 min to collect concentrates and tailings products (including the third product in the 3PC cell). The main parameters ( Bench and column flotation data are presented as grade-recoveries trend curves as a function of operating and chemical parameters. Results are compared with reference lines illustrating the target concentrate grades.  However, the siliceous concentrate (floated fraction) yielded Fe grades higher than 15%, showing the difficulty of obtaining two products with the quality required in a single rougher stage (see dashed line). This led to studying the treatment of the tailings by column rougher flotation.  Best parameters were Jg = 1.5 cm s Results showed that the objectives were met for both products, in a single rougher stage. Noteworthy, the best results were obtained only after HIC; without this turbulent conditioning, the floated fraction was as low as 5–7% of the feed mass, showing the importance of a favourable condition for dispersion and adsorption of the collector in these ultrafines, in addition to a possible aggregation of the hydrophobic ultrafine particles to be floated. Recently, differently structured amines (modified amines or polyamines, amide-amines alone or mixed with ether amines, alkyl phosphonium) has drawn great attention in the field of reverse iron flotation ( The steric hindrance and the associated higher entropy of those moieties (branched hydrophobic groups, cited above) would reduce the general degree of adsorption but not the electrostatic interaction between the N- (or P-) bearing cationic sites and the ionised silanols (Si-O For example, Based on surface charge difference of hematite and quartz in solution, Regarding the adsorption mechanisms involved, the authors reported that the introduction of functional groups into the alkyl amine molecule improved the amenability (selective adsorption) of the collector for quartz compared to hematite by electrostatic attraction. Thus, the electrostatic attraction would be higher at the quartz/silicate water interface than in hematite, which is more affected by the steric hindrance effect caused by the arrangements of the hydrocarbon chains in the form of pseudo-hemimicelles ( In the present work, it appears that the good selectivity of the new amide-amine cationic collector for the siliceous minerals might well be explained by these mechanisms reported by  Furthermore, in the 3PC, as expected, siliceous concentrates with lower iron grades were obtained (  In the case of the CCC, these froth rejected particles are not separated but return to the froth/pulp interface and/or collection zone, continuing to recirculate and affecting the flow conditions. As a result, these particles exit the column either through the floated fraction or by the flotation tailings. In other words, the third product, which is separated in the 3PC, is randomly split between floated and non-floated products in the CCC ( In addition, the 3PC is a flotation device that improves mass transfer rates and value particles capturing capacity, while operating at optimal (constant) superficial gas velocities to maintain bubbly flow conditions (  On the other hand, quartz and silicates floated and are split in the siliceous concentrate and third product. Interestingly, kaolinite, which is mostly in the < 9 µm, is well distributed in all products; probably because the ultrafine particles with low momentum are entrained following the liquid streamlines of the hydrodynamic flow. The third product is responsible for those particles entrained and rejected from the froth layer by the washing water, leaving the concentrate cleaner – free from iron bearing species. This low-mass product, depending on the iron grade, can be disposed of. Obviously, this mass distribution of the distinct species will change depending on the quality of the flotation in this “enriching” column cell. In this work, the separation of two concentrates by reverse rougher column flotation of fine tailings was possible by using an amide-amine as collector-frother assisted by high intensity conditioning (HIC) ( Based on the results obtained, This work will continue in a higher rate in-situ pilot flotation plant to validate these results and to gather design and operating data for the scale-up of the process to industrial level. The reverse rougher column flotation of a typical Brazilian iron bearing fine tailings (40–43% Fe) was studied in two different cells, a conventional rectilinear column and a modified three-product column (3PC), aiming to obtain products with high or low enough iron grades to be recyclable. These targets were achieved due to a combination of high intensity conditioning, high selectivity of the collector-frother used (composite of amide-amines) and optimisation of cell operating parameters (mainly superficial flux parameters). High iron recoveries (>90%) were obtained for the iron concentrate in both columns and richer siliceous concentrates (lower than 10–12% Fe) were possible in the 3PC. Herein, a third low-mass product (between 5 and 8% of the feed) with about 20–30% Fe corresponded to the drop-back material, rejected by the froth washing water. Because of the low quality of this product and low mass, this product may be discarded. All mechanisms involved were discussed, especially those involving the high selectivity of the collector, which appears to adsorb onto quartz/silicate by electrostatic attraction assisted by steric hindrance phenomena. It is believed that this novel route, without the conventional use of starch as an iron oxide depressant has great potential in the general theme of reverse flotation of fresh iron tailings.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to thank all the Brazilian Institutions that supported this study, namely: Vale S.A. (Grant number