This chapter provides the principles of structured food emulsions. With oil and water being the most common liquids for the preparation of food emulsions, the basic types of emulsions are referred to as oil-in-water (o/w) emulsions and water-in-oil (w/o) emulsions, respectively. More complex types consist of three or more phases, which can be achieved, for example, by dispersing a w/o emulsion into a second watery phase, leading to a water-in-oil-in-water (w/o/w) emulsion. Due to the interfacial tension between the immiscible liquids, emulsions containing only oil and water are thermodynamically unstable. By using surface-active molecules called emulsifiers, emulsions can be kinetically stabilized. Some compounds with interesting properties for food and feed products or pharmaceuticals are insoluble in water and insufficiently soluble in edible oils at room temperature. Among these are some carotenoids with health-promoting properties, phytosterols with their cholesterol-lowering and anticarcinogenic effects, as well as the majority of novel pharmaceutically active substances. Because of insolubility or poor solubility of their usually crystalline form, they are barely bioavailable and have poor dose responses. The Concept of Energy Density of Emulsions Adjustment of Emulsion Properties Stability of Emulsions Formulation of Emulsions Containing Poorly Soluble Compounds Acknowledgments References Most properties of food emulsions depend on emulsion microstructure, which is largely influenced by mean droplet diameter and droplet size distribution. The correlation between the properties and the microstructure is called the The droplet size of an emulsion depends on the intensity and mechanism of droplet disruption and on the extent of superimposed or subsequent droplet coalescence. Recent experiments have shown that the emulsifier, by reducing the interfacial tension, does not improve droplet disruption because only the interfacial tension of the unoccupied interface is relevant for droplet comminution. Several methods suitable for the production of emulsions with the desired microstructure will be presented. Among these, newly developed valves inducing elongational flow have allowed for greatly increased homogenization efficiency in high-pressure homogenizers. Advances and new processes in emulsification with membranes and microstructured systems as well as their potential will also be discussed. In an example it is demonstrated how nanoemulsions can be used to design functional foods. Phytosterols may significantly reduce cholesterol levels in humans. Due to their poor solubility in water and oil, product engineering is required to achieve satisfactory dose responses. With Emulsions are systems made up of at least two, practically immiscible liquids (e.g. oil and water), in which one liquid is finely dispersed in the other liquid. The dispersed liquid is also referred to as the disperse phase, whereas the other liquid is referred to as the continuous phase. The two basic types of emulsions are dispersions of a lipophilic or oil phase in a hydrophilic or watery phase or vice versa. With oil and water being the most common liquids for the preparation of food emulsions, these basic types of emulsions are referred to as oil-in-water- (o/w-) emulsions and water-in-oil- (w/o-) emulsions, respectively. More complex types consist of three or more phases, which can be achieved, for example, by dispersing a w/o-emulsion into a second watery phase, leading to a water-in-oil-in-water- (w/o/w-) emulsion. Due to the interfacial tension between the immiscible liquids, emulsions containing only oil and water are thermodynamically unstable. By using surface-active molecules called emulsifiers, emulsions can be kinetically stabilized. Furthermore, a difference in the densities of the two liquids may cause undesired creaming or sedimentation of the dispersed droplets. The occurrence of this physical instability can be delayed or prevented by increasing the viscosity of the continuous phase by so-called stabilizers (e.g. macromolecular substances). The basic types of emulsions as well as the role of emulsifiers and stabilizers are demonstrated in Most of the properties of emulsions depend on the emulsion microstructure, the emulsifiers used, and the viscosity of the continuous phase. The microstructure is mainly a function of droplet size and droplet size distribution. Droplet size is of essential importance because of its great influence on physical and microbiological stability, rheological and optical characteristics, bioavailability or dose response, taste and many other properties ( Emulsions with fine-dispersed droplets, so-called ‘fine emulsions,’ can be produced in many different ways ( Fine-dispersed emulsions can also be produced by ultrasound ( Besides the processes mentioned above, which are based on droplet disruption, emulsions may also be produced by droplet formation at membranes and microstructured systems ( Except for high-pressure and membrane or microchannel emulsification, emulsions may be produced either batch-wise or continuously. In the case of continuous emulsification, the ingredients are usually dosed separately and Besides these mechanical processes, there are several non-mechanical emulsifying processes applied to produce specific products, for example in the chemical industry. A typical example of such processes is based on the precipitation of the disperse phase previously dissolved in the external phase. Changes in the phase behavior of the substances to be emulsified, prompted by variation in temperature or composition, or mechanical stress, are used to achieve the desirable dispersed state of the system. Another process of interest is the phase-inversion temperature (PIT) method discussed by Most emulsions are produced in a continuous mode by mechanical droplet disruption. However, the prevailing principles differ depending on the type of mechanism used for droplet disruption. Fundamental work in this field has been done by In general, the Sauter diameter in continuous emulsification with droplet disruption may be described by the relationship: with the constants a As mentioned above ( The concept of energy density ( Energy density is easy to measure because in an emulsifying system, power input P into the machine, volume flow rate Another important factor for homogenization of emulsions is the ratio of the viscosity of the disperse phase η Besides the viscosity of the disperse phase, the interfacial tension between the continuous and the disperse phase plays an important role in hindering droplet disruption. The minimal required energy for droplet disruption is directly proportional to the resulting increase in interfacial area as well as the interfacial tension between the two phases. Therefore, reducing the interfacial tension by the addition of an emulsifier, and its absorption to the It also becomes evident that adding the emulsifier too far behind the valve causes droplet coalescence due to the interfacial area not being covered by emulsifier molecules and the droplets thus being unprotected against coalescence ( The results discussed so far provide a basis for product design and the formulation of emulsions. In this context, product design means creating a product with certain desired properties that are adjusted by engineering methods. As it is very expensive to vary all essential parameters of a technical apparatus in order to ultimately achieve the desired property of a product, an interim attribute is introduced. In the case of emulsions, their microstructure is taken for the interim attribute, which is mainly determined by mean droplet size, droplet size distribution, and type of emulsifier and stabilizer. For most problems, it may be sufficient to simply characterize the microstructure by the mean droplet size, a physical value easily measurable and adjustable by means of emulsifying equipment. The link between the emulsion's microstructure and the process or emulsifying apparatus, respectively, is called the Without doubt, stability is the most important property of emulsions. However, it has to be differentiated between physical, chemical, and microbiological stability, of which only the first will be subject to detailed discussion here. An emulsion is called physically stable if its dispersed state does not change, i.e. if its droplet size distribution remains constant The chemical stability of an emulsion reflects its resistance against chemical changes. Mostly oxidation of fats and oils is the critical reaction for chemical deterioration of emulsions. The addition of antioxidants and protection against external influences such as light or excessive heat, as well as suitable diffusion barriers on the surfaces between the different liquid phases, improve the chemical stability. The physical stability of emulsions during and immediately after emulsification, which we have called short-term stability, presents specific problems too. The short-term stability of an emulsion indicates whether the newly formed droplets of an emulsion are sufficiently protected against coalescence during or directly after emulsification. Therefore, this protection determines the success or failure of the emulsification process because mechanical emulsification processes are expected to not only size-reduce, but also to immediately stabilize these smaller droplets. Droplets successfully protected against coalescence remain small, resulting in the desired fine-dispersed emulsion. If coalescence cannot be successfully prevented, droplets will flow together and form larger droplets. In a critical case, this could completely reverse the previous size reduction. In unfavorable cases, it may even cause emulsions to break. Therefore, avoiding droplet coalescence during and immediately following the formation of new droplets, i.e. achieving sufficient short-term stability, is of utmost importance for any emulsification process. Despite many indications for droplet coalescence in emulsifying apparatus, this question is discussed controversially in the pertinent literature. Based on the Gibbs-Marangoni effect, some authors are of the opinion that newly formed droplets in emulsions immediately following the formation cannot coalesce with an emulsifier present. For immediate detection of droplet coalescence during emulsification, a method has been developed at the Institute of Process Engineering in Life Sciences, Section of Food Process Engineering by  Some compounds with interesting properties for food and feed products or pharmaceuticals are insoluble in water and insufficiently soluble in edible oils at room temperature. Among these are some carotenoids with health-promoting properties, phytosterols with their cholesterol-lowering and anticarcinogenic effects, as well as the majority of novel pharmaceutically active substances. Because of insolubility or poor solubility of their usually crystalline form, they are barely bioavailable and have poor dose responses. In order to improve bioavailability and dose response, products containing these compounds may be formulated as emulsions ( For the preparation of phytosterol-loaded o/w-emulsions the two phases of the emulsion are prepared separately. A maximum of 35% of phytosterols, referring to the disperse phase, can be dissolved in a medium chain triglyceride (MCT-oil) together with an oil-soluble emulsifier at approximately 100°C. Demineralized water with Tween The resulting coarse raw emulsion was homogenized at a pressure of 1000 bar at 90°C. After emulsification, the stable fine-dispersed emulsion with a Sauter diameter well below 1 μm could cool down to room temperature. Since phytosterols, due to their molecular structure, are interface-active components, they tend to migrate to and crystallize at the oil–water interface of the oil droplets in o/w-emulsions ( Regarding their physical stability, the small Sauter diameter of approximately ten times the phytosterol-supersaturated oil droplets, together with the crystallization inhibitor, makes sure that no crystallization or creaming occurs. The formulation of emulsions enriched with poorly soluble compounds such as phytosterols or carotenoids may – in a greatly simplified way – be demonstrated by means of the process and property functions. Following Eq. Above that, it can be assumed that the bioavailability B of the added compound (e.g. carotenoids) increases with decreasing Sauter diameter. The validity of this interrelationship could be demonstrated for example by For the border cases B For this case Eqs. If, for instance, the bioavailability of the incorporated compound is 60% (B = 0.6), a homogenizing pressure of These studies were financially supported by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) within the joint research project ‘Lipide und Phytosterole in der Ernährung’ and within the framework of the DFG Graduiertenkolleg 366 ‘Grenzflächenphänomene in aquatischen Systemen und wässrigen Phasen.’ The authors would also like to thank the ‘Bundes-ministerium für Bildung und Forschung’ for the financial support of the subproject