This work presents a forensic analysis of buildings affected by mining subsidence, which is based on deformation data obtained by Differential Interferometry (DInSAR). The proposed test site is La Union village (Murcia, SE Spain) where subsidence was triggered in an industrial area due to the collapse of abandoned underground mining labours occurred in 1998. In the first part of this work the study area was introduced, describing the spatial and temporal evolution of ground subsidence, through the elaboration of a cracks map on the buildings located within the affected area. In the second part, the evolution of the most significant cracks found in the most damaged buildings was monitored using biaxial extensometric units and inclinometers. This article describes the work performed in the third part, where DInSAR processing of satellite radar data, available between 1998 and 2008, has permitted to determine the spatial and temporal evolution of the deformation of all the buildings of the study area in a period when no continuous in situ instrumental data is available. Additionally, the comparison of these results with the forensic data gathered in the 2005–2008 period, reveal that there is a coincidence between damaged buildings, buildings where extensometers register significant movements of cracks, and buildings deformation estimated from radar data. As a result, it has been demonstrated that the integration of DInSAR data into forensic analysis methodologies contributes to improve significantly the assessment of the damages of buildings affected by mining subsidence.Ground subsidence involves the settlement of the ground surface and can affect wide areas. Civil buildings in these areas do not always withstand these vertical deformations, and may suffer severe structural damage. Subsidence associated with the collapse of underground cavities is generally more localised than the former, but exhibits a greater destructive capacity due to the velocity of this phenomenon. This type of subsidence has occurred in the industrial area of Lo Tacón in the village of La Union (Murcia, SE Spain) since May 1998, as a result of the collapse of an abandoned underground mine gallery. La Unión is a metal mining area that has been exploited since the Roman period. The mineral extraction method varied over time from open pit to underground mining (S. XVIII-XIX) and back to open pit mining (s. XX). Due to this historic exploitation, a high concentration of abandoned underground mining galleries is found in the area. A fast and sudden collapse of several underground mining cavities occurred on 2nd May 1998 in Lo Tacón industrial area, which is located in the Southwest part of the village of La Unión. This event caused the complete structural failure of one building and severe damages to surrounding constructions, thus triggering considerable social alarm. In June 1998 a topographical levelling network was set up measuring a maximum settlement of 50 This work is structured in five sections. In Section 2 previous studies and the work done in parts I and II are presented. The next section is devoted to DInSAR analysis of satellite radar data and the retrieved ground surface deformation radar results. Section 4 is devoted to the comparison of these results with the detailed mapping of the cracks of damaged buildings, as well as with the measurements of the extensometric and inclinometric units installed in several damaged buildings. Advantages and limitations of this approach are summarised in the conclusions. After the collapse occurred in Lo Tacón, a geological survey was conducted. Ground movement was monitored and a detailed mapping was made of the cracks appearing in the ground. Cracks exhibit a higher density in the Northwest and Southeast boundaries, being located around the centre of the subsidence bowl area (see The evolution of ground movements was monitored using various levelling networks. Measurements carried out for a time span of one year, June 1998–June 1999, revealed an accumulated deformation of 50 A forensic analysis of the buildings affected by mining subsidence was started in June 2005 A total of 17 wall extensometers and three inclinometers were installed for the monitoring of the most damaged buildings located in zones Z2, Z3 and Z4 ( Over the last decade DInSAR techniques have become an important remote sensing tool for the estimation of temporal and spatial surface motions due to subsidence, in general, and particularly in mining subsidence cases Conventional Differential Interferometry (DInSAR) consists on the combination of a pair of SAR images of the same area acquired at different times to measure ground displacement. This technique uses the phase difference of backscattered signals from the two acquisitions to measure differential displacements A significant improvement in the quality of DInSAR results is given by a family of algorithms called Persistent Scatterer Interferometry (PSI) which are based on the simultaneous processing of multiple interferograms derived from a large set of SAR images and only over a subset of quality pixels selected from the whole images Displacement measurements are only obtained in those pixels, or ground surface targets, that show a stable electromagnetic response to the radar signal for the whole period of study. These ground surface targets usually correspond to buildings and rock outcrops. The displacement measurements are retrieved along the line of sight (LOS), which is the line defined between the satellite sensor and the ground surface target. Note that the radar is sensitive to displacements parallel to the LOS and blind to displacements orthogonal to the LOS. The theoretical displacement detection threshold between two SAR images is In this study, we have made use of the Coherent Pixels Technique (CPT) algorithm For this purpose a data set of 95 SAR images, acquired by the European Space Agency (ESA) remote sensing satellites ERS-2 and ENVISAT, between the 17th of January 1998 and the 2nd of August 2008, respectively, have been used ( The displacement velocity field measured for the City of La Union is shown in In this section we perform a comparison between ground surface deformation results and the cracks map of damaged buildings, as well as against the in situ measurement stations installed in several damaged buildings. In In order to quantify these observed relationships we have calculated first, the average and standard deviation of the total displacement of all the CPs included within each of the five zones proposed for the crack mapping of damaged buildings shown in Secondly, we have compared the total deformation measured in the common observation period (2005–2008), for all the buildings where damages were mapped, as well as for all the buildings where in situ measurement stations were installed (Figs. From the 14 buildings equipped with extensometric and inclinometric instruments, 11 of them have been detected with radar measurements ( We have compared in In the case of buildings E9 and E8 ( Consequently, the pixel resolution provided by the CPT technique prevents us to quantify precisely the deformation of every single building. Nevertheless, and assuming this limitation, we can calculate the subsidence rate of every building of the study area for each analysed period. For this purpose, we have calculated the average subsidence rate of those CPs that are included within the area of every building, taking into account the % of the area of every building that is occupied by every CP. This simple weighted average calculation permits us to illustrate very clearly what has been the most “probable” subsidence rate in each analysed period. In The study area is affected by mining subsidence due to a collapse of abandoned underground mining labours occurred in May 1998. This phenomenon continues to gradually evolve over time, showing a deceleration trend. Measurements obtained from satellite radar data have permitted to detect buildings displacements in the period 1998–2000 where no in situ instrumental data were available, demonstrating that subsidence rate has been progressively reduced. The forensic analysis performed in the study area between 2005 and 2008 has permitted to identify the buildings where new damages have appeared, and also to monitor the evolution of the cracks and the slope of the walls of damaged buildings. A clear correlation has been found between radar deformation measurements and the map of damaged buildings, as well as with those buildings where instrumental devices have been installed. The main disadvantage of the proposed DInSAR analysis is the final pixel resolution (80 by 80 Another possibility could be to exploit SAR images from the TerraSAR-X satellite mission launched in 2007, which is much more expensive but provides a full pixel resolution of 1.6 by 1.9 Nevertheless, assuming the existing limitations, the application of the DInSAR technique has permitted to enhance the forensic analysis of the buildings affected by mining subsidence, providing the following additional information: Subsidence bowl spatial extent has been determined thanks to the wide coverage of SAR images. Subsidence temporal evolution has been measured in the period 1998–2008 (when no continuous in situ instrumental data was available) exploiting the historical records of satellite SAR images. Subsidence rate has been calculated for every building of the study area and correlates well with other forensic analyses made previously. Therefore the future exploitation of high resolution radar satellites with the most advanced DInSAR techniques will improve the capacities of damaged buildings forensic analysis, permitting to: Improve the spatial and temporal characterization of subsidence processes that affect buildings and urban structures. Identify the buildings that suffer the greatest deformations where detailed forensic analysis should be made. Detect and monitor the differential settlement of every targeted building. The European Space Agency (ESA) has provided all SAR images used in this work in the framework of the project EO Cat.1-2494. This work has been partially financed by the Spanish Geological and Mining Institute (IGME) within project 2004051, by the Spanish Ministry of Education and Science and EU FEDER within project TEC2008-06764; by the Generalitat Valenciana under project ACOMP/2010/082 and BEST-2011/225 by the University of Alicante (Projects VIGROB-114, VIGROB-157 and VIGROB-184); and by the Industry and Environment Regional Ministry of Murcia (CIMA).