Purpose
                  To determine whether volar fixed-angle plate fixation with a new plate system could be used to treat dorsally unstable distal radius fractures. We hypothesized that volar fixed-angle plate fixation with or without radial styloid fixed-angle plate fixation would provide sufficient rigidity to allow early active range of motion without compromising fracture reduction. The initiation of early active motion may improve functional outcomes.
               
                  Methods
                  A retrospective review was conducted of one institution’s initial experience using a new volar fixed-angle plate system to treat dorsally displaced intra-articular and extra-articular distal radius fractures. Thirty-two fractures in 32 patients with dorsally displaced distal radius fractures were treated with a volar fixed-angle plate with or without a radial styloid fixed-angle plate. Fractures were classified using the AO classification. Radiographic parameters on preoperative, postoperative, and final follow-up radiographs were compared. The time to initiation of active range of motion was determined. Final follow-up ranges of motion and complications were reported. Finally, comparisons were made between the 23 fractures treated with a volar plate alone and the 9 fractures treated with a volar plate and a radial styloid plate.
               
                  Results
                  The average follow-up period was 13 months. Two thirds of the fractures were intra-articular. Average loss of reduction from initial postoperative to final follow-up radiographs was 0° of volar tilt, 1° of radial inclination, and 0 mm of radial length. Active wrist and forearm ranges of motion were initiated at an average of 11 days after surgery. The final follow-up flexion-extension and pronation-supination arcs averaged 112° and 151°, respectively. The 9 fractures treated with the combination of a fixed-angle volar plate with a fixed-angle radial styloid plate had greater initial displacement than did the 23 fractures treated with a volar plate alone. Otherwise, differences between the 2 groups were not significant. Only 1 radial styloid plate became symptomatic.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Volar plate fixation using a new fixed-angle plate system successfully can stabilize dorsally unstable distal radius fractures. Early active range of motion was facilitated without compromising fracture reduction.