Lower ore grades and rising competition require new, more efficient approaches in ore processing. Instead of blending different ore varieties into a homogeneous feed for processing plants, selective comminution may be a solution for certain mining operations to increase recovery at lower costs.
                  Selective comminution exploits selected ore characteristics to achieve an enrichment of valuable minerals in certain fractions. A simple classification step will already produce a pre-concentrate in this case, while other fractions can be discarded or processed separately. Quantitative Microstructural Analysis (QMA) provides valuable information on the behaviour of an ore in the comminution process.Deteriorating ore grades force mining companies to mine and process more raw materials to supply sufficient concentrate amounts to the refining industry. New mining projects often face challenges of more complex ore textures or more fine-grained valuable minerals, requiring additional grinding for sufficient mineral liberation. Already these trends may lead to a four times higher energy consumption for the comminution of the main metal ores in the year 2030 compared with today ( While the world population will grow from around 7.1 While it is recommendable to examine the whole value chain of metal production from exploration to metallurgy for potential improvements in the efficiency, mineral processing should be in the focus. Already at the present level of consumption, about 2% of the electrical energy generated worldwide is spent on comminution processes ( Selective comminution is a promising way to reduce the specific energy consumption. If it is properly applied, it would allow to separate the portions of material with no or low mineral or metal content already at an early process stage by a simple classification step. Thus, a pre-concentrate can be produced. No further grinding of the earlier discarded material portion is performed, and this can save a substantial amount of energy. The pre-concentrate from a selective comminution often contains still locked or semi-liberated particles and bigger amounts of waste mineral. Since selective comminution in combination with subsequent classification is a cost-effective way of generating pre-concentrates, it is also a promising method for the treatment of low-grade ores and old tailing dumps. While selective comminution was occasionally applied in processing ores and industrial minerals in the past ( In-depth knowledge of properties of the mineral constituents of an ore is essential for the understanding of selective comminution phenomena. Geologists characterize ore formations by verbally describing their texture and structure based on the analysis of thin or polished sections. This method has limitations as it describes the ore microstructure usually two-dimensionally and qualitatively only. The search for systematic relations between relevant processing parameters, product characteristics and inherent textural attributes, however, requires quantification of the microstructural description of raw materials. Therefore, Quantitative Microstructural Analysis (QMA) was developed to support the process engineer in selecting the appropriate type and size of machine and determining the proper operating parameters for the most efficient liberation and recovery. A wide range of mineral analysis methods supports mineralogists today, such as the Mineral Liberation Analysis (MLA), QEMSCAN or computer tomography (CT). While each of these methods has provided important new insights into the composition of minerals, traditional optical microscopy still maintained its importance in many applications. It allows the direct identification of minerals rather than just chemical elements for instance. Within the limits of optical resolution, thin sections in an optical microscope may provide plenty of valuable information for efficient mineral processing. For this purpose, QMA is a method to structure the information in a mathematic way. Some similarities may also be established with methods applied for the analysis of polished sections of steel or cast iron. The details of the application as well as most of the conclusions drawn are however different. This may be compared with the application of the Vickers indenter used for hardness testing. While in metallurgy the dimensions of the indentation are measured, the length of the Palmqvist cracks ( A microscopic analysis of thin or polished sections forms the basis of the QMA ( The three-dimensional description of minerals and ore microstructures within QMA allows a quantitative characterization of complex geological materials ( For QMA, a hand specimen is collected from exposures in the field with detailed informations about the sampling location and the geological context. Three orthogonally orientated thin or polished sections of the sample are then prepared and investigated with optical microscopy using stereological methods ( The photomicrographs are analyzed in successive steps utilizing point counting, linear analysis as well as area analysis ( Based on the 2-dimensional information from the three thin or polished sections it is possible to synthesize a 3-dimensional model by mathematical transformation and approximation ( The analysis of the ore microstructure prior to breakage can provide valuable information regarding the types of textures and mineral assemblages that are likely to produce certain particle sizes and characteristics that are favourable or unfavourable for selective comminution. The volume percentage of a mineral group is defined as the quotient of the sum of the volumes of the individual mineral grains in the sample and the total sample volume. It can be most easily determined with the point counting method ( Volume percentage or derived mass percentage of the ore constituents before a certain comminution step, serves as a reference for any evaluation of selectivity achieved. Even comminution products may be investigated using this method after embedding the particles in epoxy. Knowledge of the grain sizes in an ore is essential for judging the potential for selective comminution, since differences in particle sizes after comminution is usually the simplest way to separate an enriched fraction by simple classification. The size of the individual grains varies in the ore’s microstructure, so the size of the grains has to be approximated with a size distribution function. Accordingly, the distribution density of the grain diameter d of a logarithmic normal distribution function can be described with a median d The shape is a geometric grain characteristic that has to take all three dimensions into account ( For the consideration of selectivity in comminution, the grain shape may have an impact on the sensitivity of an ore constituent against certain loads during comminution. A mineral forming mainly platy grains, might preferably be ground by applying shear loads supporting the platy shape. Then, an air classifier could support the separation of the different shaped particles, taking into account the constraints that may be imposed by the density of the various minerals. The ellipsoid serves as reference also for the determination of the roughness since it is the geometrical shape with the smallest surface relative to the volume of a body with three different dimensions in orthogonal directions. Any increase in surface relative to this optimum shape is considered as increase in roughness of the surface. The roughness K The calculation of the “ideal” surface area S The surface area per unit volume is especially useful as it is linked with the determination of contacts between mineral phases within ore. This parameter is easily calculated from the number of intersections per unit length of test line applying one of these stereological relationships. The outer shape of the grains largely determines the character of the microstructure. In selective comminution, roughness may play an important roll through its influence on the shear strength and fracture toughness of an ore, in particular along the grain boundaries. The linear analyses are done at varying angles (usually by rotating the stage clockwise by 15° with each step). With every new position, all the intersections of lines with the grain boundaries are counted ( From three 2D-roses of intersections which are orthogonal to each other, with an approximation, the parameters of a spatial rose of intersections (n A spatial rose of intersections of an oriented microstructure, is the superposition of the roses of intersection of ideal boundary surface systems ( Grains of a mineral phase can be evenly distributed in the space, but they can also form clusters in which the grains of a mineral phase share boundary surfaces ( Within a raw material there are not only solid phases, but also pores, fissures. The latter are filled with gas and liquids. The volumetric portion of those gas and liquid filled volumes can be calculated and used to determine the space filling of solid phases ε After evaluation of all mineral groups present in the ore, the results of the evaluation are summarized in the form of characteristic values ( The test results presented in the following deliver statistical relationships between the ore properties (e.g. grain size, grain shape, mineral intergrowth, etc.), selected machine parameters (e.g. stress loading rate) and the achievable product parameters (particle size and particle shape distribution). Not only could a weighting of the influence of the different ore characteristic values on individual target values be established, statistical relationships between selected target values and the various design and operating parameters could be proven as well. The ore characteristic values permit an estimation of the ore comminution behaviour with respect to selectivity, crushability, product particle shape, wear and energy consumption. The term “selective comminution” as used in this article describes a method to exploit differences in the comminution behaviour of the mineral phases of an ore. Even if there are such differences, selectivity is only achieved if the comminution technology can exploit those differences by the kind, speed, frequency, energy, etc. of the load it exercises onto the material. Selective comminution may also occur unintentionally, even with adverse influence on the mineral processing system by the incidentally combination of a material suitable for selective comminution with a technology exploiting that characteristics. So, selective comminution can also be considered as a property of a comminution system comprising of the appropriate comminution technology for the inherently suitable material ( In addition to suitable material characteristics, an appropriate technology is fundamental to exploit those characteristics for selective comminution. The design of the comminution machine and its operational parameters such as the kind of load, its frequency, velocity and energy take decisive influence on the comminution system. Selective comminution can be expected only if both, material properties and comminution technology are suitable (see In most of the reported or investigated occurrences of selective comminution, the mass specific content of valuable minerals in certain size fractions of the comminution product is different from the one in the feed material. In this case, the size serves as separation criterion between the fractions which are rich in valuable minerals from the rest ( The selective comminution helps only to realize the differentiation in the size of comminution products having differences in the specific content of valuable products but with no separation. A downstream separation step is always necessary for the separation of different materials. In the simplest case, this is a classification. When selecting a comminution technology, knowledge on crack propagation within the feed material is essential. Numerous descriptions of the crack propagation mechanisms can be found in the literature, often using various terms for the same phenomenon ( Selective comminution in combination with a process, which separates fractions containing different percentages of valuable components, can be considered as a sortation process. The method for measuring the effect of selective comminution depends on the kind of selective comminution and the separation process. The most common case of selective comminution presents as a different distribution of valuable and waste minerals in dependence on the particle size. Thus, particle size is the most important parameter for the evaluation of the selective comminution, as shown in the following three examples. This integration method is independent of any separation cuts and provides only one evaluating parameter, which makes it easy to compare results from various test series. Material components to be separated after selective comminution are subsequently named V for valuable component and W for waste component (index V and W respectively). For each component, a cumulative particle size distribution Q The selectivity S of two components describes the difference in a considered class feature (here particle size) of these two components. It is calculated as the area between the cumulative particle size distributions of the two components and may, for example, be described for the comminution product (index P) with Eq. It should be noted that, when evaluating the selectivity of a comminution process even in the feed material (index F) the components V and W may exhibit differences in the cumulative particle size distributions and reflect a selectivity of the feed material S SZ can be determined by inserting Eq. SZ is positive in the example shown in Another option for characterizing a selective comminution effect and the selectivity of different materials in the product is the ore separation degree η If just the concentration of the valuable component in the feed (F), the product (P) and the waste (W) are known, η The parameters are c A further method for evaluating the effect of selective comminution is to use the Fuerstenau upgrading diagram in recovery plots ( The following example shows some results of selective comminution tests with a lead-zinc-ore ( The ore originates from the marble mine Hermsdorf in the Erzgebirge Mountains, Germany. Six separated calcite/dolomite horizons are located in the deposit. The mainly dolomitic, partly calcitic horizon K1 contains a larger concordant lead-zinc-mineralisation consisting of two types of ore. One type is banded, the other type is as brecciated as a part of the dolomite in the K1-horizon. The brecciation leads to a coarser recrystallization of a part of the ore mineralisation. The wall rock is phyllite. The whole deposit contains a lot of larger dislocations. Since the 16th century marble was mined in the deposit. In 1956 lead-zinc ores were sent to the smelter in Freiberg. An intensive prospection of the lead-zinc-mineralisation took place in the years 1958, 1960 and 1963. The high variability of the thickness of the ore layer and the relatively low amount of ore prevented the economic ore mining. The lead-zinc-mineralisation is largely triaged by the marble mining ( Both ore types were investigated. Some results of the investigations with the brecciated ore type are shown below. First, the texture and structure properties were determined with the QMA ( In addition to QMA, the Vickers hardness number and fracture toughness were measured to further quantify the difference in the comminution properties, see The results of the QMA investigations in combination with the Vickers hardness tests allow the prognoses that a good selectivity can be expected for galena, since its hardness is much lower than that of the other components. Its comparable high roughness however leads to the conclusion that the breakage will be rather of preferential than of interfacial nature. For the sphalerite, much less selectivity is to be expected as result of the comminution process. The part of sphalerite locked with the galena will be enriched together with the galena in the fine fractions. The low roughness between galena and sphalerite is advantageous for liberating both minerals. The other part of sphalerite locked with the calcite with a high roughness and more often smaller grained will be hardly enriched in the fine fractions by selective comminution. It will stay locked or semi-liberated with the calcite in the coarse fractions. The minimum amount of sample mass was calculated to ensure a representative sample (Schubert, 1984) based on a confidence level of 80%. Finally, the representative sample was generated with a sample divider. Only the narrow fraction 10/12.5 Some results from the investigation with single particle impact comminution in a shoot apparatus will be shown first. The sample contains 499 particles. The particles were crushed individually in a pneumatically operated shoot apparatus by perpendicular impact load at 60 Further tests were conducted with other samples of the same material on a double roll crusher (compressive load), a pin mill (impact load with high loading frequency) and a disc mill (shear load with subordinated compressive load). The samples for the tests on the other machines were prepared in the same way as for the shoot apparatus. The gap of the double roll crusher was set to 0.25 The reduction ratio ε is defined with mesh size d For the comminution with the shoot apparatus ε is about 2. Thereby, only about 5% (mass) of the comminution product is in the same range as the grain size of galena and sphalerite, see The best ore separation degree for the galena enrichment can be achieved with the shoot apparatus in coarse fractions at t As expected from QMA and Vickers hardness test, the selective comminution effect for sphalerite is much smaller; η The main aim of selective comminution is the separation of the valuable content from waste material, thereby relieving the subsequent beneficiation process. The different comminution behaviour of ore constituents is exploited to generate a product, which shows an enrichment of the valuable content in certain fractions. With particle size often being the preferred parameter to differentiate these fractions, a simple classification step may be sufficient in those cases to separate a waste fraction and produce a pre-concentrate. In order to select the appropriate kind and magnitude of load to be applied and thus the most suitable comminution machine, the mineral has to be investigated. With the QMA the paper presents a proven scientific approach to characterize ores in a mathematic way, oriented to the terms of geology to identify opportunities for selective comminution. By determining the texture (grain size, grain shape, roughness, specific surface) of the minerals and their structure (orientation, clustering) in an ore and in combination with further parameters such as Vickers hardness, toughness, I First results in this new field of scientific investigation into selective comminution are presented. Parameters are defined to quantify selectivity S and ore separation degree η Test results with a lead-zinc-ore confirm that selective comminution requires a systemic approach, comprising of the comminution behaviour of the ore under a certain load, the type of comminution machine and a number of operation parameters of the system. Further investigation is required to establish correlations between the quantified ore properties, the machine properties and the selective comminution results, for a better understanding of the influence of certain ore characteristics on its comminution behaviour under various loads. Another task is to relate the new parameter sets to indices widely used in the resource industry nowadays such as UCS or the various Bond indices. The new approach was applied and tested with a number of ores already. Future investigations with materials from other sources, however, will certainly help to refine the method.