We consider the problem of constructing gene regulatory networks from expression data using the probabilistic-Boolean-network paradigm. We propose to construct the networks according to the following stages. Firstly, we determine the number of possible parent gene sets and the input sets of gene variables corresponding to each gene, and this is done by using a novel clustering technique based on mutual information minimization. Simulated annealing is employed to solve the optimization problem. After such initial gene clustering, we restrict our attention to the class of different functions from the possible parent gene sets to each target gene. Secondly, each function is then modeled by a perceptron consisting of a linear term and a nonlinear term. A reversible-jump Markov-chain-Monte-Carlo (MCMC) technique is used to calculate the model order and the parameters. Finally, the coefficient of determination (CoD) is employed to compute the probability of selecting different predictors for each gene. To test this approach for constructing gene regulatory networks, we have carried out computational experiments using data from known gene response pathways including ionizing radiation and downstream targets of inactivating gene mutations.To understand the nature of cellular function, it is necessary to study the behavior of genes in a holistic rather than in an individual manner because the expressions and activities of genes are not isolated or independent of each other The advantage of PBNs is that they naturally allow one to incorporate prior biological knowledge Since the current data revealing the structure of the transcriptional regulation process is both limited and noisy As the first step in constructing a gene regulatory network, the complexity of the expression data is reduced by thresholding changes in transcript level, for instance, into ternary expression data: −1 (down-regulated), +1 (up-regulated), or 0 (invariant). When using multiple microarrays, the absolute signal intensities vary extensively due to both the process of preparing and printing the EST elements The paper is organized as follows. A deterministic gene regulatory probabilistic Boolean network In a probabilistic gene regulatory network, for every node Determine Each The coefficient of determination (CoD) When the data sample size is small, we can adjust the clustering result and the corresponding predictors by a local search technique. In the case of gene-expression microarrays, the data are severely limited relative to the number of variables in the system. Consequently, it is necessary to restrict the number of variables over which a function is defined. Fortunately, most functions require only a few essential variables The motivation for considering mutual information is its capacity to measure a general dependence among random variables. The main idea of this technique is to identify a relatively small number of candidate parents for each gene based on statistics such as correlation. We then restrict our search to networks in which only the candidate parents of a variable can be its parents, resulting in a smaller search space in which we can more efficiently find a good structure. Shannon's information theory provides a suitable formalism for quantifying the above concepts. The Suppose we are to partition the set of gene variables into The original simulated annealing algorithm Let The basic simulated annealing procedure suffers from a very slow convergence, we therefore resort to the fast annealing techniques We set an upper bound In the next section, we adopt a new nonlinear model to estimate the predictors (functions) for each gene. A reversible jump Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) annealing method is adopted to perform the necessary computations for parameter estimation. Based on the possible We consider the following family of regression equations (the estimated predictor denoted by The linear model From model MCMC is a family of procedures for Bayesian computations. The basic idea is to draw random samples from a Markov chain, whose equilibrium distribution is the target distribution. These samples are then used to approximate the desired inference. The reversible jump MCMC algorithm is capable of jumping between parameter spaces of different dimensions Birth jump: Let Death jump: Random drop one of the Merge jump: Randomly choose one of the Split jump: Randomly choose one of the No jump: We illustrate the performance of the above prediction construction procedure for the following model A natural way to select a set of predictors for a given gene is to employ the In this study, we limited the number of parents of each gene to be less than 10. However, if it happens that there are more than 10 genes in some classes, then we use a local optimal clustering algorithm to re-cluster those sets or use the CoD technique directly. Once a class of gene sets After obtaining the possible The number The ability of the mutual-information clustering algorithm and MCMC predictors to build probabilistic gene regulatory networks based on the observations in transcription level has been tested in the context of responsiveness to genotoxic stresses. As a result of a microarray study surveying transcription of 1238 genes during the response of a myeloid line to ionizing radiation The ternary data of the survey (14 genes and 30 samples) are given in  It is instructive to compare the results of the new information-MCMC approach with those obtained by using a full search restricted by a small number of predictor genes. To do so, we consider four target genes, It is known that To fully interpret the results, we must recognize that In The biological expectation is that Lastly, we consider In this study, we have developed a procedure for constructing gene regulatory networks, e.g., probabilistic gene regulatory networks, using the following approach. First, the number of possible parent gene sets and the input set of variables corresponding to each gene are determined via a novel clustering technique based on mutual information minimization, with simulated annealing being employed to solve the optimization problem. Second, each function is then modelled by a perceptron consisting of a linear term and a nonlinear term. A reversible jump Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method is used to calculate the model order and the parameters. Finally, the coefficient of determination is employed to compute the probability of selecting different predictors for each gene. To test this approach for constructing probabilistic gene regulatory networks, we have applied our approach to microarray data from known gene response pathways including ionizing radiation and downstream targets of inactivating gene mutations. Suppose that the current state of the Markov chain is in  Propose a new RBF center randomly from the interval in Compute If  Randomly remove one of the Compute If  Randomly choose one of the Replace it by two RBF terms as Compute If  Randomly choose one of the If Compute If For Draw a sample If Randomly sample a RBF center Compute If If Randomly sample a RBF center Compute If The CoD must be redefined when the error of the best constant predictor is 0 for a random data split during cross-validation estimation of the CoD. Let 0< 0<  0= We now let