This paper presents the evolution of techniques for simulating correlated wind speeds, over the last decade. The work stems from the problem of obtaining a value that can be defined as the simultaneousness of the production of wind power in electrical networks containing many wind parks. As will be seen, we have steadily extended the research towards the analysis of the correlation of wind speed series at several locations, which is important for assessing the probability of a given wind power being injected in the electrical network.IT is well known that wind energy has been experiencing important growth in power generation in many countries around the world. Until a few years ago it was mainly in Europe (with Germany, Denmark and Spain in the lead) and the US. Later India joined this trend and, in the last two years, China has come closer and closer to topping the list When wind energy injection became large scale in the power systems of some of these countries, one major concern for stakeholders, such as the Transmission System Operators (TSO) and the distribution companies, was the idea that wind energy is not easy to control, could not be stored as the primary resource, and was, in some ways, difficult to predict reliably. Some distribution companies wondered if a concept of simultaneousness could be applied to wind energy production, similar to the way it is defined for the loads. In other words, they wondered if it could be said that a good approximation for wind parks included in power flow analyses could be to consider all them operating at, for example, 40% of their nominal power. For loads, the idea of groups of them behaving similarly (i.e., operating at a similar percentage of their maximum value) is not absurd. As TSOs record load–duration curves, the values of these percentages can be considered different for different parts of the day, which generally allows us to talk about peak and valley hours. However, in the case of wind injection, it is easy to imagine that some wind parks produce one particular percentage of their maximum power and, simultaneously, other parks operate at a very different percentage, especially at sites with complex terrain and when the distances between them are considerable. This was the case, for instance, in Galicia, the autonomous community located in the most northwestern part of Spain, one of the regions where wind energy has experienced the fastest growth over recent years due to its potential Once this point is reached, the concept of correlation appears, which was soon understood to be the concept that should be used instead of simultaneousness. Wind speed variability can be classified, in a first stage, by means of two different features: (a) wind speed is different simultaneously at different locations, which results in a correlation between wind speed series; (b) wind speed at the same location is different in time domain, which results in chronological series or autocorrelation processes. The latter is not dealt with here. In this review, we will be focusing on correlation between wind speeds at different locations, as this can be important and useful for reliability studies In general we can say that a first indication of wind correlation at different locations can be expressed as a function of distance, as suggested by Freris and Infield The problem to solve can be stated thus: is it possible to simulate sets of wind speed values with given correlations and find some features from the point of view of their probability density functions (PDF)? Or, as we are speaking about wind speed distributions, can several Weibull distributions be generated with different shape and scale factors and with the desired correlation matrix? In this paper, a review is made of different solutions and how they have allowed us to improve the final solution to the problem, which can be helpful when solving subsequent electrical problems such as reliability and probabilistic load flow studies in power networks containing wind parks. As this paper is a review, let us firstly remind ourselves which of the more accepted kinds of statistical distributions are the most widely used for wind speed steady-state simulations. Meteorological stations measuring wind speed over a period of time (often for at least a year) obtain a good collection of samples, so features such as wind speed mean value and direction are available. Once the data are collected, the mean wind speed presents a discrete frequency distribution given by the classification of values in an assumed number of intervals. However, over the years it has been assumed that some continuous distributions can approximate the behaviour of the discrete distribution. Weibull and Rayleigh distributions have been the most generally accepted. The PDF of the Weibull distribution is given in As for the derivation of a good Weibull approximation for the distribution of wind speed mean values at a location, the process to obtain it is explained in An alternative way of approximating wind behaviour is the Rayleigh distribution, which is a specific Weibull one, when the shape parameter In general, the use of the Weibull approximation can be made when a large amount of previous data exists, whilst the Rayleigh one can be used when only the mean wind speed is known. Given two series of wind speeds, corresponding to mean wind speed values every so many seconds at two different locations, different moments from the mean value and the standard deviation can be calculated. One of them is the correlation, which is calculated as a normalized way of giving the variance, i.e., a measure of how both series vary as a set. When the series vary in a very similar way, i.e., when they grow together or decrease together, they will be highly correlated and if the effects are opposite, they are highly correlated in a negative sense. A definition of the correlation has been given by Pearson, and it is expressed in Now we can come back to the questions at the end of the Introduction to this paper and look at the answers to them and how these answers have evolved. Let us suppose that we have In For each wind park, sets of wind speeds are generated by means of the Monte Carlo simulation method, according to the given distribution functions for each of them, i.e., their An operation, explained here, is carried out to transform the correlation matrix with values close to 0 to the desired one. Here is an explanation of both steps and the results obtained in general for them. Step 1 does not present any difficulties, and it is solved thanks to some commercial software. In fact, the function Step 2 consists of the derivation, for the same samples, of values of correlations close to the desired ones. In method I of In this case a new vector The relationship between the mean values and standard deviations of the sets of variables An alternative possible change of variables is to use normalized uncorrelated variables, such as in Additionally, when the procedure is applied to normally distributed variables, the resulting vector When applying the method explained in this section to the simulation of correlated wind speeds, the main problems that appear are the following: Negative wind speeds appear when applying The features of the distributions are lost during the process, although their mean values and correlations are kept. For a better understanding, let us express In The values Negative values can appear during the process, depending on the values of the matrix And when the process finishes, experience shows that the feature of the non Normal distribution is progressively lost as the subindex number of the variable grows. So, if the initial distributions were Weibull distributions, then, In As the number of sets with negative values of wind speeds was generally between 5 and 10%, the solution was not to take these series into account. So, only the other 90–95% of the series with simulated correlated wind speeds were taken into account. This procedure adds some error to the global solution, but it is assumed as part of the process. On the other hand, instead of Weibull distributions, and according to recommendations given in In the previous subsection we have mentioned the errors made when applying the proposed method to the simulation of correlated wind speeds. There are two kinds of errors: Errors in the mean value or in the correlation/covariance matrix Errors due to the loss of features in the distributions. The first kind can be assessed numerically, by comparison between the desired mean values with the obtained mean values or between the desired correlation matrix and the obtained one. Although the initial sets contained in However, as those errors can be numerically assessed, we are going to focus here on the second kind of errors, those due to loss of features in the distributions. Due to the CLT, as we have mentioned, and due to the operational procedure, explained with help of As an example, let us suppose that we want to simulate 10,000 values of wind speed for three locations where the After carrying out the process, the results are three distributions with mean values exactly the same as the desired ones, and correlation matrix: However, from the 10,000 series of three simulated wind speeds, all them positive, at least one negative value appears in 460 of them. If we reject these series, which are less than 5% of the total, then we will have three series without negative values. In that case, the mean values change to 7.3555, 6.4519, and 5.5829, and the parameters obtained in the simulation for the distributions are We can summarize the results of the process in A different point of view in the simulation of correlated wind speeds is given in The method proposed in In order to carry it out, evolutionary techniques are used, such as Genetic Algorithms (GA) and Local Search (LS). GA has been explained in In the case of the simulation of wind speed series, the condition maintained throughout the process is the conservation of the PDF of the wind speed series for every single location, based on the fact that the change of position of the elements in their sets does not modify the PDF. The conditions that have to be fulfilled are the correlations between each pair of wind speed series, defined in the correlation matrix. The error measure functions, defined as the proximity to the desired results, are obtained through the maximum norm of the differences between the elements of the correlation matrix, obtained from the possible solution, and the desired one. Note that this kind of error measure could be used in the method explained previously, although it would not serve to improve it, as it does in the evolutionary techniques. So, for the possible solution The evolutionary techniques in When applied, the LS consists of swapping pairs of wind speed values in the same corresponding location, in order to improve the correlation matrix of the whole group. GA consists of generating possible solutions of wind speed series combining series from two other locations, seeking the same improvement. Perhaps the great disadvantage of using evolutionary techniques for the solution of such a problem is the fact that they need a long computing time. Some possible ways to reduce this are the options to initialize the method described in next section. The key in any evolutionary or iterative process is good initialization, in order to avoid wasting time avoiding local minimums of the error function. This happens in the method described in Two types of initialization are described in In order to generate the wind speed samples of two locations, when there is a correlation greater than Therefore, the initial possible solution, which is the input to the method described, can have an initial correlation matrix where all of its non-diagonal elements are equal to a fixed value (for example, 0.5). Moreover, as the method described utilizes two possible solutions, two initializations of this type with different values are suggested. Obviously, the best initialization depends on the values of the correlation matrix, but combined values of 0.6 and 0.4 or 0.7 and 0.3 are recommended. Generally speaking, it can be said that messing up is easier than arranging, so higher values reduce the computation time significantly. In order to approximate the initial possible solution provided as an input of the method described, the fixed initialization can be improved. Taking the whole group of locations and its different correlation values by pairs, following what has been explained, they can be understood as percentages of full correlation values. First the whole group of Finally, it can be said that the method described can provide a solution that is as approximate as required. The only circumstance to consider is the computation time, which depends on the number of locations considered, the initialization utilized, and, of course, the speed of the computer, but future improvements in computer technology will minimize the need for this consideration. In order to show the evolution of the algorithm considering its initialization, The proposal here is to change the definition of correlation being used. So far we have talked about parametric Pearson's correlation. However, if a different correlation parameter is used, i.e. the nonparametric Spearman rank correlation, the problem of derivation of correlated wind speeds can be better solved. Spearman rank correlation is not calculated as a function of the values, but on the basis of the ranking of these values in the series. The algorithm was presented in Spearman rank correlation can be expressed as in As a summary, the method consists of the following process. Firstly, the Spearman rank correlation between all pairs of wind speed series is calculated according to Secondly, the Monte Carlo technique is used to generate the wind speed distributions corresponding to the different locations, independently. Finally, the IC method is used as described in A number of independent distribution functions coinciding with the number of distributions of the original problem is generated (Weibull or Rayleigh). Also, the number of samples must coincide. The operation Some order of the elements is analyzed in each vector. For example, if they are sorted by their values, a classification is established according to their ranks in the vectors. After this, the same order is analyzed in the original distributions, and they are re-ordered according to a ranking similar to that obtained in step 3. The results of step 2 can be values out of the range of the original Uniform distributions. This is not important, as all that will happen is that similar ranks will be used in the Weibull or Rayleigh distributions, which, when applied to the generated independent distributions, will only reorder their values in the vectors. As a result, correlated distributions are obtained according to the rank correlation matrix desired and also keeping all their features, i.e., if they were Weibull distributions, they will remain Weibull distributions. This is due to the fact that all their values are respected, and only their rank values (their positions in the series) are changed. For example, if a first set has the following values: In order to compare the results with those obtained with the first method presented, they are given for its application to the example with the same wind parks, with a small difference: the change of the correlation definition. According to this, the values that were used in the first method as Pearson parametric correlations are used here as Spearman rank correlations. The resulting Spearman rank correlation matrix is as follows: Although it was not the goal of this method, we can add that the Pearson parametric correlation matrix obtained as a result was the following: What can be commented about this Pearson correlation matrix is that it does not seem to be a worst approximation to the initial Pearson correlation matrix obtained by means of the first method presented. So, even if only Pearson parametric correlations are known, perhaps the use of this second method can be advantageous, by assuming they are Spearman rank correlation values. And finally, the results obtained for the other parameters are given in Part of the work that has not been included in this research is the use of Markov chains to obtain correlated wind speeds. In a way, method II presented in Alternatively, for those who have simultaneous data of wind speeds, the most obvious way to simulate is by repeating these values as if they were randomly generated. It is the simplest and quickest way. The methods proposed and commented here are envisaged for cases when the initial data are mean wind speeds and correlations. One of the main applications for the techniques presented in this review, is to generate wind power series of aggregated wind turbines in order to obtain wind power distributions of wind parks. Some results of this have been presented in After long experience simulating series of wind speeds at different locations, the following conclusions can be made from a comparison of results obtained by the different means presented in this review. The main conclusion is that when it is not mandatory to use parametric correlations, but rank correlations can be used, then the method based on the Spearman rank correlation definition is perhaps best for simulation, as it is very quick and allows us to simulate whilst keeping the correlation matrix and the features of the distributions. When parametric correlations have to be used, then the methods based on genetic algorithms offer good results, and they can be optimized in order to be run in a short time. Finally, there should be no need to use the first methods employed, and they were described because they formed the origin of this research. The financial support given by the autonomous government