Background
                  The best surgical strategy for extra-capsular proximal femoral fractures (PFFs) is controversial in the elderly. Poor bone quality and neck screw instability can adversely affect the results with currently available fixation devices, which predominantly consist in dynamic hip screw-plates and proximal reconstruction nails.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  The helical blade of the proximal femoral nail antirotation (PFN-A™) achieves better cancellous bone compaction in the femoral neck, thereby decreasing the risk of secondary displacement.
               
                  Materials and Methods
                  We retrospectively reviewed consecutive cases of PFN-A™ fixation performed between 2006 and 2008 in 102 patients (75 females and 27 males) with a mean age of 84.9±9.5 years (range, 70–100 years). Functional outcomes were assessed using the Parker Mobility Score.
               
                  Results
                  Mean follow-up in the 102 patients was 21.3±17.5 months (4–51 months). Fracture distribution in the AO classification scheme was A1, n
                     =45; A2, n
                     =41; and A3, n
                     =16. At last follow-up, Parker Mobility Score values in the 65 survivors were 0–3, n
                     =35; 4–6, n
                     =11; and 7–9, n
                     =19. Fracture union was consistently achieved, after a mean of 10.3±3 weeks. Blade back-out allowed by the device design occurred in 16 (15.7%) patients but caused pain due to screw impingement on the fascia lata in only five patients (of whom two underwent reoperation). Cephalic blade cut-out was noted in three (2.9%) patients, of whom one required reoperation because of acetabular penetration. Two hardware-related fractures were recorded.
               
                  Discussion
                  The new PFN-A™ device ensures reliable fixation with low mechanical complication rates. Although our data do not constitute proof that a helical blade is superior over a neck screw, they suggest a decreased rate of construct failure and may serve as a basis for a comparative study.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level IV, retrospective study.Proximal femoral fractures (PFFs) account for a substantial proportion of trauma surgery procedures and carry high mortality rates of 5% after 1 month and 15% after 6 months The introduction of dynamic screw-plates and proximal intramedullary reconstruction nails has transformed the management of extra-capsular PFFs. Whether one of these devices is superior over the other remains controversial, particularly as their introduction coincided with a decline in complication rates due to increasing surgeon experience The proximal femoral nail antirotation We conducted a single-centre multi-surgeon retrospective study of the 108 patients older than 70 years who underwent PFN-A™ implantation for non-pathological traumatic extra-capsular PFFs between January 2007 and December 2008. None of the patients was lost to follow-up. Six patients died during the immediate postoperative period and were excluded from the analysis. At last follow-up, 37 of the remaining patients had died; the clinical and imaging data obtained at the last visit in these 37 patients were used for the study. Thus, 102 fractures managed with PFN-A™ in 102 patients were included. During the study period, PFN-A™ was used in all patients older than 70 years of age who had trauma-related extra-capsular PFFs. Patients younger than 70 years of age and patients with intra-capsular femoral neck fractures were not eligible for the study. The 102 study patients had a mean age of 84.9 The PFN-A™ device is a titanium reconstruction nail. Although this device is available in various lengths, diameters, and blade angles, all the study patients had implantation of the 200-mm nail measuring 10 All patients had surgery within 48 Low-molecular-weight heparin was given routinely to prevent thromboembolism. Rehabilitation was started on the second postoperative day by mobilization and full weight-bearing in all patients. Activity and function before the injury were assessed using the Parker Mobility Score (PMS) The patients were divided into two groups based on the clinical outcome 6 months after surgery: 74 (73%) patients had good or very good clinical outcomes (favourable-outcome group) and 28 (27%) had fair or poor clinical outcomes (unfavourable-outcome group). Classification into these two groups was based on functional capacity, with good and very good clinical outcomes being defined as a PMS decline no greater than 2 points compared to the pre-injury value, with no reoperation. For classification, we used the best PMS value recorded during follow-up and not the value at last follow-up, because delayed age-related functional impairments developed in 22 (21.5%) patients older than 85 years of age. We recorded medical and surgical complications. Visits were scheduled 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, and 12 months after surgery. In addition, a last follow-up visit occurred between April and July 2011. Walking and pain were evaluated at each visit, and the PMS at last follow-up was recorded. Blade position was recorded as in the upper half or lower half on the anteroposterior view and as in the anterior, middle, or posterior third on the lateral view. The ideal blade position according to the manufacturer is in the lower half on the anteroposterior view and in the middle third of the neck on the lateral view. Blade position was assessed by fluoroscopy during surgery. Anteroposterior and lateral radiographs were obtained immediately after surgery and at each follow-up visit to monitor bone healing, to assess blade position, and to look for blade back-out. We looked for mechanical complications such as blade cut-out, penetration of the blade into the joint cavity, hardware-related femoral fracture, and non-union. We compared patients with mechanical complications to those who experienced fracture union without complications. Among potential factors involved in treatment failure, we assessed general physical findings, the preoperative PMS, the type of fracture, and blade position in the neck. We also compared results in the favourable- and unfavourable-outcome groups described above. We evaluated whether age, BMI, ASA class, anticoagulant therapy, and/or antiplatelet therapy were significantly associated with complications and/or with reoperation. Between-group comparisons were with the Chi-square test or Fisher exact test, as appropriate, for qualitative variables, and the non-parametric Mann-Whitney test for quantitative variables. Values of Mean operating time was 47 At last follow-up, 65 (60%) of the 108 operated patients (50 females and 15 males) were alive. Six patients died during the immediate postoperative period. In addition, 37 patients died later on; time to death was less than 3 months in five patients, 3 to 6 months in 18 patients, 6 to 12 months in eight patients, 1 to 2 years in three patients, and 3 years in three patients. PMS values indicated a favourable outcome (good or very good result) in 74 (73%) patients and an unfavourable outcome (fair or poor result) in 28 (27%) patients. Significant loss of self-sufficiency occurred, with a 1.5-point decrease in the PMS after 3 months ( Mean time to healing was 10.3 One or more medical complications occurred in 18 patients ( Reoperation was required in eight (7.8%) patients:  the two patients with early surgical-site infection required reoperation for surgical-site lavage with intraoperative collection of multiple bacteriological specimens. Both had unstable fractures (A2 or A3) requiring operating times longer than 75 two patients required reoperation because of blade back-out due to fracture impaction and responsible for incapacitating pain in the fascia lata during walking. There was no varus deviation of the femoral head. In each patient, the blade was removed after fracture union was achieved. After this procedure, one of the patients experienced no further pain. The other patient continued to experience pain and underwent partial hip arthroplasty at another institution. After more than 4 years (51 months), her pain persisted and her PMS was 4 compared to 9 before the fracture and 7 before the intermediate hip arthroplasty; a patient with an A2 fracture had acetabular penetration of the blade and underwent removal of the device. This 80-year-old ASA-2 woman had a BMI of 21 blade back-out with leg length inequality due to femoral head displacement led to removal of the nail and total hip arthroplasty at another institution in a 79-year-old ASA-2 woman with a BMI of 24 finally, two patients required reoperation for femoral diaphyseal fractures under the nail. In both cases, the reoperation consisted in implanting a long PFN-A ™ nail. One of these patients was an 87-year-old man with a BMI of 25 After 6 months, 29 (28%) of the 102 patients had died, and this number increased to 37 (36%) after 1 year. We identified no factors significantly associated with postoperative medical or surgical complications. Blade malposition was not significantly associated with the development of mechanical complications ( The medical complication rate was higher in the older patients, i.e., 40.6% in the patients older than 85 years of age compared to 15.2% in younger patients ( The patients with the highest PMS values before the injury (indicating greater self-sufficiency) had higher rates of radiological complications including cut-out, acetabular penetration, and pain due to blade back-out ( Controversy continues to surround the choice of fixation material for trochanteric fractures The PFN-A™ device is a proximal reconstruction nail that is anchored in the femoral head by a helical blade. Few studies have assessed this method of cephalic fixation, which theoretically ensures rotational and angular stability with a single component Our results are comparable to those reported with the gamma nail in terms of operating time (30 to 90 Our study has a number of limitations. The design was retrospective. The PFN-A™ device was not compared to other internal fixation systems. However, our study is among the first to evaluate this new fixation device. The 2-year data with no patients lost to follow-up show a low complication rate. A comparison of our data to previous reports suggests that the PFN-A™ device may be preferable over dynamic hip screw fixation in patients with unstable fractures The PFN-A™ device is a proximal reconstruction nail whose implantation is simple and fast. The helical blade may confer additional benefits in patients with osteoporotic trochanteric fractures, both by preventing rotation and by ensuring cancellous bone compaction. This design may diminish the rate of complications associated with the cervical implant, provided the implantation procedure is scrupulously followed and fracture reduction is optimal. Our results should be interpreted with caution until the results of an on-going prospective study become available. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article.