Copper bleed solution generated from an Indian Copper smelter contains high amount of copper and nickel along with several impurities. Attempts have been made to develop a new process for the production of pure copper powder from such streams. The purity of the electrolytic copper powder produced from such bleed streams was found to be 99.93%. Properties such as compact density of the annealed copper powder, flow-ability, particle size, etc. were evaluated and were found to be suitable for the powder metallurgical applications.A large part of the total metal powders ( With an aim to recover copper powder from copper bleed stream (CBS) containing high concentration of copper and nickel besides several other impurities, generated from a copper smelter, we report here a new process comprising of decopperisation–crystallization–SX–electrowinning steps. This paper presents the effect of various parameters on the electrowinning of copper powder from the actual and synthetic CBS. Properties of the electrowon copper powders have also been evaluated. The copper bleed solution obtained from an Indian copper smelter contains 39.86 Analyses of the samples for low concentration of metallic contents were carried out by an Atomic absorption spectrometer. Solutions containing high copper and nickel were analysed by conventional method ( Parameters were optimised on the bench scale using the copper pregnant solution (1.0 Parameters optimised on the bench scale were substantiated by large scale synthesis of copper powder in a non-diaphragm cell of 9.0 During decopperisation of the synthetic and actual CBS solutions copper concentration was reduced from 38.42 After the separation of copper and nickel as sulphate solutions by solvent extraction the strip solution was used to produce pure copper powder by electrolysis in bench and large scale. The results are described below. Results of the experiments on bench scale at various time intervals and current densities are presented in Four sets of the experiments were conducted on large scale (9.0 L solution). In the first three sets (LS A, LS B and LS C) the current efficiency ( Copper powder produced in set LS B was annealed in an electric furnace at 973 Thus copper bleed stream can be effectively used for the recovery of pure copper by the electrolysis process. 95% copper powder recovery could be achieved at a current density of 700