Beta Ti-alloys are known for their high fracture toughness and ductility, and are used in applications where these properties are needed, such as the aerospace and biomedical industries. The selective laser melting of the alpha + beta Ti-6Al-4V alloy has been extensively studied for applications in the aerospace industry. Although there has been success in building small parts, the acicular α′ microstructure becomes a problem when large parts (800 × 400 × 500 mm3) are built. The acicular α′ microstructure of Ti-6Al-4V causes low fracture toughness and low ductility (<10% elongation), which causes the parts to warp and delaminate from the base plate, even before completion, due to the stress build-up. This work investigated the microstructure and mechanical properties of the beta titanium alloy Ti-38644 and two-phase Ti-6Al-4V in the as-built condition, using scanning electron microscopy with electron backscattered diffraction imaging, optical microscopy, micro-Vickers hardness and tensile tests. Ti-6Al-4V had a fine martensitic α′ structure inside columnar β grains, whereas Ti-38644 had a fully β microstructure, resulting in lower strength. The percentage elongation of Ti-38644 was thrice that of Ti-6Al-4V, showing potential for building large parts.Ti-6Al-4V is a titanium alpha-beta (α + β) alloy currently used in making parts for the aerospace industry The β phase is more ductile than α, thus stabilising β by adding β-stabilisers, such as molybdenum, vanadium, tantalum and niobium, increase ductility Previously, in situ alloying has been investigated to modify Ti and Ti-6Al-4V by adding β-stabilising elements via the selective laser melting process Material development is crucial for the advancement of additive manufacturing technology. To date, investigations have concentrated on manufacturing and testing near-β alloys for the aerospace industry, such as Ti-5Al-5V-5Mo-3Cr (Ti-5553) The selective laser melting of commercial β alloys has not been extensively studied, mainly due to the lack of availability of these alloys as powders Beta-Ti alloys have been identified as the best candidates for producing landing gear beams for the aerospace industry Ti-38644, with composition 74% Ti, 5% Al, 8% V, 6% Cr, 4% Zr and 4% Mo (mass %), was procured in rod form from Titanium A to Z (United States) and then spherically gas atomised by TLS Technik, Germany. Ti-6Al-4V, with composition 90% Ti, 6% Al and 4% V (mass %), was readily available as spherical powder from TLS Technik, Germany. The particle size of the Ti-38644 β-Ti alloy was 20–80 µm with a d Samples were processed with a Nd:Yag laser at 1.3 kW power and at a speed of 4 m/s with a hatch overlap of 65%, allowing the manufacture of samples with densities > 98% (evaluated by image analysis). The dimensions of cubic samples for microstructural analysis were 10 × 10 × 10 mm  Wave-like structures were also present in the β-Ti microstructure. Vrancken et al. Ti-6Al-4V only has vanadium as a β-stabilizing element, whereas Ti-38644 also has molybdenum and chromium as β-stabilisers, together with vanadium. Aluminium was the only α-stabilising element in the Ti-38644 alloy. Vrancken et al. Phase analysis by EBSD ( From the inverse pole figure (IPF) ( The phase analysis by EBSD of Ti-38644 (    For Ti-6Al-4V, this area was calculated to be 2803.3 mm  Comparing Ti-38644 with another SLM processed β alloy, Ti-24 Nb-4Zr-8Sn In SLM processing, it is common to have different tensile properties in different directions, i.e. anisotropy  The microstructure of Ti-38644 was fully β, and the grains were elongated in the building direction. The strength of Ti-6Al-4V was attributed to the fine α′ microstructure, while the thicker but shorter β grains in Ti-38644 promoted higher ductility and fracture toughness. This indicates that Ti-38644 would be better suited for making larger parts in high power, high speed processing, as it should be able to withstand the residual stresses which caused the Ti-6Al-4V parts to delaminate. This work contributed to the available knowledge, showing that Ti-38644 could be used for additive manufacturing. Its microstructure and mechanical properties gave promising results, not only for high power, high speed processing, but for additive manufacturing in general. The use of pre-alloyed powder was demonstrated to be better suited than in situ alloying as it produced a homogeneous microstructure for SLM. The raw/processed data required to reproduce these findings cannot be shared at this time as the data also forms part of an ongoing study. The authors thank the