A life cycle assessment was carried out using IMPACT2002+ to estimate the environmental impacts of caprolactam production in China. The technology highly contributed to the potential impacts of carcinogens, respiratory inorganic matters, global warming, and non-renewable energy. The technology played a limited role in the categories of non-carcinogens and terrestrial ecotoxicity. Specifically, the emissions from the steam, electricity, benzene, sodium hydroxide, hydrogen peroxide, ammonia, and sulfuric acid production processes involved played important roles, whereas the potential impact generated from other elements was quite small. Caprolactam recovery from nylon filament yarn, the use of natural gas-based energy generation system, and increasing the efficiency of nitrogen oxide and ammonia emission control systems are the key factors for reducing the overall potential environmental impact of caprolactam production in China.Caprolactam is an organic compound mainly produced during Nylon 6 productions, one of the most widely used types of commercial nylons. Due to vast population growth and urbanization, the consumption of caprolactam in China has dramatically increased. For instance, approximately 3.6 Life cycle assessment (LCA) is well-known as an effective tool for analyzing environmental impact associated with all the stages of a product, process, or activity from cradle to grave. Today, the LCA applications are used as the basis of marketing, consumer education, process improvement, eco-labeling program, strategic planning, and product design throughout the world. However, few studies have been performed on the environmental impacts of caprolactam production using the LCA method ( The functional unit is 1 ton of caprolactam. In the current study, all emissions, transport, waste treatment, chemical, energy, and material consumption are based on this functional unit.  Infrastructure of each life cycle stage; Road transport of chemical and raw materials to caprolactam production site; Waste treatment processes; Direct emissions generated from caprolactam production site; Material- and coal-based energy production; The results of the life cycle impact assessment (LCIA) were calculated at the mid-point and damage level using the IMPACT2002+ method ( The life cycle inventory data related to the operation processes (e.g., electricity, steam, direct emissions, chemicals, and water consumption) of a caprolactam production site in south China were utilized in the current study ( The phase defined by the impact assessment of classification, characterization, and normalization was considered in the current study. ReCiPe and TRACI methods were used for comparison with IMPACT2002+ to confirm and add credibility to the current research. The mid-point assessment results of the ReCiPe method tended to be similar to those of the IMPACT2002+ analysis results for the ozone layer depletion, acidification, eutrophication, and global warming categories. For the respiratory inorganics, the life cycle impact assessment (LCIA) result using the IMPACT2002+ method (8.7    The LCIA results presented that electricity, steam, benzene, sodium hydroxide, hydrogen peroxide, sulfuric acid, and ammonia production processes played important roles in the carcinogens, non-carcinogens, respiratory inorganics, terrestrial ecotoxicity, global warming, and non-renewable energy potential scores, whereas the potential impact generated from the infrastructure, transport, wastewater treatment, water supply, hydrogen, toluene, TBA, coal, and nitric acid production processes was quite small. Compared with virgin caprolactam production, the use of the reclamation of end-of-life carpet and the recycling of the Nylon Type 6 face fiber into caprolactam approaches can reduce approximately 30.7%, 13.5%, 12.2%, 67.6%, and 14.4% of non-renewable energy, global warming, acidification, eutrophication, and smog air impact, respectively ( The current study introduces the environmental impacts generated from the caprolactam production site in China. Sensitivity analysis of the key factors and LCIA methods were used to confirm and add credibility to the current study. The results obtained could be very helpful to increase the life cycle inventory database of China’s caprolactam production and provide useful and scientific information for policymakers in China to make their decisions regarding to the construction of caprolactam production plants. The main conclusions drawn from the current study are as follows: The LCIA method of IMPACT2002+ is reliable as far as the current research is concerned. The impact generated from carcinogens, respiratory inorganics, global warming, and non-renewable energy categories had a dominant contribution. The impacts on non-carcinogens and terrestrial ecotoxicity played a relatively small role and the impacts on the rest of the categories were negligible. Energy (i.e., steam, electricity) and chemical production processes (i.e., benzene, sodium hydroxide, hydrogen peroxide, ammonia, and sulfuric acid) were the main contributors on the environmental impact of the caprolactam production sites in China. The mid-point LCIA results in the global warming, acidification, eutrophication, and smog air categories were higher than those of previous study; Caprolactam recovery from nylon filament yarn, natural gas-based electricity and steam generation system usage, and increasing the efficiency of nitrogen oxides and ammonia emission control systems are highly recommended for the reduction of the potential impact of the overall environmental score. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the