With the advent of reverse shoulder arthroplasty, indications for hemiarthroplasty are changing and may best fit younger patients with comminuted fractures of the proximal humerus not amenable to open reduction and internal fixation. Hemiarthroplasty is the preferred option in three- and four-part fractures, which have a higher likelihood of osteonecrosis, malunion, and nonunion. In evaluating patients for hemiarthroplasty, the greater tuberosity should represent a large fragment with minimal comminution. In those cases where the greater tuberosity cannot be reconstructed, reverse total shoulder arthroplasty is the better option.
               Preoperative planning is of paramount importance in treating these difficult fractures. We have found that placing the patient in the supine position allows for easier access for intraoperative imaging. It is crucial to obtain the appropriate height and version of the prosthesis. Various tools are available to ensure optimal implant placement, such as alignment guides measuring off the transepicondylar axis and the “best fit” circle method to improve sizing of the humeral head. The most important technical aspect of the procedure is anatomic positioning of the greater tuberosity. Innovative fracture stems have allowed for easier reduction of the tuberosities. Despite improved implant designs, surgical technique is still the most important aspect of successfully performing this procedure.See  Comminuted four-part fractures for patients younger than 65 years of age Three- and four-part fracture/dislocations for patients younger than 65 years of age Head-splitting fractures Impaction fractures of the humeral head with involvement of greater than 50% of the articular surface Anatomic neck fractures in patients older than 40 years of age  Patients with multiple comorbidities have diminished outcomes with hemiarthroplasty for fracture compared with healthier counterparts ( Patients with concurrent rotator cuff pathology are not ideal candidates for hemiarthroplasty.  Indications for reverse shoulder arthroplasty include fractures in the setting of Glenohumeral arthritis Rotator cuff pathology Elderly patients above 65 years of age with three- or four-part fractures or where the likelihood of tuberosity healing is remote (  Nonoperative management Open reduction and internal fixation Reverse shoulder arthroplasty  A thorough physical examination for associated injuries and a detailed neurovascular examination should be performed. Routine orthogonal radiographs should be obtained in all patients. The radiographs in Preoperative computed tomography (CT) is useful for diagnostic purposes and surgical planning. The CT scan in  Imaging of the contralateral arm should be obtained to determine the proper humeral length and head size. Intraoperative fluoroscopy is useful to assess height and tuberosity reduction.  Deltoid Fibers of the anterior deltoid run parallel as they extend from the clavicle to the broad area of their insertion on the humerus. This orientation can act as a landmark in identifying the deltopectoral groove. The pull of the deltoid may cause proximal migration of the distal segment. Pectoralis major The fibers of the clavicular head of the pectoralis major, as compared with the deltoid, take a more transverse course toward their insertion on the humerus. Force exerted by the pectoralis major may cause the distal fragment to assume a valgus and internally rotated position. The long head of the biceps tendon is identified beneath the pectoralis major insertion as it passes into the biceps groove ( The cephalic vein passes through the clavipectoral fascia to drain into the axillary vein. This vein presents a landmark for the deltopectoral interval and is almost always present. The axillary nerve can be identified within the subcoracoid space and along the inferior border of the subscapularis (see  Patients are placed in the supine position with the bed in 20–30 degrees of reverse Trendelenburg. Once the patient is in position, the head is stabilized. Meticulous padding of bony prominences, with particular attention to the ulnar and peroneal nerves, is performed. Positioning should ensure that the operative shoulder, including the scapula, is freely mobile. The table is then turned approximately 90 degrees relative to the anesthesiologist. Fluoroscopic imaging is obtained by positioning the C-arm parallel to the patient at the head of the bed ( The C-arm is rotated over the top so that an anteroposterior view is obtained. Adequate imaging is confirmed prior to sterile prepping. The operative arm is draped free.  An interscalene block minimizes postoperative pain. The endotracheal tube should be positioned on the opposite side of the surgical field to prevent inadvertent dislodgment. Patients at risk for cervical spine instability require preoperative evaluation.  Arm extension and adduction is necessary for adequate exposure and placement of the humeral component. Cervical spine hyperextension can cause serious neurologic injury. Slightly bending the knees avoids strain on the lumbosacral spine.  Radiolucent fracture table  Patients can be placed in varying degrees of bed inclination (more horizontal vs. more upright) depending on surgeon preference. Alternatively, a radiolucent table can be useful in the setting of polytrauma.  For the deltopectoral approach, the incision begins from approximately 5 cm medial to the acromioclavicular joint and extends in a line over the coracoid to end at the midhumerus near the proximal insertion of the pectoralis major. Identification of the deltopectoral interval is aided by locating the “fat stripe” at the most proximal portion ( The cephalic vein is identified within the deltopectoral interval (see The subdeltoid, subacromial, and subcoracoid spaces should be developed. The axillary nerve may be palpated in the subcoracoid recess along the inferior border of the subscapularis. Any hemorrhagic bursae and hematomas are removed.  The axillary nerve is not routinely dissected free during exposure.  Avoid excessive retraction of the anterior deltoid. Release the subdeltoid bursa adequately to prevent excessive tension on the deltoid insertion. Do not dissect medial to the coracoid.  Radiolucent blunt Homans Browne deltoid retractor (Innomed Inc., Savannah, Georgia)  Multiple fracture-specific implant systems are now available. Each offers features such as guides to help place the prosthetic device at the correct height and version as well as design alterations to enhance tuberosity reduction and fixation. Important implant characteristics to consider in choosing an implant include the following: Modularity—A wide variety of head and stem sizes should be available to assist in obtaining an anatomic reconstruction. Simple version guide—Multiple methods exist, including simple guide rods and extramedullary fracture jigs. In addition, fins on the proximal body may be positioned to help obtain proper version and fragment reduction. Centralizer—This feature may help prevent varus/valgus displacement. Small proximal porous ingrowth body—This feature will allow for easier reconstruction of the tuberosities without the complication of overtensioning or the need to debulk the fragments. Various fracture stems use different methods to address this challenge. Examples of specific features include a small offset proximal segment and hollow sections within the body to allow for additional bone graft. Available area for suture placement—A smooth medial surface allows for cerclage suture passage and minimizes the risk of suture breakage. Fins on the prosthesis may be fenestrated to allow for additional suture passage and to secure tuberosity fragments. Irregular proximal body geometry—An irregular shape improves the effects of cerclage compared with a smooth circular shape, which should help counteract the pull of the rotator cuff musculature ( Secure distal fixation—Cement fixation or bony ingrowth technology can provide adequate distal fixation and prevent malrotation. The prosthesis may be cemented in the shaft portion only and bone grafted proximally to facilitate healing of the tuberosity. Systems are available that provide the option to place the prosthesis without cement.  A wide variety of fracture-specific systems are available, each with unique design features. We recommend using whichever implant the individual surgeon feels provides the best prospect of an anatomic reconstruction in his or her hands.  Understand how to utilize design-specific features to aid in the reconstruction prior to entering the operating room.  There are arguments for and against the use of specialized fracture prostheses in terms of improving outcomes (  The major fracture line between the greater and lesser tuberosities is identified. This fracture is usually located just posterior to the bicipital groove. An osteotome may be used as an aid to “deconstruct” the fracture and separate the tuberosities ( To enter the joint, the supraspinatus may be split in line with its fibers extending from the fracture site to the level of the supraglenoid tubercle. The lesser tuberosity is identified and a traction stitch is placed at the tendon-bone interface. Mobilization of the tuberosity allows for access to the glenohumeral joint ( Head fragment(s) are identified and removed. Cancellous bone from the humeral head is used for bone graft. The glenoid is evaluated for any trauma or degenerative arthritis. The greater tuberosity is often retracted posteriorly and superiorly. Abducting and internally rotating the arm can improve the exposure of these fragments. A traction stitch placed into the supraspinatus may be used to deliver the fragment into the wound. Once the fragments are exposed, multiple heavy sutures are placed at the supraspinatus tendon–bone interface and used to manipulate the fragments. Banking larger-diameter needles off the Browne deltoid retractor posteriorly may facilitate suture placement into the greater tuberosity fragment. Small greater tuberosity fragments may require additional suture from the humeral shaft to a Krakow stitch in the supraspinatus in order to prevent suture pullout and further fragmentation in younger patients ( In patients over 60 years of age with a communited porotic greater tuberosity fragment, reverse shoulder arthroplasty may be the better option.  The use of small skin hooks can help pull the tuberosity fragment into the operative field with minimal damage to them. Minimize trauma to tuberosity fragments using a “no touch” technique.  Excessive handling can lead to fragmentation of the osteoporotic greater tuberosity segment. Never debulk tuberosity fragments.  The humeral canal is sounded to the appropriate size in preparation for cement fixation. Two drill holes are placed along the lateral humeral cortex approximately 1 cm distal to the surgical neck fracture, with one hole on each side of the bicipital groove. Two heavy sutures are placed through the drill holes for vertical fixation. The humeral component is trialed to assess for proper height. This determination is aided by: Medial calcar—A portion is usually intact, and the medial collar of the prosthesis should be flush with remaining calcar. Pectoralis major tendon—The average distance from the proximal edge of the tendon to the highest point of the humeral head is 5.6 ± 0.5 cm ( Tuberosity position—With the trial head in place, the tuberosities should reduce to the shaft and remain beneath the humeral head without undue tension. Head-to-tuberosity distance should be approximately 10 mm ( Proper version is determined. Forearm—An alignment guide can be used to place the prosthesis in 20–30 degrees of retroversion with respect to the forearm. This method has been found to be reliable in matching retroversion with transepicondylar axis in fracture setting ( Biceps groove—The biceps groove is S-shaped; it travels from subcapital to surgical neck regions ( In Version is marked on the humeral shaft. Head size can be estimated using the removed head segment and the glenoid vault. It is important to not over- or undersize the humeral head, which should sit 1 cm above greater tuberosity. Alolabi et al. describe a technique using a “best-fit” circle marked by three points: lateral cortex of the greater tuberosity, medial calcar at the inflection point when calcar meets articular surface, and medial edge of the greater tuberosity at medial supraspinatus insertion. It is recommended to remain within 3 mm of the radius of the implant-matched circle to avoid overstuffing the joint ( A trial reduction of tuberosities around the stem and trial head is done to ensure proper fit. The greater tuberosity should abut the anterior fin of the prosthesis in a three-fin design and should overhang the lateral fin. A cement restrictor is placed and cement is pressurized into the humeral canal. Two heavy sutures are placed around the neck of the prosthesis. Excess cement is removed as the prosthesis is placed. Bone graft from the humeral head is packed around the proximal portion of the neck of the prosthesis. Proper size of the humeral head implant may be judged by assessing the head fragments removed and/or by measuring the size of the patient’s glenoid. The cement is allowed to cure; then the humeral head implant is impacted.  Body size of the prosthesis should be minimized to allow for tension-free tuberosity reduction. The key to good function is anatomic tuberosity union. Voids are filled with bone graft and not cement. Use the best-fit circle for humeral head sizing to ensure the best anatomic relationship of the proximal humerus and appropriate tensioning of soft tissue to avoid overstuffing joint.  Use of the distal biceps groove for alignment causes 10–20 degrees of excessive retroversion ( Excessive retroversion limits internal rotation and increases traction forces on the repair ( Improper height, version, or head size compromises functional outcome (  Cerclage sutures Heavy sutures are passed around the body of the prosthesis and then through the greater and lesser tuberosities at the bone-tendon junction ( Maximal tuberosity stability is provided by one or two heavy cerclage sutures around the tuberosities and prosthesis (see Horizontal fixation—These sutures are passed from the greater to the lesser tuberosity at the bone-tendon junction laterally. Holes in the anterior fin of the prosthesis may be used to pass suture through. Tuberosity reduction—The C-arm can be used to check tuberosity position prior to final fixation. The greater tuberosity should be approximately 10 mm from the top of the humeral head articular surface. The greater tuberosity is then secured to the anterior fin in its reduced position. Cerclage sutures and horizontal fixation are secured after proper reduction is confirmed. Vertical fixation—The tuberosities are secured to the shaft by passing one shaft suture through the construct anteriorly and one posteriorly in a figure-of-eight fashion. The arm is abducted approximately 20 degrees prior to securing the vertical suture fixation to relieve tension on the construct. Stability of the tuberosities is evaluated throughout the range of motion both visually and fluoroscopically.  Meticulous suture management allows for efficient tuberosity fixation. Fluoroscopy intraoperatively can minimize the possibility of malreduction. Kirschner wires may help with provisional tuberosity placement.  Improper tuberosity placement (malreduction either vertically or horizontally) or inadequate tuberosity fixation will result in a poor outcome.  The wound is copiously irrigated. A standard closure is performed in layers. The patient is placed into a shoulder immobilizer postoperatively.  Drains may be used if there is concern for hematoma.  The shoulder immobilizer is used for 4–6 weeks or until there is evidence of tuberosity healing. The patient performs pendulum exercises only. After 6 weeks, the patient begins active-assisted range of motion and use of the arm for activities of daily living. Lifting restrictions of 5 pounds or less are imposed. The patient may begin to progress to activity as tolerated at 3 months. Heavy lifting and sport restrictions continue until 6 months.  The recovery period may last for more than a year.  Early, aggressive therapy for range of motion puts the patient at risk for tuberosity failure.