The purification of zinc oxide has been carried out from zinc dross waste by pyrometallurgy method. The amount of zinc dross waste was cleansed by using aqua DM liquid with ratio of 1:10, then this amount was characterized using XRF to determine chemical compounds contained within the 90% of zinc dross waste, while impurity compositions of Fe, Al, and Mg were found. Hence, the amount of zinc dross waste was mixed to carbonized coffee within two ratios, i.e. 87.5%wt: 12.5%wt, and 75%wt: 25%wt. Carbonized coffee is obtained from carbonization of coffee grounds waste from the coffee industry. The mixture samples were then dissolved by aqua DM, followed by milling treatment by performing Planetary Bill Mill for 40 min, so that the muddy-phase were obtained. This sample was then filtered and it was heated inside an oven at 100 °C for 24 h to powder. The mixture powder of zinc dross and carbon was then placed in pyrolysis vessel at 1200 °C for 2.5 h. The obtained amount of zinc oxide powder was characterized by using XRF, and this has 98% of purity with impurities element i.e. Al2O3, Fe2O3, MgO, and SiO2. Thermal testing was performed for ZnO sample by using DT instrument to investigate the effect heating to the reaction events. The analysis of DTA showed that the mixture sample of zinc dross and carbon had reaction sequences at 800 °C. The morphological analysis conducted by SEM and OM depicted that ZnO has agglomeration characteristics with uniformity shape among particles. The size of the particles is between 1900 μm and 9378 μm.Anti-corrosive coating on iron and steel can be done in electroplating, however the most common technique that has been used widely now is hot-dip galvanisation, or it is popular as galvanisation [ Zinc dross waste treatment throughout hydrometallurgy method has been reported to be able in obtaining zinc oxide (ZnO), yielding for 62.45%, while in other study 81.73% of ZnO [ Zinc oxide can be produced from different methods, i.e.: (1) The oxidation of zinc oxide metal, (2) The reduction based on re-oxidation system, (3) The deposition of metal oxide and carbonate. Moreover, zinc oxide is also synthesized from industrial wastes from hydrometallurgy and pyrometallurgy methods. In hydrometallurgy method, acid and base solvent are performed, while in pyrometallurgy, high temperature heating process is carried out [ This research aims to investigate the effects of carbonized coffee as treatment agent in zinc dross waste for zinc oxide purification, and to identify the ZnO characterisation resulted from zinc dross purification by pyrometallurgy process. It is expected that zinc dross which has been exported as waste can be treated, so that the sale value can be increased or become one of the sources of ZnO to meet domestic needs. Sample materials used were zinc dross waste, which was resulted from Galvanic Industry at Cikarang. Glacial acetic acid, nitric acid, zinc standard solution and distilled water were analytical pure. This research was carried in three steps, and firstly, they were zinc dross particle reduction which is followed by extraction process, and finally was results analysis. In the first step, which was particle reduction, zinc dross was placed into a crusher, followed by sieving on 150 mesh. Next, samples were analysed to obtain its concentration by performing the Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer (AAS). As many as 20 g of zinc dross was extracted by adding glacial acetic acid solution throughout open hydrometallurgy system. In this process, several variables were employed, such as time of extraction for 30; 60; 90; 120 min. Meanwhile, extraction temperatures were employed from 150 °C, to 170 °C, and 190 °C, and the concentration of glacial acetic acid was 20%. The precipitation resulted from the reaction was analysed by AAS instruments to determine the zinc concentration within zinc oxide. X-ray Diffraction was performed to identify the crystallinity of zinc oxide resulted. Instrumentations that were used in this study were crusher, filter, glasses apparatus, oven memmert, electrical heating Selecta multimatic 5 N, magnetic stirrer Magsuda SM 60 N, timer Seiko, analytical balance Satorius BSA 2245-CW, stirrer, thermometer, Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer (AAS) Shimatsu, X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) GPC type Emma X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF). The amount of zinc dross was purified by analysing the elements or compound composed within throughout XRD analysis. The diffraction pattern of zinc dross is illustrated by following The diffraction pattern of zinc dross from The analysis of element from zinc dross was performed by using x-ray fluorescence (XRF). The element compositions which are contained within zinc dross were demonstrated by the following From The thermal characterisation of zinc dross was performed by DTA to investigate the effect of heat expansion to the reaction events. From the analysis, the DTA data was demonstrated in ratio between real mass changes (%), heat flow (mW) to the temperature ( Thermal analysis of zinc dross and carbonized coffee showed the alteration of real mass change (%) in form of spectrum peaks resulted from DTA machine. The change of spectrum peaks are caused by the extreme alteration of chemical reactions followed by temperature shifting of the mixture samples of zinc dross and carbonized coffee. The following From The reaction above was continuously followed by the loss mass around 3% at 392 °C. Moreover, at 410 °C, the endothermic reaction occurred which showed the end point of these first two reactions. Second exothermic reaction appeared at 670 °C which was indicated by second peak in Above reaction expired at 791 °C. In this reaction, carbon transformed from solid to carbon dioxide gas, airborne to the air, and this reaction was indicated by the loss mass accounted for 25% in exothermic reaction. Furthermore, at 791 °C was the peak melting temperature implying to the starting reactions of ZnO in second endothermic reaction. Chemically speaking, the following equation demonstrates the formation of ZnO at 791 °C: This reaction involved zinc ferrite (ZnFe The amount of Zn which was separated during the process was in oxygen condition, and no pristine ZnO was obtained. On the other hand, the carbon dioxide gas which was placed in oxygen condition produced no precipitation. The following reaction describes the reaction occurred in oxygen condition: Continuously, at 1200 °C, the Zinc Oxide (ZnO) was yielded highly due to higher temperatures and the number of this metal oxide emerged, followed by a small number of Fe that reacted at 1200 °C. These two metals (zinc and ferrite) were flowed with oxygen gas to obtain the formation of pure ZnO, while in Fe there were no results, as in the reaction below: In the above reaction zinc (Zn) turned into gas and oxygen gas was reduced from zinc oxide (ZnO) until the test ends in this reaction. Sampling preparation was done by mixing each material with a ratio of zinc dross powder and carbonized coffee powder, 87.5% wt: 12.5% wt. This mixture then was added as many as 200 ml of aqua DM, followed by dimilling process by using Planetary Bill Mill (PBM) for ± 40 min. The samples were place inside a furnace for 2.5 h at 1200 °C. The composition of ZnO powder elements attached to the thermocouple and attached to the wall as well as the residual combustion powder were analysed to determine the composition, which was shown in the following Based on the tables above, it can be seen that the largest percentage of weight comes from zinc metal (Zn). In The ZnO powder microstructure obtained can be analysed by using an optical microscope with 40 times magnification. Sample ZnO + Carbonized coffee which were placed at 1200 °C for 2.5 h were analysed. The zinc oxide powder attached at (a) cover the furnace tube, (b) wall of the furnace tube, and (c) thermocouple. On these two planes, some zinc oxide powder was agglomerated on the surface of the planes, which had non-uniformity. From The ZnO sample was observed by using SEM to analyse the microstructure, with magnification 2000 times. The following From Based on the results and analysis, conclusions can be drawn, namely: zinc oxide (ZnO) from zinc dross has been successfully purified by pyrometallurgical process using furnaces at 1200 °C for 2.5 h. The use of carbonized coffee as a mixture in the purification of zinc oxide (ZnO) produced a fairly high percentage of yields, and it can purify ZnO through the reduction that actively began at temperatures of 1000 °C. The Differential Thermal Analysis/Thermal DTA/TG Gravimetry Analysis of Zn dross and Carbonized Coffee samples that have been given Heat Treatment showed that the Zinc Oxide started the reaction at 791 °C. The results of characterization with XRF obtained that purified ZnO powder from Zn dross and carbonized coffee samples in before and after pyrolysis at 1200 °C, for 2.5 h, 90%–98.1% purified results were obtained. Optical microscopy (OM) results and SEM-EDX test results on the morphology of ZnO powders had non-uniform shape and particle agglomerations with sizes from 1.900 μm to 9.378 μm. The authors would like to thank Research Center for Physics,