Suspended particulate matter (SPM) is considered to play important biogeochemical roles in aquatic systems, particularly in estuaries, and the assessment of their temporal trends is essential in the current period of climate change. Concentrations of SPM and particulate inorganic matter (PIM) in the St. Lawrence Estuary (SLE), downstream of the maximum turbidity zone (MTZ), were measured at 21 stations during four time periods, related to hydrological or biological events, between 2014 and 2016. SPM concentrations decreased seaward with no lateral difference observed. At the deepest stations, SPM vertical profiles followed a typical ‘C’ shape whereas PIM content increased from surface to bottom. The inventories of SPM in the study area varied from 1.29 ×106 tons during the period of low river runoff to 2.14 ×10
                        
                           
                           
                              6
                           
                        
                      tons during the spring freshet. On average, 80% of SPM was made of PIM. The amount of PIM (SPM) entering the Lower SLE during the 8 to 9 ice-free months corresponded roughly to its inventory in the study area suggesting that PIM (SPM) stays in the water column for several months before being removed by sedimentation. Our results support the hypothesis that most SPM is retained in the MTZ during the summer and released with drifting ice during the winter–spring periods. Strong relationships were observed between water discharges at Quebec City and SPM (PIM) inventories in the study area (R2>0.94). The variability of SPM (PIM) inventories, estimated from water discharge proxy, was highest during the period of spring freshet and lowest during the period of low river runoff. When corrected for water discharges, a significant decrease in SPM and PIM inventories was observed over the last 15 years.Most aquatic systems have faced biological, physical and chemical changes over recent times resulting from a variety of causes, including climate change, land exploitation and many other direct or indirect human activities ( Suspended particulate matter (SPM) is considered to play a key biogeochemical role in aquatic systems and in particular in estuaries where concentrations and composition of SPM are highly variable along the salinity gradient. Light penetration in the water column, a determinant factor affecting primary production, is strongly attenuated by the presence of SPM ( The St. Lawrence Estuary (SLE) is among the largest estuarine systems in the world as being connected to the Great Lakes, the second largest terrestrial freshwater reservoir on the globe ( Earlier studies showed that SPM concentrations in the USLE varied between 20 and several hundred mg l To the best of our knowledge, Assessing long-term temporal trends of SPM in the SLE can be very challenging since SPM varies within the year due to hydrological and primary production cycles. Short-term SPM variability also occurs, especially in the USLE, as a result of the tidal cycle, winds or internal waves that generate resuspension ( Annual SPM input from the St. Lawrence River and sediment accumulation in the Laurentian Channel of the SLE has been reviewed by The objectives of this work are (1) to report recent data on SPM and PIM concentrations in the SLE waters collected during four time periods related to major hydrological or biological events, (2) to calculate inventories of SPM and PIM for various water masses in the SLE and compare them with sedimentation rates within the SLE and with St. Lawrence river loadings at Quebec city, (3) to assess temporal trends of SPM and PIM in the SLE over the last 25 years by comparing inventories of recent and older data.  Located in the SLE between Baie St-Paul and Pointe-des-Monts, the study area covers the USLE downstream of the MTZ and the entire LSLE ( At each station, a rosette equipped with a CTD, Niskin bottles and an altimeter was deployed. The rosette was lowered to a depth of about 10 m above the sediments and water samples were collected during the ascent of the rosette using either 5.5 or 10 l Niskin bottles. Once on the deck, the water was filtered through a Each sample was filtered in triplicate using vacuum filtration units where the vacuum was set at 17 kPa ( SPM concentrations were obtained by calculating the dry weight difference of the filter before and after filtration, corrected by the mean blank value, divided by the volume of filtered water. Mean blank values were calculated for each cruise after the exclusion of outliers based on the Modified Thompson Tau test. The blank values were all negative, indicating a consistent loss of weight (fibers) during sample processing. Mean SPM concentration for each water sample was calculated from triplicate analyses. In general, coefficients of variation (CV) of SPM were smaller than 20% but when they were higher, the outlier value was excluded from the SPM mean calculation. PIM concentrations were determined from the same filters used for SPM determination after combustion at 450 °C for 5 h, cooled in a desiccator and weighed at a precision of 0.01 or 0.001 mg. The calculation of PIM concentrations as well as the acceptance criteria (CV < 20%) were identical to those for SPM. When a filter was excluded from the SPM mean calculation, it was systematically excluded from the PIM mean calculation. The percentage of PIM was calculated from the PIM and SPM concentrations of each replicate. The impact of using different rinsing solutions on SPM and PIM concentrations was tested on several estuarine water samples with different characteristics (e.g. organic content) using ammonium formate solutions at 30 g l An adequate comparison of SPM and PIM data with other studies requires the validation of the different methods used. SPM data in the SLE were reported by  The study area was divided in cells of 2.5 by 2.5 km (6.25 km Zones were grouped in three sectors based on the distinctive features of the study area ( For each of the four time periods, the SPM inventory was calculated for each of the 76 water volumes and summed by zones, sectors, water layers and for the entire study area. Hereafter, calculations performed on SPM were also applied to PIM data. For each water layer of each zone, the SPM inventory was obtained by multiplying the mean SPM concentration with the corresponding water volume. The mean SPM concentration was determined from the SPM concentration measured at a specific depth in the water layer and interpolated to the depths above and below this specific depth up to half the distance before the previous or next sample. In the case of the shallower and deeper samples of the zone, the SPM concentrations were extrapolated to the surface and to the bottom, respectively. In the rare occasion where SPM concentrations were not available for a specific water layer, average concentrations were determined from water layers just above and below. Compared with linear interpolation, this ‘steps’ approach is more representative of the vertical water stratification observed in the SLE. SPM inventories in the SLE were also determined from data reported by SPM inventories in the SLE are expected to result in large part from freshwater entering the SLE. Although the SLE receives water and SPM from several tributaries, about 75% of freshwater comes from the St. Lawrence River at Quebec City (  Mean SPM concentrations and their corresponding fraction of PIM for water samples collected during the four cruises are reported for each time period (Table S1). Detailed data on each individual water sample also include temperature and salinity. Table S1 also shows detailed information on the stations visited during each cruise such as the location and the date of sampling. Vertical profiles of mean SPM concentrations as well as mean percentage of PIM in the SPM are plotted as a function of depth for six selected stations sampled at each time period ( Profiles of PIM(%) with depth were very similar between southern and northern stations within sectors but clearly different from one sector to another. Stations from Sector A showed a narrow range of PIM(%) throughout the water column. Similarly, there was no clear trend of PIM(%) with depth for Sector B stations but the range of values was wider. In Sector C, stations exhibited increasing values of PIM(%) with depth. The mean values of SPM (log scale) and PIM(%) are reported for the four water layers of each station, when applicable, sampled at each of the four time periods ( A clear decline of PIM(%) was observed from Sector A to Sector C for every time period. Most of the time, the surface PIM(%) exceeded 90% in Sector A but decreased to 50% at some stations in Sector C. PIM(%) in bottom waters rarely dropped below 80%. The SPM and PIM inventories for each time period are presented in  SPM and PIM inventories in the SLE were correlated best to water discharge at Quebec City 21 days prior to the median cruise sampling period. The relations between inventories (INV) and lagged water discharges (LWD) were very significant for SPM ((SPM INV Water discharge (m   The highest SPM concentrations reported in the SLE, specifically in the MTZ, reached 500 mg l Even if the MTZ was not investigated in our study, almost 90% of the SLE area was represented by the three sectors delineated. In sector A, downstream of the MTZ and the most western area of the SLE considered in this study, SPM concentrations ranging from a few mg l In addition to freshwater runoff, concentrations and vertical profiles of SPM are also affected by the tidal cycle in Sector A ( In contrast with SPM, PIM(%) was relatively constant throughout the water column suggesting that the nature of SPM was fairly stable at each station in this sector ( Sector B, located near the mouth of the Saguenay Fjord, is relatively small compared to the other two sectors. Concentrations of SPM were consistent with previous measurements in this area ( The vertical SPM profiles in Sector B are characterized by higher SPM concentrations in the surface layer ( Sector C comprises about 95% of the water volumes of the study area (  No obvious difference of SPM concentrations in surface waters was observed between the stations located on the northern side and those located on the southern side of the LSLE, consistent with previous results ( For the first time, SPM and PIM inventories are reported over most of the area and water column of the SLE and at different time periods ( About 10.9 × 10 On the other hand, our data show that the mean PIM concentration in surface water at the two stations (8 and 13) located near the lower limit of the USLE was 2.44 mg l This discrepancy of PIM flushing times in the LSLE is likely explained by the assumption that PIM data collected between April–May and November cannot be extrapolated to the entire year. According to Despite sediment retention in the MTZ, high water discharge at Quebec City is known to increase the transport of SPM from the MTZ to the SLE ( SPM (PIM) inventories in the study area vary strongly with water discharges ( Water discharges at Quebec City are good proxies of SPM (PIM) inventories in the study area ( Variables, other than water discharges at Quebec City, are also expected to affect SPM (PIM) inventories in the SLE. For instance, heavy rain over the watershed resulting in high water discharge in local rivers, resuspension events resulting from winds, tides and internal waves are all expected to affect the concentration of SPM (PIM) and their inventories. According to The limited number of stations in the study area (21) and the time (several days) to sample the stations combined with the extrapolation from one station to a large area, likely result in missing more localized SPM (PIM) variation or the integrity of hydrological or biological events. However, the inventory approach, which weighs the different portions of the water column with the appropriate SPM (PIM) data, offers a better way to study SPM (PIM) than concentrations only. Assessing temporal trends of SPM (PIM) inventories in the SLE relies on temporally and spatially well distributed data. Earlier data of SPM (PIM) are limited to samples collected 25 and 15 years ago and the number of water layers used to calculate SPM (PIM) inventories varied between 8 and 49 compared to the 76 water layers defined in the present study. Consequently, inventories calculated from 12 water layers or less ( As expected, the highest water discharge at Quebec City was found within the P1 time period corresponding to the spring freshet ( When corrected for water discharge, a significant decrease of SPM and PIM mean inventories is reported here over the last 15 years ( The study area, which covers the entire SLE except the MTZ, is a complex aquatic system with relatively high variations of SPM concentrations and PIM contents. SPM and PIM data collected between 2014 and 2016 in this area fall within similar ranges of values for the different sectors and water layers reported in previous studies. For the first time, SPM and PIM inventories were calculated for a large portion of the SLE. SPM (PIM) inventories in Sector A were the most affected by the fluctuations of water discharges occurring at Quebec City. Higher SPM and PIM inventories were observed during P1 (spring freshet) and lower ones during P3 (low river runoff). SPM and PIM inventories estimated from water discharges at Quebec City during the ice-free season varied by approximately 50% during the three years of the surveys. The limited amount of SPM reaching the LSLE during the ice-free season, compared to its inventory during the same time period, suggests that SPM stays in the water column for several months before being removed by sedimentation. The transport of SPM from Quebec City to the LSLE would however need to be measured throughout the year to validate the hypothesis that most SPM (sediments) drift out the MTZ with the ice during winter and early spring before reaching the LSLE sediments. Adequate assessments of temporal trends of SPM, PIM or any other variables in aquatic systems rely on monitoring programs. Unfortunately, substantial historical SPM data in the SLE were very limited which restrained the statistical power of the analysis. The inventory approach allows improving the integration of SPM or PIM data and more globally assess temporal trends. The correction of SPM and PIM inventories for freshwater discharge appears to be essential in assessing temporal trends. A decreasing trend of SPM and PIM inventories was observed in the study area over the last 15 years. Although the causes of the decline are uncertain, it will likely have impacts on the global biogeochemical processes within the SLE. The authors would like to thank the captains and crews of the NGCC F.G. Creed and NGCC Hudson. The support of many employees of the Department of Fisheries and Oceans (DFO), mainly F. Villeneuve, involved in the Canada’s Atlantic Zone oceanographic Monitoring Program (AZMP) was greatly appreciated. Special thanks to H. Talbot and C. Potvin for their work in the laboratory and in the preparation of the field work, to S. Senneville for his help in the calculations of the average delay in the transport of water to the SLE and to P. Galipeau for his work in geomatics. This research was supported by None. Supplementary material related to this article can be found online at The following is the Supplementary material related to this article.