Background
                  The aim of this study was to evaluate variables that could be related to complications and sequelae in fractures of the tibial pilon treated by open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) with a locking compression plate-less invasive stabilising system (LCP-LISS).
               
                  Patients and methods
                  A total of 137 fractures treated by ORIF in a 7-year period were analysed. The mean follow-up was 3.3 years. We analysed the following variables: age, sex, side, type of fracture, energy of the injury, use of provisional external fixation (EF), time until ORIF, stages of treatment (one or two), surgical approach, type of bone fixation, quality of reduction, use of bone graft, hardware removal, associated fractures (fibula and others), functional results (AOFAS scale), early complications (infection, skin necrosis) and late complications (nonunion, early post-traumatic ankle osteoarthritis [AOA]).
               
                  Results
                  According to the AOFAS scale, 30.5% of the results were excellent, 46.7% good, 13.1% fair and 9.7% poor. The rate of infection was 8.7%, and the rate of skin necrosis requiring flap coverage was 15.2%. Furthermore, type 43C3 fractures of the AO classification had a higher rate of skin necrosis and flap coverage. The rate of nonunion was 16.3% (22 cases, 4 aseptic, 18 infected), and the use of a medial plate was related to a higher rate of nonunion than the use of a lateral plate. The rate of early post-traumatic AOA was 13.1%, and open fractures were related to a higher prevalence of nonunion and flap coverage. Both infection and a suboptimal anatomic reduction were related to a higher prevalence of fair and poor results. The anteromedial approach was associated with a higher prevalence of skin necrosis and early post-traumatic AOA than the anterolateral approach.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Optimal reduction and stable fixation is paramount to diminishing the rate of complications and sequelae after ORIF (LCP-LISS) of these fractures.Pilon fractures are dangerous injuries affecting the joint surface of the distal tibia. They are sometimes related to high-energy trauma with an axial load, whereas in other patients they are the result of low-energy trauma due to a rotational injury [ To attain good function, we need to restore the joint surface through optimal anatomic reduction and a stable fixation [ The objective of this study was to assess which variables could be related to functional results, complications and sequelae of tibial pilon fractures following ORIF with a locking compression plate-less invasive stabilization system (LCP-LISS). We analysed 137 patients with tibial pilon fractures treated by ORIF (LCP-LISS) between January 2010 and December 2016 in a university hospital. Seventy-three were men and 64 were women. Fractures were in the right leg in 74 cases and in the left leg in 63 cases. The mean follow-up was 3.3 years (range: 6 months–6 years). The mean age of the patients was 47.5 years (range 21–92). Data were taken from the clinical records of the patients. The trauma energy was defined as high (traffic accidents, falls from heights) or low (domestic accidents, accidental injuries): 73 were high-energy fractures, 64 were low-energy fractures. In all cases, a preoperative computed tomography (CT) scan was performed to determine the grade of articular and metaphyseal involvement. All the fractures were classified according to the AO classification published by Muller [ ORIF was performed in one stage (<48 We used an anteromedial (81 cases), anterolateral (38 cases) or percutaneous (18 cases) approach, depending on the type of fracture and the state of the skin. As for ORIF (LCP-LISS plate), we separated patient groups into those who had bone fixation with a single medial plate (71 cases), a single anterolateral plate (44 cases), two plates (16 cases) or cannulated screws (6 cases). The fibula was fixed with LCP-LISS plates (6 holes) using a direct lateral approach. The objective was to maintain the tibio-peroneal length within its normal range as well as the normal rotation of the fibula. The mean length in days of conversion from EF to ORIF was 6.7 days (range, 2–21). The quality of the reduction was defined as optimal or suboptimal in terms of the presence of an articular step-off of <2 We noted early complications (necrosis of the skin, infection) and late complications (nonunion and early post-traumatic AOA). Early post-traumatic AOA was assessed using a modification of the Kellgren-Lawrence scale [ Function was evaluated according to the American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society (AOFAS) scale, although we are aware that this scale is heavily weighted [ Associated fractures were found in 25 cases. The other 112 cases had no associated fractures. Hardware removal (HR) was performed in 34 cases. The other 103 did not require HR. We performed a statistical analysis of qualitative data (chi-squared test, Fisher’s exact test, Mann-Whitney U test and Student’s t-test) and of quantitative data (ANOVA and Kruskal-Wallis test). The parameters for the study were analysed with a Cox multivariable regression analysis. A value of p The AOFAS scale was more likely to show a poor (<70 points) or fair (70–80 points) outcome in patients who had a superficial or deep infection (p Among the early complications, we encountered 12 infections (8.7%) and 21 skin necroses (15.2%) that required flaps for skin coverage (22.04%) in 16 open and 5 closed fractures. Among the late complications, we had 22 nonunions (16.03%) (4 were aseptic nonunions, 18 were infected nonunions) and 16 patients with early post-traumatic AOA (13.01%) (in 5 of whom ankle arthrodesis was later performed, with satisfactory outcomes in terms of pain remission). Twelve of the 18 aforementioned infected nonunions also required flaps for skin coverage. Other complications included 2 (1.5%) compartment syndromes, 15 (10.9%) complex regional syndromes, 3 (2.2%) sural nerve injuries, 1 neuroapraxia of the deep peroneal nerve and 2 injuries of the posterior tibial artery (1 during the approach and 1 during the placement of the EF). No lower limb amputations were needed in this series. Thirty-four hardware removals were performed, at an average of 1.4 years after ORIF. Implant removal was performed due to pain. We found a statistically significant correlation between skin necrosis and the anteromedial approach (p No correlation was observed between presentation of a postoperative infection and the rest of the parameters studied. There was a statistically significant correlation between EF and flap coverage (p Open fractures exhibited a higher rate of nonunion (p A statistically significant correlation between the anteromedial approach and early post-traumatic AOA was observed. There was no significant correlation between early post-traumatic AOA and the other parameters analysed. Pilon fractures account for 1% of all fractures [ The quality of anatomic reduction is the most important parameter in the management of these fractures. Anatomic reduction of the tibial articular surface is associated with better functional results [ The literature discusses which surgical approach must be used, taking into account the poor condition of the skin of the distal tibia. There are a number of approaches; however, the fracture pattern often defines the approach to be used [ More complex fractures (43C3) have poorer functional results [ We found that open fractures had a higher rate of nonunion. The need for a flap following ORIF takes place in those fractures with poor skin condition or important skin defects [ There is debate with respect to the time to flap coverage. Allegrand et al. mentioned that flap coverage should be performed in less than 7 days. From the 7th day, soft tissue complications might emerge, particularly infection [ In some fractures, ORIF of the fibula is not needed [ In our series, we performed both one-stage surgery (ORIF in <48 Sirkin et al. obtained good results in open and closed fractures [ Boraiah et al. had very good outcomes using an algorithm with an individualised management according to each patient. They observed a rate of healing of 88.13%; 3% with deep infection and 5% with superficial infection [ Penny et al. recently reported that anterolateral plates are superior in addressing the coronal primary fracture line across the apex of the tibial pilon and buttressing the zone of comminution, and also that in complex intra-articular tibial fractures the addition of a second plate is needed for appropriate stability [ Deivaraju et al. analysed the two-stage treatment, using a medial plate or an anterolateral plate during ORIF [ In terms of infection, Ren et al. stated that the risk factors for infection are postoperative glucose concentration >125 The role of bone graft in the course of ORIF is not clear in the literature. We observed a higher rate of nonunion and a higher incidence of fair and poor outcomes in fractures needing bone grafts. Perhaps the fracture pattern rather than the bone graft was responsible for the high nonunion rate (16.3%) and poor outcomes (9.7%) in this study. Use of negative pressure has been correlated with ameliorated rates of soft-tissue healing following surgery [ As for the generalisability (external validity) of the study results, we can make some proposals to improve the surgical management of tibial pilon fractures: The anteromedial approach had a higher rate of skin necrosis and post-traumatic AOA than the anterolateral approach. Medial plating was associated with a greater rate of nonunion than lateral plating. To get good and excellent results, an anatomic reduction is mandatory. Regarding the prognosis, 43C3 fractures were associated with a higher rate of skin necrosis and flap coverage. Open fractures had a higher incidence of nonunion and needed more flaps. Patients needing bone grafting during ORIF had more nonunions and a higher rate of fair or poor outcomes. Infected fractures and patients needing HR showed a higher rate of fair or poor outcomes. The use of an EF in the casualty department was associated with a greater need for flap coverage. Once again, maybe the fracture pattern, rather than the use of an EF, was accountable for the high need for flap coverage (15.2%) in this study. We agree with Duckworth et al. that despite the severity of these fractures, a satisfactory result can be obtained using primary Tomás-Hernandez et al. have stated that no single fixation technique is ideal for all fractures of the tibial pilon or is suitable for all patients [ Leonetti and Tigani have recently reported a new classification system of tibial pilon fractures based on CT scan [ We do not have an explanation to the higher rate of AOA in the anteromedial approach. We believe that skin necrosis was higher in medial plating because of skin poor vascularization. However it could be also related to the damage caused by a compound fracture or secondary to a degloving damage. In such cases, perhaps EF could be a better indication than a medial plating. The main limitations of our study are that it is retrospective and that several surgeons were involved in the management of fractures. We did not study other parameters that could affect the outcomes, which could be related to a poorer prognosis or a longer duration of surgery. Such parameters include glucose concentration in the postoperative period, the use of negative pressure for the healing of the soft tissues and the presence or absence of bleeding blisters on arrival to the casualty department. Another limitation of our study is that the results were not compared in connection to the different type of operations. The final limitation of our study is that we have not analysed the high rate early osteoarthritis in connection to the anatomical reduction and the comminution of the articular surface. Optimal reduction and stable fixation in fractures of the tibial pilon is paramount to diminishing the rate of complications and sequelae after ORIF (LCP47 LISS). Rubio-Suárez JC, Carbonell-Escobar R, Rodríguez-Merchán ED, Ibarzabal-Gil A, and Gil-Garay E declare that there are no conflicts of interest.