The teeter bed zone is the critical component of the teetered bed separator (TBS), and the calculation of its height plays an important role in optimizing structure of TBS and improving separation performance of coarse slime. This paper simulates the velocity profile in TBS using jet theory and discusses the relationships between velocity profile and axial height as well as fractional open area. The separation of 2–0.3mm coals using TBS with different bed lengths was also performed. The simulation results show that flowing behavior in the teeter bed zone through the distributor could be simplified as single round hole jet in con-current ambient; the fractional open area and axial height of TBS are two important influencing factors, and the even velocity distribution could be easily achieved with greater axial length and larger fractional open area. The height of the teeter bed zone could be calculated using 
                        
                        
                           H
                           tb
                        
                        =
                        exp
                        
                           
                              
                                 1.0164
                                 −
                                 φ
                              
                              0.2089
                           
                        
                        ×
                        
                           d
                           0
                        
                     , showing that the teeter bed height increases with an increase in hole diameter and a decrease in fractional open area. The experimental results show that good performance with Ep value of 0.117 is achieved using the TBS with bed length of 1000mm, due to the even velocity distribution with minimum flow disturbance resulted from the use of larger bed length.Fluidization is one of the major techniques for fine particle processing and it is employed in a wide range of industrial applications, including the environmental, chemical and pharmaceutical industries in addition to mineral processing and power generation industries The TBS permits separation by particle density for particles with narrow size range As a major part of the TBS, the distributor greatly influences the fluidization quality in the teeter bed zone, and the parameters of the distributor determining the formation of high quality fluidization bed will affect the teeter bed height The previous studies on the TBS mostly focused on the effects of distributor configuration on the flow field, velocity distribution, and pressure distribution. Few investigations could be found on the calculation of the teeter bed height and the quantitative correlations between the teeter bed height and the distributor structure parameters. Along with the progressive understanding of fluidization characteristics in the teeter bed zone, the calculation of the teeter bed height and its influencing factors should be paid more attention. According to the flow behavior of a jet, the flowing of upward current through the distributor in the TBS could be regarded as submerged turbulence jet with round hole. Therefore, in this paper, an attempt was made to characterize the teeter bed zone using jet theory and to analyze the velocity profile of single round hole jet in co-current ambient and to discuss the relationships between structure parameters of the TBS and velocity profile in the teeter bed zone. In this respect, the calculation of the teeter bed height was explored; meanwhile, the separation of 2–0.3 Using submerged turbulence jet with round hole in the free and static ambient as an example, When the ambient is flowing with a certain velocity, The flowing of upward water through the distributor in the TBS behaves the same as that of water jet going into the con-current ambient.  Deficit velocity of axial velocity, Velocity profile of deficit velocity, Combining Eq. The continuity equation could be written as Eq. The fractional open area, φ, could be calculated using Eq. Substituting Eq. In terms of the axial velocity in con-current ambient from Rewriting Eq. The standard deviation (σ) of velocity distribution in any cross-section is used as flow disturbance intensity to evaluate the uniformity of velocity distribution, and it can be calculated using Eq. It is commonly accepted that the flow disturbance intensity drops with an increase in the axial height; however, the quantitative relationship cannot be figured out in the published literature. The parameter, As seen from As an important parameter of the distributor, the fractional open area determines the fluidization characteristics of the teeter bed zone, thus influencing the performance of coarse slime separation. In order to demonstrate the relationship between fractional open area and velocity field in TBS, a single round hole distributor with diameter of 12 As seen from Good separation performance was achieved for the investigated conditions due to the even velocity distribution with minimum flow disturbances experienced in the coal separation process In order to achieve uniform velocity distribution, on the basis of Eq. It is concluded from Eq. In order to validate Eq. A 200  As discussed above, the height of the teeter bed zone is calculated on a basis of Eq. As seen from  Flowing behavior in the teeter bed zone of TBS could be simplified as single round hole jet in con-current ambient, and the simulation of velocity profile that can be carried out on a basis of jet theory shows that the fractional open area of the distributor and the teeter bed height are important factors influencing the velocity profile; the even velocity distribution could be achieved in the cross-section away from distributor with larger axial length and using the distributor with greater fractional open area; The teeter bed height could be calculated using The validation of the calculation technique of the teeter bed height shows that good performance with Ep value of 0.117 is achieved when bed length of TBS is 1000  area of the holes in the distributor area of the distributor length from the jet/ambient interface to the axial of any cross-section characteristic half width of any cross-section, and equals to the length of the position with velocity diameter of the nozzle or the hole in the distributor diameter of the hypothetical single hole distributor diameter of the distributor standard deviation of velocity distribution in any cross-section probable error, used for evaluating the separation performance fractional open area, the teeter bed height intermediate parameter, number of points chosen for calculating the standard deviation of velocity distribution number of holes in the distributor velocity of any position in the jet zone initial velocity of jet axial velocity in the jet zone velocity of the ambient deficit velocity of axial velocity, and equals to the difference of axial jet velocity and ambient velocity deficit velocity of any position in the jet zone, and equals to the difference of velocity of any position in the jet zone and ambient velocity dimensionless parameter for describing the velocity field length of any certain position away from the axial axial length away from the distributor or the nozzle intermediate parameter, the ratio of the axial height of any cross-section to the hole diameter  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at