The selective transport of Au(III) over Cu(II) and Hg(II) using ω-thiocaprolactam as extractant and carrier in solvent extraction and polymer inclusion membrane transport experiments is discussed. Solvent extraction experiments were carried out using the extractant dissolved in chloroform to establish the chemical equilibria involved in the Au(III)-ω-thiocaprolactam separation system. Au(III) is extracted into the organic phase quantitatively (E (%)>99%) at low extractant concentrations from aqueous HCl solutions. Cu(II) extraction kinetics is slow compared to Au(III) extraction, allowing for the efficient separation of both metals. Polymer inclusion membranes (PIMs) are designed as alternatives to the use of high amounts of hazardous and expensive reagents. Several stripping phases were tested. Up to 70% of Au(III) can be recovered from 1M HCl feed aqueous phase solutions. Interference from Cu(II) or Hg(II) is negligible at short times (160min) in competitive ([M(II, III)]0,feed
                     =0.1mM) membrane transport experiments using a cellulose triacetate/NPOE/ω-thiocaprolactam PIM and a potassium iodide–hydrochloric acid aqueous stripping solution. Apparent diffusion coefficients in the membrane for Au(III) and Hg(II) in the system were estimated to be 2.2×10−11 and 3.4×10−15
                     m2
                     s−1, respectively.effective membrane area (m calculated distribution coefficient experimental distribution coefficient apparent diffusion coefficient in the membrane phase (m flux of metal ion (mole Cu(II) extraction equilibrium constant Au(III) extraction equilibrium constants ( Pseudo-first-order rate constant of extraction at the feed aqueous phase solution–membrane interface (min membrane thickness (m) membrane permeability (m time lag-time volume of the feed aqueous phase solution (m volume of the membrane (m volume of the stripping aqueous phase solution (m mole fraction of ω-thiocaprolactam gold mole fraction in the feed aqueous phase solution gold mole fraction in the membrane overall formation constant for AuCl overall extraction constants for Au(III) ( membrane porosity The processing of electronic wastes containing considerable amounts of valuable components for their recovery or separation is of great interest. Circuit boards, particularly, printed wire boards (PWBs) It is well known that SX methods usually consume large amounts of reagents, solvents and extractants, which in many cases are considered as environmental and health hazards. In order to reduce the amounts of reactants and energy needed for separation and to decrease the environmental and economic impact of SX separations, several membrane-based separation techniques have been proposed in the past years. Supported liquid membranes (SLM) have been extensively studied since they offer high transport rates, good selectivities and automatization possibilities, although lack of stability hinders their use in practical applications. As an alternative to SLMs, polymer inclusion membranes (PIMs) have been developed. In these membranes, the carrier is efficiently confined within a polymeric matrix consisting of a support (cellulose triacetate, CTA, or polyvinyl chloride, PVC) and a plasticizer, improving membrane stability. Alguacil In the present work, continuing our research on the extractive properties of ω-thiocaprolactam ω-Thiocaprolactam (Aldrich) 98% was recrystallized twice from water. Stock solutions of the reagent were prepared by dissolving the appropriate weighted amounts in a given volume of chloroform previously washed successively with 0.01 Equal volumes of 5 In order to evaluate the Au:ω-thiocaprolactam stoichiometric ratio, the Job's method of continuous variations was used. The sum of the initial concentration of Au(III) in the aqueous phase and the total concentration of ω-thiocaprolactam was maintained constant at 0.1 PIMs were prepared according to the phase inversion procedure described by Sugiura Quantitative extraction (>99%) of 1 According to Job's method a plot of the concentration of the extracted Au(III) versus the molar fraction of ω-thiocaprolactam ( This plot shows a maximum of [Au(III)] A comparison of the In back extraction experiments aqueous 0.1 Selectivity over Cu(II) was tested since this metal is usually present in high quantities in electronic wastes. Cu(II) is extracted very slowly with ω-thiocaprolactam when low concentrations of the extractant are used, as seen in For higher extractant concentrations the equilibrium time shortens noticeably. HCl concentration also exerts an important influence on the Cu(II) distribution ratio, according to The numerical analysis of equilibrium data of Cu(II) extraction favors an extraction model where only one Cu(II) species (CuCl In solutions containing [Au(III)] Comparing these results with those obtained from previous work on the extraction Hg(II) (also a soft acid) using ω-thiocaprolactam as the extractant It is possible to apply the previous findings in membrane-based separations. In membrane transport experiments, the membrane is placed between two aqueous phases: the feed aqueous phase solution, containing the metal to be separated, and the stripping phase, deliberately designed so that the metal can be transported in an efficient way from the feed aqueous phase solution. In membrane experiments the permeability, The chemical compositions of the stripping solution and membrane were varied in order to study their influence on Au(III) transport across the membrane using a 1 It is worth noting that although thiourea proved to be a good stripping reagent in solvent extraction experiments using ω-thiocaprolactam dissolved in chloroform, in the case of PIMs, where the membrane matrix is composed of CTA and NPOE, practically no transport of the metal was observed with thiourea stripping solutions. Thiourea was found to migrate to the feed aqueous phase solution, where it probably reacted with Au(III) Iodide ion was then found to be the best stripping agent for the membrane system considered. The overall formation constant of the tetratiodoaurate(III) ion is high According to Eqs. Applying stationary conditions for the Au(III) containing species in the membrane, i.e. d[Au(III)] Regarding the effect of membrane composition on Au(III) transport, it was observed that as the amount of ω-thiocaprolactam in the membrane increased from 0.23 Selectivity over Cu(II) and Hg(II) was also studied in membrane experiments. As shown in From the lag-time observed in Assuming a value of 0.8 for the porosity, As for the stability of the membranes, gold(III) recovery after seven cycles of 6 Au(III) can be selectively extracted over Cu(II) from HCl solutions using ω-thiocaprolactam as the extractant dissolved in chloroform. Au(III) kinetics of extraction is approximately 20 times faster than Cu(II) distribution (for [M(II,III)] The authors wish to thank the financial support given by CONACYT (Project 38061-U), DGAPA UNAM (Project IN106802 and IN211405) and PROMEP (scholarship for ME Núñez).