Objectives
                  In the present study, we assessed the biomechanical advantage between the single LISS and double-plate used in AO type 33-C2 fractures with the method of finite element analysis, which will help surgeons choose the optimal therapy to the unstable distal femoral fracture.
               
                  Methods
                  The AO type 33-C2 fractures and the models of LISS plate and medial plate was constructed in 3-matic software and UG-NX software respectively. We then assembled the single plate and the double-plate to the fracture model separately to form the fixation models. After meshing the models’ elements, we used the Abaqus software to perform the finite element analysis. Values of peak Von Mises Stress (VMS) on the plate, maximum deformation of the models and the distance changes of the fracture gap were used to capture the mechanical factors in this study.
               
                  Results
                  Our results indicated that the single LISS underwent 1.2 times higher amount of stress than the double-plate (316.0 MPa VS 281.6 MPa). And the medial plate dispersed some stresses (the maximum stress is 47.4 MPa). Single-plate generated 3 times greater bending angle than double-plate (0.6° VS 0.2°). The bending angles of the single and double-fixation-fracture models are 0.9° and 0.3° respectively. The maximum distance changes of the fracture gap in the single-plate model was 2 times higher than that of double-plate model (2.6 mm VS 1.3 mm). In the torsional load analysis, peak VMS of the single and double model was 1.0 MPa and 0.8 MPa respectively. And the bending angle was 0.8° in the single model and 0.4° in the double model.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The double-plate is more effective scenario using in the distal femoral fractures, particular in unstable fractures with joint involvement.The distal third of the femur is involved in 6% of femoral fractures [ The goals for the treatment of distal femoral fractures are to restore bone length, articular surface alignment and rotation, early mobilization, and finally get the union without severe complications. Lateral locking plate fixation has been the popular and accepted standard treatment of the distal femoral fractures. But unfortunately, using a single lateral implant is inadequate to afford enough stability in the distal femoral fractures especially in the unstable fracture style like AO type 33-C2 fractures, which may progress to some complications like residual axial malalignment, decreased range of motion of the knee, or even the nonunion. It was reported that distal femoral nonunion rates range from 0% to 10% after the treatment of single lateral locking plate [ In this situation described above, adding a medial plate become crucial to fix the C-2 fractures. And it is available to add a medial plate in the medial side of distal femur due to the anatomic study [ The geometric model of femur was employed from a three dimensional model of a left fourth-generation composite femur (MODEL3405#, Pacific Research Laboratories, Vashon, WA). Then we constructed the fracture model in the 3-matic (Materialize, Belgian) to simulate AO/ASIF type 33-C2 fracture according to the osteotomy methods described by Lindahl et al. [ Based on the manufacturer-provided engineering drawing, we reconstructed the geometric 3-D models of plates and screws using the Unigraphics NX 8.5 software (Siemens PLM Software). The thread screws were replaced by smooth surfaces, the size of which was corresponding to the average diameter of the given thread ( The assembled 3D models were imported into ABAQUS (Simulia, France) to generate the finite element models. The synthetic bone was assumed to be isotropic with linear elastic properties as reported by the manufacturer and previous studies [ Frictional contact interactions were assumed between the different parts of the models. The interfaces between bone and internal fixations were simulated by contact pairs with a friction factor of 0.3 and the friction coefficients for bone-bone interaction was 0.46. The interface of screws and locking plate was set as tie. All nodes on the surface of distal femur were constrained with 0 ° of freedom. The FE models were applied a load of 600 N corresponding to 100% body weight and the force was introduced to the center of the femoral head. The force vector was pointing laterally in the coronal plane at an angle of 13°with the axis of the femoral shaft and posteriorly at an angle of 8°with the shaft axis in the sagittal plane [ Three parameters were used to capture the mechanical factors involved in the fixation stability and fracture healing. They included the peak Von Mises Stress (VMS) on the plate, maximum deformation of the models and the distance changes of the fracture gap. We used bending angles to evaluate the plate deformation and the femoral deformation on the fracture site. We chose three points (A, O, B) of LISS plate on each model. Point O was located on lower part of the plate which was corresponding to the middle of the fracture gap. Point A and B were respectively located on the upper and lower part of the plate. AOB formed a line paralleled with the axis of the plate. We compared the values of ∠AOB of the two models after subjecting the load to the femoral head. Because of the same meshes condition of LISS, we could choose the points with the same coordinate values. We also chose CUD to evaluate the femoral deformation, on which point U was situated on the laterally distal fracture site of the femur and C and D were also respectively located to the proximal and distal part of the femur. The line of CUD was also paralleled with the axis of the femur. And we compared the values of ∠CUD to evaluate the stability of the fracture site. Make sure the selected point situated the same location in different models. We simulated the physiological process from sitting to standing. Distal ends of the model were constrained with 0 ° of freedom. We applied 150 Nm torsional loads in the middle of the femur head without considering the effects of various muscle groups. We observed the peak VMS of the plate and the twisting angle of the proximal fragment indicating the deformation of the models. We used the bending angles to evaluate the plate deformation. We chose two points (E, F) of proximal fragment. Point E and F were respectively located to the proximal and distal part of the proximal femur. Make sure the selected point situated the same location in different models. Recorded the coordinate values of each point before and after load implementation, then we could get the bending angle of each model. Big different condition of stress distribution was observed on two models ( We calculated the ∠AOB and ∠CUD on behalf of bending angles to evaluate the fixation strength after subjecting the load. Single-plate generated 3 times greater bending angle than double-plate. The ∠AOB was 0.6° of the single plate and 0.2° of the lateral plate in the double-plate model. The ∠CUD was 0.9° and 0.3° in the single and double-plate models respectively. The displacement of the fracture gap is defined as the maximum changes between the fragments of proximal and distal femur. The maximum distance changes of the fracture gap in the single-plate model was 2 times higher than that of double-plate model. The maximum changes between the fragments was 2.6 mm and 1.3 mm respectively in the single and double-plate models. The detailed values of angle and displacement in each group were shown in In the torsional load analysis, peak VMS of the single and double model was 1.0 MPa and 0.8 MPa respectively ( In the present study, we investigated whether the double-plate fixation had the biomechanical advantages over the single plate in the treatment of comminuted distal femoral fractures. To clarify this problem, we adopted this finite element analysis research that showed the different fixation scenarios affected the stability of the AO/ASIF type 33-C2 fractures. This study supports the concept that the double plates have biomechanical advantages compared with the single plate for this fracture model. And it would be convincible and available to instruct the clinical and biomechanical studies based on this research results. As shown in the There is agreement that an added plate in the medial side of the femur metaphysis provides greater stable. Koval et al. [ In 2015, Pro. Jiamton et al. [ In this study, some important aspects should be paid attention: (1) All screws were added to the plate using the assemble function in the UG software, because screws can run along the center line of every hole on the plate, which make every screw locate on the right place of the plate. (2) The medial plate should be shorter and smaller in its dimensions than the lateral plate because of avoiding the stress-riser at the proximal end of the plate. (3) Fixation of at least eight cortices of the both side of the fragment is obtained using LISS in the lateral side, and the medial plate should be fixed with at least three bicortical screws both distally and proximally. Here we described finite element analysis results about the comparation between the single and double plates used in the AO/ASIF type 33-C2 fracture models. We found it provides greater fixation stability and shows less stress distribution when using the double plates in the distal femoral fractures. This research of the finite element simulation can facilitate the further biomechanical research and guide the treatment of the distal femoral fractures clinically. In conclusion, our study indicates that the double plates is more effective scenario using in the distal femoral fractures, particular in unstable fractures with joint involvement. And it is available and safe to add a medial plate in the distal femur clinically. Each author certifies that he has no commercial associations that might pose a conflict of interest with the submitted article.