Visible violet photoluminescence (PL) has been achieved at room temperature (RT) from ZnO films grown on sapphire (001) substrate by pulsed laser deposition (PLD). Substrate temperatures of 200, 300, and 400°C have been used in an oxygen pressure of 1 mTorr during the PLD. As the oxygen pressure for the thin film deposition increases over 20 mTorr at a substrate temperature of 400°C, the violet luminescence vanishes. Instead ultra-violet (UV) and green–yellow luminescence appear. The most intense UV and green–yellow luminescence is obtained from a sample grown in an oxygen pressure of 200 mTorr at 400°C. It is concluded that the intensity of the UV luminescence strongly depends on the stoichiometry of the film as well as the crystalline quality, while the violet PL is due to a defect level in the grain boundaries of the ZnO
                        x
                      crystals.Wide and direct bandgap semiconductor materials are of much interest for blue and ultra-violet (UV) optical devices, such as light-emitting diodes and laser diodes. ZnO is a wide direct bandgap II–VI semiconductor with such potentials because it has an energy gap of 3.3 eV at room temperature A PLD chamber evacuated by turbomolecular pump to a base pressure of 5×10  Photoluminescence (PL) spectra obtained from the samples deposited with various oxygen pressures at the substrate temperature of 400°C are shown in The most interesting are the PL results from the samples deposited under the oxygen pressure of 1 mTorr. Instead of 375 nm (3.3 eV) and 550 nm (2.25 eV) emissions, only the violet luminescence centered around 420 nm (2.95 eV) is observed. This phenomena may indicate that the ZnO The stoichiometry effects are supported by the results of Hall measurements as shown in We have deposited ZnO thin films on sapphire using a PLD under various oxygen pressures and substrate temperatures. Visible violet luminescence centered at 420 nm (2.95 eV) is observed from the samples grown at a lowest oxygen pressure of 1 mTorr and the luminescence is thought to be emitted from the grain boundaries of an oxygen-deficient ZnO Authors want to thank J.H. Song in Korea Institute of Science and Technology for the backscattering spectrometry and also thank W.K. Choi in Korea Institute of Science and Technology for valuable discussion. The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support of the Korea Research Foundation made in the program year of 1998 (1998-017-E00173).