Researchers in the field of geoscience have identified several effects on the stability of the surrounding minerals caused by naturally occurring solution species. Organic acids and their conjugate salts have been shown to provide significant influence on a wide range of minerals, generally increasing elemental mobility and aiding in solubilising the solid matrix. Their ability to complex elemental and molecular species, presents interesting opportunities in manipulating systems to achieve outcomes that are otherwise not thermodynamically favoured. Such properties form the basis of some analytical techniques such as the toxicity characteristic leaching procedure (TCLP) used in environmental assessment of waste product stability and the acidified ammonium oxalate (AAO) process used to selectively dissolve poorly crystalline iron oxide phases.
                  These characteristics also present the opportunity for use of these species to aid in industrial dissolution of value-containing minerals (extractive metallurgy). Such an approach provides the basis for the current review. The literature has been reviewed to identify organic acids – particularly low molecular weight organic acids (LMWOAs) – that significantly aid dissolution of relevant minerals, trends in their behaviour and fundamental explanations for these observations. It is also of interest to find evidence that these acids may improve selectivity in a hydrometallurgical application. This review is limited to silicate, carbonate and phosphate minerals as they represent the information relevant to the ongoing research.
                  Formic and acetic acids had the greatest impact on minerals composed of group I and II elements, while citric, oxalic, EDTA and salicylic acids represent the most promising options for transition metal and lanthanide-based minerals. The variation between the effect of the acids and a degree of the selective nature of their effect can be attributed to differences in the stability of the metal-ligand complex formed. pH plays a highly significant role, assisting the dissolution through, altering the dissociation of the acids, modifying the surface charge of the mineral, acid attack, maintaining the solubility of other dissolved ions and/or altering the mechanism involved. The crystal structure and secondary reactions occurring with other constituents in the mineral alter their amenability to dissolution in organic acids.Acetic acid enhances dissolution of calcium carbonate Gangue minerals have a strong effect in decreasing the carbonate content in the phosphate rock Acetic acid solution leaches the calcium carbonate without decomposing the phosphate itself The leaching rate of carbonate is improved by increasing the acid concentration, reaction, temperature, time and decreasing pulp density The dissolution rate of carbonate is a chemically controlled and occurs at the surface of the particle Acetic acid solution does not attack the phosphate minerals Stirring speed had not shown any effect on the carbonate dissolution rate Acetic acid reacts mainly with calcite meanwhile almost all of the francolite remained in the solid phase Mechanical stirring has an important effect on the dissolution process The temperature and concentration of acetic acid did not play an important role in the dissolution process Formic and acetic acids have the tendency to attack the phosphate minerals (poor selectivity for carbonate) and can corrode equipment Less corrosive effects and risk of phosphate mineral dissolution were achieved by lactic acid Leaching is less effective at high organic concentrations due to the polarity of the O-H bond High temperature may increase the leaching efficiency but the temperatures may be limited due to low boiling temperatures and the decomposition of organic acids Oxalic Oxalic acid has a strong affinity for chelating metal ions avoiding their precipitation as phosphate species The ability of the oxalic acid to release P can be related to the formation of a soluble oxalate-metal-P complex Precipitation of P ions can occur due to the capacity to chelate metals and the relatively strong acidity of its solution Optimisation of operating conditions: Temperature, 50 Formic acid is used in industrial scale Demonstrated the ability of organic acids for leaching compounds Lactic acid dissolve carbonate material in low grade phosphate rock, therefore, it improved the P The large polarity of O Succinic acid can be used to enhance of calcareous material in low-grade phosphate rock Succinic acid is not an adequate leaching agent below 37 Patua silt loam (volcanic ash) soil Tokomaru clay loam soil In the case of monocalcium phosphate (Patua silt loam) Citric achieved 83.78% dissolved phosphate Lactic achieved 8.71% dissolved phosphate The number and position of carboxyl ( The performance of organic acids to release P from PRs basically depends on the chelation of calcium and the supply of protons Kodjari, low reactive PRs North Florida, medium reactive PRs Oxalic and citric acids appeared to be the most efficient acid in releasing P The dominant factor, which determines the degree of release of P, seemed to be the type of functional groups and position within each carboxylic group The hydroxyl group seemed to play an active role in the P release North Carolina PR (P content about 15.7%) Citric acid displayed the greatest ability to dissolve P from PRs followed by oxalic and tartaric acids It appears that the presence of more carboxyl groups in the organic acid, the higher rate of P dissolve The solubilisation of P is enhanced greatly by increasing the concentration of organic acids except in the case of oxalic acid. It seems that when the concentration of oxalic acid is increased, the precipitation of calcium oxalate would inhibit further solubilisation Phosphate rocks from China, Jordan, Togo, USA (Florida), Sri Lanka and Tanzania Sulphuric and tartaric acids dissolved the same amount of P from PRs despite a tenfold difference in the free acid concentration Protonation reactions initially influenced the PRs dissolution which only explains 13–38% of the amount of P released. Therefore, most of the P release could be explained by other factors (ie. Chelation) Organic acids are common, naturally occurring compounds, distinguished by the presence of the carboxylate (COOH) functional group. These range from very simple molecules such as formic acid (CHOOH) found in many ant species, through to DNA, the blueprint of complex life. LMWOA is a somewhat subjective term as the spectrum of molecule sizes is so great and each application may have a different perspective on what constitutes low molecular weight species. For the purpose of this paper the term includes aliphatic and aromatic compounds with 1–3 carboxylic acid functional groups. The relationship between LMWOAs and mineral surfaces has been studied for several decades and is an important geochemical process ( Organic acids such as fulvic and humic acids, which are present in geological weathering systems, break down minerals to create metallo-organic chelates ( Mineral weathering may be increased by organic acids and their anions (conjugate bases) ( It has been established that organic acids and their conjugate bases can be of great value in the minerals industry. One of the United States Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) key tests for assessing the stability of toxic elements in waste material (TCLP) ( There are also examples of research evaluating the potential of organic acids for direct employment in mineral processing applications. The well-established complexing properties of these species have inspired research into a multitude of applications. This carries on from a significant history of complexation reactions in the extraction stage of metallurgy including the use of cyanide in gold leaching, employed since the 1890s, and ammonia in nickel processing (Caron process), established in the 1950s. Nickel laterites are oxide ores generally with low nickel contents dispersed throughout the gangue minerals, these are difficult to treat and represent up the 70% of know nickel reserves ( A range of other studies have investigated the use of organic acids in extraction, ( Organic acids induce multiple effects on various aspects of compounds and the reactions are governed by a variety of phenomena. Therefore a review of literature spanning the interactions of organic acids with as many varieties of relevant minerals as possible will provide the greatest insight into not only the effect of the species on dissolution but also the underlying reactions and factors that influence this behaviour. All mineral compositions for this section are provided in Basalt represents material composed of a range of minerals. The major phases present are silicates and aluminosilicates such as plagioclase, feldspar, alkali feldspar, quartz and augite. The experiments carried out by The presence of organic ligands improved basalt dissolution in all cases with respect to blank tests in the absence of these reagents. The aliphatic acids displayed a significantly greater ability to release the elements of interest (Fe, Al, Mg, Si and P) than aromatic acids, this was attributed to protonation of the functional groups of the aromatic compounds. It also appears that the relative effect of each reagent correlates well with their respective complex stability constants, and the greatest influence was observed in species with the greatest number of binding sites (tri- and tetradentate ligands). There was a slight decrease in the dissolution observed at higher ligand concentration, suggesting a limit to the influence of these species and possible solubility effects. Interestingly, anoxic conditions appeared to inhibit dissolution at the lower organic concentration (0.01 Feldspars, composed of calcic plagioclase, albite and microcline, were investigated under the effects of oxalic, citric, salicylic, protocatechuic, gallic, p-hydroxybenzoic, vanillic and caffeic acids by The order of impact on element release was observed to be citric  In terms of dissolution, the order of decreasing effectiveness was citric, salicylic, aspartic and acetic acids. Citric acid has shown the highest efficiency in extracting Ca and Al, especially from Ca-rich plagioclase, apparently due to the creation of Al- and Ca-complexes. The dissolution of anorthite, labradorite and albite, displayed a strong complexation with salicylic acid but weak complexation with aspartic acid.  The release of F is an important process achieved using the influence of organic acids. Both the citric and malic acid extractions indicated a rapid release of F at the beginning, which may be the exchange of organic acid ion with surface F in the soil. This is followed by a decrease in the rate, which might be a second mechanism involving the interaction of organic acids with clay minerals and created compounds with metal cations, resulting in the F release. Several variables affect the level of F ion release such as soil surface charge, complex stability constants, pH, and the position and number of functional groups in the organic molecule. It has been noted that the surface charge of colloidal soil particles may greatly impact several of its properties (   The nature of the acid influences the relative stabilities of the silicate minerals. Solubilisation seems to be influenced by three factors: (a) structure of the mineral, (b) composition of the mineral and (c) nature of the acid. The results indicated that the organic acids decomposed silicate minerals via simultaneous actions of acid attack and chelation. The order of solubilisation in the presence of organic acids suggests that the position of the cations in the crystal is a determinant variable in the order of solubility of silicate minerals. The most soluble species are epidote and hornblende due to the presence of ions (Ca There are several studies related to clay minerals. A summary of the most relevant findings is presented in Formic acid was investigated for leaching natural magnesite ores by Experiments conducted by  The presence of more hydroxyl groups per molecule is important to release P A similar effect was observed in other acids along with the influence of the molecular structure (  The presence of the second carboxyl group has a strong effect on the reaction and this second carboxyl group (generally only slightly dissociated) decreases the acid strength and an important reduction in the amount of phosphate that dissolves into solution. This effect aids in the removal of calcium ions from the reaction by association. Therefore, the reaction can go much further and raises the presence of phosphate into solution.  There are several interesting points to note from these experiments (   There are several studies related to calcium carbonate phosphate minerals. There are several studies related to phosphate rocks (distinct from the calcareous phosphate rocks discussed above), the major findings of which are shown in Organic acids have shown the ability to solubilise monazite and xenotime minerals. After long exposure times, humic acids considerably enhanced the solubility of monazite, which is opposite to the general opinion on the stability of phosphate compounds based on experiments conducted in nitric acid. The detected enhancement in the concentration of released elements and the monazite solubility demonstrates these species to be a potential alternative to conventional processing techniques ( Several organic ligands have shown an effective solution association with rare earth ions. However, the most extensive research has been conducted with aminocarboxylic acids (EDTA, HEEDTA, DCTA, DTPA, EGTA and EEDTA acids), where with the exception of Nitrilotriacetic acid, all of these ligands create 1:1 complexes with REEs (  Similar experiments were conducted on monazite as well as apatite by The most obvious conclusion from the literature available was the general trend that organic acids aid in mineral dissolution. This is not outwardly revolutionary based on their ability to complex cationic solution species and thus decreases their activity, increasing the overall concentration achievable based on solubility. However, the breadth of this review highlights several additional facets of the interaction of organic acids and mineral surfaces. The variation in behaviour between different acids and minerals, the impact of conditions, the mechanism of dissolution and whether the process represents a legitimate potential process. The variation in the impact of the acids can generally be attributed to the complexing behaviour of the ligand to the relevant cations in the mineral. As an example, the increasing dissolution of calcium phosphate minerals from acetic to mandelic acids as the calcium complexes have K The anion likely plays an important role as its behaviour in solution may also limit the extent to which a mineral may be dissolved. Solubility being a significant factor, silicates for example being poorly soluble in most leaching systems. Subsequent reactions may produce relatively large impacts on the extent of reactions achievable. The reprecipitation of dissolved anions could passivate the surface, phosphate forms many insoluble salts and may redeposit on the surface. This may occur with other cationic components as is a consistent problem with iron in weakly acidic or alkaline leaching systems. In their use of phthalic acid to dissolve forsteritic glass, The mechanism of the dissolution in these systems is likely to be complex. While simply decreasing the solution activity of the elements thus promoting further dissolution is one method by which complexation aids dissolution, it is unlikely to be the main driver for vast improvements in leachability. The binding of complexing ligands to sites on the mineral surface and thus destabilisation of the compound around that site is likely prominent factors. What is apparent from both the geochemical processes and uses of organic acids in assisting metallurgical processes is that they are significantly dependent on the conditions, particularly pH. There are several manners in which pH will impact the system; the first being the degree of protonation. The binding energy of the complex with a specific cation will differ somewhat based on whether the acid groups have the protons attached. However, where high proportions of dissolution are reported at one pH, a significant change at another is unlikely to be solely related to the degree of dissociation of the acid. Another factor would be adsorption of the acid on the mineral surface. The surface charge will change significantly with pH and therefore may interfere with the adsorption process. Where the conditions may have the greatest impact is in systems that have multiple reactions occurring. This is likely to occur in higher systems with higher acidity and concentration. This may occur where (i) acid attack is significant in the leaching mechanism ( In terms of representing legitimate options for extractive metallurgical processes, the mineral interactions suggest significant potential in certain systems. The major considerations would then surround two points of focus: the material being treated and the conditions of the treatment system. Potential benefits would include the use of relatively benign reagents, likely at lower acidity/alkalinity than otherwise required, greater selectivity in both mineral dissolution and elemental control (as is the case with most complexing media), and potentially recyclable reagents. However, both technical and economic challenges would need to be overcome such as the solubility of the acids (many are relatively low in comparison with inorganic reagents), the expense of the reagents, reaction rates and extents and conditions required. It is likely that processes arising using these reagents will be highly specialised and will either not be applicable to other related materials or will need to be modified. The data presented in the literature displays that, in most cases, the presence of organic acids increases the degree and/or rate of dissolution of silicate, carbonate and phosphate minerals. Based on the fact that the majority of these studies were conducted under fairly benign conditions, low acidity/alkalinity, low concentration, ambient temperature and pressure, it is reasonable to assume that any effect observed should be accentuated in more aggressive conditions. This may present opportunities for their use in mineral dissolution in an industrial context, whether that be as the primary lixiviant or to facilitate another leaching system. Generally, the relative effect of the acids followed complex stability values with formic and acetic acids having the greatest effect on minerals of group I and II elements and oxalic, citric and EDTA impacting those of d-block elements. The impact of pH appears to be greatly significant, most likely due to altering dissolution mechanisms, the inclusion of acid attack or reduction at low pH or additional leaching modes in alkaline conditions. Other pH-based factors such as solubility, surface charge and dissociation of the organic acids likely all contribute to a degree. The crystal structure (ion availability) and behaviour of the other components of the mineral (reprecipitation/polymerisation following dissolution) may represent a significant limitation in reaction extent. All of these factors will contribute to the selectivity observed in these systems. The authors would like to acknowledge the 