This study is concerned with the physio-chemical characterization and investigation of the dissolution kinetics of a Nigerian sphalerite in hydrochloric acid (HCl). The effects of HCl concentration, temperature, particle diameter, stirring speed, solid/liquid ratio on the leaching of sphalerite were investigated. The XRF analysis showed that the sphalerite mineral consists of zinc and sulphur as major elements with Fe, Sn, Ag, K, Sb, Ca and Pb occurring as minor or trace elements. The XRD examination confirmed the originality of the sphalerite sample and it revealed the presence of associated minerals such as ilmenite (FeTiO3), pyrite (FeS2), siderite (FeCO3), α-quartz and cassiterite (SnO2). Optical microscopic examination also supported the above. The leaching experiments showed that sphalerite dissolution in HCl increases with acid concentration and temperature, but decreases with particle diameter and solid/liquid ratio. In HCl 4M and at 80°C, about 91.80% of sphalerite was dissolved within 120min using −112+63μm particle diameter and solid/liquid ratio of 10g/L. The activation energy calculated from the experimental data was 39.09kJ/mol, while the reaction order, Arrhenius constant and reaction constant of 0.24, 13.46s−1 and 2.21±0.4×103 were computed for the process respectively. Kinetic data analysis indicated that the rate determining step for the dissolution process followed a surface chemical reaction and the reaction data fitted shrinking core model for spherical particles. Finally, the XRD analysis of the post-leaching residue provided evidence for the presence of silica and traces of sulphur in the residual solid.Sphalerite also known as Blende or Zinc Blende, is the major ore of zinc. Pure sphalerite exists in form of a clear crystal. As its iron content increases, it assumes a dark appearance ( Conventional zinc recovery process from sphalerite concentrates involves roasting the concentrate to zinc oxide or sulphate leaching the resultant calcine with diluted sulphuric acid and followed by electrode position of zinc from purified leach solution (roasting–leaching–electrowinning) ( Chloride systems in hydrometallurgy have been used for the treatment and recovery of precious metals for a number of years. The leaching of sulphide minerals in chloride media is a subject of considerable interest ( Several studies on the characterization of sphalerite ore have been carried out in recent years. Some of the instrumentation techniques used was inductively-coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES), inductively-coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS), X-ray fluorescence (XRF) and atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS). Some of these results reported by various authors in respect of sphalerite from diverse geological locations of the world are summarized in The literature values in The kinetics of dissolution of sulphide minerals in chloride media has received considerable attention recently. There are several justifications for this interest; among them is the availability of materials for construction with improved resistance to chloride attack. Most importantly, however, is the substantially faster dissolution rate exhibited by sulphides in chloride media, as well as the potential application of such electrolytes in the treatment of complex sulphides (  Sphalerite leaching in oxidizing media such as acidic ferric chloride solutions has been reported to result in the formation of zinc chlorides, elemental sulphur and iron chlorides ( Hhydrometallurgical studies, particularly on the chemical leaching of Nigerian sphalerite are very limited. The only major work was that of Olanipekun and Oderinde ( The sphalerite ore used for this study was collected from the Federal Ministry of Solid Minerals, Geological Survey Field Headquarters, P.M.B. 2007, and Kaduna, Nigeria. The ore was from Abakaliki, Enyigba origin mining site in Ebonyi State of Nigeria. The sphalerite ore was reduced in size by grinding into very fine particles with the aid of acetone-cleaned agate mortar and pestle and was later dry-sieved to four size fractions (− The X-ray fluorescence (XRF), Philips model 12045B4/3 was used for the elemental analysis of the sphalerite ore. The mineralogical purity of the ore was investigated using Philips PW 1800 X-ray diffractometer (XRD) with CuK The petrographic slides of sphalerite ore were prepared using Epoxy and Lakeside 70 media ( Leaching experiments were performed in a 250 An important aspect of the study is the hydrometallurgical recovery of sulphur from sphalerite ore. Sulphur is an important non-metallic product that has wide application in pharmaceutical and other allied industries. To this end, 2.0 The residual product containing sulphur was air-dried and later oven-dried at a temperature of 60 The results of the composition of this mineral had earlier been published ( The list of mineral phases recorded from XRD examination of the sphalerite is provided in The appearance of sphalerite characteristic peaks, two principal and one minor, at 3.12, 1.94 and 1.63 The results of the optical microscopy of sphalerite show the presence of bundles and aggregation of thin layer prismatic and spindle shaped plates. These are pale yellow in plane polarized and cross nicol. The scattered, opaque granular crystal feathery pattern (  The results show that the sphalerite dissolution depends largely on the stirring speed over the range 0–720 The results of effect of solid/liquid ratio on the rate of sphalerite dissolution in 120 The results from Previously, in our earlier work (  From the results in The effect of temperature on the rate of sphalerite ore dissolution was studied over a temperature range of 28 to 80 As expected, increasing temperature brings about increase in sphalerite dissolution in hydrochloric acid ( The results of this investigation show that increasing temperature is accompanied with increase in the concentration of zinc and iron leached from sphalerite. The rate of release of Zn was higher than that of Fe, and this is evident from the slope of their respective graphs ( The dissolution rates were analyzed with the shrinking core models which state that the leaching process is controlled by: the diffusion of reactant through the solution boundary layer, or through a solid product layer; or by the rate of the surface chemical reaction ( by mixed controlled process (chemically and diffusion controlled reactions). Therefore, for better understanding of dissolution mechanism of sphalerite by HCl solution, three shrinking core models were tested ( Eq. All the data shown in The experimental rate constants, The slope of the resulting plot ( The apparent rate constants, The apparent rate constants, Some of the reported activation energies, From A value of 13.5 The Arrhenius constant is proportional to the pre-exponential factor A or frequency factor. This is otherwise referred to as the frequency of collision between species (collision number) which vary from one system to another ( The effect of particle diameter on the rate of sphalerite dissolution was examined and the results are presented in From From the effects of solid/liquid ratios and particle diameters on sphalerite dissolution, given in Consequently, the values of the activation energy and the order of reaction with respect to hydrogen ion [H The results of the XRD analysis obtained for solid residue after optimal leaching of sphalerite in HCl 4 The leaching residue amounted to 9% of the initial sphalerite. Its XRD data given in An important aspect of this work concerned the effort made in characterizing the end product of leaching reactions. This is important in hydrometallurgical beneficiation. To this end, 0.12 The measured melting point of the light yellow sulphur solid recovered was 86.5 Based on the results of the characterization and leaching investigations undertaken in this study, the following conclusions can be drawn: The X-ray fluorescence technique showed that the sphalerite mineral used in this study exists mainly as ZnS, with metals such as Fe, Sn, Ag, K, Sb, Ca and Pb occurring as minor elements. The XRD analysis on the other hand confirmed the originality of the sphalerite sample and it also revealed the presence of minerals such as ilmenite (FeTiO The leaching investigation clearly showed that sphalerite dissolution in HCl increases with increasing concentration of hydrochloric acid and temperature, and decreases with increasing particle diameter and solid/liquid ratio, at a stirring rate of 360 The dissolution results suggested that the shrinking core model for spherical particles is applicable and thus, the leaching reaction follows the surface chemical reaction which is consistent with the expression given below: The post-leaching residue was found to be constituted of silica, calcium aluminate and sulphur. A quantity of about 0.12 The authors are grateful to Dr. R.B. Bale of the Department of Geology and Mineral Sciences, University of Ilorin, Ilorin, Nigeria for assisting in X-ray diffraction analysis and to the Geological Survey-Kaduna, Nigeria for providing the sphalerite sample. A.A. Baba acknowledges the financial support of