The formation enthalpies of Cd–Ga–Sn, In–Sn–Zn, Cd–Ga–In–Sn, Ga–In–Sn–Zn and Cd–Ga–In–Sn–Zn liquid alloys are calculated by molecular interaction volume model (MIVM), which only using the limiting partial enthalpies of binary systems and the coordination numbers of the constituent elements in liquid alloys. The predicted values are compared with the experimental data and the values calculated using Hoch–Arpshofen model, which indicate that the model is reliable and convenient.It is important to know the formation enthalpies of multicomponent alloys in many fields of material science and engineering. Enthalpies of formation data for multicomponent systems provide important thermodynamic information for industry and for theoretical studies in physics, chemistry and metallurgy. A great deal of binary data has been so far compiled as monographs such as Hultgren et al. The purpose of this work is to apply the MIVM to predict the formation enthalpies of quinary liquid alloys only using the limiting partial enthalpies of binary systems and the coordination numbers of the constituent elements in liquid alloys. The predicted values are compared with experimental data and also calculated by HAM to verify the usefulness of the method. According to MIVM It is necessary to determine the coordination numbers of liquid metals before applying the model to liquid alloys. The coordination number In order to determine the required binary parameters The partial molar formation enthalpy of component It is seen that the values of The Hoch–Arpshofen model (HAM) was deduced from physical principles and is applicable to multicomponent systems For a multicomponent solution ( The values of From  The formation enthalpies of quaternary systems Cd–Ga–In–Sn and Ga–In–Sn–Zn are shown in  From the predicted results above it can be clearly seen that the present calculations using the MIVM are in overall agreement with experimental data, considering the accuracy of the experimental technique and the thermodynamic data of the sub-systems. The model will bring certain errors during prediction, which are more obvious in multicomponent systems. A significant advantage of the MIVM lies in its ability to predict the formation enthalpies of multicomponent liquid alloys using only the binary limiting partial enthalpies. It, therefore, avoids empirical fitting for the pair potential energy interaction parameters. Compared to the experimental data and the results by HAM, the present calculations are reasonable and reliable, which show that the model is reliable and convenient. The authors are grateful for financial support from the Fund of National Natural Science Foundation of China under grant nos. 50764006 and 60567001, the Applied Fundamental Research Foundation of Yunnan Province under grant nos. 2007E039M and 2006E0021M and Young Foundation of Kunming University of Science and Technology.