Introduction
                  Intra-articular hand fractures can have devastating consequences for movement and function. The unique nature of the injury and diverse management strategies are a challenge for conducting trials.
               
                  Purpose of the Study
                  To conduct a scoping review of traction constructs for the management of intra-articular hand fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  We conducted a systematic search of the literature, extracting data on the scope and nature of the evidence for traction constructs.
               
                  Results
                  Our search yielded 87 articles addressing 3 traction constructs: (1) static traction (n = 17), (2) dynamic external fixation (n = 53), and (3) dynamic orthoses (n = 17). Active range of motion of the target joint was the most frequently reported outcome. Study designs included 36 cohorts, 21 case series, and 9 case studies: 24% contained only technical information.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The current literature addressing traction constructs consists primarily of small and low-quality studies. Evidence synthesis could improve the estimation of range of motion outcomes but would not be able to identify the best treatment. Consensus on classification of fracture patterns, routine use of outcome measures, and randomized trials are needed to compare different traction constructs and inform evidence-based care.
               
                  Study design
                  Scoping review.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  N/A.Narrative reviews or other review articles that do not contain any data/results not reported elsewhere Use of traction orthoses for injuries occurring more than 4 wk previous to the surgical intervention, chronic joint instability, or arthroplasty Neither abstract nor article is available in English OR unable to obtain article in full form Fracture healing Change in fracture position/joint alignment Adverse events (ie, pin tract infection) AROM and PROM of the affected joint TAM of the finger Grip and/or pinch strength Hand function and/or dexterity Pain and/or self-reported disability, return to work status, and other participation indicators Intra-articular fracture dislocations in the fingers and hand are often the result of axial load associated with high-velocity impact such as being hit by a baseball or a cricket ball. A variety of acute management options have been developed and applied to this class of injury with the goal of maintaining reduction of the fragments, preserving joint alignment, restoring range of motion (ROM), and minimizing the risk of post-traumatic arthritis or autofusion. Although extension block orthoses are generally the treatment of choice when the joint is stable, Although there are no formal estimates of the incidence of these injuries, they are described as common sequelae of sports. Scoping reviews are a form of knowledge synthesis that seek to be inclusive for maximum breadth of understanding of a topic and can include research from both quantitative and qualitative traditions. Given a wide range of surgical and conservative management options for intra-articular fractures in the hand, we elected to undertake a scoping review to critically examine the scope of research supporting the use of traction or distraction methods to inform evidence-based management by both surgeons and hand therapists. Accordingly, this scoping review will address the following question. What is the scope and nature of evidence and reported outcomes in the current literature for using traction or distraction constructs for persons with acute intra-articular fracture or fracture dislocation of the metacarpal or interphalangeal joints? The overarching purpose of this review is to synthesize the available evidence that addresses traction as a construct in the management of intra-articular fractures and fracture dislocations in the hand and answer the following questions. What orthotic designs have been proposed? What is the breadth and nature of the evidence comparing the various designs of orthoses? What evidence exists to guide selection of traction forces applied and the duration of traction across constructs? What is the extent of information available to describe the role of hand therapy cointervention? What are the surgical traction options? Refer to Six iterative steps have been recommended In January 2013, an initial systematic search was performed using OVID EMBASE, MEDLINE, Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature, PubMed, Web of Science, and Google Scholar. See All references in the Excel database were independently reviewed for inclusion by 2 reviewers (TLP and PDB). In all instances, differences of opinion were resolved by discussion among the 2 reviewers. Inclusion criteria consisted of all articles containing qualitative or quantitative data related to the use of traction orthoses or traction-based external fixation for acute management of traumatic injuries to the joints of the fingers and hand (interphalangeal or metacarpophalangeal joint) in adult humans. Articles exclusively describing fractures to the central shaft of the metacarpals or phalanges were excluded, as were mallet-type injuries to the distal phalanx, and injuries to the thumb carpometacarpal joint, as these may be associated with carpal injuries. A single reviewer (TLP) independently applied a data extraction form, which included patient characteristics (age, gender, injury, comorbidities, and finger and joints involved), sample size, intervention, outcome measures, results, complications, and clinical pearls (see A cross section of surgeons and therapists ( About 87 articles were identified for inclusion in the review. Articles were categorized as follows: Static traction: surgical application of an external fixator using static traction or static traction using a K-wire, skin traction, or nail traction in combination with an orthosis or cast ( Dynamic external fixation: surgical application of an external fixator using dynamic traction with rubber bands ( Dynamic traction using a K-wire or skin traction and custom orthosis or cast ( Tables list the articles in chronological order to map the evolution of each general construct. The earliest articles obtained were from 1919 through the 1930s, describing static traction appliances About 66 articles contained some form of case data with description and/or measurement of outcomes. These were presented in the form of 36 cohorts (only 1 of which Agarwal et al Information on the functional impact of these injuries was reported less systematically. Return to work or previous activity was occasionally addressed with descriptive statements, Six articles contained formal statistical analysis of their ROM outcomes. Rutland et al Two articles included persons managed with traction constructs in studies looking more broadly at the outcomes of PIPJ fracture dislocations. Schoke et al The article by O'Brien et al Although Keramidas et al The only head-to-head comparison of 2 different traction constructs is found in a 2007 conference abstract. Finally, the only economic evaluation comparing costs incurred by 2 different forms of management was presented by O'Brien et al. We grouped the articles into 6 overall categories for presenting summaries of the articles (Tables 2-7), including 5 pragmatic categories of dynamic constructs: (1) orthoses, (2) pins and rubbers-type fixators, (3) commercial fixators, (4) S-Quattro fixators, and (5) other dynamic fixation constructs. Seventeen articles (Table 2) were found to use static traction; these included the earliest articles using traction A frequently cited advantage of dynamic traction is the ability to start AROM and passive ROM immediately after application of the construct. However, other authors suggest waiting 5-7 days before commencing ROM to the affected digit to reduce risk of inflammation and infection. Dynamic orthoses designs, such as the arcuate The largest group of articles describing essentially the same design of dynamic construct were those who used the PRTS pioneered by Suzuki et al, Nine articles (10.2% of the overall articles identified) were based on Schenck's arcuate orthosis Traction forces used ranged from 200 to 300 g Duration of traction used varied from 8 days Several commercial products were described to assist in the surgical management of these injuries: (1) the mini Hoffman external fixator, Details on adverse events were not collected or presented systematically. The most commonly reported complications were pin track infection, ongoing pain, and ongoing cold intolerance. The highest rates of pin track infection were reported in dynamic fixators: for example, 41% reported by Nilsson and Rosberg while using the PRTS About 55 of 88 articles (62.5%) described formal prescription of ROM exercises and/or physiotherapy, occupational therapy, or hand therapy. However, there was often minimal description of the specific components, frequency, duration, or methods of progression of therapy. In addition, most descriptions of interventions used in hand therapy (other than dynamic orthoses used to apply traction) were lacking in detail for reproducibility. However, Feldscher and Blank Three of the 6 experts responded to our request for feedback on the summarized findings of the scoping review. Two were occupational therapists practicing hand therapy in Canada, and the third was an orthopedic surgeon specializing in hand trauma and microsurgery in Brussels. Their responses are compiled in At present, the literature on use of traction and distraction for the management of intra-articular hand fractures is largely populated by small cohort or case studies and technique articles. We identified the key considerations as including efficacy of static vs dynamic constructs, outcome measures used to inform efficacy findings, range of surgical and orthosis management options, risk of adverse events, and hand therapy cointervention. Dynamic constructs (71 articles) were far more common than static constructs (17 articles), but both reflect a diversity of applications. Slade et al Morgan et al Most (62 of 88) articles contained some description of outcomes, but these were highly variable in the scope, precision, and timing of reported measurements. Study designs used produced low-quality evidence with risk of bias, as none were prospective, randomized, or controlled, and there were only few comparisons between methods. It is important to note the question raised by O'Brien et al The most commonly reported adverse events included pin-site infections and post-traumatic arthritis; it is interesting to note that the highest rate for both was in the same study. Orthoses described can generally be divided into 3 classes: (1) static traction, (2) dynamic arcuate, and (3) dynamic swing hinge designs. This area tended to have more case studies and technical articles rather than cohort data. A great need exists for research based on unique orthotic designs and comparisons between different constructs, including efficacy of the construct for fracture reduction, effectiveness for restoring ROM, patient satisfaction, and economic evaluations weighing surgeon and therapist time for the various constructs. Most authors who reported measuring the amount of traction applied cited Schenck's recommended 300 g force The lack of detail describing hand therapy cointervention is perhaps reflective of surgical focus of much of the literature. Articles produced by hand therapists tended to take the form of technical articles describing fabrication of specific traction orthoses or single case studies. Three experts who had previously published in the field and who continue to use traction orthoses in their clinical practice responded to our request to provide feedback on the database of articles compiled and the initial evidence summary. All highlighted the need for more research in this area, specifically comparisons between orthotic designs and traction constructs. The role of experience was again emphasized, reflecting the belief that simpler constructs should be used in geographic regions where the clinical expertise of a multidisciplinary hand service is not available. The need to evaluate detailed pain outcomes both during the traction phase and at long-term follow-up was also reinforced, with the suggestion that this may be an important point of comparison between management methods such as extension block orthoses, ORIF, and traction/distraction techniques. This scoping review has identified a number of gaps in the medical and rehabilitation literature and opportunities for improved reporting of outcomes for the use of traction orthoses, constructs, and devices for the management of intra-articular fractures and/or fracture dislocations in the fingers and hand ( A further opportunity also exists to conduct evidence synthesis. Because this scoping review identified a set of generally small cohort studies and case series, the first step to define the most pressing research questions might be to conduct a meta-analysis of the outcomes and adverse events from the existing studies to develop more precise estimates and variability estimates to support future trials. Future evaluations of the quality of the literature to support meta-analysis would be greatly strengthened by the implementation of reporting standards ( Thanks to Desiree Kadelbach, Shrikant Chinchalkar, and Dr Chul Ki Goorens for sharing their insights through consultation. Thanks also to Dr Susan Michlovitz, PT, PhD, and Dr Norman Buckley, MD, FRCP, for their comments on an earlier version of this article. Articles excluded on full review   The primary outcome measure in demonstrating effective management of intra-articular digital fractures is grip strength hand function PROM AROM An important criticism of the current literature is that there are conflicting results reported in numerous RCTs the cohorts are too large studies are small and of low quality from a research perspective all the investigations are authored by surgeons with little to no input by therapists The study design is scoping review case series retrospective cohort RTC The summarized data was reviewed by the lead author a cross-section of published therapists and surgeons the editor of the the editor of Currently there are conclusive data to demonstrate the effectiveness of traction devises in the management of intra-articular digital fractures true false When submitting to the HTCC for re-certification, please batch your JHT RFC certificates in groups of 3 or more to get full credit.