This study aims to identify the correlation between microstructure of mechanically processed olivine powders and the milling energy input, for an ultimate purpose of optimizing the ball milling approach for achieving the best CO2 sequestration characteristics. Powders were processed in a high energy magneto ball mill. A variety of instrumental techniques such as scanning electron microscopy (SEM), Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) were utilized to characterize the particle size, specific surface area, pore volume, crystallinity and crystallite size of processes powders obtained with different levels of milling energy input. In each case, the variation of microstructural parameters with milling energy is compared for different milling devices extracted from the literature. Structural parameters of activated powders are correlated as a function of milling energy input, regardless of the ball mill type. The optimal range of milling energy input, expected to achieve the most desirable microstructure for CO2 sequestration is found to be about 55kJ/g.Fossil fuels are still the primary energy source in the world. The growing energy demand has led to an increasing fuel consumption which releases a huge amount of CO The ultramafic minerals are a promising candidate for mineral sequestration because they are very rich in magnesium oxides which are bound with other oxides in a silicate matrix Direct carbonation of solid olivine can be performed in dry CO This reaction could be accelerated in the presence of water steam, as it activates the olivine surface by producing Mg(OH) Alternatively, carbonation of olivine can also be carried out through wet (aqueous) processes. Wet carbonation includes dissolution of CO Dissolution of olivine (magnesium silicate) (Eq. In the literature several pretreatment methods have been developed to accelerate the rate of mineralization including the thermal activation, chemical activation, use of additives, combined high temperature – high pressure processes, and mechanical milling Several researchers have evaluated the influence of milling conditions on structural properties. Haug In another study by Kleiv and Thornhill The influence of ball milling was also investigated in a planetary mono mill running at 450 Other researchers also reported Although a number of investigations have been performed to study these structural variations occurring as a result of mechanical milling, a comprehensive study which correlates these variations with the milling energy input is still lacking. In the present study the olivine powders are processed in a magneto ball mill and structural changes are studied as a function of milling energy input. The ball milled olivine powders were characterized using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) and the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller analysis (BET) methods to evaluate the particle size, specific surface area, pore volume, crystallinity (%) and crystallite size. The main purpose of this research is to identify a quantitative correlation between the milling energy input and structural variations. This is expected to be used as a comprehensive factor for most mechanical activation processes, regardless of the milling type, because for a known milling mode and ball to powder mass ratio, milling energy input per unit mass of powder is the single factor that includes all the other effective parameters such as mill geometry, milling time etc. For this purpose, structural changes in the milled samples are examined as a function of milling energy input. The derived trend of each property’s variation is then used, by comparison with other reported milling types, to find the correlation between milling energy input and microstructural parameters of processed olivine samples. The outcome of this study can result in determining critical parameters as the process controlling factors for optimizing olivine structural activation and estimating the milling energy input range which could be applied for CO As received olivine powders were supplied by READE Advanced Materials, China. The bulk chemical composition of the olivine samples, before ball milling, was analyzed by means of energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) using a Zeiss ULTRA Plus Scanning Electron Microscope equipped with a calibrated Pegasus 1200 energy-dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDX) analyzer which revealed the olivine formula of (Mg Mechanical processing (ball milling) of olivine powders was implemented by controlled mechanical milling (CMM) in the magneto ball mill (Uni-Ball-Mill 5 manufactured by A.O.C. Scientific Engineering Pty Ltd., Australia) Milling experiments were conducted in a stainless steel vial, operating under the impact mode at ∼200 The SEM micrographs were obtained with the secondary electron detector using Zeiss ULTRA Plus Scanning Electron Microscope with the voltage of 10 The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were collected by a Bruker D8 diffractometer using a monochromated CuKα The specific surface area (SSA) of powders was determined through nitrogen adsorption at 77 Milling energy is known as one of the most effective parameters to control structural properties of materials For the employed IMP68-4B milling mode   Although the average size of particles is generally reduced with an increase in the milling energy input (increasing milling time), the extent of agglomeration slightly increases and becomes noticeable after one hour of milling (27.6 The average particle size data from It is clearly seen in Specific surface area (SSA) was measured from the BET analysis as described earlier and the results are included in Ball milling in a magneto mill in the present work is apparently very effective because the SSA values increase from the initial value of 1.12 m Since one would expect that SSA is directly proportional to the particle size both parameters should behave in a similar manner vs. milling energy input. However, if one compares XRD patterns related to different milling energies show a general reduction in a peak height and broadening of the peaks with increasing milling time ( In the same way, the amount of amorphous phase (amorphization) could be calculated using Eq.  Since the previous studies reported in the literature The trend of crystallinity vs. milling energy input that is achieved in a magneto ball mill is compatible with the data that were collected from the literature which confirms the controlling role of milling energy on the crystallinity variation, regardless of the mill type. According to Crystallite size for as received and mechanically processed samples was calculated from XRD peaks through two separate methods of Scherrer and Williamson–Hall According to the Scherrer method, crystallite size is directly related to the XRD peak width of diffracted crystalline structure and this method is capable of accurately estimating the crystallite size of less than 100 For the purpose of improving accuracy, the crystallite size was calculated using Eq. Based on the Williamson–Hall equation (Eq. Both methods predict the reduction of crystallite size with increasing milling energy, although the Scherrer estimate provides smaller crystallite sizes at lower energy levels. The main difference between the Williamson–Hall and Scherrer estimations originates from the structural strain, since the Williamson–Hall method considers the strain in the estimate while the Scherrer method does not  The following conclusions were made based on the correlations between the milling energy and the produced material properties. Regardless of milling type, milling energy is found to be the determining factor controlling the structural parameters of ball milled olivine powders such as particle size, specific surface area (SSA), pore volume, crystallinity percentage (amorphization) and crystallite size. These properties are known as the most essential parameters for CO The particle size variation of activated olivine powders vs. milling energy input is found to be controlled by the competing events of fracture and agglomeration during ball milling. The optimal amount of energy (of those tested) to achieve the minimum particle size is around 13.8 The SSA of olivine powders increases with increasing milling energy up to 13.8 The total pore volume of milled samples increases with increasing milling energy up to the energy level of 13.8 The crystallinity percentage of mechanically activated powders decreases with increasing milling energy input while the crystallinity percentage does not show a considerable variation beyond the energy of 27.6 The crystallite size shows a decreasing trend vs. milling energy input up to 55.1 In summary, considering the optimal energies estimated from the behavior of all investigated structural parameters (particle size, SSA, total pore volume, crystallinity and crystallite size), the optimal range of milling energy input for the most desirable material characteristics for CO The authors thank Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 