Falcon concentrators are commonly used in the mining industry to separate ores. Recent research yielded a predictive model for their separation performance in the form an analytical expression, based on a mechanistic understanding of the separation physics in these devices. While giving good results for lab-scale concentrators, in the form it is given, this model is not ready for industrial applications because of two limitations: its strong dependance on high quality measurements of size-density distributions, and its sensitivity to the discretization of data. These two shortcomings are solved by representing the distributions using continuous polynomials functions, in order to produce a robust model that makes it possible to validate the predictions for industrial scale Falcon bowls.Falcon concentrators are commonly used by the mining industry to achieve physical separation of fine particles in high tonnage slurries. They have proven to be efficient density-based separators that operate well over a wide range of conditions, so there is great interest in their application to challenging separation processes such as light fine material recovery as needed in Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE) treatment ( These concentrators are made of a fast spinning bowl in which the slurry flows in a thin film at the wall ( The model makes use of two calibration constants, For concentrated feed slurries, the dependence of the separation on the particle size–density prevents the original model from being a useful engineering tool since operating data sets are usually not sufficiently detailed, and information that is missing from the field data, as well as discretization issues can change the model’s predictive capabilities significantly. For the model to be able to process industrial data, such data must be expressed in a form that allows the model to properly ‘guess’ the missing values, without any knowledge from the operator about the model’s formulation. In the present study, polynomials are used to represent particle distributions in order to overcome this limitation. The separation function ( Multiplicative terms that do not depend on particle properties are grouped in a single coefficient ( Using this expression, the minimum and maximum functions in Eq. The integration and composition of polynomials yield polynomial functions. However, here, the upper integration bound for the density is not a real polynomial as it contains negative exponents. In the particular case of this model, this issue can be circumvented as the final value that is expected is a scalar ( As polynomials cannot asymptotically tend to zero, the polynomial representation of finite distributions must be defined on bounded intervals. This is particularly well suited for processing tabulated data, since such data comes with its own definition domain for each cell. Eq. From Eq. Also when The discrete implementation of the model has already been used to predict separation efficiencies of the Falcon concentrator for fine coal recovery (   The coal washability used previously was well described, so linear interpolation of the cumulative distributions (which yields piecewise constant probability density functions) gave good results. Because it is very difficult to measure coupled size-density distributions experimentally, data of such quality are very rare for industrial applications. A sample distribution for a dredge sediment is presented in  A predictive model of the Falcon concentrator based on a physical analysis of its separation principle has been implemented using polynomial continuous functions to represent the particle size–density distribution. This new implementation is a significant improvement over the discrete version as it makes the model directly usable without requiring any knowledge of the numerical methods behind it, and allows for reconstruction of missing information, which is a serious issue when dealing with particle distributions in industrial separations. The new implementation is able to reproduce the result of the discrete version without needing a discretization step, and is much better suited for industrial applications.