The effect of lithium, sodium, potassium, and cesium chlorides on the properties of dilute guar gum solutions was investigated through viscosity measurements. The results showed that the intrinsic viscosity of guar gum is not significantly affected by the salts up to an electrolyte concentration of 4.1mol/L. In the same ionic strength range, however, clear differences were observed between individual salts in their ability to influence the Huggins constant. At even higher electrolyte concentrations, only lithium and sodium chlorides markedly increased the intrinsic viscosity of the polymer, pointing towards the formation of a new type of structure in those solutions. The observed trends were attributed to the chaotropic (K+,Cs+) or kosmotropic (Li+,Na+) properties of the background salts. It was suggested that chaotropic electrolytes were capable of enhancing the dissolution of colloidal guar gum aggregates normally present in polysaccharide solutions under ambient conditions. On the other hand, the presence of high concentrations of kosmotropic ions led to enhanced aggregation of guar gum due to competitive hydration for free water molecules between the polysaccharide chains and the strongly hydrated cations. Comparative tests with the use of urea showed that the solute affects the behavior of dilute guar gum solutions in a way similar to NaCl, so its dispersing/hydrogen bond-breaking capabilities towards the polymer were not very clear in the studied system.Guar gum is a natural non-ionic polysaccharide produced from the seeds of two annual leguminous plants, Guar gum has a number of applications in the mining and mineral processing industry. In the froth flotation of base metal and platinum group metal ores, guar gum is used as a depressant of naturally hydrophobic waste minerals, such as talc. The role of the polysaccharide is to adsorb on the talc surface, render it hydrophilic, and prevent its flotation. A wide variety of modified guar gums are available for this application ( In another important flotation application, natural guar gum is employed as a “blinder” of water-insoluble, ultra-fine minerals in the froth flotation of potash ores. Canadian potash ores typically contain over 90% of the minerals sylvite (KCl) and halite (NaCl) with only a few percent of the so-called water-insoluble slimes, represented mostly by various clay and carbonate minerals. The objective of the process is to selectively separate sylvite from halite while completely rejecting the slimes. Since both sylvite and halite are highly soluble in water, the entire potash flotation process is carried out in a saturated KCl–NaCl brine. Sylvite is floated from halite with the use of a primary amine-based collector that also shows a high affinity towards the unwanted slimes. Therefore, the “blinding” action of guar gum in this high-ionic strength system relies on the adsorption of the polymer on the ultrafine minerals, thus forming a protective coating around these particles, and allowing the collector to selectively interact with the sylvite (KCl) crystals. In the absence of guar gum, the amine consumption would be very high and the selectivity of the amine-type collector towards KCl would drastically be reduced. In relation to mineral processing applications, the adsorption of guar gum, and polysaccharides in general, on various minerals has been studied quite extensively ( The main objective of this study is to gain insight into the behavior of guar gum in different electrolyte solutions of varying ionic strength through intrinsic viscosity measurements. A sample of guar gum, Rantec KP4000, was obtained from Rantec Corporation (Ranchester, WY, USA). The KP4000 is widely used by the Canadian potash industry as a slime blinder. First, a stock guar gum solution was prepared at a concentration of 1.8 The ionic strength of guar gum solutions was adjusted with lithium, sodium, potassium, and cesium chlorides, and with the salts obtained after evaporating a saturated potash brine. The brine was prepared from a potash ore (Lanigan mine, Saskatchewan) by dissolving the ore in warm distilled water. The resulting solution contained a large amount of suspended slimes which were allowed to settle over a period of 3 weeks. The clear brine was siphoned out and evaporated. A chemical analysis of the brine revealed the following concentrations of the main cations: Na Cesium chloride (crystalline, 99.9% pure) was supplied by Aldrich. Lithium, sodium, and potassium chlorides were ACS-certified chemicals from Fisher. Viscosity measurements were also made using urea (ACS) provided by Alfa Aesar. Dilute guar gum solutions were made by mixing a stock solution (after centrifuging) in distilled water with concentrated salt solutions, or by adding crystalline salts to a guar solution in distilled water and taking a concentration correction for a change in the solution volume (for saturated salt solutions). The viscosities of guar gum solutions were measured using Cannon-Fenske capillary viscometers (Schott Geräte GmbH, Germany). After preparation, the solutions of desired polymer and salt concentration were left overnight (10–12 The kinematic viscosity was measured by allowing each solution to flow under gravity through the capillary. A Lauda PVS1 photo-timing and processing system, interfaced with a computer, was used to automatically measure the flow times from which the kinematic viscosities were calculated. Capillaries of different diameters (from 0.44 to 1.26 One of the simplest ways of assessing interactions between background salts and guar gum is through intrinsic viscosity measurements. The intrinsic viscosity [ It can be seen that a plot of Based on experimental observations, the physical meaning of the dimensionless Huggins coefficient In other words, the Huggins coefficient It should be noted that there are several other empirical equations that can be used to approximately obtain the intrinsic viscosity, or the constant In order to characterize the main functional groups on the guar gum macromolecule, Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) was employed and FTIR spectra were recorded with the use of a Perkin–Elmer System 2000 infrared spectrophotometer. A droplet of 1-g/L guar gum solution was first frozen on an AgCl infrared window, then evaporated under vacuum (freeze-dried) and the resulting film of guar gum on the AgCl window was used for infrared analysis. The film preparation procedure was basically that of  Of special interest to this investigation is the range between 1500 and 1800  It can be seen that there is a marked decrease in the viscosity values when the temperature is raised to 45  As As seen from  Although there appears to be a trend in the average values of intrinsic viscosity in the different electrolytes: 11.7 Urea gave rather unexpected results, as shown in As far as other methods of evaluating the raw viscosity data are concerned, several linear approximations were also tested and compared against the Huggins equation, i.e., the Schulz–Blaschke equation (1/ Since the intrinsic viscosity of guar gum is essentially constant (except saturated LiCl, NaCl, CsCl, and more concentrated urea), the observed differences in the reduced viscosity values in alkali metal chloride solutions, and in more dilute urea, are primarily due to changes in the Huggins coefficient, Huggins constants calculated with the use of Eq. It is important to note that the results shown in It should also be recognized that the solution preparation procedure employed in this study does not guarantee that the resulting solutions are truly molecular. Most likely, and based on the study of The Huggins constant for guar gum in distilled water decreases from 1.07 at 24 It is worthwhile stressing that the usually accepted values of The fact that the intrinsic viscosity of guar gum is quite constant over the studied temperature range does not exclude the possibility of the presence of colloidal guar particles since the contribution of such aggregates to the overall intrinsic viscosity value is very small ( Since the effect of temperature on the viscosity of guar gum in distilled water is reversible it would be very hard to argue that the observed decrease in the viscosity of guar gum solutions at higher temperature could result from de-polymerization of the polysaccharide. The effect of increasing salt concentration is remarkably similar to the effect of increasing temperature. Assuming that high temperatures promote the dissolution of aggregates, the effect of salts can also be analyzed in terms of their ability to either promote or inhibit the dissolution of colloidal guar gum aggregates by following changes in the Huggins constant, One of the most interesting features of the data presented in Interestingly, the model of Peterson and Fixman was criticized for the predicted maximum value of In the low salt concentration range, guar gum remains in an aggregated state regardless of the solute type. However, as the electrolyte concentration increases above 0.1 Comparing the final The order of the salts in their ability to enhance the solubility of guar gum is actually very significant. Sodium and lithium cations are known to be strongly kosmotropic ions, while potassium and cesium are very strong chaotropes. The terms “kosmotropes” and “chaotropes” refer to ions that are capable of either “reinforcing” or breaking the hydrogen-bonded network of water molecules. Kosmotropes are usually small (in terms of crystallographic radii), strongly hydrated ions, while chaotropes are relatively large and poorly hydrated. Therefore, kosmotropic ions are also called water structure making ions, and chaotropes are referred to as water-structure breaking ions. It is noteworthy that one of the simplest ways of assessing whether an electrolyte is of chaotropic or kosmotropic nature is through viscosity measurements. As the salt concentration in solution gradually increases, the viscosity of the solution will increase for kosmotropic ions, and it will slightly decrease (compared to the viscosity of pure water) for chaotropes. Chloride anions are usually classified as weakly chaotropic ( At electrolyte (and urea) concentrations higher than 4.1 In contrast to Na Considering the above, the effect of urea on the viscosity of guar gum is much more similar to the action of kosmotropic NaCl and LiCl than to the effect of KCl and CsCl. As the urea concentration increases above 1 Finally, the saturated potash brine behaves more like 4.4-M NaCl than 1.7-M KCl (note the composition of the brine given in the experimental section). The brine produces an intrinsic viscosity value of 11.2 The similarity between the effect of high temperature and high salt concentrations deserves a couple of additional comments. The main property that is affected in both systems is the Although direct light scattering measurements would be needed to confirm the dissolution of aggregates in chaotropic salt solutions (KCl and CsCl), our results highlight the importance of background ions in controlling polymer hydration phenomena and defining the behavior of guar gum in dilute and concentrated electrolyte solutions. From the adsorption point of view, the presence or dissolution of colloidal guar gum aggregates, as influenced by various background salts, should lead to different modes of polymer adsorption on mineral surfaces. Traditionally, it is assumed that individual guar gum molecules participate in the adsorption process from dilute guar gum solutions, but as the results suggest it is probably more accurate to consider the adsorption of entire guar gum aggregates as opposed to single polymer chains. The intrinsic viscosity of the KP4000 guar gum is remarkably constant over a wide range of alkali metal chloride concentrations at 24 The effect of urea on the properties of dilute solutions of the KP4000 guar gum is comparable to the effect of NaCl. Therefore, the “dispersing” capabilities of urea towards guar gum aggregates appear to be very poor in the studied polymer concentration range. Financial support for this study through an NSERC (Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada) Discovery Grant is gratefully acknowledged.