It is generally recognized that the existence of unknown discontinuities with varying sizes, locations and orientations lead to a significant level of uncertainty in the physical behavior of fractured rock masses. Uncertainty and variability are caused by the nature and unpredictable behaviors of the fractured rock mass as an inherently heterogeneous geological material. Therefore, the variability of the fractured rock properties is an important and inescapable issue, which remains one of the most difficult challenges. In this regard, stochastic analysis of strength and deformability parameters of fractured rocks is a key issue of site characterization of rock engineering projects, which may provide more reliable estimation of variability of strength and deformability of the fractured rock masses concerned, as a means of quantitative representation of uncertainty/variability of the host rock mass concerned, and therefore enhancing design of surface and subsurface structures in and on rock masses, and reliable economic evaluation. Although a number of laboratory experimental study related to strength and deformability characteristics of rocks [ On the other hand, the available empirical methods [ There are theoretical studies in the literature to develop constitutive models for describing the deformation behavior of rock masses [ Therefore, proper numerical modeling approach becomes a feasible tool for conducting stochastic analysis of the mechanical behavior of the fractured rocks, due to its flexibility in fracture system representation and initial/boundary conditions. Numerical methods, especially the finite element method (FEM) as the continuous or implicit methods, and discrete element method (DEM) as the discontinuous or explicit methods, have been used to assess the strength and deformation behavior of fractured rock [ There are a limited number of numerical studies [ The main objective of this study is to develop a systematic numerical platform for statistical predictions of strength and deformability parameter distributions of the fractured rocks by the numerical stochastic analysis, which incorporates the uncertainties of the intact rock and fracture parameters, and was rarely reported in literature. The work described in this paper is a part of a systematic research program to study the strength and deformability of fractured rocks at a fundamental level, as developed recently for predicting strength and deformability of fractured rocks [ In this paper, a stochastic modeling approach is developed to quantify the variations of equivalent the deformation parameters, such as Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio and strength parameters defined two widely-used failure criteria, namely Mohr–Coulomb (M–C) and Hoek–Brown (H–B), of fractured rock masses. The numerical models considered contain stochastically generated fracture system realizations within a suitable REV, so that the multiple realizations of discrete network fractures (DFN) captured heterogeneity in fractured rock mass properties at the REV level so that the overall behavior of the DEM models can be represented as an equivalent fractured medium of the site considered. The multiple fracture system realizations are created by identifying geometric parameters of joint sets and defining the distribution forms of fracture location, orientation, and length using Monte Carlo simulations. To continue, the sets of so-called “numerical experiment” are adopted, in the similar ways for the standard uniaxial and biaxial laboratory testing on intact rock samples, to generate stress–deformation behaviors of all stochastic DEM models for probabilistic analysis the variation of strength and deformability of fractured rocks concerned. The code applied is the DEM code UDEC [ The methodology adopted is a systematic numerical simulating of typical laboratory compression test conditions based on procedures developed by Noorian et al. [ The numerical experiments were performed in a two-dimensional (2D) space and under quasi-static plane strain conditions without considering the effects of gravity for stress–deformation analyses. Fractured rock was assumed a crystalline hard rock mass without considering strain-softening since only the strength and elastic deformability parameters are concerned. The rock concerned is a volcanic type at Sellafield, UK, where a comprehensive site investigation was conducted in the past, as the properties of the intact rock and fractures are shown in Based on measured data from site investigations and the available constitutive models in the UDEC, the intact rock matrix was defined as a linear, isotropic, homogeneous, and elastic material, and fractures were defined to follow an ideal elasto-plastic behavior of a Mohr–Coulomb model in the shear direction and a hyperbolic behavior (Bandis' Law) in the normal direction ( In this paper, the cracking and crushing of rock blocks during loading processes was not considered. The DFN method has ability for creating stochastic geometric models of the complex fracture systems, reflecting the uncertain and heterogeneous nature of fracture systems whose representative properties and parameters can only be partially measured or estimated. Hence, to realize the stochastic fracture system for the numerical experiment, a set of stochastic DFN models was generated. An independent DFN generator was developed using the MATLAB workspace for generating the DFN realizations, based on the method developed by Min and Jing [ In this research for generating the fracture network realizations, the fracture location, orientation and length are assumed that follow a Poisson, Fisher, and power law distribution, respectively, based on the field mapping results in Sellafield area that were four identified sets of fractures ( For this study, a set of 50 square-shaped DFN realizations were generated with side length of 5 It should be noted that, the DEM model setup requires a fracture system regularization, by which the isolated fractures and dead-ends are removed. This issue will not generate significant differences when a large number of fractures and blocks are contained in the DEM model, since in such cases, number of removed partial or isolated fractures are usually very small compared with the total number of fractures included in the models. Moreover, the issue has no significant effects when only mechanical processes are concerned, such as in this paper. The resulting set of 50 DFN models was used to create the DEM models with an internal discretization of finite difference elements, for stochastic stress–deformation analysis when loading conditions of numerical experiments were applied to simulate test conditions. Both standard uniaxial and biaxial compression tests were carried out in the similar ways for the laboratory testing on intact rock samples. Following the modeling procedure in the previous study [ The numerical compression tests were performed by applying a very small axial load increment (∆ It should be noted that for the validity of the equivalent continuum assumption that was adopted in this research to evaluate the equivalent strength and deformability of the fractured rocks, the loading needs to be stopped when the peak strength of the DEM models was reached, without need for modeling the post-peak softening behavior of the DEM models. A numerical servo-control loading program was applied so that the cyclic loading rate was selected in a reasonable range of maximum and minimum unbalanced forces to prevent sudden failure of the DEM models. As shown in This monitoring scheme defined was used for each realization of the DEM models for two following purposes to ensure that velocities (in both the  Generally, it can be seen from Also, the obtained stress–strain curves show that with the increase of confining pressure, the average axial stress and strength of fractured rocks increases, and that the deformation behavior follows elasto-plastic model with a strain-hardening trend for all of the DEM model realizations. By continued loading, strain-softening may occur, but it is not required since the constitutive model of the rock mass is not included in this research. Although the general deformation behavior of 50 realizations has the similar trends, but the magnitude of peak stress at the end of loading and the slope of elastic regions of stress–strain curves before reaching the initial yielding strength vary, due to changing the fracture system geometry, and differences in the number and size of blocks during the generating multiple realization process. Based on the axial stress–strain curves obtained, the distribution of the peak of compressive strength curves for 50 realizations of DEM models under different confining pressures was illustrated in Generally, besides the peak strength for each realization of the DEM models, the distance between two bounds of peak strength increased with the increasing confining pressures. This show that the variations range of peak strength of fractured rocks is dependent to confining pressure. With increasing confining pressure, the strain rate becomes less and thus fractured rock becomes stronger and stiffer and requires a higher value of axial load to deform it. The strain rate variations are more persistent in the lower confining pressure and vice versa, hence it causes the stress jump upon varying levels with the wider range when high confining pressure. The equivalent values of directional Young's modulus (  Generally, it can be seen that with increasing of confining pressures, the equivalent directional Young's modulus increased for each realization of the DEM models, while the distance between two bounds of Young's modulus is approximately constant. Since the value of Young's modulus is in fact the averaged local slope of the stress–strain curves, and variations of slops are insignificant in each confining pressure, hence variation range of Young's modulus of DEM models is constant under different confining pressures. In addition, the obtained numerical results from each realization of the DEM models compared with the deformation parameters of the intact rock (see In this study, the appropriate statistical distributions are fitted on the strength and deformation parameters of fractured rock by using the Chi-Squared goodness-of-fit test. The Chi-Squared statistic is defined as The equivalent directional Young's modulus obtained were fitted to some commonly observed probabilistic distributions (such as normal, lognormal, exponential, and etc.), according to the statistical goodness-of-fit criteria, using Chi-Squared goodness-of-fit test. It was found that the PDF and CDF of Young's modulus (    Generally, with increasing of confining pressures, the equivalent Poisson's ratio for each realization of the DEM models, and also the distance between two bounds of Poisson's ratio decreased. In fact with increasing of confining pressures, the deformation rate of the DEM models decreases under loading, hence the variation range of Poisson's ratio decreases when high confining pressure applied. In addition, the obtained numerical results from each realization of the DEM models, compared with the deformation parameters of the intact rock (see The results show that, Poisson's ratio (  It is possible to quantitatively estimate the variation and distribution of strength parameters of fractured rocks using suitable failure criteria with statistical analysis of multiple testing samples or models. The Mohr–Coulomb (M–C) and Hoek–Brown (H–B) failure criteria are widely used for representing rock mass strength. The equivalent values of strength parameters defined by these strength failure criteria can be calculated after the curve fitting process. The strength envelopes of M–C and H–B failure criteria can be fitted on the obtained major (  The equivalent friction angle and cohesion derived from the 50 fitting curves to the M–C strength criterion were used to establish the best fitted statistic distribution. The normal distribution was found to have the best fit to both friction angle and cohesion of DEM models of the fractured rock concerned.   The equivalent  To estimate uncertainties in measuring fracture systems of fractured rock masses, a stochastic analysis was performed to quantify the distributions of strength and deformability a fractured rock mass under uniaxial and biaxial compression. The 350 numerical experiments on the DEM models were undertaken using 50 stochastic realizations of DFN models to generate representative stress–strain behavior curves. The variations and the best-fitted distribution functions of strength and deformability parameters were estimated statistically. The results indicate that generally variation of strength and deformation parameters of the fractured rocks are dependent upon confining pressure. Therefore, the effects of confining pressure can be important in evaluating the mechanical properties of fractured rocks. The strength and deformation properties of fractured rocks have ranges of values instead of fixed values. The main source of such uncertainties comes through largely unknown fracture system properties, so that stochastically generated DFN realizations including different fracture system geometry and block numbers, has to be applied as a tool for uncertainty quantification. Hence, the parameter variability must be taken into account in the constitutive model development for fractured rocks. The best distribution of two deformation parameters of fractured rock concerned in this study during elastic deformation stages, namely the equivalent Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio, can be considered to follow a normal and lognormal distributions, respectively. In this study, both strength parameters defined in the M–C failure criterion, namely, friction angle and cohesion, obey the normal distribution. Moreover, Despite being time-consuming of the systematic numerical experiments as presented, the results provided an appropriate tool to evaluate the uncertainty and variability of the strength and deformability of fractured rock masses that cannot be achieved by laboratory and in situ tests at present, and cannot be realized by applying continuum based numerical modeling. In the absence of more advanced alternatives, therefore, it can be used to give an acceptable estimation of mechanical properties of fractured rocks. Stochastic analysis is a useful way to estimate how the strength and deformability parameters of fractured rocks vary within what kind of limitations, which will be helpful for the design and performance assessments of rock engineering projects. It should be noted that to reduce uncertainty in the strength and deformability of fractured rocks, it is necessary to generate a large number of stochastic DFN models. Time and computational requirements are usually limitations to do more works. However, more realizations are required to produce more representative stochastic behavior of the fractured rocks. Also, the mechanical properties of rock matrix and fractures used in this study were site-specific data. This research is limited to 2D analysis for simplicity. A similar study can be extended to a 3D space to avoid simplification issues in the 2D models, with much increased computational demands. Also, this study assumes a constant initial fracture aperture for the entire fracture network model for simplicity. The methodology proposed can be applied to studying the more realistic fracture networks with varying apertures, or correlated to fracture lengths. The current study focuses on stress–deformation analysis. However, a full thermo-hydro-mechanical analysis needs to be conducted for more complete prediction of variations of strength and deformability of fractured rocks, when heating concerned. It should be noted that for validation of the obtained numerical results against experiment results, large volumes of rocks containing many fractures should be tested at desired stress levels, with varying testing volumes until their REV are reached, which is almost impossible to be carried out in the conventional laboratory or field test facilities today. Therefore, experimental validation of such numerical models is not possible at present. This shortcoming exists in the field of rock mechanics in general. On the other hand, preliminary blind numerical predictions are also needed before testing for helping the test design and interpreting the results after the tests completed, that this cannot be avoided when testing fractured rocks of large testing volumes. This research helps to design such predictive modeling.