Retrobulbar haematoma following blunt orbital trauma is a rare, but potentially serious, complication, since it can evolve rapidly from visual impairment to permanent loss of vision. This sight-threatening situation most commonly arises from orbital bleeding accompanying undisplaced fractures of the orbital walls, an event that increases the pressure inside the orbit and results in vascular damage to the optic nerve. The clinical presentation includes pain, exophthalmos with proptosis, and internal ophthalmoplegia, with impairment or loss of the pupillary reflex. A thin-layer orbital CT scan is an essential diagnostic aid. Any delay between the onset of symptoms and treatment can have a significant effect on functional recovery.
                  Therapy is based on orbital decompression, via different surgical approaches, with the intention of reducing the pressure on the nerve and vascular structures inside the orbit. This paper presents eight cases of retrobulbar haematoma and their follow-up, in detail.Bleeding inside the orbit can produce a rapidly evolving retrobulbar haematoma, which can lead to loss of vision. This event is uncommon and usually follows the surgical reduction of orbital fractures The clinical files of 1971 consecutive patients with trauma involving the orbit, who were treated in the Maxillo-Facial Surgery Division of the University of Turin between 1990 and 2002, were reviewed. Ten cases of post-traumatic, sight-threatening, orbital haematoma were identified. Of these, eight patients met the criteria for inclusion in this study: blunt orbital trauma, onset of the haematoma before surgery, complete clinical and radiological records, and follow-up of at least 6 months. One patient was lost to follow-up and one patient was excluded because the haematoma followed surgical reduction of orbital fractures. For each patient, age, sex, mode of injury, visual acuity, interval between trauma and onset of symptoms, location of the haematoma, relevant medical history, associated lesions, and medical and surgical treatment were recorded. The data on the clinical presentation, treatment, and functional results are summarised in Seven of the eight patients were female, with a mean age of 44 years. Trauma was caused by accidental falls in four cases and by road accidents in the other four. Two patients were sedated on arrival in the emergency room; the others were conscious and cooperative. Of the six conscious patients, two presented with no vision in the affected eye; in three cases, vision was deteriorating progressively; in one case vision was preserved. As it was impossible to evaluate visual acuity directly in the two unconscious patients, pupillary function was monitored using the swinging flashlight test; both cases showed a progressive loss of the pupillary reflex. In four cases the haematoma was extraconal, in one case it was intraconal, and in the remaining three cases it was both. In six out of eight cases, concomitant undisplaced fractures of the orbital walls were observed. The inferior orbital compartment was affected in two cases ( Patient 4 was being treated with oral anticoagulants and the international normalised ratio (INR) was 3.81. Patient 1 had a history of hypertension. Patient 2 was being treated with phenobarbital, 100 The three patients who presented with progressive deterioration of vision were treated with high-dose steroids (methylprednisolone 30 Drainage of the haematoma and bipolar coagulation of bleeding vessels was performed via subperiosteal dissection of the orbit, with incision of the periosteum over the haematoma and blunt dissection of the orbital retrobulbar structures. Access was obtained through a subtarsal lower eyelid incision, or an upper eyelid or coronal approach. A temporary marginotomy was occasionally required to gain adequate surgical visibility of the retrobulbar area ( Only one patient in the series had complete loss of vision after treatment. Of the others, two showed improvement with some residual visual impairment and five had a complete recovery of function. Loss of vision as a complication of maxillo-facial trauma occurs in 3–12% of cases There is general agreement that the damage to the visual system caused by a haematoma is the result of increased intra-orbital pressure, representing a “compartment syndrome” Moreover, due to the septal system, the pressure on sensitive structures can increase locally, without a remarkable increase in the overall orbital pressure Orbital haematomas most commonly accompany undisplaced fractures of the orbital walls (six out of eight cases in our series). In fact, linear fractures may cause a small bleed that is unable to drain into the paranasal sinuses, in the absence of displacement or comminution of the orbital walls. If there is no natural drainage, the bleeding associated with a linear fracture of the orbital roof is more likely to lead to retrobulbar blood collection, hi our study, the superior orbital compartment was affected in six of eight cases. In our opinion, the most critical aspect of orbital haematoma treatment is the rapidity of the diagnosis and the decision to perform surgical drainage. Any delay between the onset of symptoms and orbital decompression can have a marked effect on functional recovery. Accordingly, Bailey et al. Clinical diagnosis is based on the observation of painful exophthalmos with a visual deficit or, in an unconscious patient, loss of the pupillary reflex. An emergency multi-slice orbital CT scan is a fundamental diagnostic aid. In our experience, only a CT scan can identify the cause of clinically evident ophthalmologic deficiencies in trauma patients. Misdiagnosis is more likely in an unconscious patient with gross facial oedema. hi such cases, the swinging flashlight test allows indirect assessment of optic nerve function A clinical assessment protocol for use in trauma involving the orbit is mandatory As soon as visual deterioration is detected, high-dose steroid therapy should be given in order to protect the nervous tissues from ischemic insult Medical therapy In our survey, surgical control of orbital pressure on an urgent basis allowed resolution of most of the cases, and should be adopted in the absence of visual deterioration when there is blood in the orbit and changes in eye position and motility. In patients with a progressive reduction in vision, there was postoperative recovery of visual acuity. Unfortunately, when amaurosis occurs rapidly (case 1), recovery is very unlikely, as reported elsewhere Different surgical approaches have been proposed, including lateral canthotomy with cantholysis In our retrospective analysis of the drainage operations performed, retrobulbar bleeding was caused by linear fractures with lesions of the periosteum and orbital tissue, without rupture of the major vessels. Therefore, surgical control of a retrobulbar haematoma may be achieved through the same surgical approaches as used to treat fractures of the orbital walls or small benign lesions that occupy a similar location inside the orbit. In our experience, eyelid approaches, with the possible aid of marginotomies More extended approaches to the internal orbit, involving a more complex procedure and causing higher morbidity, are only to be used in the case of extensive retrobulbar hemorrhagic infarction and when it is necessary to treat associated fractures or to perform optic nerve decompression. In some cases, reconstruction of the orbital floor is delayed in order to allow transsinus drainage; this approach may be justified after considering the more acceptable risk of enophthalmos, rather than a loss of vision (cases 1, 3). In this respect, Liu In conclusion, retrobulbar haematomas are a rare, but potentially severe, complication of blunt orbital trauma, with different clinical consequences, and onset may be delayed. Therefore, visual acuity must be monitored carefully over time in all facial trauma patients, and an accurate CT scan assessment should be performed in any suspected case. Early diagnosis and immediate treatment based on surgical decompression are essential to prevent permanent damage.