Aims
                  Phytoestrogens and xenoestrogens act as agonists/antagonists in bone formation and differentiation. Strong bones are depending of the ability of osteoblasts to form new tissue and to mineralize the newly formed tissue. Dysfunctional or loss of mineralization leads to weak bone and increased fracture risk. In this study, we reported the effect of different types of phytoestrogens (daidzein, genistein and equol) on mineralization in hFOB 1.19 cells stimulated with bisphenol A (BPA).
               
                  Main methods
                  Cell mineralization capacity of phytoestrogens was investigated by evaluating calcium, phosphate content and alkaline phosphatase activity. Bone related markers, osteocalcin and osteonectin, responsible in maintaining mineralization were also measured.
               
                  Key findings
                  BPA is significantly interfering with bone mineralization in hFOB 1.19 cells. However, the enhanced mineralization efficacy of daidzein and genistein (particularly at a dose of 5 and 40 μg/mL, respectively) was evidenced by increasing calcium and phosphate content, higher ALP activity, compared to the untreated BPA group. The quantitative analyses were confirmed through morphological findings. Osteocalcin and osteonectin levels were increased in phytoestrogens-treated cells. These findings revealed the potential effect of phytoestrogens in reverting the demineralization process due to BPA exposure in hFOB 1.19 cells.
               
                  Significance
                  We found that osteoblast differentiation and mineralization were maintained following treatment with phytoestrogens under BPA exposure.Environmental oestrogens like bisphenol A (BPA), p-n-nonylphenol (NP) and bis(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP), are synthetic, oestrogen-like hormones used in the industrial production of plastic products, epoxy resins, polycarbonate and etc. [ The endocrine-disrupting compound bisphenol A (BPA), a monomer of poly-carbonate plastics and epoxide resin, exerts numerous adverse health effects including bone loss. BPA, compared with 17β-estradiol, only weakly binds to the intracellular oestrogen receptors ESRα & β [ A group of researchers reported that BPA interrupted the process of osteoblast differentiation and bone formation by suppressing the expression of Runx2 and osterix, osteoblast differentiation markers [ Phytoestrogens raise major interest in regulating bone loss in the state of oestrogen deficiency. Daidzein, the most widely studied soy phytoestrogens, is considered as a potential antiosteoporosis agent [ The present study was thus aimed to observe the effect of different types of phytoestrogens in bone mineralization process by enhancing the expression of bone markers in BPA stimulated in vitro osteoblastic model. The mineralization activity of daidzein (Dz), genistein (Gt) and equol (Eq) in hFOB 1.19 cells was evaluated in terms of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, calcium and phosphate levels. To gain further insight into bone formation process, a variety of bone-related protein markers including osteocalcin (OCN) and osteonectin (ON) were evaluated in phytoestrogens-treated in vitro osteoblastic model simulated with BPA. It was believed that phytoestrogens could regulate biomarkers that are critically imperative for bone mineralization and hence can be used as an alternative osteoprotective agent. The immortalized human foetal osteoblast (hFOB 1.19) cells (AddexBio Technologies, USA) were maintained in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium: Nutrient Mixture F-12 (DMEM/F12) supplemented with 10% FBS (Biosera Laboratories, France) and 1% penicillin and streptomycin. Cells differentiation was induced by adding (Feldman M.D., 1997) 50 μg/mL ascorbic acid and 10 mM β-glycerophosphate (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA). The cultured cells were fed every three consecutive days and cell passage 4 was used in this study for all experiments. The cells were incubated in a standard procedure (95% air, 5% CO2 at 37 °C humidified chamber). Following 6 days of osteoblast differentiation period, the actual experiment was started. In the present study, hFOB 1.19 cells were stimulated with bisphenol A (BPA) and treated with phytoestrogens Dz, Gt, Eq and the results were compared with control (Ctrl) and Est groups. Cells in the Ctrl group was fed with complete medium alone. Dz, Gt, Eq, Est, and BPA were sourced from Abcam (Cambridge, UK). Three (3) effective concentrations of each phytoestrogen were chosen by using haemocytometer. All the experimental group were stimulated with BPA 12.5 μg/ml except for the Ctrl group. Dz (5,10,20); Gt (10,20,40); Eq. (1,2,4) and Est (2,4, 16) μg/ml were selected for the present study. The treatment was continued for 24 h. To analyse the ability of BPA to disrupt bone mineralization, calcium (Ca About 35,000 cells/well of hFOB 1.19 cells were seeded in a 24 well plate for 6 days. The cells were treated with normal medium and differentiation medium (as described above). Following 6 days of incubation period, the medium was removed and both group of cells treated with or without differentiation medium was compared. Then, the new group of cells were seeded again (as mentioned above) and at the end of 6 days of inducing with differentiation medium, they were treated with different doses of BPA (0, 1.56, 3.12, 6.25, 12.5, 25, 50 μg/mL) for 24 h. Then, the cells were viewed and images were captured using an inverted microscope (Leica, Tokyo). To observe the effect of phytoestrogens on cell differentiation in BPA exposed hFOB 1.19 cells, a similar procedure was performed. However, this time, the cells were treated with different doses of phytoestrogens (Dz - 5, 10, 20; Gt- 10, 20, 40; Eq- 1, 2, 4 μg/mL) and Est (2, 4, 16 μg/mL) in the presence of BPA (12.5 μg/mL) for 24 h duration. For the alizarin red staining, the medium was removed, cells were slowly washed thrice with PBS and fixed with 4% formaldehyde for 45 min at 4 °C. The cells were subsequently rinsed with deionized water. Then, the cells were incubated with 1 mL of 2% alizarin red (pH 4.2) for 20 min at room temperature with a gentle shaking. Later, the dye was removed and the cells were gently washed with distilled water twice. The stained cells were captured for calcified nodules formation by using inverted microscope (Leica, Tokyo). The plate was stored at −20 °C before proceeding the extraction method. Subsequently, the cell differentiation was confirmed by using quantitative analysis with acetic acid technique. Following 24 h of incubation period, 10% acetic acid was added into each well and was incubated at room temperature for 30 min with gentle shaking. The cultured and treated cells were taken out by using a cell scraper and were quantitated spectrophotometrically according to the manufacturer's protocol. Briefly, 5 μL of the cell supernatant was taken from tested samples (medium only, untreated and treated cells) and was mixed with 200 μL of working reagent in each well and incubated at room temperature for 3 min. The standard curve of alizarin red staining was prepared by serial dilution of 4 mM of alizarin red staining (PH 4.1–4.3). Briefly,150 μL of the samples and standard curve's dilution were transferred into a 96 well plate and were measured at 450 nm in the microplate reader (Bio-Tek Instruments Inc., Winooski, VT). The concentration of alizarin red obtained for each sample were calculated based on the standard curve. A total of six samples in each group were tested. Phosphate deposition in the hFOB 1.19 cells was observed using Von Kossa staining. Phosphate deposits were viewed as brownish-black nodules under the microscope. Approximately 40,000 cells were seeded in the 24 well plates. Cells were stained following a 24 h of incubation period. According to the manufacturer's protocol, each group of cells; Ctrl, BPA alone, BPA plus Dz (5,10,20), Gt (10,20,40); Eq. (1,2,4) and Est (2,4, 16) μg/ml were fixed with 10% formaldehyde for 15 min at room temperature. Then, the fixed cells were washed with deionized water for 3 times. Then, the cells were incubated with 5% silver nitrate solution under UV light at room temperature for 1 h. Following the incubation period, the silver nitrate solution was washed out with distilled water for 3 times and the cells were neutralized in 5% sodium thiosulfate for 10 min. Then, the sodium thiosulfate was removed from each well and cells were air-dried. Hence, images were viewed under the microscope and captured. Differentiated osteoblast cells were cultured in 24 well plates. Following 24 h of incubation period, the medium from each group of cells; ctrl, BPA alone, BPA plus Dz (5,10,20), Gt (10,20,40); Eq. (1,2,4) and Est (2,4, 16) μg/ml were aspirated. Briefly, the cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS for 1–2 min. The fixative was then aspirated and rinsed with 1× rinse buffer. For alkaline phosphatase staining (Millipore, USA), the fast red violet was mixed with naphthol AS-BI phosphate solution, according to the manufacturer's protocol. The mixture (500 μl) was added into each well of the 24 well plate. The plate was then incubated in the dark at room temperature for 15 min. Then, the staining solution was removed, and the cells were rinsed with 1× rinse buffer. To avoid drying-up of cells, the cells were covered with 1× PBS and the images were captured. All the slides/stains in this study were viewed under a Leica Phase Contrast microscope using a digital camera (Leica, Tokyo). In this study, the expression of specific bone markers such as ALP, OC and ON involved in bone mineralization were measured by using ELISA. Cells supernatant was used to assess the expression of each markers following the manufacturer's instruction (Sunlong Biotech Co., LTD). The OD value was recorded at 450 nm in the microplate reader (Bio-Tek Instruments Inc., Winooski, VT). Each experiment was performed in triplicate and the data were expressed as mean ± standard error mean (SEM). Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS version 22.0. Analysis of variance was performed using one-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni test. Prior to the study, the doses of each phytoestrogen along with BPA and Est were optimised using haemocytometer. In this study, hFOB 1.19 (5 × 10 For the cell differentiation of hFOB 1.19 cells, the cells were stained with alizarin red staining which appears as nodules with orange red colour. The cells treated with osteoblast differentiation medium was compared to the normal medium. A prominent nodule formation, increased intensity of colour and cell density was observed in the differentiation medium group ( Another osteoblast mineralization staining of osteogenesis is phosphate deposition. We used von Kossa staining to examine phosphate deposition. In doing so, hFOB 1.19 cells were treated with phytoestrogens in the presence of BPA. Cells are treated with different types of phytoestrogens (Dz, Gt and Eq) in osteogenic medium for 24 h except the BPA group. Phosphate deposits (dark brown spots), nodule formation were observed and the resulted photomicrographs were shown in The mineralization effect of phytoestrogens on BPA stimulated hFOB 1.19 cells was accessed quantitatively. Bone mineralization markers (Ca In this study, semi qualitative analysis of ALP was performed using phase contrast microscope ( To confirm the findings from the ALP staining, ALP protein expression was quantified using an ELISA kit. Results showed a significantly decreased ( In this study, OC level was recorded using ELISA kit and the results were presented in To observe the protective effect of phytoestrogens on the osteoblast markers, we detected the role of each types of phytoestrogens (Dz, Gt and Eq) in the expression of ON in hFOB 1.19 cells stimulated with BPA 12.5 μg/mL. We showed that Dz significantly increased the expression of ON ( Chronic exposure to xenoestrogens have high impacts on humans and animals' health including bone health. Bisphenol A, xenoestrogen and endocrine disruptor, interrupts the bone mineralization by binding to both classical and non-classical oestrogenic receptors. Since bone is an endocrine organ and oestrogen is a key factor involved in bone metabolism, 17β-oestradiol gains highlights in improving bone demineralization by increasing the osteoblast formation and differentiation [ From the present study, we found that BPA 12.5 μg/ml showed decreased in cell viability rate compared to the other concentration. This is in accordance with the earlier study in which the dose of 12.5 μg/ml decreased the viability rate in MC3T3-E1 cells [ Calcium and phosphate serve as important markers in mineralization process [ The mineralization markers (Ca ALP, OC and ON are the non-collagenous bone proteins associated with osteoblast differentiation [ OC and ON, non-collagenous proteins abundantly found in bone matrix are the important biomarkers responsible for the maintenance of bone mineralization [ However, in untreated (BPA) group, OC and ON levels were significantly reduced compared to the Ctrl group. Surprisingly, the lower OC level than the ON level was found in BPA alone group. Despite this finding, we are unable to show any mechanism of action of the BPA on OC and ON markers. In addition, our study showed a clear-cut stimulating effect of Est on ON but not on OC thereby confirming earlier observation in which the researcher unable to show any effect of Est on OC gene expression [ Our results evidenced that lowest dose of Dz (5 μg/ml) and the highest dose of Gt (40 μg/mml) showed most protective effects when compared with other phytoestrogens group. Earlier study explained that low-dose of Dz mainly acts on ERs, whereas high-dose acts on peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ (PPARγ). The author stated that while acting on ERs, Dz promotes the osteoblasts proliferation and inhibits proliferation by acting on PPARγ [ In light of the present findings, we conclude that xenoestrogen, BPA, reduced the mineralization and differentiation process in hFOB 1.19 cells. However, treatment with soy phytoestrogens (Dz, Gt and Eq) enhanced calcium, phosphate, ALP activity as well as OC and ON expressions in hFOB 1.19 cells stimulated with BPA. Resulting data also revealed that Dz (5 μg/ml) and Gt (40 μg/ml) showed higher bone mineralization potential. Eq is more potent phytoestrogens in reverting de-mineralization compared to Dz, the more pronounced effect was observed in Dz treated group. Our results provided the molecular source of phytoestrogens in improving the bone demineralization due to BPA exposure. Moreover, the detailed None. 