Many experimental models have been developed to investigate the effects of mechanical stimulation of cells, but none of the existing devices can simulate micromotions at the cellular–mechanical interface with varying amplitudes and loads. Osteoblasts are sensitive to mechanical stimuli, so to study the bone–implant interface it would be important to quantify their reaction in a situation mimicking the mechanical situation arising at that interface. In this study, we present the development of a new device allowing the application of micromotions and load on cells in vitro. The new device allowed the cells to be stimulated with sinusoidal motions of amplitudes comprised between ±5 and ±50
                        μm
                     , frequencies between 0.5 and 2
                        Hz
                     , and loads between 50 and 1000
                        Pa
                     . The device, with a total length of 20
                        cm
                     , was designed to work in an incubator at 37°C and 100% humidity. Expression of various bone important genes was monitored by real-time RT-PCR. Micromotions and load were shown to affect the behavior of osteoblasts by down-regulating the expression of genes necessary for the creation of organic extracellular matrix (collagen type I) as well as for genes involved in the mineralization process (osteocalcin, osteonectin). The developed device could then be used to simulate different mechanical situations at the bone–implant interface.The presence of a fibrous tissue around orthopedic implants is associated with implant loosening as this tissue is unable to resist shear stress which occurs at the bone–implant interface ( Micromotions are important in the fate of tissue differentiation. Jasty et al., found that micromotions lower than Many experimental models have been developed to mechanically stimulate cells including osteoblasts. A recent review has classified the different developed devices in function of their loading modality ( A mechanical device was developed allowing micromotions to be performed between two surfaces ( MG-63 osteoblast-like cells (ATCC, Rockville, MD) were seeded on the well ( The cell viability was not affected by the different loading condition ( Micromotions at the bone–implant interface have been shown to play an important role in the outcome of orthopedic implants ( In the present study, the two contact surfaces were made of stainless steel, which does not match the clinical situation for a hip implant where material as stainless steel would be in contact with bone. The results obtained in this study are only an indication of possible effects produced by micromotions and load. The two surfaces have a flatness of When the cells were collected after The osteoblast is mainly a secreting cell producing large quantities of type I collagen, which contains two identical MG-63 cells have already been shown to be sensitive to mechanical stimuli. Stretching these cells for only The new device was developed to mimic the situation at the bone–implant interface and to quantify the corresponding cells reaction. Micromotions and load were shown to affect the behavior of osteoblasts by down-regulating the expression of genes necessary for the creation of organic extracellular matrix (collagen type I) as well as for genes involved in the mineralization process (osteocalcin, osteonectin). Lending evidence that the formation of fibrous tissue around orthopedic implants could be due to an osteoblast gene modulation induced by mechanical stimulation. This work was supported by Grant #309 from the Leenaards Foundation, and the manuscript was critically reviewed by Davey Smith, MD.