An industrial grinding-classification process of diasporic bauxite is modeled based on the integration of phenomenological and statistical learning methods. The breakage characteristics of the ore and running status of the whole process are first investigated by laboratory testing and process sampling, respectively. Based on the population balance model (PBM) framework, the breakage distribution function is estimated from laboratory test data. The breakage rates are back-calculated directly from the industrial data, where a nonlinear breakage rate function is proposed for coarse particles. They are then correlated to the operating variables (including the water flow rate and feed flow rate), ball characteristics and material properties using the least squares support vector machine (LSSVM) method so that the model is suitable to various grinding conditions. Material transportation through the mill was treated as two equal smaller fully mixed reactors followed by a large one. The particle size distribution (PSD) of the mill product is then predicted by sequentially solving the reactors in series, considering the nonlinear breakage kinetics. A spiral classifier model is obtained with the Rosin–Rammer curve, where the bypass, real classification effect and operating conditions are included. The simulation results of the whole process by using the sequential module approach (SMA) demonstrate reasonable agreement between the predicted and measured industrial process data. The models are finally applied to the process for the prediction of particle size indices and to provide valuable information for the operation and further optimization of the process.Grinding is a common size reduction process in mineral processing, the pharmaceutical and cement industries, and other fields. In mineral processing, it is usually followed by a classification process to produce a slurry with a desired particle size and solid concentration for flotation. The performance of the grinding-classification process plays a determinative role on the financial and technical indices of the whole mineral processing plant. Diasporic bauxite is the main raw ore for alumina production in China, where a large percentage of the world's alumina is produced. Due to the low grade of the ores, mineral processing, which is a potential method of using high silica bauxite The population balance model (PBM) introduced by Refs. PBM can also be combined with other methods to integrate the advantages of different methods. A combination of PBM with the discrete element method (DEM) is popular, where DEM is used to simulate different types of breakage, such as impact breakage and abrasion/chipping breakage Models using solely data-based methods, such as neural networks, support vector regression, or fuzzy inference, have also been developed for soft sensing the particle size indices in the grinding-classification process [e.g., One key problem in predicting the particle size distribution is the lack of knowledge of the breakage rate of the material being ground. The properties of different materials are different, and each grinding-classification process also has its own features. For an industrial continuous grinding process, it is especially difficult to obtain accurate prediction values due to the complicated running conditions. Therefore, much work has been conducted to develop a ball mill model and a spiral classifier model for the processing of bauxite. In this work, we present a hybrid ball mill model and a spiral classifier model for the grinding-classification process of bauxite, where the material characteristics and operation conditions are all considered. The models are useful for particle size distribution (PSD) prediction, process simulation and further optimization. The work is organized as follows: In the next section, the process knowledge and sampling campaign are introduced. The laboratory test method and findings are provided in The industrial grinding-classification process consists of one ball mill and two spiral classifiers, as the schematic diagram shows in The ball mill has an inner diameter of 3.6 Diasporic ores excavated from several deposits are crushed and homogenized into heaps through a complex procedure and then used as the feed of the ball mill. The designed maximum size in the feed is 12 The maximum diameter of the two spiral classifiers is 3 Several sampling campaigns were carried out on the whole grinding-classification process to assess the mill-classifier operation and to collect data for modeling. It is difficult to keep the samples representative because of the high flow rates of some streams and the rapid coarse particle sinking. Therefore, each flow was sampled four times in 2 The sampling campaign was carried out twice a day, and 30 groups of data were finally obtained. The chemical compositions of all of the flows and each size interval of these flows were analyzed. When the sampling campaign was started, the balls were used for a long period of time so that their make-up was not clear. Therefore, the ball distribution and the ball load were sampled and estimated when the ball mill was stopped after the sampling campaign. Data reconciliation was then conducted using the commercial package Bilmat® to minimize the sampling and analysis errors and estimate the immeasurable slurry flow rates. The adjusted data were then used to investigate the process performance and perform the modeling work. The process data show a large fluctuation of the grinding-classification circuit. The maximum and minimum circulating loads are 142.2% and 495.1%, respectively, in all of the samples. The process indices of the greatest significance (including the − In the fresh feed, the grade (i.e., A/S, which is the ratio of the contents of Al Among all of the flows, the A/S of underflow 1 is the highest. The A/S of underflow 2 is not stable. The A/S of the coarsest and finest size intervals are both very low. As such, with the decrease of the grade of the fresh ore, the grade of underflow 2, which is taken as the concentrate, becomes unqualified more and more frequently. Therefore, the optimization of the process is extremely urgent. Wet grinding tests of diasporic ores were performed in a laboratory ball mill to investigate the grindability of the ores and to estimate their breakage distribution parameters. The ball mill has a 240-mm diameter and 300-mm length. Cast steel balls with diameters of 32, 22, and 19 Diasporic ores collected from several heaps of the feed to the industrial ball mill were tested. The reproducibility of the tests was first confirmed, as illustrated in The size-discrete, time continuous PBM for batch grinding is Usually, the breakage distribution function is presented in cumulative form as In batch grinding, if the breakage rate is constant, the breakage rate of the top-size interval can be calculated as follows From the mono-sized grinding data, it is found that the fine and the coarse fractions of the tested ores follow non-first order breakage and the deceleration rates of the breakage are non-uniform for different size intervals, as shown in The obtained breakage distribution is plotted in For the continuous ball milling process, the breakage rate, breakage distribution and RTD of materials in the mill are the three main parts of the PBM. The model framework can be found in The details of obtaining the RTD model and the breakage rate parameters are as follows. The RTD function describes the transport of materials through the mill, which is a significant factor that affects the fineness of the product. Based on radioactive tracing studies, several RTD models have been proposed, which can be found in Refs. The overall mean residence time can be calculated as follows When the mill is running at a certain speed, From the measured data, Let According to the measured values of RTD, γ varies with the geometry of the mill (L/D for ball mill), feed flow rate, slurry concentration in the mill and mill speed The ball mill model is then solved for one mixer by another. That is, the product size distribution of the first mixer is calculated first and then used as the feed of the second mixer, and so on. For the The breakage rate function is dependent on many factors, including the ore properties, slurry concentration, and media characteristics  It is difficult to determine whether the diasporic ore follows first-order or non-first order breakage in the industrial ball mill. However, the heterogeneity of the ore is the most probable reason for non-first order behavior in the laboratory test Then, the breakage rate is modeled as follows According to the test results for the size intervals −  The reconciled process data were used in groups to estimate the breakage rate parameters. As Investigation of the ball milling processes of quartz, hematite, and other minerals demonstrated that The modeling process using the LSSVM method is simply described as follows. In the SVM method, for a given training sample set ( According to the principle of structural risk minimization, the regression problem in Eq. Solve this optimization problem by using the Lagrange multiplier method, the optimal The kernel function is important to the performance of SVM models. The common kernel functions for nonlinear problems are RBF, polynomial, multi-layer perceptron, and sigmoid. Thus far, no analytical or empirical study has conclusively established the superiority of one kernel over another; thus, the kernel is usually selected by experiment or experience. For different applications, different kernels have been found to be the most suitable, or sometimes several kernels show almost identical performance [e.g., Using the back-calculated breakage rates and the corresponding operating conditions, the model was developed mainly based on the MATLAB LS-SVM toolbox The performance of the classification process is usually evaluated by an efficiency curve showing the mass fraction of a particular size interval where The separation process is inherently complex and strongly nonlinear. Furthermore, the feed of classifier 1 contains a wide size range of particles, which makes it even more complex to describe using simple relationships. To characterize the feed size distribution, it is expressed as follows where The LSSVM method, as described in where the kernel and the penalizing parameters are For classifier 2, because the feed contains mainly fine particles so that it cannot accurately be described by using In this section, the off-line simulation results of individual unit models and the whole process and the application results of PSD index measurement are shown to illustrate the effectiveness of the models. Firstly, In all of the 30 groups of data collected by the full-scale process sampling campaign described in The ball mill model and the classifier models are first individually used and then put in series as the actual process to predict the PSD of the ball mill discharge and the overflow and underflow of the classifiers. The statistics of the simulation results for the individual models are given in where The unit models are then built in series to simulate the whole grinding-classification process by using the SMA. The convergence criterion is to iteratively minimize the simulated and set values of the size distribution of underflow 1. If the criterion cannot be satisfied, the set values will be replaced by the simulated values and re-calculated. The best and the worst simulated mill discharge size distributions with the corresponding classification efficiencies for the two classifiers are plotted in As the validation results of the unit models shown in Both in For the ball mill, one group of the simulation results is quite poor, as shown in The model precision becomes higher from the ball mill to classifier 2. The simulation results for classifier 2 are always of high accuracy because its feed has a narrow size range with mainly fine particles. The predicted size fractions of − The proposed models are then applied to the process for the measurement of the PSD indices. Some of the running results are shown here. Considering that the sieving work is time-consuming, only size intervals + The prediction error distribution is shown in Fortunately, the precision is acceptable in the real application because the mass fraction of − Mineral processing of bauxite is significant for the sustainable development of aluminate production in China. Hybrid models using the phenomenological and statistical learning methods are developed for the ball milling and spiral classification processes of bauxite based on a large amount of test and industrial running data. Operating conditions, ore properties and ball characteristics are considered in the models so that they are adaptable to variations in the running conditions. The simulation results using the individual unit models and the SMA both show reasonable accuracy. Notably, in more than 80% of the cases, it can be determined whether the subscribed mass fraction in the product is achieved or not using the prediction results, although the quantitative accuracy still needs to be improved, which is significant to the process operation. Optimization is being conducted to improve the performance of the grinding-classification process based on the developed models. The authors are grateful to the workers in Zhongzhou Branch, China Aluminum Corporation and the other members of the project for their support of the experiments and the plant sampling campaigns. The authors acknowledge the financial support from the