Knowledge of pore pressure is essential for cost-effective, safe well planning and efficient reservoir modeling. Pore pressure prediction has an important application in proper selection of the casing points and a reliable mud weight. In addition, using cost-effective methods of pore pressure prediction, which give extensive and continuous range of data, is much affordable than direct measuring of pore pressure. The main objective of this project is to determine the pore pressure using well log data in one of the Iranian gas fields. To obtain this goal, the formation pore pressure is predicted from well logging data by applying three different methods including the Eaton, the Bowers and the compressibility methods. Our results show that the best correlation with the measured pressure data is achieved by the modified Eaton method with Eaton׳s exponent of about 0.5. Finally, in order to generate the 3D pore pressure model, well-log-based estimated pore pressures from the Eaton method is upscaled and distributed throughout the 3D structural grid using a geostatistical approach. The 3D pore pressure model shows good agreement with the well-log-based estimated pore pressure and also the measured pressure obtained from Modular formation Dynamics Tester.Formation pore pressure is traditionally estimated based on well log analysis in combination with Terzaghi׳s hypothesis, which describes the compaction of the soil due to overburden stress. The pore pressure, which is the pressure of the fluid inside the pore space of the formation, is defined with several aspects of the pressure terminologies contains: Pore pressure, based on the magnitude, can be described as being either normal (hydrostatic) or abnormal (overpressure or under pressure). Overpressure can lead to several problems such as kicks, blowouts, wellbore instability, hole washouts and loss of drilling mud circulation. Therefore, accurate pore pressure prediction is necessary for a safe and economic drilling. Stress related mechanisms Disequilibrium compaction Tectonic stress Fluid volume increase mechanisms Temperature increase Water release due to mineral transformation Hydrocarbon generation Cracking of oil to gas Gas expansion with uplift Fluid movement and buoyancy mechanisms Hydraulic head Osmosis Buoyancy due to density contrasts Lateral transfer All of these mechanisms are effective when they occur faster than the formation ability to expel the excess pressure. The compaction disequilibrium is one of the main mechanisms in creating large magnitude overpressure. During the deposition, the overburden pressure makes compaction on underlying sediments and causes fluid to expel. However, if pore fluid is not expelled fast enough to reach hydrostatic pressure, the pore fluid pressure increases. When the rate of sedimentation in a basin is low, the underlying sediments will be able to compact and dewater in a normal way and it reaches hydrostatic pressure equilibrium. However, high sedimentation rates prevent sediments from dewatering, so the compaction rate decreases and pore space preserve with overpressure. So far, several works have been done in pore pressure prediction using well logs and seismic data, resulting in some empirical formula for estimation of pore pressure. The first study on the pore pressure prediction was made by In 1975, Eaton proposed an empirical equation to quantify the pore pressure using well log data such as sonic transient time, formation resistivity or dc-exponent. He considered the disequilibrium compaction as the main mechanism of overpressure generation. This method was based on the first prediction approach by Hottman and Johnson. Both methods rely on this assumption that overburden pressure is supported by pore pressure and vertical effective stress, as shown in Terzaghi׳s equation. According to Eq. Like Eaton׳s method, In disequilibrium compaction conditions, Bowers used an empirically determined method to calculate the effective pressure with the following relationship between the effective stress and sonic velocity: In basins with the mechanism of unloading, This method uses rock compressibility to calculate the pore pressure. Pore pressure depends on pore volume changes. Any change in pore space is a function of rock and fluid compressibility. In general, when the formation is under compression, pore space reduces and it causes an overpressure on fluid pressure. Hence, compressibility is used as a parameter to determine the pore pressure.  The study gas field is located in Persian Gulf Basin, South Iran. The first exploration well was drilled in 1990, encountered gas reservoir in the Kangan–Dalan formations. The Kangan Formation and the Upper Dalan member collectively host the gas reservoir in this field. These formations are composed of a sequence including shale, anhydrite, dolomite, and limestone. In Arabian nomenclature, the Kangan and Dalan formations together are known as the Khuff Formation. Khuff Formation is divided into five layers, K1–K5. K1 plus K2 is equivalent to the Kangan and K3 plus K4 is equivalent to the Upper Dalan formation. In the studied field, K5 is assumed as non-reservoir and put out of the field. The data from 10 wells ( The aim of this study is to evaluate and model pore pressure within the productive reservoir. Here, the Eaton, the Bower and compressibility methods, with modifications as in an unconventional field with complex geology, are applied to predict pore pressure. Finally, the best obtained result of these methods is used to build the 3D pore pressure model in the field. In pore pressure prediction, the Eaton method is the most common one. As the velocity at the surface is about 1500–1800 Substituting Eq. According to the overall studies in Middle East, especially in Iran, the gradient of normal hydrostatic pressure gradient Using a number of points with measured pressure and well-log data, the mean exponent constant, Hydrocarbon buoyancy may cause an increase in pressure due to the difference in pressure gradient between gas, oil and formation water. As shown in An inclined aquifer with enough permeability can redistribute the excess pore pressure laterally in the subsurface. Transference along such inclined aquifers can make an increase in pore pressure at the crest of structure ( Bowers proposed an idea of obtaining effective vertical stress to calculate the pore pressure, which is the difference between overburden pressure and effective stress. By calculating the parameters of Bowers’ equation (A and B) and knowledge of rock velocity, the effective pressure can be determined as Bowers’ equation can be calibrated at well points with measured pressure, density and velocity values. The overburden pressure is calculated from Eq. Calibrated Bowers’ equation and sonic well log are used to generate effective pressure at each well. Then, the pore pressure is estimated using obtained effective pressure and Terzaghi׳s equation. Finally, the buoyancy and lateral transfer effects are considered as explained in Eaton׳s method. The result of estimated pore pressure and its corrections are shown in Any change in pore space is a function of rock and fluid compressibility. When a formation is placed under compaction, the pore spaces reduce and pore fluid pressure increases as a result. Therefore, compressibility is used as a parameter to determine the pressure.  Since the pore compressibility is calculated from special core analysis (SCAL) and due to keeping the test in constant pore pressure, the determined pore compressibility is In the above equation, the term By adding an exponential constant to this equation to correlate it for different geological fields, the modified equation in pore pressure calculation by Atashbari can be expressed in the following form: In order to calculate pore compressibility, Since the fractional Effective porosity log is available only in two wells in the study area. Therefore, the petrophysical logs are used to estimate the effective porosity in other wells. One of the challenges in geoscience is to find the complex relationship between petrophysical logs and cores or other well-log data. Back-propagation is an effective method to solve these complex relations. BP is a training technique where input vectors and the corresponding target vectors are used to train a network. Then the difference between calculated output and desired target in the training set is computed and propagated backward by adjusting the weights. The Levenberge–Marquardt (LM) back-propagation algorithm in MATLAB Neural Network Tool is used for training the neural network in this study. For this propose a two-layer feed-forward network with sigmoid hidden neurons and linear output neuron is applied. The input layer has 3 neurons corresponding to sonic transient time, density and neutron porosity logs. The hidden layer has 20 neurons and the output layer has 1 neuron for effective porosity data. The two available effective porosity logs of total 5700 samples are used for training (70%), validation (15%) and testing (15%). It can be clearly seen from The effective porosity is predicted by the trained neural network and used to calculate the core porosity. The estimated core porosity is used in pore volume compressibility calculation from Eq. In order to select the best pore pressure prediction method, a comparison between these three methods applied is shown in In order to create the 3D pore pressure model, the structural framework, vertical layering and petrophysical analysis are utilized to model the estimated pore pressure. The 3D structural framework is constrained first by defining the boundary to mark the lateral extent of the model. The boundary has a triangular shape with respect to the well locations distribution. It should be noted that the area of study is about 57×58.5 This process involves making horizons, zonation and layering. Horizons are defined from geological data including underground contour maps and well tops. In the zonation process, an interval is inserted between each horizon by introducing isochore thickness data. The final step in vertical layering of the structural model is to define the layers between the horizons in order to make a finer resolution of the 3D grid. The layers are defined based on the lithological changes, which are detected from gamma-ray and sonic logs. Estimated pore pressure data from Eaton׳s method is treated as a property, upscaled to the resolution of the cells in the 3D structural grid in order to distribute the property values for each cell. Before modeling the distribution of the pore pressure, a variographic analysis is performed by the upscaled pore pressure data to determine the layer thickness and direction of anisotropy. Finally, the pore pressure model is generated based on the Sequential Gaussian Simulation method considering the variogram model. The estimated pore pressure model is shown in The predicted pressure values from the model (solid line) are in good agreement with the predicted pore pressure from well logs data ( The cross-correlation between the predicted pore pressure from the model and upscale predicted pore pressure from well logs is shown in In order to predict the pore pressure, common well log data are used along with measured pressure test (MDT) and some geological analysis reports. The results of this study are listed below. Pore pressure prediction and modeling based on conventional well logs provide acceptable results in the studied carbonate formation. Analyzing results of three different methods for estimating pore pressure indicate that Eaton and compressibility methods provide better correlations with the measured pressure data compared to the Bowers method. The Eaton method with an exponent coefficient of 0.5 gives the best correlation with MDT measured pressure. The predicted pressure from the compressibility method also shows good agreement with MDT measured pressure; however, these results have been affected negatively by lack of enough core data to obtain pore volume compressibility. Accordingly, the Eaton method is selected for the 3D pore pressure modeling. Validation of the 3D pore pressure reveals that the pressure estimation is reliable (with more than 89% accuracy) and also it is in good agreement with the measured pressure data at the well location. Using a 3D pore pressure model, we can image the pressure profile throughout the surrounding area with limited data and provide a safe well planning. Also, the results obtained in this study can be considered as a useful tool to replace the formation pressure test for wells in which no measured test data are available. The authors gratefully acknowledge the Pars Oil and Gas Company (POGC) of Iran for their permission to publish this paper and for their provision of software and dataset.   By assuming the infinitesimally small and equal size of increments of all independent variables (pore pressure and confining pressure), the differentiation could result in Bulk frame and pore compressibilities are accountable from special core analysis (SCAL), but since the test is taken by keeping pore pressure as constant, the term in denominator ( Adding an exponential constant to this equation to correlate it for different geological fields, he proposed the following equation to predict the pore pressure using compressibility: