This chapter presents methods for particle size measurements for a better understanding of the physical properties of food powders. Standard methods of defining the size and shape of irregular particles are described together with ways of handling particle size data. Practical aspects of measuring particle size distributions are covered including how powders should be sampled for particle size analysis. The many techniques available for particle size analysis are described by grouping in three types: (1) direct methods, (2) methods based on classification, (3) methods based on secondary measurements. Finally the advantages of in-line continuous measurements for process investigation are described.  Particle size analysis is the necessary prerequisite to any understanding of powder properties, but this affirmation must be accompanied by a reflection on what it means to measure particle size, shape and distribution: What is the size of a powder particle? What is the shape of a powder particle? As it is not practical to measure each individual particle in a given powder (a teaspoonful of sugar comprises about 1 million particles), how can we best determine the distribution of particle sizes in a powder, and how should we present the results? The answers to these questions are all the more important as different particle size analysis techniques can give values for particle size for the same powder which may differ by 100% or even 1000% depending on the method used and the way of presenting the data, which can obviously lead to confusion when evaluating results. To obtain meaningful information on the particle size of a powder, the methods should be used according to the standards, conventions and established practice of particle size analysis. Following the established standard methods gives validity and generality to particle analysis allowing comparisons between measurements on different powders in different situations. The size of an irregular particle is taken to be the diameter of the sphere which has the same property as the irregular particle, whether volume, projected perimeter, surface area, etc. This means that several different equivalent spheres can represent a given irregular particle depending on the property considered. For example, consider a cubic particle of side length 1 unit. The volume of the cube is 1 unit In practice the instrument used for particle size analysis defines the equivalent spherical diameter used. Laser diffraction instruments based on Mie theory give results in terms of particle volume. Particle counters with light obscuration detectors give results in terms of projected area. Permeability methods give results in terms of surface/volume diameters. Another special spherical equivalent, used in studies of fine airborne particles, is the ‘aerodynamic diameter’ of an irregular particle. This is defined as the diameter of the sphere of unit solid density that has the same sedimentation velocity as measured for the real irregular particle. Such a definition is useful because it is not normally practical to obtain information on the real solid density of fine airborne particles. As a consequence it is perfectly normal for the particle size of a given powder to differ considerably when measured by different techniques. In the simple case given above for cubic particles, the measured sizes can differ by up to 38%. For more exaggerated shapes such as fibres or flakes the difference can be much greater. It will be shown later that comparing particle sizes of a given powder determined by different techniques can give information on the shape of the particles. The sphere equivalent diameter gives a simple and clear definition of the size of an irregular particle, but it has the disadvantage ofineglecting the shape of the particles, which can have a big influence on powder properties. For example rounded particles will generally flow better and pack more tightly than angular particles. Particle with exaggerated shapes such as fibres, flakes and platelets will also tend to have very different bulk properties. Particle shape can be directly accessed only by microscope observation and modern techniques using image analysis for this will be described later. However a numerical value related to particle shape can be obtained by taking ratios of dimensions. A fibre can be characterised by the ratio of fibre length to fibre diameter, a flake can be characterised by particle thickness to surface area, etc. This notion of describing shape by a ratio of two measurements can be generalised by using two different sphere equivalents. One example is the circularity of a particle defined in terms of the sphere equivalent diameter in volume and in sphere equivalent diameter in surface area. Measuring all the particles in a given sample to a given degree of precision (say one decimal place in micrometres) would lead to unmanageable amounts of data. In practice the size range ( An example of particle size distribution in sizes classes is given in In this specific example the ‘quantity’ of particles in each size class is the number of particles in each size class expressed as a percentage. However it should be remembered that the ‘quantity’ of particles in a size class can be given by other values, for example the mass or volume of particles in each class, the surface area in each class, etc. These aspects will be detailed later. In  Particle size distributions in the tabular form given above do not allow an easy appreciation of the characteristics of a powder. Consequently results are often presented as graphs to give a visual appreciation of the results. Three types of graph are commonly used: histograms, cumulative distribution curves and frequency distribution curves. The natural way to present tabular data is in the form of histograms with the size of each bar to represent the amount of particles in each size class and the width of the bar to represent the class width. For size classes in geometric progression a log scale for particle size has the advantage of giving a constant bar width, as shown in A more pertinent way of presenting the data is as a cumulative distribution curve which eliminates the apparent imprecision of putting particle size data into relatively wide particle size classes. The data of As indicated above the cumulative distribution is a continuous curve with precise values of quantities of particles as a function of precise values of particles size. This means that true frequency distributions can be obtained by differentiating the cumulative curve  It should be remembered that graphical representations of particle size distribution are not just a way of stocking data but the presentation should Complete particle size distribution data is unwieldy for a rapid appreciation of a given powder, especially for comparing different powders one with another. This is best done by numerical values to represent the data by mean particle sizes, or the spread of the distribution, or representative values of the distributions, called quantiles. As indicated above the particle size distribution of a given powder can be represented by several different quantities, for example as a function of the number of particles in each size class ( Quantiles are values read off particle size distribution curves. The mode of the distribution The mean particle size of a powder is the arithmetic mean of the distribution, whether number, surface or mass distributions. However, these three different distributions are related. The surface area in a class is proportional to the number of particles in the class times the square of the mean size of the class. The mass of particles in a class is proportional to the number in the class times the cube of the mean size of the class. This is shown in The danger of transforming number data into surface or mass data (or the inverse) by multiplying by the square or the cube of particle size is clearly illustrated in this table. Considering the largest size class, which contains only 1% of the total number of particles measured. If we had made measurements on say 10 000 particles we would have counted only 100 particles in this class. However by the diameter cubed relation this class contains 52.4% of the particles by weight, that is the 100 particles counted out of the 10 000 represent half of the total weight of the powder. Any error in the number measurement will bring an extremely large error in the mass measurement. Generally speaking the transformation of number data into mass data, and vice versa is not recommended, especially as here when only a few size classes are used. Nevertheless the values in The values in It can be seen that for a same powder the mean particle size can go from 1 to 3, to 5 times depending on the type of distribution considered. This observation can be generalised by noting that This latter expression The conventional mathematical way of quantifying the spread of a distribution is by the variance Here Other commonly used indices for quantifying the spread of a distribution are the span or the uniformity defined as: The best way to summarise the above on how to describe particle size distributions is by looking at the report sheet of a modern particle size measurement instrument shown in This section discusses several practical aspects of making particle size measurements. One of the reasons we are interested in particle size analysis is that practically all the properties of a powder depend on particle size and distribution. This also means that the particle size distribution could be inferred from measurements of practically any set of powder properties leading to a wide range of methods and instruments for particle size analysis. Over the years, thousands of different methods and instruments have been proposed for determining particle size and distribution, and many hundreds of instruments have been put on the market. To better understand the different techniques they can be grouped in three types by method of similar characteristics, similar advantages and similar disadvantages. In these methods each particle is examined individually and put into its appropriate class. These methods have the advantage of having a clear definition of what is measured, but care is required in sampling to obtain the required statistical validity of the results. The obvious direct method is particle counting under a microscope, but there are several other direct measurement techniques.  These methods involve measurements of some property of the powder which depends on particle size. The property used is chosen for the rapidity and ease of measurement so as to give rapid overall determination of the particle size and distribution. The validity of the methods depends on the quality of the physical model linking the property measured to the particle size and distribution. The best example of a secondary method is laser diffraction where instruments measure the light diffraction pattern of a dispersion of powder and Mie theory is used to calculate the particle size distribution. Instruments based on secondary measurements offer rapid results and are easily interfaced with computed data treatment but the essential validity is that of the applicability of the physical model to the powder being examined. Whatever method used for particle size analysis it is necessary to work with samples that are representative of the particle system to be studied, here called the ‘Lot’ ( The primary sample must be representative of the whole Lot to be analysed which implies two things: that the primary sample be formed by a certain number of sub-samples taken from different geometrical points in the Lot, or at a certain number different times during the period to be studied. For example to characterise the contents of a lorry carrying sacks of powder a certain number of different sacks should be sampled. To characterize a day’s production of a plant, samples should be taken at different times during the day. Rather than taking random samples at different points in a Lot it is best to make the Lot flow and take samples randomly over time. For example it is best to take samples from the outflow from a lorry as it is being emptied, rather than taking probe samples in the static bulk powder. In this case it is important to take samples over the whole section of a flowing stream so as not to introduce bias caused by flow segregation. Sampling a flowing stream converts a three-dimensional (3-D) space randomisation into a one-dimensional (1-D) time randomisation, giving a more valid characterisation of the Lot than sampling in the bulk by thief probes. Such probes have the additional disadvantage of disturbing the structure of the Lot and tend to introduce bias by preferring free flowing fine particles over more cohesive or large particles. The primary sample should therefore be made up of a certain number of sub-samples to ensure that all the parts of the Lot are included in the primary sample. This can entail a lot of work but, whereas it is probably not sufficient to take only three sub-samples, to take more than 50 is probably an exaggeration. As a rule of thumb the primary sample will probably be adequate if it is composed of the order of ten sub-samples taken at random. The primary sample must be big enough to contain representative amounts of each size fraction of the powder to be analysed. Strictly this is a number criterion and not a weight criterion. For example a 100  The second step in the sampling chain is to divide the primary sample into sub-samples sufficiently small for direct introduction into the particle size analysis instrument to be used. For example, about 1 A particle size analysis result is only as valid as the sample used in the measurements. It is therefore worth spending some money on sampling equipment to complement the relatively heavy investment in a particle size analysis instrument. The direct method par excellence for measuring particle size is by counting individual particles under a microscope. Laborious manual microscope counting has now been abandoned and the method has had a regain in interest due to the ready availability of computer image analysis techniques used in several dedicated particle size analysis instruments which are now on the market. The technique of direct microscope particle size analysis is simple: each particle is observed, the size of its image is measured, and the particle is registered in the appropriate size class by computer. However modern image analysis allows a great many different measurements to be made on a given particle, and allows measurements to be made on a great number of individual particles. The most direct measurement is the projected area of the particle given by the number of pixels ( Microscope counting is the most direct method for determining particle shape. There are many different ways of doing this but the simplest are those based on the ratio of two size measurements on each particle. Several ways can be imagined, here are two examples: More sophisticated morphological measurements are also available ( Particle counting by image analysis has the advantages of all direct methods of particle size analysis in that there is a clear definition of what is measured. The disadvantages are that great care must be taken in sampling and making sure that the particles counted are representative of the whole sample and without bias. The sample should be well dispersed with few touching particles and enough particles in each view. In particular it should be remembered that particles deposited on a microscope slide are seen in two-dimensional (2D) lying in a preferential orientation flat on the slide. To make sure of the validity of the results a sufficient number of particles should be counted. In modern image analysis systems this can be many tens of thousands of particles but this may not be much in terms of mass of a powder. Calibration is required and made by using certified standard graticules. There are several automated image analysis systems available having a microscope and camera system to observe particles on a glass slide. These usually have specific sample preparation systems for depositing the particles for visioning, and dedicated pre-programmed software to make measurements and produce results sheets. The nominal range of particle sizing by microscope systems is from about 3 Other systems involve visioning particles poured in front of an optical system with a video camera. The particles are observed in free-fall which alleviates the orientation problems with microscope slides. The nominal range is from 30 Another type of direct particle measurement, but which does not use actual imaging, is called Focused Beam Reflectance Measurements (FRBM) as shown schematically in Particle size determinations by image analysis give number distributions in terms of the essentially 2D particle size measurements selected from the many different sizes available to image analysis software. Electrozone particle counters, based on what is commonly called the Coulter principle, are another example of a direct method for particle size analysis. In these instruments the powder to be analysed is put in suspension in a beaker of an electrolyte solution with two electrodes. As shown in In this way particle size distribution can be determined in terms of the volume diameter of particles and the particle volume per class. In addition, as each individual particle is registered when passing through the sensing zone, a number distribution can also be determined. Electrozone particle size counters are the only instruments which can rigorously determine both volume and number distributions simultaneously. In addition, as a known volume of suspension is sucked through the aperture, the instrument can also determine the particle concentration by number and volume in the suspension. The concentration of the suspension should be low enough to reduce the risk of two or more particles passing through the electrozone at the same time. Such double particles will be seen as a single large particle. High concentrations lead therefore to results showing larger and less numerous particles. Measurements made with successive dilutions can be used to determine the practical concentration for measurements when the number count becomes constant. Instruments usually include an automatic statistical correction for coincidence counts based on the determined number concentration. The heart of an electrozone instrument is the glass tube with its calibrated hole, the size of which determines the range of measurement. A given size Commercial examples of electrozone particle size instruments include the Beckman-Coulter Multisizer 4 and the Micromeritics Elzone II. These instruments measure both number and volume distributions in terms of the volume (or mass) diameter of the particles. They also can be used to determine the number or volume concentrations of particles in suspension. Sieve analysis is the oldest technique for measuring particle size distributions but is still a standard laboratory operation and extremely useful in practice. The method is based on the availability of sieves with a range of aperture sizes. The standard laboratory version uses 200 Tables of standard sieve sizes can give the appearance of offering a precision of separation down to a micron or so, which is unjustified. Firstly, because woven wire sieves are an industrial product and subject to tolerances Powder to be analysed is put on the top sieve of a stack of 5 to 10 sieves in descending aperture size with a lid on top, a collecting pan at the bottom, and the stack shaken for up to about 30 Hand sieving can be used for more accurate work. Here a single sieve with lid and bottom pan is shaken, tapped and rotated by hand until there is no noticeable change in the pan weight. It is good practice to first separate the fines from the bulk using the sieve with the smallest aperture, then to separate the coarse particles using the sieve with the largest aperture. The remaining sieves are then used one by one in descending aperture size. In some circumstances it may be advantageous to use wet sieving by washing the powder through sieves. This is especially useful with very fine powders where particles tend to clump together, but subsequent caking after drying may bring more difficulties. Another technique is the air jet sieve apparatus sold by Alpine Hosokawa which is particularly useful for fine powders less than 50 It is possible to calibrate sieves and compare results with particle size analyses made by other methods ( Sieving produces particle size distributions on a mass basis as a function of the sieve size equivalent diameter, that is the size of sphere which just passes through the sieve aperture. For irregular particles this can be considered to be a selection by the smallest 2D profile. As large amounts of powder are used in sieving the technique can have a good statistical representativity. Particles in free-fall in a fluid attain a terminal velocity ( Stokes Law It is not practical to follow the sedimentation of individual particles and the technique used in most instruments, whether gravity or centrifugal sedimentation, is to follow the changes in particle concentration over time (  Gravitational sedimentation can be used for particle size analysis in the range 2 The method described above is directly used in the simple Andreasen pipette where samples are collected at different times by a pipette fixed at a given height in a glass vessel. The method is rigorous and traceable to primary quantities but quite labour intensive and requires waiting for up to 24 The range of validity of sedimentation particle size analysis can be extended to smaller particles down to 0.01 Particle size analysis by sedimentation gives the size of the equivalent spherical particle which sediments at the same rate as the irregular particle. This is called the Stokes diameter and expressed as a mass or volume distribution. It may be considered to give a good representation of the hydrodynamic properties of particles.  The rate of flow of a fluid through a porous medium, such as a packed powder, is described by Darcy’s law where the permeability The specific surface of Thus measurements of the rate of flow of fluid Automatic fixed flow rate permeability instruments are fully automated. The powder is packed automatically, all the parameters of the packed sample are determined by the instrument, and the calculations of specific surface and The factor Air permeability measurement gives the specific surface of a powder leading to the mean surface volume diameter Particle size analysis by laser diffraction has become the most widely used technique for determining the particle size distribution of powders. It is a secondary method because these instruments do not measure particle size distribution but measure the diffraction pattern formed by passing laser light through a dispersion of powder. The diffraction pattern is then treated by light scattering theory to calculate the particle size distribution which would have given that diffraction pattern. When using Mie theory the calculations require knowing optical parameters of light adsorption and light refraction of the powder. The method has found wide applications for both wet and dry dispersions of all types of powder. The rapidity and generality of the method has led to the development of many different instruments, both bench type of line systems and continuous on-line measurements for all types of powder.  Mie theory is a general theory for the interaction of light with a spherical homogeneous particle that takes into account backscattering, diffraction, refraction and light absorption of the light by the particles. If the index of light adsorption and the refractive index of the particles are known, then the theory allows calculation of the diffraction pattern resulting from a given particle size distribution. This is summarised in the matrix equation given below where the vector [ Practical solutions to the inversion problem involve suggesting partial solutions by specifying some known features of the particle size distribution. For example, bimodal, narrow distribution, etc. Instrument manufacturers provide means for making these choices and for the values of the optical parameters required for the calculations and facilitating practical measurements.  Laser diffraction particle size analysis based on Mie theory gives the diameter of the sphere which has the same diffraction pattern as the irregular particles in terms of the mass (or volume) distribution. As mentioned previously the key factors governing the physical properties of powders are the particle size and distribution. In industrial operations where powders are being made or transformed it has been found that continuous measurement of particle size gives invaluable information for maintaining product quality not easily available by sampling and off-line laboratory particle size analysis. Consider a process where a powder is being produced by grinding.  All these problems can be overcome by using continuous particle size analysis. For this reason the laser diffraction technique has been adapted by several instrument makers for continuous process measurements (Malvern Insitec, Sympatec and others). This can be done by shining a laser beam through a pipe carrying powder and detecting the diffraction pattern on the other side. The pipe could be a part of the process or alternatively a sample of powder can be continuously taken then blown through a measuring cell before re-introduction in the process. Other versions for sprays or free falling powders have the laser module and the diffraction module separated in space (Malvern Spraytec). These instruments can give a continuous output of various selected properties: Knowledge of the particle size distribution has become essential for characterising food powders and understanding their physical properties. This is attested by the many and varied instruments now available for particle size measurements. As described in the preceding sections of this chapter, different instruments measure different aspects of the size of a given particle and a judicious choice of method can reveal different aspects of a powder. However, in practice, the choice of particle sizing method is mainly made as a function of the ease and rapidity of its use. This is exemplified by the great success of laser diffraction methods, which offer many practical advantages over what may be considered to be more ‘direct’ methods. Automatisation and computerisation of more labour intensive methods will continue to resuscitate traditional particle size measurement methods. This has been the case for particle sizing by microscope counting where the incorporation of computer image analysis and data treatment has led to the development of several new instruments which are easy to use and even suitable for on-line particle counting. The measurement of the fluid permeability of a powder, while only giving a mean particle size, has always been recognized However more information could be obtained from particle size analyses, and it would seem that measurement possibilities have outstripped the possibilities of using the data. The normal practice when evaluating changes in a given powder, or differences between two powders, is to reduce a particle size distribution to a mean particle size, or a set of quantiles, or perhaps some measure of the spread of the distribution. It is not presently feasible to use the whole detail of a particle size distribution to describe or analyse a powder, or the performance of a powder process. One counter example is in comminution where breakage and selectivity matrices are used to examine the detailed action of grinding processes. Perhaps in the future the ready availability of particle size distribution measurements will promote a greater reflexion on what the detailed shape of a distribution really means for powder properties. It has been mentioned that a better appreciation of the properties of a powder can be made by a comparison of the number distribution and the mass (or volume) distribution. But more generally it would be interesting to establish how the properties of a given powder depend on the relative amounts of fines, coarse particles, and how these relate to the mean particle size of a powder. For example where the fine particles are ten times smaller than the coarse particles it only requires about 25% of fines to completely swamp the presence of the coarse particles. On the other hand for the coarse particles to dominate the overall properties they have to make up more that 70% of the powder. This approach could be considered as a sort of ‘de-formulation’ of a powder into its components so as to characterise the overall physical properties of the powder.