Objective
                  The aim of this study was to investigate the in vitro osteogenic activity of EGF in association with bone morphogenetic proteins BMP2 and BMP7.
               
                  Methods
                  SaOS-2 (osteoblast-like cell line from human osteosarcoma) were cultured in the presence of EGF and BMPs for various culture periods to assess (a) cell proliferation by MTT assay, (b) Runx2, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and osteocalcin (OC) mRNA expression using quantitative RT-PCR and ELISA, and (c) bone tissue mineralization using Alizarin Red staining.
               
                  Results
                  EGF alone was able to stimulate osteoblast growth in a time-dependent manner. When mixed with BMP2, BMP7, and their combination, EGF greatly promoted osteoblast growth, compared to the BMP- and EGF-stimulated cells, suggesting a possible synergistic effect between EGF and BMPs on osteoblast growth. Stimulation with EGF, EGF/BMP2, and EGF/BMP2/BMP7 for 7 days upregulated Runx2 mRNA expression by the osteoblasts. EGF downregulated ALP mRNA expression, which was recovered when the BMP2/BMP7 combination was added to the osteoblast culture. Tested on OC mRNA expression, EGF had no effect and inhibited the enhancing effect of BMP2 and BMP7 on osteocalcin expression. The bone mineralization assay showed that EGF reduced both the number and size of the bone nodules. This reducing effect was observable even in the presence of BMP2 and BMP7.
               
                  Conclusion
                  This study demonstrated that EGF may act in the early phase to promote osteoblast growth and specific marker expression rather than the late phase involving cell differentiation/mineralization.Reconstruction of craniofacial bone defects resulting from trauma or as a treatment for disease is an extremely challenging medical task. Despite the many clinical bone replacement approaches using a vast array of materials ranging from alloplastic materials to autogenous bone grafts, the ideal bone tissue for clinical applications is yet to be found. To overcome the limitations of current clinical procedures, bone-based tissue engineering Engineering bone tissue using osteoblasts can be achieved using natural or artificial scaffolds and various growth factors such as bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs). More than 20 types of BMPs have been recognized, but only BMP2, BMP4, BMP6, BMP7, and BMP9 have been shown to display significant osteogenic properties. BMPs are capable of inducing the formation of bone tissue in ectopic sites and in critical-sized bone defects in several animal models. Several studies have shown that BMP2 induces many of the events necessary for both intramembranous and endochondrial ossification as well as for bone formation. EGF is a key molecule in the regulation of cell growth and differentiation. Human EGF contains 53 amino acid residues and three intramolecular disulfide bonds. EGF receptors decrease when cells differentiate into cell types capable of forming mineralized tissue, which suggests that these receptors may participate in the phenotype stabilization of periodontal ligament cells. SaOS-2 (osteoblast-like cell line from human osteosarcoma) were subcultured in 75 To investigate the effect of EGF with and without BMPs on osteoblast growth, cells were seeded into 12-well plates at a density of 2 The osteoblasts were incubated in a humid atmosphere containing 5% CO To investigate the effect of EGF with and without BMPs on the expression of osteoblast-specific markers, osteoblasts were seeded into 12-well plates at a density of 2 Total cellular RNA content was extracted using the Illustra RNAspin Mini (GE Health Care UK Ltd., Buckingham, UK), while RNA concentration, purity, and quality were determined by means of the Experion system and RNA StdSens analysis kit according to the instructions provided by the manufacturer (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). RNA (1 In order to investigate the effect of EGF with and without BMPs on the secretion of osteocalcin by osteoblasts, cells were seeded into 12-well plates at a density of 2 The terminal differentiation of SaOS-2 cells was determined by tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase activity (TNAP) using osteoblast cell lysates. To do so, osteoblast cells were seeded into 12-well plates at a density of 2 We assessed the mineral formation of the osteoblasts under culture using Alizarin Red S (ARS) staining Experimental values are presented as means When used alone, EGF significantly enhanced osteoblast growth after 3 ( As the separate use of EGF, BMP2, and BMP7 promoted osteoblast growth, we also examined their combined effect on osteoblast proliferation. As shown in As EGF was shown to upregulate osteoblast growth, we proceeded to investigate the expression of the osteoblastic marker Runx2. The qRT-PCR revealed ( To confirm the effect of EGF on bone engineering, we examined a second marker, ALP. As shown in The presence of EGF in an osteoblast culture stimulated with BMP2 and/or BMP7 blocked the increase of ALP mRNA expression. However, EGF was not able to stop the upregulation of ALP mRNA expression obtained with BMP2/BMP7 stimulation ( Osteocalcin is a typical late osteoblast differentiation marker at the onset of mineralization, therefore we investigated osteocalcin mRNA expression following EGF stimulation. As shown in Growth factors are known to affect osteoblast proliferation, differentiation, and mineralization. In this context, we investigated the effect of EGF on bone mineralization The combination of EGF and BMPs resulted in EGF reducing the nodule formation, thereby suggesting its antagonistic effect on BMP2 and BMP7. To confirm these results, quantitative analyses were performed using a CPC assay. EGF reduced osteoblast mineralization and down regulated the mineralizing activities of BMP2 and BMP7 ( Growth factors such as BMPs play a key role in bone regeneration through growth and differentiation, In our study, we found that EGF alone significantly promoted osteoblast proliferation, while EGF combined with BMP2 and BMP7 significantly upregulated this proliferation. The effect of EGF on osteoblast growth may thus occur through specific receptors that are expressed by the osteoblasts. Indeed, it has been reported that EGF binds to the EGF receptor, member of the tyrosine kinase super-family, similar to the BMP receptor found on cellular membranes of epithelial origin. To further investigate the efficacy of EGF with or without BMPs on bone formation, we examined the bone-specific marker osteocalcin. This well-known bone marker is exclusively synthesized by mature osteoblasts and is an important regulator of bone development. Osteocalcin expression by osteoblasts is under the control of runt-related factor-2 (Runx2), Because EGF modulated the expression of osteocalcin and Runx2, we thus examined ALP activity and found that EGF alone slightly promoted ALP expression and activity, yet tended basically to reduce ALP activity at a later period (2 weeks) when combined with BMPs. EGF evoked a biphasic response on ALP gene expression, which must be further investigated to better understand the signal pathway involving EGF during osteogenesis. Our findings are in agreement with others showing a moderate increase of ALP mRNA levels at the early stimulation period followed by a gradual decrease over subsequent weeks in human bone marrow stromal cells (BMSC). Mineralization is the final phase in the bone formation process. This occurs through calcification at nucleation sites and nodules. These are believed to accumulate Ca In conclusion, we demonstrated that EGF, used either alone or in combination with BMP2 and BMP7, exerts a positive effect on osteoblast proliferation and protein (osteocalcin, Runx2, and ALP) expression and a negative effect on bone mineralization by inhibiting nodule formation. Additional studies will focus on the mechanisms underlying the bimodal phenomenon observed within the EGF signalling process in osteoblast proliferation/differentiation and not mineralization. This study was supported by an operating grant from the “   