In addition to the sharp growth of unconventional natural gas wells in the past decade, there are few hundred thousands of abandoned and orphaned wells across the world, potentially contributing to gas emissions. Failure in the barrier and sealing capabilities of the cement and casing are of factors playing role in these leakages. Squeeze job as a remedial treatment is performed to place cement slurry from the surface to the target points to seal narrow spaces behind the casing and/or perforations placed in the casing. In this study, a novel additive for the squeeze-cement is proposed by introducing surface-modified graphite nanoplatelets (GNPs) to carefully adjust rheology and mechanical properties of the prepared cement slurry to remediate some flaws in pre-existing cement sheaths. We seek for better penetration into narrow spaces behind the casing with appropriate thickening time, low fluid-loss, and high final strengths. The process of surface modification is very important to generate a homogeneous cement composite with superior mechanical properties. We develop a chemical method for the surface treatment of GNPs to alter their intrinsically hydrophobic properties to hydrophilic, making them compatible with the aqueous medium of cement. Details of surface modification approach and the concentration of surface-modified nanoparticles are tailored to achieve a desirable slurry for squeeze treatments following API RP 10B-2 (2013) procedures. We believe that these nanoparticles due to their 2D nanostructure not only improve cement movability, but also provide appropriate sealing in the target zones. To assess the performance of the prepared cement slurry to effectively seal narrow targets, narrow-slot tests with 120 microns thickness are conducted to show the supremacy of the proposed solution in sealing narrow spots. We also investigate the effect of adding a commercial superplasticizer on the properties of nanoengineered cement slurry to better resemble field practices. Results show that the presence of surface-modified GNPs provide cement slurry with low rheological properties, zero free fluid, low fluid-loss, and deep penetration which are promising for future field trials.Providing energy while meeting important environmental challenges continuously requires development of novel technologies to achieve better economics, enhanced safety, and low proliferation risk. Using the database gathered by the Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) in the US state of Pennsylvania, The most successful and economic way for remedial cement jobs is avoiding it by thorough planning, designing, and performing all completion operations. However, severe downhole conditions such as frequent pressure and temperature fluctuations can jeopardize the cement sheath integrity. These fluctuations can be especially intensified for the wells undergoing thermal shocks and hydraulic fracturing treatments ( Squeeze cementing is the process of placing cement slurry from surface to downhole to penetrate through narrow spaces behind the casing and/or perforations placed in the casing. Mainly, a squeeze job is conducted to repair a faulty primary cement job, to isolate formation intervals, to alter formation characteristics, and to finally repair some casing problems ( Traditionally, squeeze cement is composed of API class-A, G, and H cements in conjunction with fluid-loss control agents to minimize slurry dehydration. In 1980’s, micro-cements were also introduced for squeeze cementing jobs. The diameter of largest particles of this small-particle-size cement must be smaller than In this study, we investigate the appropriateness of the cement slurry composed of surface-modified graphite nanoplatelet (GNP) for the squeeze operations. To this end, experiments based on In this study, slurries were prepared using API class-G cement. GNPs with Carbon content greater than 95% and the specific surface area about Following GNP is composed of a few parallel graphene sheets bonded to each other, providing a planar geometry. GNPs, employed in this study, are characterized by the approximate lateral dimensions of The prerequisite to benefit the planar geometry of nanoparticles and their superior mechanical properties is their uniform dispersion within the cement matrix. Graphite nanoparticles are intrinsically hydrophobic, which makes them agglomerate and settle out of the aqueous media. Therefore, we first developed a chemical approach to change the surface properties of nanoplatelets from hydrophobic to hydrophilic. To this end, nanoparticles were introduced to a combination of sulfuric and nitric acids. Then, the process of surface modification was followed by acetone washing to remove organic compounds formed on the surface of nanoplatelets by oxidation. More details on the developed approach for the surface modification (acid functionalization) of nanoplatelets can be found in This section is devoted to the examination of the properties of the cement slurry composed of surface-modified GNPs. The API guidelines in Rheological properties of cement slurry reveal fluidic properties that affect solid settling, free water, and the friction pressures of slurry. To achieve a successful squeeze job, the cement slurry should penetrate into narrow gaps to fill the target zones behind the casing and seal off zones to meet isolation goals. The zonal isolation of underground formations is particularly vital to reduce the release of CO From the viewpoint of rheological properties, cement slurry is a non-Newtonian fluid which needs a certain threshold of shear stress to commence flow. The required amount of shear stress to put the slurry into motion is called yield stress, For the overall success of the squeeze operation, a cement slurry with low rheological properties and high-level of stability under downhole conditions is required. As mentioned earlier in the Introduction, We used coaxial cylindrical viscometer to measure the rheological properties of the prepared cement slurries. Tests were conducted on the cement slurry composed of Using data analysis, When the cement slurry is exposed to the formation, the aqueous phase of the slurry may escape into the formation due to the differential pressure between the slurry and formation. This fluid-loss can diverge the properties of cement from the original design by increasing density and viscosity of the slurry. Moreover, by squeezing water out of the cement slurry, its volume and thickening time decrease so that the slurry may become unpumpable. Insufficient fluid-loss control may result in failure of primary cementing. Fluid-loss control for the squeeze-cement is necessary to leave a pumpable cement that will strengthen and seal all voids/micro-annuli. These defects at the geological formation-cement-casing are pointed out as fragile points of leakages. Fluid-loss tests concerns dehydration during and immediately following cement jobs. According to Experimental results are tabulated in During the process of cement setting, water may separate from slurry and move upward. Since the capacity of upper layer to accommodate water is limited, thus, redundant water would be accumulated at the top of the slurry. This water separation and its upward movement may induce channels within the cement, which will jeopardize zonal isolation. In terms of squeeze-cement, the free water should be zero. For the measurement of free water, Thickening time determines the length of time which cement slurry remains pumpable under high-pressure high-temperature (HPHT) conditions in the downhole. This time is measured as the time at which the cement slurry reaches a consistency of We prepared cement slurries composed of An injection cell composed of a channel with the thickness of Water was first injected through the glass hole to soak the filter paper. Then, cement slurry was immediately injected into the channel, and the depth of penetration was measured. A comparison was made between the slurry including Concerns about the possible environmental risks from greenhouse gas emissions of couple hundred thousand of abandoned and orphaned wells across the world as well as challenges in geological carbon sequestration raise the need to novel preventive and remedial technologies. Having efficient and effective methodologies to seal leakage pathways in abandoned geological formation-cement-casing systems make it possible to use these available infrastructure for CO  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: