The performance of fungal biomass immobilized within a loofa sponge (FBILS) to remove heavy metal ions such as Pb(II), Cu(II) and Zn(II) from aqueous solution was tested as a new biosorbent system. FBILS was found to remove heavy metal ions efficiently from aqueous solution with selectivity in the order of Pb(II)>Cu(II)>Zn(II). The biosorption of metal ions by FBILS increased as the initial concentration of metal ions increased in the medium. Biosorption equilibrium was established by 60 min. The maximum heavy metal ions adsorbed was found to be 135.3, 102.8, 50.9 mg/g FBILS for Pb(II), Cu(II) and Zn(II), respectively. The maximum uptake of metal ions was obtained at pH 6.0. Temperature over the range 10–50 °C had no effect on the biosorption capacity of FBILS. The adsorption of all three metal ions followed the Langmuir isotherm. Competitive adsorption of Pb(II), Cu(II) and Zn(II) ions was also studied. FBILS was regenerated by washing with a 50 mM solution of HCl. The desorption efficiency was as high as 98%. The regenerated FBILS was found to be suitable for repeated use for five adsorption–desorption cycles without significant loss in adsorption capacity. The results suggest that FBILS can be used as a biosorbent for an efficient removal of heavy metal ions from aqueous solution.Heavy metals are discharged from various industries such as electroplating, metal finishing, textile, storage batteries, mining, ceramic and glass. Copper, zinc and lead are the common contaminants of wastewater from these industries. As they pose serious environmental problems and are dangerous to human health, considerable attention has been given to the methods for their removal from industrial wastewaters. The commonly used procedures for removing metal ions from wastewater include chemical precipitation, ion exchange, membrane separation, reverse osmosis, The search for alternative and innovative treatment techniques has focussed attention on the use of biological materials such as algae, fungi, yeast and bacteria for the removal and recovery technologies and has gained importance during recent years because of the better performance and low cost of these biological materials ( The white-rot basidiomycete, The loofa sponge was obtained on removing hard pericarp tissue of the ripened dried fruit of The immobilization of Standard stock solutions of Pb(II), Cu(II) and Zn(II) (1000 The biosorption capacity of FBILS and FFB (100 mg) was determined by contacting 100 ml metal solution of known concentration (10–500 mg The reusability of biosorbent is directly related to the application potential of biosorption technology. The same FBILS was reused in five biosorption–desorption cycles to determine its reusability. For this purpose, 100 mg of fungal biomass was contacted with 100 ml of 100 mg The desorption efficiency was calculated from the amount of metal ions adsorbed on the biosorbent and the final metal ion concentration in the adsorption medium using the following equation: Data presented are the mean values from three separate experiments. Statistical analysis of the data was carried out using the Duncan’s new multiple range test ( Initial biosorption tests for Cu(II), Zn(II) and Pb(II), using 100 mg Lower rates of metal uptake by FFB may be attributed to aggregation of fungal hyphal biomass in the form of pellets, thus reducing their exposed surface area for sorption and limiting the accessibility of metal ions to the binding sites for adsorption. Higher rate of metal ions uptake by FBILS as compared to FFB, on the other hand, is due to hypal immobilization along the surface of the fibrous thread, no clumping/pellet formation and the reticulated open network of loofa sponge, which together contribute to enhanced surface area and free access of metal ions to sorption sites. Increase in metal uptake by FBILS further indicates that no diffusional limitations are present, unlike other reported systems such as immobilization of a mixture of organisms from activated sludge in hydrogels where significant decrease in the rate of metal sorption occur ( The kinetic profiles of Pb(II), Cu(II) and Zn(II) biosorption by FBILS at various metal concentrations are shown in Solution pH has been identified as the most important variable governing metal adsorption in the biosorbent ( Results of metal sorption experiments carried out at different temperatures ranging from 10 to 50 °C are shown in Heavy metal ion biosorption capacities of FBILS are presented as a function of the initial concentration of Pb(II), Cu(II) and Zn(II) ions within the aqueous solution in Analysis of the equilibrium data is essential to develop an equation which precisely represents the results and which can be used for design purposes. Various isotherm models have been used for the equilibrium modelling of biosorption systems. The Langmuir model is one of the most widely used models to describe the biosorption process. The Langmuir isotherms assumes monolayer adsorption, and is presented by the following equation: For the determination of synergistic/antagonistic effect of cations present in the effluent metal solution, the biosorption of metal ions by FBILS in mixed-metal system was investigated. To test the binding of each metal ion in the presence of others, metal solutions containing either one metal alone (100 mg The regeneration of the biosorbent is likely to be a key factor in accessing the potential of the biosorbent for commercial application. The capacity of the FBILS to adsorb metal ions was determined by repeating the adsorption experiments in five consecutive cycles. HCl (50 mM) solution was used as a desorption agent. Higher than 97% desorption was obtained after five adsorption–desorption cycles ( The results demonstrate that loofa sponge is an effective immobilization carrier for the entrapment of fungal biomass to produce FBILS biosorbent and can be successfully used as a biosorbing agent for the removal of heavy metal ions from aqueous solution. Kinetics of Pb(II), Cu(II) and Zn(II) ions biosorption on the FBILS was found to be dependent on experimental conditions, particularly the medium pH and the initial concentration of the metal ions. The Langmuir adsorption model was used to represent the experimental data and equilibrium data fitted very well to the Langmuir isotherm model. The biosorption capacity of FBILS for single metal decreased in the order Pb One of the authors, M.I., thanks the Ministry of Science and Technology of Pakistan for the financial support provided through Postdoctoral Research Fellowship Program.