For a widely used combination of the functional forms for describing the size dependence of particle breakage rate and breakage distribution functions in the ball mill grinding operation, Kapur [13] has derived an energy–size relationship from a similarity solution to the fundamental size–mass balance equation of batch grinding kinetics. In spite of its significant relevance from the practical application point of view, this relationship has not been properly validated so far. Therefore, a detailed study was undertaken for its validation using some simulated batch grinding size distribution data as well as actual experimental data. The relationship has now been comprehensively validated. It is concluded that as compared to various known empirical energy–size relationships the one presented by Kapur can provide a more rational and sound basis for estimation of energy requirements for industrial ball milling operations.A large number of empirical energy–size relationships have been proposed in the literature for the purpose of estimation of the energy required to carry out a particular size reduction job Kapur Kapur He further showed that in the self-similar regime the 80% passing size, x From Eqs. During batch grinding experiments, it has been generally observed that the mill power does not vary significantly with grinding time It may be mentioned that as x Using experimental batch ball milling data on limestone, quartz and ferrosilicon, Kapur Therefore, if the time–size relationship given by Eq. The size discretized version of Eq. As mentioned earlier, it has been found that for a large number of mill-material systems the grinding kinetics can be described with a reasonably good accuracy using the size discretized breakage rate and distribution functions corresponding to Eqs. For generation of the simulated size distribution data, the particle size range of interest was divided into 12 size intervals (including the pan), the ratio of apertures of successive sieves being √2. With a view to facilitate comparison of results obtained for different α values, breakage rate for the last sieve size interval was kept constant (= α β θ ϕ* The starting feed was taken as a single size feed, i.e. 100% material in the top most sieve size interval. Size distribution data corresponding to different grinding time values were generated using the Reid solution to Eq. For validation of Eqs. For various combinations of values of the constants α, ϕ*, β and θ, F(x,t) values were plotted as a function of x/μ In Thus, Kapur's similarity solution and the energy–size relationship were verified for the size-discrete functional forms of k and B functions given by Eqs. Before proceeding further, based on the analysis of the extensive data generated by us, we would like to make three important observations: (i) though the two self-similar size distribution curves in Dry batch ball milling size distribution data on olivine (this work) and that of Svensson and Murkes For each material values of the constants A*, α, ϕ*, β and θ were estimated using the well-known indirect estimation approach Next, using the unidirectional search part of the Rosenbrock algorithm (any other unidirectional search method can also be used), the best estimate of α was obtained by minimizing an error function Er as defined below Thus, the time–size relationship given by Eq. The functional forms given in Eqs. From the data presented in In the present context, the famous energy–size relationship first proposed by Walker et al. It is interesting to note that in Eq. Further, a comparison of the feed and product size distributions of several production mills has shown that these are quite similar to the similarity spectra shown in Using extensive simulated as well as experimental ball milling size distribution data it has been shown that if the breakage behavior of a material can be adequately characterized by Eqs. Unlike various empirical energy–size relationships, the Kapur energy–size relationship has one parameter of a definite physical significance. In this relationship, the exponent of the characteristic particle size (μ In light of the results presented in this paper, it can be concluded that the Kapur energy–size relationship given by Eqs.  constant in Eq. constant in Eq. breakage distribution function breakage distribution function in discrete size intervals cumulative breakage distribution function in discrete size intervals constant in Eq. constant in Eq. C average of C energy input to mill error function defined in Eq. cumulative weight fraction finer specific breakage rate for particles of size x specific breakage rate for particles in i-th size interval mill-material constant in Eq. constant in Eq. constant in Eq. mill-material constant in Eq. relative mass frequency function in particle size mass fraction of particles in i-th size interval total number of size intervals grinding time particle size particle size size of the openings of the lower sieve of the i-th size interval particle size corresponding to F specific energy in Bond equation Bond Work index similarity frequency function in Eq. similarity distribution function in Eq. similarity distribution function in Eq. exponent in Eqs. α value estimated using Eq. exponent in Eqs. exponent in Eqs. first moment of particle size distribution constant in Eqs. indices for particle size interval mill feed mill product