 The greatest challenge to a mineral processor is to produce high grade concentrates consistently at maximum recovery from the ore body. To quantify recovery a reasonable idea of the initial concentration of mineral in a lode is required. Proper sampling representing the ore body is therefore essential. The book therefore commences with the techniques of sampling of ore followed by the design and operation of unit processes of comminution that help to release the mineral from the associated rocks. Separation and concentration processes using techniques involving screening, classification, solid-liquid separations, gravity separation and flotation then follow. In the book some early methods of operation have been included and the modern methods highlighted. The design and operation of each unit process is a study by itself. Over the years, improvements in the understanding of the complexities of these processes have resulted in increased efficiency, sustained higher productivity and grades. Mathematical modeling has helped in this direction and hence its use is emphasized. However, the models at best serve as guides to most processes operations that invariably involve complex interdependent variables which are not always easily assessed or manipulated. To solve the dilemma, plants are increasingly being equipped with instruments and gadgets that respond to changes much faster than humans can detect. Dynamic mathematical models are the basis of operations of these gadgets which are usually well developed, sophisticated, electronic equipment. In this book therefore, the basics of instrumental process control is introduced the details of which belong to the province of instrument engineers. This book is written after several years on plant operation and teaching. The book is biased towards practical aspects of mineral processing. It is expected to be of use to plant metallurgist, mineral processors, chemical engineers and electronics engineers who are engaged in the beneficiation of minerals. It is pitched at a level that serves as an introduction to the subject to graduate students taking a course in mineral processing and extractive metallurgy. For a better understanding of the subject solved examples are cited and typical problems are set. Most problems may be solved by hand-held calculators. However most plants are now equipped with reasonable numbers of computers hence solution to problems are relatively simple with the help of spreadsheets. The authors are grateful for the help received from numerous friends active in the field of mineral processing who have discussed the book from time to time. Particular thanks are due