In this paper, the centrifugal casting of ceramic membrane tubes is presented using different powder particle sizes and powder mixtures. The inner surface of the tubes has a very regular pore structure and is also very smooth. The strength of the tubes increases with increasing sintering temperature and decreasing particle size up to stress values of 1500 MPa. For the strongest materials, the pores sizes and porosities are in the order of 50 nm and 30%, respectively. The water permeability varies between 5 and 50 l/m2.h.bar. The inner surface of the tubes was coated with a highly porous chitosan biopolymer layer of 30–50 μm thickness. The chitosan layer is prepared by a phase-inversion method using water with low and high pH values as a solvent/non-solvent system. Silica, which dissolves at high pH values, is used as porogen and creates the pores. This biopolymer can adsorb heavy metals like copper. With this membrane system, Cu2+ (50 ppm as CuSO4) can be removed almost completely with a membrane capacity of 0.1 g Cu2+/g chitosan.Usually, ceramic membranes have a composite structure consisting of a support for mechanical strength and a number of layers coated on the support. These layers decrease in thickness and pore size towards the top of the membrane. In manufacturing these composite membranes, it is important that the surface quality of the support and supporting layer is sufficient to be suitable for a next layer. Surface roughness, defects and irregular pore-size distributions can cause defects and irregular structure in the top layers. Therefore, a high-quality surface is a necessity. If pastes are used for support manufacturing, defects and irregular packing are almost unavoidable. The distribution of particles in suspensions is much better and a good packing can be achieved. Then, the porous structure of the support is very regular and the surface can be very smooth. A new method for such a support preparation is centrifugal casting This high-quality support can be coated directly with thin, microporous layers of silica or zeolites, for instance. In this paper, the preparation of a layer of chitosan, a biopolymer, is presented. Chitosan, poly(2-amino-2-deoxy- The objectives of this paper are therefore related to the following points: preparation, structure and water permeability of centrifugal casted alumina tubes; surface quality and strength of the tubes; can the tubes be provided with a gradual pore structure by using powder mixtures? optimal structure of the chitosan layer for adsorption purposes; and adsorption performance of the composite membrane. The starting α-Al To obtain tubes with 2 mm wall thickness, 120 g of the starting powder were mixed with different amounts of APMA (ammonium polymethacrylate aqueous solution, Darvan C, R.T. Vanderbilt Company, Inc., Norwalk, USA) and distilled water. The mixture of powder, water and APMA, 120 ml in total, was brought to a pH of 9.5 by adding (∼1.5 ml) concentrated ammonia. The resulting suspension was ultrasonically treated for 15 min using a frequency of 20 kHz and a transducer output power of 100 W (Model 250 Sonifier, Branson Ultrasonics Corporation, Danbury, USA). With this suspension, tubes were prepared with 6 cm lengths in a home-built apparatus, using steel moulds. Before pouring the suspension into the mould, the mould was coated on the inside with a solution of Vaseline in petroleum ether (boiling range 60–80°C) to ensure easy mould release. The tubes were centrifuged for 20 min at 20 000 rpm, and the remaining liquid was poured out of the moulds afterwards. The green tubes were horizontally dried inside the moulds for 1 day at 30°C. After drying, the green tubes were removed from the moulds and sintered horizontally on a flat support at 1050, 1150 and 1200°C respectively, for 1 h with a heating/cooling rate of 1°C/min. The liquid permeability of the ceramic membrane supports was tested using a liquid permeation set-up, consisting of a N To ensure that the support will be strong enough to withstand the pressures exerted on it, strength tests had to be carried out on the supports. A force is exerted on the outside of the tube by means of a metal object, and the tension before breakage is calculated. A schematic presentation of the break tests is given in The following equations were used to calculate the tension a tube could withstand until rupture or breakage occurred. The schematic presentation in Mercury porosimetry (Autopore III, Micromeretics) tests were done to determine the median pore radius as well as the porosity of the supports. An SEM type Philips XL30 was used to investigate the structure of the tubular support and coated layer. The chitosan coating of the membrane is based on the phase-inversion method using silica as a porogen to create pores in the layer One gram of chitosan (Aldrich Company) was dissolved in 100 ml of 1 vol.% aqueous acetic acid solution. Silica particles [Silica gel 60 (0.063–0.200 mm), Merck, Darmstadt, Germany] were added to this solution, followed by vigorous stirring in order to disperse them uniformly. An AKP-30 ceramic support sintered at 1050°C was filled with this solution. The largest part of the solution was then removed so that only a thin chitosan layer remained on the inside of the support. This procedure was repeated, and then the liquid inside the support was allowed to evaporate. The dried membrane was immersed in a 5 wt% aqueous NaOH solution and kept for 2 h at 80°C in order to dissolve the silica particles and generate a porous membrane. The heat treatment accelerated the dissolution of silica and also improved the mechanical properties of the membrane. Finally, the porous membrane was washed with distilled water to remove the remaining NaOH. In order to prevent its shrinkage during drying, the membrane was immersed in a 20 vol.% aqueous glycerol solution (softening agent) for 30 min and, after the excess glycerol solution was removed, the support/chitosan system was dried at room temperature. In this way, a strong and flexible macroporous chitosan membrane without shrinkage was obtained. The Cu The Cu Porous alumina tubes were prepared with a length of about 6 cm, an inner diameter of about 16 mm and an inner surface area of about 25 cm In The water permeability of these tubes was measured using different pressures. Here, there is a direct relation between the used particle size and sintering temperature. The permeability decreases with higher sintering temperatures and a smaller particle size. The permeability can also be calculated using the extended Hagen–Poisseuille equation: The calculated water flux is remarkably close to the experimental water flux. The deviation is larger only for the AKP15/30 powder mixture. This can be due to the fact that the gradual decrease of pore size towards the inner side of the tube is larger for powder mixtures than for mono-sized powders, as is shown by Biesheuvel et al. The mechanical strength of the tubes increases with increasing sintering temperature, decreasing powder particle size or increasing water flux of the tubes. One can imagine that at higher sintering temperatures, the neck area between the particles, and therefore also the strength of the porous compact, increases. The strength is also larger for a small particle packing compared to a larger particle packing because the number of necks per volume is larger. For practical applications, both water flux and strength should be as high as possible. From the presented results, the best choice for a porous ceramic support is a combination of a coarser powder and a somewhat higher sintering temperature. A photograph of a chitosan coating is shown in The adsorption of Cu In For testing Langmuir adsorption behavior, the linearized form of the Langmuir isotherm can be used according to the equation Tubular ceramic membranes have been prepared by the centrifugal casting method using different types of powders and powder mixtures. The inner pore structure was very regular. Pore sizes varied between 50 and 100 nm, and porosities varied between 30 and 50%. As expected, the tubes with small pores and a low porosity were strongest (1500 MPa), which could be achieved using higher sintering temperatures (1200°C) and a smaller particle size (0.40 μm). For particle mixtures, the structure and sintering behavior resembled that of the smallest particles used. The biopolymer chitosan was coated as a layer on the inner side of the tubes with a highly porous and very regular structure. A phase-inversion method was used for the coating with water at low and high pH values as a solvent/non-solvent system. Silica particles were used as a porogen, which created the pores when it was dissolved and removed at the high pH values. The chitosan layer could remove Cu