Instrumented indentation is very useful to determine the elastic modulus and hardness of materials. To obtain reliable values of the mechanical properties, the measurement of the indenter displacement into the material must be very precise. In practice, the frame compliance of the instrument and the indenter tip defect are among the most influential parameters. In microindentation, the frame compliance term must be calculated for each analysis. On the other hand, the tip defect can lead to a wrong estimation of the contact area, which is involved in both the elastic modulus and the hardness calculations. The present work is mainly focused on the influence of the tip defect on the determination of the mechanical properties of a composite TiB2–60% B4C hard material using Berkovich, Vickers, Knoop and spherical indenters. This composite system was obtained by sintering in vacuum, employing a pulsed electric current, without any sintering additives. It has been shown that the tip defect greatly affects the results related to the mechanical properties of the system under study, even for low defect sizes, which are usually neglected in practice. After correction, the elastic modulus of the TiB2–60% B4C is found to be equal to 490GPa whatever the indenter shape used. This result corroborates the value of 500GPa found for this system by employing the resonance frequency method according to the ASTM Standard e1876-99. For analyzing the hardness-load dependence, the representative parameter of the Proportional Specimen Resistance model becomes null when the tip defect is introduced into the hardness calculation. Additionally, this parameter is found to be directly proportional to the tip defect size, suggesting a special attention when characterizing the indentation size effect of materials. Finally, the Meyer hardness found for the TiB2–60% B4C is close to 20GPa.Nowadays, the evaluation of the mechanical properties of materials is widely carried out by means of nanoindentation techniques, which allow a local determination of the elastic modulus and hardness in various types of materials, like metals With the objective of determining the mechanical behavior of a material at a macroscopic scale, nanoindentation is very useful and appropriate for homogeneous materials. However when the material is heterogeneous from a microstructural point of view or when it presents some defects like porosity or microcracks, nanoindentation could give results, which can vary to a large extent depending on the location of the indentation experiment For example, this can be achieved by instrumented indentation at a micrometric scale for which the load ranges between 1 and 20 As a consequence, the frame compliance must be taken into account as a free-parameter for each microindentation data analysis. On the contrary, at a microscopic scale, the indenter tip defect responsible of the variation of the contact area has been often and probably wrongly neglected regarding its size, in comparison with the indenter displacement values. Thus, the objective of this work is the determination of consistent values of the elastic modulus and hardness of a TiB The second indenter employed is a Berkovich type, which is the most widely used in nanoindentation. It has the advantage of being similar to the Vickers indenter, in the sense that the tip angle of the equivalent or effective conical indenter has the same value. The Berkovich indenter employed for this purpose has an indenter tip bluntness less than that of the Vickers indenter. To confirm the methodology proposed in the present work, a low tip bluntness Knoop indenter is also used. In addition, the Knoop indenter presents some relevant differences in comparison with the Vickers and Berkovich ones. For example, the tip angle of the equivalent conical indenter has a higher value As a main result, it has been confirmed that, independently of the indenter shape and magnitude of the tip defect, the consideration of the latter as well as the frame compliance of the instrument, into the indentation data analysis is absolutely necessary for determining reliable values of the elastic modulus and hardness of the massive TiB By analyzing the unloading part of a load–depth curve obtained by instrumented indentation, Oliver and Pharr However, the value of the parameter To avoid possible artifacts at the two extremities of the unloading curve, i.e. at the beginning of the unloading at the maximum load and just before the complete unloading; only data ranging between 40% and 98% of the maximum load, recommended by CSM (Switzerland), is generally used. Finally, Then, for an accurate determination of the reduced modulus by applying Eqs. The correction factor From a general point of view, the indentation area For materials presenting sinking-in during indentation, the computation of the contact indentation depth results from the methodology developed by Oliver and Pharr In the above relationship, Moreover, a correction related to the tip defect is necessary for calculating the true contact area. In nanoindentation, the contact area is often calibrated using the empirical eight-parameter area function advanced by Oliver and Pharr More recently, Berla et al. This approach simply consists in adding the measured indentation depth to the corrected depth, Unfortunately, the CSM mode is not available on some instrumented indentation apparatus. On the other hand, the contact area function can be obtained by plotting the square root of the contact area as a function of the indentation depth For an accurate determination of the tip defect dimension, Finally, the corrected contact indentation depth, As a result, by applying Eq. It is very important to indicate that Eq. The TiB The sintered composite samples were analyzed prior to the instrumented indentation tests by employing SEM techniques (SE and BSE modes), coupled with EDS analysis, the latter for indicating the compositional analysis. The micrographs are presented in Instrumented indentation experiments were performed employing a microhardness Tester CSM 2-107. The load range of the instrument varies from 0.05 to 30 From an experimental point of view, the lowest maximum indentation load of 100  The elastic modulus of a material is obtained by plotting the total compliance, In this figure, the dark squares represent the indentation data where the tip defect is neglected, whereas the white circles represent the data where the tip defect size is introduced into the contact area calculation. It is clear that when the tip defect is neglected the relationship that describes the change of the total compliance versus the inverse of the square root of the contact area is not linear, in contradiction with the theory. Note that the deviation between the curves is more pronounced as the tip defect increases. It is also noticeable that the frame compliance term, To compute the reduced modulus, the two coefficients β and For the Knoop indenter, the data are based on an ideal relation for the length of the diagonal to the penetration depth. Therefore, according to Riester et al. Therefore, in the present work the projected area, For a spherical indenter, the contact area is calculated from To study the hardness behavior of the material, the change in both the Meyer and Martens hardness as a function of the indentation displacement, to represent the hardness-load dependence, have been analyzed. Independently on the indenter type, the Meyer hardness considers the projected contact area, whereas the Martens hardness involves the actual contact area between the indenter and the deformed material. Among the numerous models devoted to the analysis of the indentation size effect, the Proportional Specimen Resistance (PSR) model suggested by Li and Bradt Note that in Eq.  On the other hand, when the tip defect is introduced into the hardness calculation, it is remarkable that the hardness numbers, Meyer or Martens, using Berkovich, Vickers or Knoop indenters, has a constant value. This result seems to indicate that the indentation size effect is strongly associated to the tip defect. Thus, when classical indentation tests are conducted, since the dimensions of the indents are measured at the surface of the material, there is no need of considering the tip defect. However, in the present case, a large part of the indentation size effect could be attributed to the influence of the tip defect on the contact area estimation. Nevertheless, additional work on various types of material is required to validate such observation. In any case, for the investigated material, the hardness number is found to be very similar and independent on the indenter shape. Its value is very close to 20 For spherical indentation, the Brinell hardness has been computed, which is subsequently represented as a function of the inverse of the maximum indenter displacement. As a main conclusion, the instrumented indentation at a microscopic scale is a valuable tool for determining the elastic modulus and hardness of a material if the frame compliance term is considered as a free-parameter and if the calculation of the contact area takes into account the tip defect. It has been shown that the same values for the mechanical properties can be obtained independently on the indenter shape. However, for the Knoop indenter, the maximum indenter displacement must be considered instead of the contact depth, in order to obtain appropriate values. This result has been already observed by Riester et al., although no physical explanations have been provided to account for such a difference. This is probably due to the specificity of the Knoop indenter for which the residual deformation around the edges and/or the faces of the indent is affected by its particular shape. Additionally, a direct relation between the indenter tip defect and the indentation size effect parameter has been established, represented by the distance between the ideal tip and the rounded tip of the indenter, as well as the parameter identifying the indentation size effect. However, the main result is that the value of the hardness number is found to be a constant when the tip defect tends to zero or when it is considered into the hardness calculation. Nevertheless, this result must be confirmed on other types of materials presenting sinking-in or piling-up effects around the indent. In any case, it must be carefully introduced in all studies of the indentation size effect. For the TiB Professor Puchi-Cabrera gratefully acknowledges the financial support of the Conseil Régional Nord-Pas de Calais, France, through the International Chair program 2011 and Professor Staia acknowledges the financial support from Ghent University (BOF).