Solvent extraction experiments were conducted to recover pure Pt(IV) and Rh(III) from the chloride leach liquor of glass industry scraps containing a small amount of Fe(III) using Alamine 336, TOPO, TBP and Cyanex 923. The Pt(IV) and Fe(III) were selectively extracted by Cyanex 923 leaving Rh(III) in the raffinate, while only Fe(III) was extracted by TBP. The Pt(IV) in the loaded Cyanex 923 phase was first selectively stripped over Fe(III) by NaSCN and then the remaining Fe(III) was stripped by HCl solution. The Fe(III) in the loaded TBP phase was easily stripped by dilute HCl solution. The McCabe-Thiele diagrams for the extraction of Pt(IV) by Cyanex 923 and of Fe(III) by TBP were constructed. Based on the obtained results, a flowsheet for the separation of three metals from the real leaching solution of glass industry scraps was proposed.Platinum group metals (PGMs) have specific physical and chemical properties and thus the demand for PGMs is increasing ( In order to recover pure Pt and Rh from the glass industry scraps, the scraps are generally treated by aqua regia and then the nitric acid is recovered from the leach liquor. A small amount of iron(III) is contained in the leach liquor ( In hydrochloric acid solution, Pt(IV) exists as PtCl In solvent extraction with amines or solvating extractants, Fe(III) is selectively extracted over Pt(IV) from hydrochloric acid solution. This work reports the results from solvent extraction experiments conducted to separate Pt(IV) and Rh(III) from the leach liquor of glass industry scraps which contained macro amount of Pt(IV) and Rh(III) in addition to the small amount of Fe(III). The three extractant Alamine 336, TOA, TBP and Cyanex 923 ( Alamine 336 and TOA were purchased from BASF Co. Korea and TBP was a product of Yakuri Pure Chemical Co. Japan. Cyanex 923 was purchased from Cytec Industries, Canada. These reagents were used without further purification. Toluene and kerosene were supplied by Daejung Chemicals & Metals Co. Korea and used as the diluents. The leach liquor of glass industry scrap digested by aqua regia was provided by DSM corp. in Korea, after removing nitric acid. The extraction and stripping experiments were carried out by mixing equal volumes (10 In general, either amines or solvating extractants can extract Pt(IV) from concentrated hydrochloric acid solution. In order to investigate the extraction and separation behavior of the metal ions in the leach liquor, amines (TOA or Alamine 336) and solvating extractants (TBP or Cyanex 923) of structures shown in The HCl concentration of as supplied leach liquor was higher than 8.5  The purity of Pt metal should be higher than 99.9% to be recycled to the glass industry. This means that there should be no Fe(III) in Pt(IV) solution. Since Fe(III) is co-extracted with Pt(IV) by amines, the extraction and separation behavior of the metal ions in the leach liquor was investigated by employing solvating extractants, TBP and Cyanex 923.    Third phase formation occurred during the extraction with Cyanex 923. Addition of 1-decanol as a modifier could not depress the formation of a third phase. Therefore, other diluents, such as toluene, benzene, xylene, and The effect of Cyanex 923 concentration on the extraction of the metal chloride complex ions was investigated by varying its concentration from 0.01 to 0.1 To determine the number of theoretical stages required for the complete extraction of Pt(IV) from the leach liquor, McCabe-Thiele diagram for the extraction of Pt(IV) was constructed by varying the O/A ratio using 0.07 Unlike TOA, Alamine 336 and Cyanex 923, TBP selectively extracted Fe(III) over Pt(IV) and Rh(III) from the leach liquor ( It has been reported that NaSCN and dilute HCl are two solutions which can strip Pt(IV) and Fe(III) from the loaded Cyanex 923 phase ( The loaded organic phase was prepared by contacting the real leach liquor with 0.07   Based on the extraction and stripping results obtained, a proposed process for the separation of Pt(IV), Rh(III) and Fe(III) from the leach liquor of glass industry scraps is shown in The leaching of glass industry scraps with aqua regia results in concentrated hydrochloric acid solution containing 1514 This work was supported by the Global Excellent Technology Innovation of the  