The effect of impact angle on the breakage of two types of agglomerates of a synthetic detergent formulation is analysed. The agglomerates are in the same size range (0.60–0.71 and 1.00–1.18 mm) with the same formulation but have different structures arising from the processing method.
                  In contrast to previous work reported in the literature for other materials, it is observed that for the types of agglomerates used in this work the extent of breakage increases as the impact angle is decreased from normal in the velocity range tested (15–35 m s−1). Furthermore, when the agglomerates break in the chipping regime, i.e. by surface damage at low impact velocities (less than 15 m s−1), the normal component of the impact velocity determines the extent of breakage independent of the impact angle. However, at higher impact velocities where fragmentation occurs, the role of the tangential component of the impact velocity becomes increasingly important. The difference in the failure mode of agglomerates tested here and those reported in the literature is thought to be the main reason for the dissimilarity. The granules examined here are sensitive to shearing because of the synthetic detergent formulation and their failure is predominantly due to ductile failure, whilst the previous materials fail mainly through brittle and semi-brittle mode of breakage.The mechanical strength of agglomerates plays an important role in balancing the necessary strength to withstand transportation, handling and storage, and to break to the required size when it is needed. The strength of agglomerates depends strongly on the structure, interparticle bond strength, mode of loading, i.e. distributed or local, and direction and rate of loading. The load direction may change from normal to tangential to the contact surface, leading to different stress fields in the agglomerate such as tensile and/or shear stresses. The loading rate may vary from quasi-static to dynamic also affecting the stress field in the agglomerates. Consequently, combinations of the mechanical and structural properties and the mode of loading lead to different failure modes with a wide range of breakage patterns. In an oblique impact, an agglomerate is subjected to normal and tangential loadings, the magnitude of which depends on the impact angle and impact velocity. In this paper, the impact angle is defined as the angle between the incident velocity, which is always along the gravity direction, and the target surface, measured clockwise Despite the prevalence of oblique impacts in process plants, the effect of impact angle has not been widely studied. Furthermore, the reports are often contrasting, a matter which causes uncertainty and confusion. Vervoorn Salman et al. Papadopoulos Numerical simulations by the Distinct Element Method (DEM) of oblique impacts have been carried out to get a better insight into the breakage behaviour of particulate solids. Thornton et al. In spite of the differences in type, shape and size of the particles employed in the oblique impact studies, a common feature can be found among the experimental results. In general, normal impacts seem to produce the most extensive damage in both agglomerates and solid particles, as compared to the oblique impacts. When the impact angle is reduced from 90° the extent of damage of particulate solids usually decreases. However, it should be noted that the mechanism of impact damage for most of the material employed in the literature is close to the brittle or semi-brittle failure mode. For more plastic and soft particulate solids, the effect of impact angle has not widely been investigated. Another aspect of the oblique impact is the effect of impact angle on the surface wear and erosion of the target. Hutchings In this paper, we address the effect of impact angle on the extent and pattern of breakage of two types of Two detergent-based granule types (Samples A and B) have been produced by different process routes, but with the same chemical formulation. Images of these samples taken by SEM are shown in  A schematic illustration of the impact test apparatus is shown in The internal diameter and length of the accelerating tube are 0.02 and 1.00 m, respectively. The particle passage in the tube is sensed before impact by means of a set of parallel photodiodes sensors located just above the target. The vertical distance between the photodiodes is 0.02 m. The photodiodes signals are transmitted by a transducer to a PC, from which the particle’s flight time, i.e. elapsed time between the signals from the two photodiodes, is deduced and consequently the velocity of the particle is calculated. This together with the number of particles are displayed online by a monitor and are also recorded. The recorded impact velocities are used to calculate the average velocity and its standard deviation. A round sapphire plate, 25 mm in diameter and 6 mm thick is used as the target material in the normal impacts The target is housed in a Perspex collection chamber approximately 30 mm under the tube's outlet and the chamber is connected to a vacuum line In our study, a Kodak Ektapro high-speed digital video camera (Kodak Electronic Vision System, Hemel Hempstead) has been used to record the impact events of the granules on the target. The digital images are sent to a PC-based system, where the digitised images are processed by Optimas 6.1 image analysis software (Data Cell, Maidenhead), via an IC-PCI frame grabber board. The Kodak image processor is equipped with a dynamic memory, in which 3072 full frames of 256×256 pixels can be stored. The recording rate can vary from 30 to 40,500 fps. In this study, different recording speeds have been used depending on the granule size and impact velocity. For low velocities, e.g. around free fall speed, 13,500 fps was found adequate to capture the impact event. However, at higher impact velocities a framing rate of 18,000 fps was employed to acquire better images. The start and stop of recording are done manually. For a better image quality, the collection chamber is removed and the video camera is focused on the target. The illumination of the impact event is carried out using two 50 mm halogens lamps, 500 W each, which provide a continuous light. In order to characterise the extent of breakage of the granules under different impact angle and velocity the simplest way is to describe the damage as the mass fraction of material below a certain size, e.g. sieve size, (Vervoorn and Austin The above analysis method is appropriate for chipping, in which the debris is easily distinguishable from the mother particles. In the fragmentation regime, the original particles may lose their identity as the impact product may be distributed over all sieve sizes. In this case, a full sieve analysis of the particles has been performed to get more information on the size distribution of the particles. Nevertheless, as it will be discussed later, employing the single sieve analysis is still very informative as it clearly reveals the effect of impact angle on the breakage. The size distribution of the impact product in the fragmentation regime is presented based on the cumulative mass fraction undersize as a function of size on a log–log scale according to Gates–Gaudin–Schaumann plot as well as the frequency per range. The particle size is normalised with respect to the upper limit of the feed size (e.g. for a feed sieve size of 1.00–1.18 mm, the normalisation was made with respect to 1.18 mm). A series of oblique impact tests were performed at ambient laboratory conditions (45–50% RH and 20–25 °C temperature) on the feed granule sizes of 0.60–0.71 and 1.00–1.18 mm for both Samples A and B. The extent of breakage of 1.00–1.18 mm granules as a function of the impact velocity for four impact angles is shown in As it is seen in  The high-speed digital video records of the impact events of the sample B granules (1.00–1.18 mm) at 45° are shown in To identify the influence of the velocity components on the damage, the extent of breakage of Sample B is plotted as a function of the normal component of impact velocity in   In summary, for the granules tested here, the normal component of the impact velocity determines the extent of breakage at low impact velocities when chipping dominates. However, at high velocities, where fragmentation occurs, the tangential component of impact velocity plays a major role in the breakage, the extent of which increases significantly with decreasing the impact angle. This is in contrast with the previous work reported by Vervoorn The full sieve analysis of impact products are presented in  The effect of impact angle on the failure pattern and fragment size distribution of agglomerates of a synthetic detergent formulation has been investigated. For agglomerates breaking in the chipping regime, the tangential component of the impact velocity has little or no effect on the extent of breakage. However, when agglomerates break in the fragmentation regime, the tangential component of the impact velocity appears to be as important as the normal component. In this case, the extent of breakage increases significantly with the tangential component of velocity or alternatively with decreasing the impact angle, whilst keeping the normal component of velocity constant. It appears that the trend observed in our work can be explained by the DEM simulations of Moreno et al. The effect of impact angle on the extent and regime of breakage of two types of soft agglomerates was investigated. The high-speed digital video records of the impact events along with gravimetric analyses of the extent of breakage revealed that reducing the impact angle from 90° to 30° increased the extent of breakage in contrast to the trend of previous work reported in the literature for other materials. There was a threshold impact velocity, below which the effect of the impact angle was negligible. In this case, chipping was the predominant regime of breakage. It was found that at low impact velocities, where chipping dominated, the normal component of the impact velocity determined the extent of breakage independent of the impact angle. At higher impact velocities, the tangential component played a major role in the fragmentation of the granules, as the breakage increased significantly with decreasing impact angle under constant normal component of impact velocity. The full sieve analysis of the impact product supports the above conclusions. At low impact velocities, where chipping regime dominated, the size distribution of the impact product was around the feed size, independent of the angle of impact. However, at higher impact velocities, where fragmentation occurred consistently, the broken granules were distributed over a wider size range at lower angles. In this case, the extent of breakage was higher than that of the normal impact over all complement sizes. The distribution modulus of complement expressing the spread of the distribution appeared to be independent of the impact angle. The difference in the trends observed here and previous work reported in the literature is considered to have arisen essentially from the differences in the failure mode of granules tested here and those reported in the literature. The test materials used by the previous workers failed mainly through brittle and semi-brittle mode and therefore the change in the impact angle was likely to have altered the tensile stress field. The granules examined here are more sensitive to shearing because of the synthetic detergent formulation. Their failure is therefore predominantly by ductile failure which is sensitive to shearing. A more in-depth analysis needs to be carried out to investigate the effect of interparticle bond failure characteristics on the agglomerate breakage pattern. Weibull parameter (m s Weibull parameter (–) Number of unbroken particles (–) mass of debris (g) mass of feed particles (g) mass of mother particles (g) normal failure velocity (m s normal component of impact velocity (m s impact velocity (m s mean agglomerate size (mm) size difference between two consecutive standard sieves (mm) standard sieve size of broken particles (mm) largest sieve size of agglomerate (mm) mass fraction or mass percentage of material on each sieve (–/–) lower and upper limits of extent of breakage (–/–) angle of impact (degree) complement distribution modulus (–) The financial support of the Ministry of Science, Research and Technology of Iran for A. Samimi is gratefully acknowledged. The authors would also like to thank Unilever Research, Vlaardingen, for their technical and financial support of the research programme, and are grateful to Drs. R. Boerefijn, R. Kohlus and A. Groot for their help throughout the project.