Work has been carried out to produce composites with high strength and good ductility by maximizing a uniform and smooth interface for effective transfer of load and minimizing reinforcement agglomerations/cracking/pull outs. High strength, high entropy alloy (ternary) in particulate (HEAp) form was used as reinforcement in 2024 aluminium. AA 2024-HEAp composite was prepared through stir cast route by dispersing an average particle size of 125μm as reinforcement with various weight fractions varying between 5% and 15%. Subsequently, billets were hot extruded to 14mm Ø rods. All the extrudates were thoroughly homogenized with industrial furnace at 100°C for 24h. The mechanical behaviour of alloy and composites was studied in terms of resistivity, hardness, and tensile studies. An increment of 62% in hardness has been observed. Increased reinforcement contents enhance the mechanical properties such as yield strength, tensile strength and Young’s modulus.Metal matrix composites (MMCs), a metal/alloy with ceramic reinforcements, are known for their high specific strength, modulus and hardness properties The basic idea of developing metal matrix composites is to derive high strength materials. Large number of products have been designed and manufactured for various applications. Many of the investigations have shown improved mechanical properties, but limited with low & poor ductility. In the present investigation, an attempt has been made to achieve a good combination of strength & ductility properties with composites. In the present investigation AA 2024 was used as matrix material. The alloy is most widely used aluminium–copper alloys in forging as well as rivets for aircraft industry. This alloy has a higher tensile and yield strength with lower elongation. Typical uses of this alloy are aircraft structures, rivets, hardware, truck wheels and screw machine products. This matrix alloy was chosen since it provides excellent combination of strength and damage tolerance at room as well as at elevated temperatures. AA 2024 alloy was prepared in the laboratory and the chemical composition of the same was shown in Al–20Cu–10Mg alloy has been used as the reinforcement material in the present investigation, alloy powders were produced by filing techniques, where, fingers rotating on a lathe, were filed with speeds of rotation ranging between 800 and 290 The composites were synthesized through stir casting route by dispersing high entropy alloy particulates (HEAp) of an average size of 125 Vickers hardness studies were carried out for the alloy and composites using vickers hardness tester (Lecco Vickers hardness tester, Model: LV 700, USA) with 1   In alloys, with a [Mg]:[Cu] ratio is above 0.4, the main precipitate is CuMgAl  Further, the difference in densities found to be increasing with increasing reinforcement concentrations. Since composites were prepared by stir cast technique entrapped gases due to vortex formation, were the reasons for lower densities than the calculated ones. And increased stir times with increasing reinforcement contents is a signature of the above discussion, resulting decreased densities  The drop in resistivity is due to the presence of reinforcements with lower resistivity values. Though, the rule of mixture (  Since particulate addition times in composite making increases with increasing weight fraction, interface dissolution increases with time. This has resulted in the decrease of particle size,  Similar behaviour has been reported by Kumar et al. An increment of 62% in hardness has been observed. The increase may be attributed to the reinforcement effect, refined grain size of the matrix, interparticle distance, interfacial bond between reinforcement and matrix, restricted dislocation mobility   The cumulative effect of all the above mechanisms, stimulate the hardness to higher values. Compared to the linear path of rule of mixture (ROM), the measured values took an exponential path, Since density plays an important in the selection of material, a comparison has been made between the specific hardness and measured hardness of the matrix material and the composites against their increasing weight fraction,  Rohatgi et al. Singh and Lewandowski Aghajanian et al. Sudarshan and Surappa Al-Dheylan et al. With increasing weight percentage of the reinforcement more load was transferred to the reinforcement resulting in a higher ultimate tensile strength values. The increase in work hardening rate with increase in reinforcement content enhanced the modulus values. Since both the matrix and reinforcement used were of similar nature of the materials, the good compatibility between them offered lower rate of resistance towards deformation resulting decelerated increase in modulus values. Yield strength shows a similar trend as that of tensile strength depicting an increase of 95%, while compared to 70% increase of that of ultimate tensile strength. As reported by several authors, there was only a 50% drop in % elongation compared with the matrix material. The drop in ductility is due to the increased resistance offered by the reinforcement and the intermetallics present at the matrix-reinforcement interface as explained in earlier paragraphs. Composite with 15% reinforcement has shown 8.6% ductility which is quit high compared to any of the metal matrix composites reported. The specific properties of the ultimate tensile strength, yield strength, Young’s modulus and ductility have been shown from  AA 2024 alloy prepared in the laboratory was in tune with the commercial alloy. Metal–metal composites of AA 2024 reinforced with high entropy alloy particulate have been successfully fabricated. Resultant composites were produced by direct hot extrusion. Specific hardness of the resultant metal–metal composites is much superior to conventional MMCs. The decrease in particle size with increasing reinforcement content enhances the surface area to volume ratio of the resultant particulates. Increased reinforcement contents enhance all the mechanical properties such as yield strength, tensile strength and Young’s modulus of elasticity. The authors thank the Department of Metallurgical Engineering, Andhra University College of Engineering, Visakhapatnam, India for providing necessary support in conducting the experiments; and also Dr. G. Ravi Chandra, Scientist ‘E’, Team Leader, ARCI, Centre for Mech. & Micro-Structural Characterization, Dr. G. Jayaraman, AGM, Department of Metallurgy, BHEL Corporate (R&D), Hyderabad, and Advanced Analytical Laboratories, DST-PURSE Programme, Andhra University for their support in SEM-EDX studies.