This paper examines whether conditional asset pricing models can explain the predictability in UK stock returns using the frameworks of Ferson and Harvey (1999) and Kirby (1998). The paper finds that the domestic Arbitrage Pricing Theory model is able to explain most of the observed time-series predictability in stock returns and tends to perform better than the domestic CAPM in explaining the predictability generated by the predictive instruments. The paper also finds that domestic asset pricing models tends to capture more of the time-series predictability in UK stock returns than international models. However none of the models are able to explain all of the predictability in returns.Since the development of the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) by A related issue is whether this observed predictability can be explained by conditional asset pricing models. This is important to the whole debate of stock market efficiency. The observed predictability in returns has been subject to two types of interpretation. The first is that it signifies irrational investor behavior or data mining or problems with the statistical test and the second is that it reflects rational time variation in expected returns. A series of papers by This paper uses the approaches of The main findings of the paper suggests that the domestic APT tends to capture most of the time-series predictability in UK stock returns and performs better than the CAPM and the two international models in explaining the predictability generated by the predictive instruments. When the domestic models are compared to the international models, the domestic models are able to explain more of the predictable variation in UK stock returns. This suggests that domestic factors have more of an impact than international factors in UK stock returns. However the evidence suggests that none of the models are able to completely explain the predictable variation in UK stock returns. The paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses the empirical methodology. Section III describes the data. The empirical results are presented in Section IV. The final section contains concluding comments. The conditional CAPM of  The first equation identifies the pricing error (α To explore whether the predictability can be explained by a given asset pricing model in more detail, the paper also uses the tests developed by  This study uses monthly return data from the London Business School Share Price Database (LBS) between February 1955 and December 1995. The monthly return on a 90 day UK Treasury Bill is used as the risk-free asset. This is chosen as the risk-free asset because the 30 day UK Treasury Bill is not available for the whole sample period. The domestic models include the conditional CAPM and APT. The international models include the world CAPM and a two factor version of the International Asset Pricing Model (IAPM) of The return on the Financial Times All Share index (FTA) The first international model is the excess return on the Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI) World index (obtained from Datastream) in UK sterling is used as the World market portfolio. The second international model includes the world index and an aggregate currency factor constructed in a similar way to The conditional approach used in this study requires that the information set used by investors is specified. The following local information variables are used which have been found to be important in previous research Lagged one month excess return on the FTA index. Lagged one month risk-free return. Dividend yield on the FTA index (obtained from LBS). January dummy which equals one if the month is January and zero otherwise. Two global instruments are also used chosen due to data availability. These are obtained from Datastream and include: Lagged one month excess return on the MSCI world equity index. Lagged dividend yield on the S&P 500 index. The implications of the domestic and international models are examined using monthly excess returns on 10 size and 10 industry portfolios. This is similar to The industry portfolios are formed using the industry classifications as recorded in the 1996 LBS handbook. The following classifications are used: Mineral extraction - group numbers between 123 and 165. Building and chemicals - group numbers between 210 and 255. Engineering - group numbers between 261 and 270. Printing and textiles - group numbers between 282 and 297. Consumer goods - group numbers between 320 and 380. Distribution, leisure and media - group numbers between 412 and 436. Retailers and other services - group numbers between 440 and 490. Utilities - group numbers between 620 and 680. Financials - group numbers between 710 and 794. Investment trusts - group numbers between 801 and 980. For each classification, equally-weighted monthly excess returns are calculated for all securities with a return observation in a given month. The number of securities within each group ranges between 190 and 908.  The average monthly excess returns of the 10 size portfolios range between 0.148% and 0.608%. The portfolio of smallest companies has the highest mean excess return and smallest standard deviation. There appears to be a U-shaped relationship between the portfolio size and mean excess return. The mean excess returns on the ten industry portfolios range between −0.132% and 1.164%. The predictive regressions in The Wald test rejects the hypothesis that the coefficients in the predictive regression are stable between the two subperiods for four size and four industry portfolios respectively. A Bonferroni To explore which instruments are contributing the most to the predictability in stock returns, the predictive regressions were also estimated either excluding the January dummy or the lagged excess market return from the instruments. When the January dummy is excluded, there is little impact on the results. In contrast when the lagged excess market return is excluded from the predictive regressions, there is a large drop in the adjusted R Many of the size and industry portfolios have autocorrelations at one month lags in excess of 0.2 and the FTA is highly positively correlated with the size and industry portfolios. To explore whether the lagged excess market return is acting as a proxy for the autocorrelation in the portfolio excess returns, the following robustness test is used. The excess returns on the size and industry portfolios are regressed on a constant, the lagged one month excess return on the portfolio and the lagged excess market return. If the lagged excess market return simply acts as a proxy for the autocorrelation in the own portfolio excess returns, then the significant positive coefficient on the lagged excess market return should disappear. The coefficients on the lagged excess market return is significantly positive for every portfolio Even if the lagged excess market instrument is excluded, the evidence still suggests that UK stock returns are partly predictable over time. The null hypothesis of no predictability is still rejected in nearly every case. The lagged risk-free return has a significantly negative relationship with all 10 size and industry portfolios. The January dummy has a significantly positive relationship with 9 out of the 10 size portfolios and all of the industry portfolios This subsection explores the performance of the domestic CAPM and APT in UK stock returns. This assumes that the UK market is segmented from other capital markets and the relevant risk factors are domestic factors. The  The VR1 ratios in   The individual ‘t’ statistics (unreported)for the CAPM show that there are significant differences between the unrestricted and restricted coefficients for the lagged excess market return, risk-free asset and the January dummy. The dividend yield is also significant in some cases. The CAPM underestimates the impact of the lagged excess market return and January dummy and overestimates the impact of the risk-free return. The APT in contrast has fewer rejections with these instruments. There is only one size portfolio with a significant difference between the two coefficients using the risk-free return. Much of the January predictability in returns is also explained by the APT. Another noticeable feature is that the magnitude of the difference between the unrestricted and restricted coefficients is much smaller for the APT. This suggests that the performance of the APT is much better than the CAPM in explaining the predictable variation in returns. If the lagged excess market return instrument is excluded from the analysis, there is little impact on the main findings of The tests in the previous section assumes that the UK market is segmented from other capital markets. However it is likely that the UK market has become increasingly integrated with other markets. In a world of integrated capital markets, the relevant risk factors are common to all countries. In the context of the CAPM, the market portfolio is the world market portfolio. This section examines the pricing performance of the two international models and the two domestic models and consider whether the models can explain the predictability in UK stock returns between January 1975 and December 1995. The first issue addressed is the role of the local and global information variables in predicting UK stock returns. The excess returns of the 10 size and industry portfolios are regressed on a constant and the four local information variables and the two global information variables. If the local information variables have no marginal impact on stock returns beyond the global information variables, then the slope coefficients on the four local instruments should be jointly equal to zero. If the global information variables have no impact on UK stock returns above the local instruments, then the slope coefficients on the two global instruments should be jointly equal to zero. Two χ   Comparing the magnitude of the pricing errors across the models suggests that the domestic models tend to have lower absolute pricing errors than the international models. It is either the APT or CAPM which have the smallest absolute pricing errors across nearly all portfolios. The VR1 ratios show that the domestic models explain more of the time-series predictability in returns than the international models. The IAPM has higher VR1 ratios than the world CAPM. This is followed by the domestic CAPM and then the APT. The results in   The individual ‘t’ statistics (unreported) reveal that all of the instruments have significant differences between the unrestricted and restricted coefficients. The lagged excess market return and the January dummy have the highest number of significant rejections. The world CAPM underestimates the impact of the lagged excess market return, dividend yield and the January dummy instruments and overestimates the impact of the risk-free return. The IAPM yields similar results. The results of the domestic CAPM and APT are similar to those in This paper examines the performance of domestic models and international models in UK stock returns and whether the predictability in UK stock returns is consistent with rational asset pricing. The first main finding is that neither the domestic CAPM or APT are adequate models in UK stock returns between February 1955 and December 1995. There is evidence of significant pricing errors with both models and neither model is able to capture all the predictability in returns. However the APT does explain most of the time-series predictability in stock returns and performs better at explaining the predictability of specific instruments. The second main finding is that the two international models are only able to explain a small proportion of the time-series predictability in returns. The two factor model explains more of the predictability than the world CAPM. However neither model is able to explain the predictability in returns. In contrast the domestic models captures more of the time-series predictability in returns. This suggests that domestic factors are more dominant in UK stock returns than international factors. This is consistent with a number of studies which highlight the dominance of domestic factors over international industry factors or currency factors. This is consistent with the role of country analysis in asset allocation decisions. The evidence suggests that the domestic CAPM and the two international models perform poorly at explaining the predictability of the instruments used. However the results for the APT suggests that much of the predictability in returns is close to that implied by the APT. An interesting extension of this paper would be to use the approach of  Helpful comments have been received from two anonymous referees.