Energy consumption and water resource in the cultivation and harvesting steps still need to be minimized for the popularization of the microalgae-based products. An efficient electro-flocculation method for harvesting Dunaliella Salina integrated with local sand has been successfully applied. Sand was effective for speeding up the processes of flocculation and sedimentation of algal flocs and the electrolytic hydroxides was essential to bridge the sand and small flocs into large dense flocs. The maximal recovery effective improved from 95.13% in 6min to 98.09% in 4.5min and the optimal electrical energy consumption decreased 51.03% compared to conventional electro-flocculation in a laboratory ambient condition. Furthermore, reusing the flocculated medium in cultivation of the D. Salina with nitrogen supplemented performed no worse than using fresh medium. This sand enhanced electro-flocculation (SEF) technology provides a great potential for saving time and energy associated with improving microalgae harvesting.Microalgae have been closely studied and much potential available to produce valuable biofuels ( The drives for reducing energy consumption have lead more critical research in this field and gathered momentum to develop new cost-effective approaches for large-scale microalgae harvesting. Electro-flocculation has been used successfully in wastewater treatment and mineral engineering due to its simple operability, predictability of results and feature of being non-species specific ( Therefore, this study has essentially employed in situ an efficient SEF technology without surfactant addition for the recovery of the microalgae  The sand was collected from BaiCheng beach in Xiamen, China, washed with deionized water, dried at 100 Chlorophyll a concentration was determined according to the described method ( The energy consumption The surface charge of sand, electro-flocculation modified sand, and algal cells was quantified by zeta potential (Zetasizer 2000, Malvern United Kingdom). For the floc structure and size study, the flocs were carefully transferred on a glass slide after flocculation and sedimentation and then photographed by the electromotive microscope (BX41, Olympus Japan). This experiment was conducted to study the microalgae growth using the flocculated medium after electro-flocculation and sedimentation. Four distinct media were used to cultivate microalgae: the fresh medium designated as FM, electro-flocculated supernatant as medium (EM), electro-flocculated supernatant with supplementary nitrogen as medium (EM The optimized 0.5 The amount of flocculants dissolved into the solution by the electrode is correlated with the current intensity over a certain time ( As shown in The size and structure of algae aggregate are considerably factors for determining the efficiency as well as the energy consumption in any of the applied methods mentioned above. Again, smaller the aggregate size then required longer sedimentation time or an alternative energy application for facilitating the sedimentation. As shown in Algal cells that enter a water treatment works are negatively charged and thus colloidal stability of the system is maintained ( The isoelectric point (pI) of natural sand was pH 4.3 in During electro-flocculation, the Al Although, there are different growth rate of The results showed that electro-flocculation integrated with sand can be successfully applied for harvesting This work was supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 