The mining and milling operations at Raglan, northern Québec, treat an ultramafic, pervasively serpentinised nickel ore, and produce a final nickel concentrate by grinding and sulphide flotation. A final tailings stream is discarded. A study was made of the nickel chemical assays of the Raglan final tailings stream, using a data mining technique of operational measurements. A distribution model and probability plot using nickel chemical assays were produced from this study. It was found that the nickel assay values formed a residually lognormal bimodal distribution. By using a lognormal probability plot, this distribution may be semi–quantitatively decomposed into two subordinate distributions by using either visual interpretation or the TRIPOD software. It is proposed that these two subordinate distributions represent two different degrees of nickel mineral liberation. Independent QemSCAN mineral measurement of one of the two tailings studies shows agreement with these graphical interpretations. Repetition of this method after flowsheet changes that produced metallurgical performance improvements shows that this model responds to concentrator performance improvements, and may be used as a monitoring tool to interpret concentrator behaviour. The study opens up potential for further work. This has been identified and will be pursued.It is the specific objective of this paper to introduce a simple graphical method for monitoring tailings losses in the operations of a concentrator treating a sulphide ore. This graphical method originates from geostatistics, and uses a data mining technique to capture and characterize the final tailings metal assay data in a lognormal probability plot. The interpretations from this graphical method will be cross-checked by quantitative mineralogical measurements. This paper is therefore not an academic theme, rather it is a practical demonstration of a useful method that will quantify liberated and unliberated or unrecoverable species in the tailings. The Raglan operations of Xstrata Nickel are located in the Ungava peninsula, northern Québec, and were commissioned in January 1998. The geology of the deposit indicates three End-Members, each with their own distinct sulphide abundance, grain size and metallurgical performance ( Use of the probability plot method of The milling and flotation process separates approximately 85–90% of the assayed nickel in ore milled into the final concentrate. The remainder, in the final tailings, is discarded. These tailings are routinely sampled and assayed for metal accounting purposes. From A flowsheet of the concentrator operations as commissioned in January 1998 is shown in During the period 1998–2001, four key flowsheet changes were implemented so as to improve the concentrate grade and recovery of this operation. These were: Bypassing the first rougher concentrate directly to final concentrate, Introducing a gangue depressant to control talc and chlorite flotation in the rougher float, Re-routing the recleaner tailings in order to recirculate these to the front of the cleaner circuit instead of going directly to the scavenger flotation section, Regrinding of the cleaner tailing prior to scavenger flotation. These changes, apart from the additional reagent addition, are shown in All these changes were known to have improved the recoveries of the various paymetals, but in particular, nickel. The regrind mill reduced the d These surveying activities, called statistical benchmark surveying, started in June 1998 after the concentrator was commissioned in January of that same year. This surveying method was a first-generation prototype in Falconbridge to serve their first QemSCAN installation. The full details of this method and its improvements are reported elsewhere ( The sampling and routine assaying of the final tailings stream, and the surveying of the same stream followed by QemSCAN measurement, both conducted in 1998, are totally independent activities. This independence allows a cross-check to be made concerning the inferences of the proposed graphical method. The Raglan Primary Composition File is summarized in Inspection of Much useful information may be gained by characterizing the distributions of drill-core or concentrator grade data. The first use was made by ln( raw score grade (or measured and uncorrected grade) a constant mean of ln( logvariance For a two-parameter lognormal distribution, Others such as Clark also showed that if multiple mineral phases carrying the same paymetal were present, these could be semi–quantitatively estimated using the same Naperian transform together with a lognormal probability plot ( The lognormal probability plot is a two-dimensional graph with the Because of the convenient linearity of this plot, it is amenable to least squares regression. In the case of multiple mineral host phases that carry different metal grades, a combination of straight lines with unique gradients and domains will overlap in the form of a composite distribution in this graph. A first computer programme, called ROKE, written in FORTRAN, was published by Two separate periods of operations were chosen for this study. These were: May–July 1998. December 2002–November 2003. The production period of May–July 1998 was chosen for collection of a first block of production tailings assay data. This selection was deliberate so as to align with measurements and observations from the Statistical Benchmark Survey of June 1998. The measurements gathered were of nickel assays at a level of 12-h shifts. Shifts for which the mill was off-line for maintenance were excluded, as were measurements which had been contaminated by foreign slurry flows, as reported in the concentrator shift log. A second production period of data was chosen so as to update the observations from the first exercise. In this case, the production data from December 2002 to November 2003 were selected. This period was deliberately chosen because it occurs after four key flowsheet changes had been implemented at Raglan between 1998 and 2001. Histograms of the collected nickel measurements in final tailings were prepared from the above data. Lognormal probability plots of the tailings nickel distributions were then prepared using the method of The histogram of nickel chemical assay grades in tailings for the period May–July 1998 is shown in The histogram of the nickel chemical assay grades in final tailings for the period December 2002 to November 2003 is shown in The lognormal probability plots of these two distributions are shown in  The distribution ABC has a clear inflection point at approximately 71% cumulative frequency. This infers that the two subdistributions of ABC account for 71% and 29% of the composite distribution, respectively. The forms of plots ABC and DEF are generically consistent, despite the data for each plot having been drawn from different times in the operations history. One difference is the location of the point of inflection. This is to be expected, as concentrator performance varies (or improves from commissioning date onwards into the future). It is logical to describe the domains of In 1998, the surveyed mean grade of ore milled was 3.13% Ni. In the data base for December 2002 to November 2003, the sampled mean grade of ore milled was 3.45% Ni. Despite the increase in the ore grade, the overall tailings grade was reduced from 0.543% Ni to 0.418% Ni. This reduction in tailings assay was the result of process changes in the concentrator, mentioned earlier in this paper. The probability plot for Raglan final tailings suggests an alignment with lognormality, with two main component phases present, each with a unique gradient ( In terms of nature, or End-Members, reference to the pentlandite grain sizes in In terms of nurture, imperfections or variation in key unit processes would result in recoverable losses of liberated pentlandite. Examples are in the grinding circuit (which affects size distribution) and control of the flotation process, (e.g., improper level or air control in the flotation cells, or inadequate reagent dosage). Again, QemSCAN measurements of Raglan tailings show liberated pentlandite to be present ( This End-Member and processing perspective might consolidate into a situation where the paymetal values are distributed between two distinct phases. One might be the unrecoverable form, hosted in silicates either as finely disseminated unliberated pentlandite, a feature which has become well-known as the ‘textural dominance’ of pentlandite in the Raglan ore. Also, solid solution nickel in altered ferromagnesian silicates such as serpentine is known. The other might be recoverable, such as ultrafine liberated pentlandite, or nickel either locked as pentlandite flames in slow-floating pyrrhotite. The latter group is known to be much higher in nickel grade than the former, this would explain the bimodality. Put differently, whatever weight ratio and mineral composition exists in these two components, the overall mixture is lognormally bimodal because of the mineral host carrying nickel in different orders of magnitude. The overall tailing seems to be a blend of these various components, with a strong emphasis on the first component. The reader is referred to The final tailings distribution was decomposed into its subordinate distributions using Tripod ( The above diagnostics were used together with linear extensions of the two visible lines in It is evident from the above decomposition and from the TRIPOD diagnostics that the minor distribution (Phase 2) has a higher variance and range of data than Phase 1. This is consistent with discussion on the general interpretation of lognormal probability plots ( As a cross-check, using some visible and intuitive points in Using the range 0–40% cumulative frequency, we may ignore the effects of overlap from the minor (high-grade) distribution. Taking the intercept on the overall plot at 40% cumulative frequency, and dividing by 0.8, we obtain 50%, which would represent the mean of this subdistribution. The estimated grade ( Using the 90% + cumulative frequency, we may ignore the effects of overlap from the major (low-grade) distribution. Taking the intercept on the overall plot at 90% frequency (which for the high-grade distribution is a frequency of 10%), and dividing that frequency by the weight of 20%, i.e., 0.2, we obtain 50%, which would represent the mean of this subdistribution. The estimated grade ( Comparison of the means of this simplified decomposition with the nonlinear least squares method of TRIPOD The bimodality of the Raglan final tailings described above in Liberation analysis of the above data by QemSCAN using the particle measurement analysis, or PMA, provided the following analysis. The reader is referred to the primary composition file of the Raglan system ( If nurture is the major cause of the high tailings end mode, then its recoverable nickel component should be higher than that of the lower tailing grade mode. If nature is the major cause, then the opposite should be observed. The fact that the final tailings comprise two streams, viz. rougher tailings and scavenger tailings, and that each have their own typical nickel grade, may be a contributing factor in the bimodality here described. Each stream has its individual treatment history. Each of these streams has, however, documented evidence of carrying both liberated and middling/locked nickel–iron sulphides. Obviously the relative proportion of these differs. In the June 1998 survey, the scavenger tailings reported 26% liberated nickel–iron sulphides, 29% as middling, and 45% as locked ( In the absence of more specific modal analysis, the role of nurture can be further investigated by comparing the data of This study has attempted to characterize the bimodality of the distribution of nickel grades in Raglan tailings. For the two data sets tested, this bimodality is consistent but the probability plots separate the two because they have different means and relative weights between their respective subdistributions. The plot offers a simple, powerful diagnostic to guide concentrator performance improvements. It is proposed that this approach could be applied to other sulphide concentrator tailings. The operations staff has been collecting individual samples of rougher tailings and scavenger tailings since January 2006. A further exercise to investigate potential bimodality within each of these streams has been suggested ( The author thanks Xstrata management for permission to publish this paper. Mr. Colin Hardie, Chief Metallurgist, Raglan Concentrator, provided useful comment on this work. Dr. I. Clark, Geostokos Limited, and Professor J.A. Finch, McGill University, kindly proof-read this paper.