Complex elbow dislocations include all elbow dislocations with an associated fracture. Complex elbow dislocations are debilitating for patients and can be challenging for the treating orthopedic surgeon. Evaluation of the patient with a complex elbow dislocation begins with a thorough neurovascular examination followed by appropriate imaging, including a computed tomography scan with reconstructions. Surgical intervention is typically required and may include open reduction and internal fixation, ligament repair, or even a hinged external fixator for more complex cases. Recurrent instability, stiffness, pain, heterotopic ossification, neurologic damage, and post-traumatic arthritis are among the most common complications. Improper management of these injuries and their complications may result in long-term dysfunction and significant pain. This chapter aims to educate the practitioner about these injuries and assist in complication prevention.Elbow dislocations with an associated elbow fracture are referred to as complex elbow dislocations. Complex elbow dislocations are now widely recognized as inherently unstable injuries. Unlike simple elbow dislocations, which rarely require operative intervention, complex elbow dislocations are typically managed surgically ( Complex dislocations are associated with various fractures, including radial head, proximal ulna, coronoid, or distal humeral fractures. Expected fracture patterns have been identified, allowing for the development of treatment protocols that yield predictable results ( Complex elbow dislocations can be categorized according to the mechanism of injury. This methodology is useful because it guides the surgeon as to where to look for injury, appreciate the severity, and subsequently plan treatment in a logical fashion ( A thorough understanding of elbow anatomy is crucial for the treatment of complex elbow dislocations. The elbow is a constrained joint; therefore, stability is dependent on bony architecture. The joint is a complex structure consisting of three separate articulations: ulnohumeral, proximal radioulnar (PRUJ), and radiocapitellar joints. The greater sigmoid notch of the proximal ulna comprises the coronoid and olecranon processes, which are separated by a bare area ( The MCL and lateral ligament complexes are essential primary stabilizers of the elbow ( The ability to conservatively treat simple elbow dislocations, coupled with the tendency for complex dislocations to remain unstable without surgery, accentuates the importance of the bony architecture to elbow stability. Multiple cadaveric studies divided the local elbow structures into primary and secondary restraints and analyzed their contributions to elbow stability ( The ulnohumeral articulation is a primary stabilizer of the elbow and provides approximately 50% of overall joint stability ( Secondary stabilizers include the radial head, joint capsule, and the flexor and extensor origins ( It is useful to consider injury patterns when managing complex elbow dislocations. Another mechanism for elbow fracture-dislocations is the varus posteromedial mechanism, in which the body rotates externally around the planted hand, causing a varus deformity ( A third mechanism of fracture-dislocations results from an axial loading force and is known as the transolecranon fracture-dislocation. With the elbow flexed, force is applied to the proximal ulna, resulting in the distal humerus being driven into the sigmoid notch of the ulna ( Understanding the injury mechanism associated with complex elbow injuries allows the treating physician to anticipate and identify specific injury patterns. This A thorough history should be obtained to understand the mechanism and amount of energy involved because higher energy mechanisms will often result in more structural damage as well as an increased likelihood of associated injuries. Specific injury patterns may be recognized and should be anticipated. After the history, a detailed physical examination should be performed. Inspection of the elbow should note any The dislocated elbow should be reduced using conscious sedation or general anesthesia as quickly as medically feasible. The reduction maneuver is axial traction with the elbow in extension, followed by flexion once the coronoid and radial head clear the distal humerus. Once reduced, the elbow is put through an arc of motion to assess stability. The position at which the elbow begins to dislocate should be noted. If the elbow is unstable at a flexion angle of 30° or more, then surgery is indicated. The elbow is splinted at 90°. The shoulder and wrist should also be examined for associated injuries, including evaluation of the distal radioulnar joint for a possible Essex-Lopresti injury. Postreduction radiographs are obtained and examined for concentric reduction and fractures about the elbow. The coronoid should be carefully examined to evaluate for fracture. If a terrible triad injury or coronoid fracture is suspected, then a computed tomography (CT) scan is recommended to assess the size of the coronoid fracture and determine the need for surgical intervention. The elbow should be reduced before obtaining the CT scan. Valgus posterolateral rotatory (VPLR) loading is felt to be the most common mechanism of injury leading to posterior elbow dislocations, both simple and complex ( Depending on the degree and direction of valgus and axial forces, this mechanism can result in simple dislocations, dislocations with associated radial head fractures, or terrible triad injuries. The complex nature of these injuries makes it difficult to analyze biomechanical studies on elbow dislocations for guidance in treatment. Early studies on primary and secondary restraints focused on varus or valgus instability ( Radial head fractures have been classified by the Hotchkiss modification of the Mason classification and are covered in more detail in Management of these fractures with concomitant elbow dislocation is dependent on elbow stability. Small partial articular fractures may not require surgery, but fragments that involve 25% or more of the radial head require operative repair ( When comparing radial head replacement versus ORIF in terrible triad injuries, no significant difference in outcome scores has been shown ( The combination of a radial head fracture, coronoid fracture, and elbow dislocation, known as the terrible triad, is the most unstable injury pattern in the elbow. Recent biomechanical and technical advances have resulted in improved understanding and Coronoid fractures have most often been classified by the Regan and Morrey classification, which describes three categories of fracture ( As more research becomes available, it is evident that not all coronoid fractures need to be repaired. However, some authors have recommended repair of all coronoid fractures because of the unpredictable outcomes associated with this injury ( However, a recent clinical series reported successful treatment of terrible triad injuries with Regan and Morrey Type I and II coronoid fractures without repair of the coronoid or MCL, but these findings may be due to lower energy mechanisms observed in the series ( Complex elbow dislocations are rarely treated without surgery. Nonoperative management is only recommended if specific criteria are met ( The protocol proposed by The surgical approach is either through a lateral or a universal posterior incision. The advantages of a lateral incision include a more direct exposure with the creation of smaller skin flaps. Most cases can be addressed from the lateral exposure, especially if replacement of the radial head is planned. The posterior incision allows for exposure from the lateral and medial aspects via a single incision, but it does create larger skin flaps with the potential, albeit uncommon, for hematoma and wound edge necrosis. The extensor digitorum communis (EDC) split is preferred over the standard Kocher interval between the anconeus and extensor carpi ulnaris, although the lateral interval may already be created in very high-energy injuries ( Starting from deep and working to superficial structures, the coronoid is addressed first. The exposure is simplified if the radial head is excised. In most terrible triad injuries, a suture-lasso technique is used to repair the coronoid as demonstrated by It should be reiterated that the radial head should not be excised without replacement when associated with an elbow dislocation. The goal should be to retain the native radial head, especially in the younger population. However, if stable fixation When considering replacement, radial head fragments are excised and pieced together to measure for the appropriate-sized head and ensure that all fragments have been accounted for. Many severe terrible triad injuries can result in a radial head fragment lodged in the ulnar soft tissues. Most prostheses are modular, allowing for different head diameters and stem/neck heights. The implant must be correctly sized to avoid overstuffing the joint, which is associated with excessive wear on the capitellum and varus malalignment of the elbow ( The LUCL, or lateral ligament complex, is almost always avulsed from the distal humeral attachment and amenable to repair. This can be repaired with suture anchors or by passing sutures through transosseous tunnels. A running locking stitch passed through tunnels allows for excellent tensioning of the ligament, which can be difficult to achieve with suture anchors. Either technique requires attachment to the isometric point on the epicondyle, corresponding to the center of curvature of the capitellum. A #2 or #5 braided suture is used in a running locking stitch technique and passed through drill holes ( Stability is tested by ranging the elbow under a lateral fluoroscopic view. A hanging arm test has also been described in which a bump is placed under the distal humerus, allowing the elbow to extend with gravity and again inspected under lateral fluoroscopy for subluxation ( The MCL or coronoid fragment can be approached through a flexor carpi ulnaris (FCU)-splitting or a Hotchkiss over-the-top approach. The ligament is repaired utilizing transosseous drill holes or a suture anchor if avulsed from the medial epicondyle. As techniques for repairing coronoid fractures via the lateral approach have improved, the need for MCL repair has decreased ( The elbow is splinted at 90° in neutral or pronated forearm rotation. Depending on elbow stability, motion is typically initiated within 1 If a static fixator or cross-pins are used, then they are typically removed by postoperative week 3 or 4 and elbow stability is assessed under anesthesia. Gentle elbow manipulation may be performed at the time of removal. Static progressive splinting may be useful and is initiated at week 6. Strengthening can be started after week 8. Terrible triad injuries have historically been very challenging injuries with poor and inconsistent outcomes. Better understanding of elbow biomechanics and modern treatment protocols have resulted in consistently improved functional outcomes. A summary of results from several series report an average arc of motion of 100–115° flexion-extension and approximately 135° pronation-supination. According to the Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS), The varus posteromedial rotatory injury is infrequent and often results in subluxation rather than frank dislocation. The injury pattern can be subtle but is now recognized as a cause of early post-traumatic arthritis of the elbow ( This type of injury occurs after a fall onto an outstretched hand. With the hand planted, the body then exerts a varus stress to the elbow. This varus and posteromedial rotatory load first ruptures the LUCL complex from the humerus and, with further stress, the AM facet of the coronoid contacts the medial trochlea and fractures. The radial head is not loaded; therefore, it is not fractured. As the forearm internally rotates further, the coronoid may dislocate or sublux posteriorly ( Biomechanical studies have demonstrated the unstable nature of these injuries, especially when the LCL complex is ruptured. The O’Driscoll classification is better suited for classifying these injuries compared with the Regan and Morrey classification for coronoid fractures ( Although there are reports of successful nonoperative management of these fractures, most are treated operatively because of the potential for elbow instability and progression to early arthrosis ( The incision is a matter of preference, but the universal midline posterior incision is typically used because it provides access to medial and lateral structures requiring repair. Alternatively, separate medial and lateral incisions may be used. The medial side is approached first and the ulnar nerve is identified and released between the split in the FCU. The nerve does not typically need to be transposed in the acute injury but This approach splits the flexor-pronator origin approximately 1 After a medial or posterior approach, the raphe between the two heads (ulnar and humeral) of the FCU is exposed and longitudinally split. The FCU is carefully dissected free of the anterior ulna with care to protect the UCL. As with the Hotchkiss approach, the pronator teres and flexor carpi radialis are elevated for more anterior exposure. The ulnar nerve is mobilized enough to permit posterior retraction and exposure of the fracture with placement of hardware. It need not be transposed unless extensive mobilization is necessary for exposure. The AM coronoid is exposed and the fracture site is cleaned. Frequently, there is extreme comminution to the AM facet and interfragmentary fixation is not possible. However, when possible, the AM facet is reduced and stabilized using headless compression screws or small 2.0- or 2.4-mm screws. A buttress plate is recommended After stabilizing the AM facet, the lateral skin flap is raised to expose the common extensor origin. The LCL complex is exposed with an EDC-splitting approach and is repaired with transosseous sutures or suture anchors as previously described. It is imperative to avoid varus stress on the repair after surgery; therefore, the patient is instructed to avoid shoulder abduction. The elbow is initially splinted at 90° flexion in neutral rotation. ROM exercises are started at 1 Because of the uncommon occurrence and the relatively recent recognition of this injury pattern, there are few reported outcomes in the literature. Axial loading injuries are less frequently encountered than terrible triad injuries, but they are important to recognize because of their significant morbidity. The hallmark of these injuries is the involvement of the olecranon and at times the coronoid. Two separate patterns have been described: the anterior transolecranon fracture-dislocation and the posterior transolecranon fracture-dislocation (also called the posterior Monteggia lesion). These injuries result from an axial force that impacts the greater sigmoid notch and distal humerus. In general, this occurs during a fall onto the posterior aspect of the forearm. The anterior transolecranon fracture-dislocation pattern is a high-energy injury in which the forearm displaces anterior to the distal humerus. This particular fracture can be severely comminuted with involvement of the entire coronoid ( Posterior transolecranon fracture-dislocations have been documented as occurring in an older patient population, often as the result of a fall from standing height ( These injuries occur most often from high-energy injuries and require operative intervention. Open fractures, ipsilateral injuries, and neurovascular injuries must be evaluated at the time of presentation and the neurovascular status of the upper extremity should be documented. Closed reduction and splinting should be performed if possible to minimize further bony or soft-tissue damage. The goal of surgery is to anatomically repair the greater sigmoid notch with particular attention paid to the coronoid ( Tension-band wiring (TBW) is not recommended in transolecranon fracture-dislocations. It is a popular technique in the fixation of olecranon fractures, but it is associated with higher failure rates compared with plate fixation for more comminuted fractures. To be used successfully, TBW needs a stable transverse fracture pattern, which is rarely present in these high-energy injuries ( Some authors recommend addressing the radial head fracture through the olecranon fracture, at times elevating the anconeus and LCL ( At this point, the elbow is taken through a ROM and the elbow is checked for full supination, pronation, flexion, and extension. If the coronoid has not been properly addressed, then the elbow subluxes anteriorly in extension. In situations such as these, it is advisable to properly address the coronoid, or if not constructible, apply a static or hinged external fixator. The elbow is splinted 5–7 When stable fixation is achieved in transolecranon fracture-dislocations, particularly the coronoid fragment, excellent or good outcomes are routinely obtained. Fixation may be compromised using TBW techniques for the ulna. Because of the often high-energy and complex nature of these injuries, complications are frequently encountered. These include, but are not limited to, recurrent instability, stiffness, heterotopic ossification, malunion, nonunion, infection, ulnar neuropathy, and arthrosis. The risk of complication increases with the severity of the injury. One of the more feared complications is recurrent or persistent instability, especially with terrible triad injuries and transolecranon fracture-dislocations ( Elbow stiffness is an expected finding after complex elbow dislocation. Authors advocate initiating early elbow ROM to prevent elbow stiffness when adequate stability is obtained. That being said, it is preferable to have a stiff, yet stable elbow rather than Complex elbow dislocations continue to be a vexing problem for patients and surgeons alike. Although significant progress has been made, several areas will require more research. For example, controversy still exists in determining which coronoid fractures require fixation. Recommendations range from fixing all fractures (even tip fractures) to not fixing Type II coronoid fractures in terrible triad injuries ( Another area that needs improvement is the exposure and fixation of the coronoid in the complex elbow dislocation with an intact radial head. This fracture is technically challenging, especially when the coronoid is comminuted. Future surgery incorporating arthroscopic techniques may possibly improve the ease with which we treat the coronoid. A new technique has been described using an internal joint stabilizer for elbows remaining unstable after repairing injured structures. It may be indicated in place of transarticular pinning of the joint or external fixation. It has the advantage of keeping all fixation internal while still permitting motion ( A great deal of interest has also been given to methods of reconstructing the coronoid that is too comminuted for repair. Methods described have included osteochondral autografts from a resected radial head, the olecranon, or even coronoid replacement ( Complex elbow dislocations are challenging injuries to treat. Knowledge gained over the past 2 decades from clinical and laboratory research has shed light on the mechanisms associated with these injury patterns. Recognition of the mechanism of injury allows identification of the associated injured anatomical structures and guides surgical planning. Restoration of elbow anatomy allows for early mobilization and good functional outcomes. The goal of treatment is to provide a stable and functional elbow. Unfortunately, these patients are still at high risk for complications such as stiffness, arthrosis, and early instability. If elbow stability is restored, then reconstructive options are available to improve function should arthrosis or stiffness become an issue. Future studies should offer improved techniques for fixation and better options for reconstruction of the irreparable coronoid fracture.