By using the density functional theory (DFT), we calculated some properties such as the energies of highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) orbitals and the atomic charges which are related to the reactive behavior of 2-mercaptobenzoxazole (MBO) and its methyl and methoxy derivatives. The results of the calculations indicated that the efficiencies of MBO and its derivatives depend on the investigated parameters, and 2-mercaptobenzothiazole (MBT) is better than MBO as a collector agent. Electron donating groups at the 6-position of MBO provided the best efficiency for MBO molecule. The introduction of the methyl group to any position of the benzene ring makes also MBO more powerful chelating agent by increasing the atomic charges on the N and S atoms. The theoretically obtained results are consistent with the experimental data reported in the literature.interaction energies (kcal zero-point vibrational energy included Δ the highest occupied molecular orbital energy (eV) the lowest occupied molecular orbital energy (eV) dipole moment (D) bond length (Å) bond angle (°) dihedral angle (°) Flotation is a very important method to beneficiate the low grade ores in mineral processing technology for providing materials to metallurgical industries, which is increasing rapidly. The reagents used in the flotation method are classified as collectors, frothers and regulators. Collectors are the ones that render the desirable mineral surfaces hydrophobic for better recovery in the flotation process. Since the choice of collectors type is crucial in the flotation performance of minerals, the search for new chemical reagents having strong affinity and better selectivity for certain metal ions has been paid much attention recently. The adsorption of organic molecules on the metal surface is also important from both experimental and theoretical standpoint in the recent literature. Sulfide minerals require careful choice of these flotation collectors to employ due to their complex structures 2-Mercaptobenzoxazole (MBO) containing nitrogen and sulfur as electron donor atoms is used as a chelating-type flotation collector. Since S atom has strong interaction with the metal surface results in the formation of the insoluble complexes, many heterocyclic compounds like MBO have been developed for the different purposes. Marabini et al. As widely considered, computational methods are valuable tools for understanding the chemical systems. Recently, density functional theory (DFT) has emerged as a reliable and inexpensive method that is capable of successfully predicting the properties of the chemical systems. In the present study, DFT was employed to investigate the influence of substituent and substituent position in the phenyl ring on the efficiencies of MBO and its derivatives, namely, 4-methyl-2-mercaptobenzoxazole (4-CH All molecular geometries were fully optimized by using density functional theory method B3LYP As it is known, the researches on the development and design of new chemical reagents for froth flotation continue to be an active field, because these inexpensive, selective and effective reagents would undoubtedly improve the separations of minerals by flotation. Marabini et al. The selected optimized geometric parameters of studied molecules are given in The calculated ZPE and Δ Surface-enhanced Raman (SER) spectra studies of MBO and related compounds revealed that these compounds can interact with the metal in both thione and thiol forms The effectiveness of a molecule may be related to certain quantum-chemical parameters. Among these, we can mention the energy of the HOMO that is often associated with the capacity of a molecule to donate electrons. The HOMO and LUMO orbitals are commonly known as frontier orbitals and were found to be extremely useful in explaining chemical reactivity. Since chemical bonds are mostly the product of the valence electrons, and the spatial distribution of these electrons is determined by the HOMO orbital, electrophilic attacks can be correlated very well with atomic sites having high density of the HOMO orbital. As the title compounds act as electron donor species, the HOMO orbitals were especially taken into account in this study. The HOMO energies ( On the other hand, Maier and Dobias Although, MBO structure is very similar to that of MBT, MBO chemisorbs to a much lesser extent on all of the minerals. For example, MBT is a powerful collector for pyrite comparing to MBO and adsorbs on pyrite in its thione form The chelating ability of a molecule depends on the electronic charge on the chelating atoms. Thus, the atomic charge values were obtained by the Mulliken population analysis. From the atomic charge values listed in In this work, the chemical parameters such as the energies of HOMO and atomic charges indicating the reactive behavior of MBO and its derivatives were theoretically determined. We compared such quantities with those of the molecule in its thione and thiol configurations. Based on the computational results and discussions, the following conclusions may be drawn: From the HOMO energies, the following collecting ability order was theoretically obtained: 6-OCH As a result, this study provides a straightforward use of the computational techniques for the description of the activities of the chemical systems. The authors acknowledge the CUBAP for the providing the Gaussian 98W program package.