Although osteoarthritis is characterized by a progressive loss of the extracellular cartilage matrix, very little is known about the fate of articular chondrocytes during the progression of the disease. In this study we examined the expression of syndecan-3, a marker of early chondrocyte differentiation, and annexin VI, a marker of late chondrocyte differentiation, in mammalian embryonic growth plate cartilage and normal and osteoarthritic human articular cartilage. Whereas syndecan-3 was expressed in the proliferative and hypertrophic zones of growth platecartilage, immunostaining for annexin VI waspredominately found in the hypertrophic and mineralizing zones of fetal bovine growth plate cartilage. Approximately 20% of chondrocytes were immunopositive for syndecan-3 in normal human articular cartilage, the number of syndecan-3-expressing chondrocytes significantly increased during the progression of osteoarthritis with more than 80% syndecan-3-positive cells in the upper zone of severely affected osteoarthritic cartilage. Similarly, the number of annexin VI-expressing cells significantly increased in the upper cartilage zones during the progression of osteoarthritis. Furthermore, immunostaining for proliferating cell nuclear antigen, a marker for cell proliferation, was detected in chondrocytes in the upper zone of osteoarthritic cartilage. Double-labeling experiments with antibodies against syndecan-3 and annexin VI revealed chondrocytes that expressed only syndecan-3, and cells that expressed both syndecan-3 and annexin VI. These results suggest that the expression of early (proliferating cell nuclear antigen, syndecan-3) and late differentiation markers (annexin VI, alkaline phosphatase) is activated in chondrocytes of osteoarthritic cartilage.Osteoarthritis (OA) is characterized by a progressive damage of articular cartilage, secondary inflammatory processes of the synovialis, the formation of osteophytes, and an increase in subchondral bone mass. During early stages of OA articular chondrocytes try to repair the cartilage matrix by increasing the synthesis of type II collagen and aggrecan in response to the ongoing enzymatic and biomechanical degradation. During endochondral ossification, chondrocytes in growth plate cartilage undergo a series of differentiation events, including proliferation, hypertrophy, and terminal differentiation. Syndecan-3 is a member of a family of heparan sulfate proteoglycans that are associated with the cell surface. These macromolecules contain a hydrophobic membrane-spanning domain, a short cytosolic domain, and an extracellular domain. Syndecans are known to interact with several matrix molecules, and thus are thought to serve as structural and functional links between the cell surface and the surrounding extracellular matrix. Furthermore, syndecans interact with growth factors, such as fibroblast growth factor, insulin-like growth factor, and epidermal growth factor. These interactions are required for biological activity, because these factors must first interact with the heparan sulfate chains of the syndecans before they can interact with their high-affinity signaling receptors. Thus, syndecans seem to play important roles in modulating cellular activities, including cell proliferation and differentiation. Annexin VI belongs to the annexin protein family. These proteins have in common that they bind to acidic phospholipids in the presence of calcium. Chondrocytes in normal articular cartilage have a stable phenotype in contrast to growth plate chondrocytes, and maintain a functional articular extracellular matrix. However, the possible expression of proteins, which are normally produced by chondrocytes during various stages of differentiation in growth plate cartilage, by chondrocytes in OA cartilage could lead to altered functional activities and the loss of their ability to maintain a functional articular cartilage matrix. Thus, the goal of this study was to examine whether articular chondrocytes express proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) and syndecan-3, early differentiation markers, which are proposed to play roles in proliferation and differentiation of growth plate chondrocytes, Seventeen OA human cartilage samples (five samples of mild OA, five samples of moderate OA, and seven samples of severe OA) were obtained from patients undergoing total knee replacement. Clinical data were carefully reviewed to exclude any forms of secondary OA and inflammatory joint diseases. Five normal human cartilage samples were obtained from patients who underwent amputation or during autopsies within 24 hours after dead. In addition, fetal bovine growth plate cartilage was used in this study. Samples were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, decalcified in 0.2 mol/L ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, embedded in paraffin, and 6-μm-thick sections were cut perpendicular to the cartilage surface. Safranin O-stained sections of normal and OA cartilage were graded by two different observers according to Mankin and colleagues. After deparaffinization, sections were incubated with sheep testicular hyaluronidase (2 mg/ml; Sigma, St. Louis, MO) in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), pH 7.5, for 30 minutes at 37°C. Immunostaining was performed using the Histostain SP Kit (Zymed Laboratories Inc., San Francisco, CA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, after incubation with a blocking solution for 10 minutes at room temperature, sections were incubated overnight at 4°C with primary antibodies followed by biotinylated secondary antibodies for 10 minutes at room temperature. After washing, sections were incubated with a streptavidin-peroxidase conjugate for 10 minutes at room temperature followed by a solution containing diaminobenzidine (chromogen) and 0.03% hydrogen peroxide for 5 minutes at room temperature. Control sections were incubated with nonimmune rabbit serum. Specimens were viewed and analyzed under a Zeiss-Axiophot microscope (Zeiss, Goettingen, Germany). To determine the percentage of immunostained cells, 100 cells were counted in each of two different areas of each cartilage zone of separately stained sections from different donors. The average of the two counts was used for statistical analysis. Statistical analysis was performed on all data points with regard to immunopositive cells in normal articular cartilage in each zone by an unpaired Student’s To stain sections with antibodies specific for PCNA, deparaffinized sections were treated with 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS (pH 7.4) for 2 minutes at room temperature. After blocking with 5% bovine serum albumin the sections were incubated with primary anti-PCNA antibodies (DAKO, Hamburg, Germany) for 30 minutes at 37°C followed by incubation overnight at 4°C. After washing, sections were incubated with biotinylated secondary antibodies followed by avidin-biotin-alkaline phosphatase conjugate and staining with Fast Red (DAKO). Sections were counterstained with hematoxylin. Rabbit polyclonal antisera were generated through immunization with recombinant full-length human annexin VI protein or a recombinant fusion protein containing GST and a syndecan-3 fragment encoding amino acids 215 to 313 of chicken syndecan-3 as described previously. Double immunolabeling with antibodies against annexin VI and syndecan-3 was performed on paraffin-embedded specimens of normal and OA cartilage. Sections were deparaffinized in xylene and a graded series of ethanol. One mg of the polyclonal rabbit anti-annexin VI IgG fraction (1 mg/ml) was labeled with Alexa Fluor 568 dye, whereas 1 mg of the polyclonal rabbit anti-syndecan-3 IgG fraction was labeled with Alexa Fluor 488 dye using the Alexa Fluor protein-labeling kits (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Labeling of the anti-annexin VI IgG fraction resulted in 3.8 mol of Alexa 568 dye per mol of antibody, whereas labeling of the anti-syndecan-3 IgG fraction resulted in 2.4 mol Alexa 568 dye per mol of antibody. After pretreatment with hyaluronidase for 30 minutes at 37°C, sections were blocked with 5% bovine serum albumin in PBS for 10 minutes. The two fluorescence dye-labeled antibodies against annexin VI and syndecan-3 were mixed and incubated on the sections for 2 hours at room temperature. After washing three times with PBS, sections were mounted and viewed under an Olympus Fluoview laser-scanning confocal microscope. In the first set of experiments we analyzed the immunolocalization of syndecan-3 and annexin VI in the embryonic bovine growth plate. The antibodies specific for syndecan-3 showed staining in the zones of proliferative, hypertrophic, and terminally differentiated chondrocytes, whereas the zone of reserve chondrocytes showed no staining ( We next analyzed the expression of syndecan-3 and annexin VI in normal and OA human articular cartilage samples by immunohistochemistry. Five normal articular cartilage samples, five mild, five moderate, and seven severe OA cartilage samples from different donors were investigated in this study. Normal cartilage samples were uniformly stained with safranin O ( We next determined the expression of PCNA, a marker of cell proliferation. As shown in In this study, we provide evidence that the percentage of chondrocytes expressing syndecan-3 and annexin VI increases significantly in OA cartilage compared to normal healthy human articular cartilage. The percentage of immunopositive chondrocytes gradually increases in the various stages of OA to up to 87% cells positive for syndecan-3 and 45% positive for annexin VI in the middle zone, and 66% cells positive for syndecan-3 and 34% for annexin VI in the deep zone of severe OA cartilage. Furthermore, chondrocytes in OA cartilage also show immunostaining for PCNA and alkaline phosphatase, clearly establishing that these cells activate the expression of proteins, which are produced during early (PCNA, syndecan-3) and late stages (alkaline phosphatase, annexin VI) of maturation of growth plate chondrocytes. Our double-staining experiments with antibodies specific for syndecan-3 and annexin VI reveal cells that are positive for syndecan-3 but not for annexin VI, and cells that are positive for both syndecan-3 and annexin VI. However, no cell was detected that shows only staining for annexin VI but not for syndecan-3. These findings suggest that the temporal expression pattern of syndecan-3 and annexin VI is similar to the pattern found in embryonic mammalian growth plate cartilage, where syndecan-3 immunostaining is found in the proliferative and hypertrophic zones, whereas annexin VI staining is restricted to the hypertrophic zone. The immunostaining pattern for syndecan-3 in mammalian growth plate cartilage is different from the pattern obtained in embryonic chicken growth-plate cartilage, where syndecan-3 staining is restricted to the proliferative zone. Previous studies from our and other laboratories have demonstrated that OA chondrocytes express annexins II and V. Interestingly, chondrocytes in the upper zones of moderate and severe OA cartilage are immunopositive for PCNA. PCNA, also known as cyclin, is a 36-kd intranuclear protein that is synthesized in the late G The final fate of chondrocytes in OA cartilage is not clear yet. Several studies have provided evidence that chondrocytes in the upper zones of OA cartilage undergo programmed cell death (apoptosis). We thank Drs. Bob Kosher, Stephen Moss, and Maurizio Pacifici for providing us with the full-length annexin VI cDNA and syndecan-3 cDNA; and Jerry A. Katzmann for developing the monoclonal antibodies against human alkaline phosphatase that were obtained from the Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank maintained by the University of Iowa, Department of Biological Sciences, Iowa City, IA, under contract N01-HD-7-3263 from the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development.