The linear attenuation coefficients (μ, cm−1) for concrete having marble aggregates in different concentrations have been investigated. The marble concentrations investigated in the work were 0%, 5%, 10%, 15%, 20% and 25% in concrete. The measurements were performed using a gamma spectrometer that contains a NaI(Tl) detector and Multi-Channel-Analyser (MCA) connected to a PC. Three different gamma rays energies have been used at 662, 1173 and 1332keV from 137Cs and 60Co sources respectively. The measured results were compared with the calculation obtained using computer code of XCOM for 1keV–1GeV gamma energies.Nowadays radiation technology is being started to be used in a variety of different fields such as nuclear power stations, particle accelerators and medical hospitals and thus radiation protection becomes important. As shielding is widely and effectively used method to be protected from radiation hazards, improvement of the shielding properties of concrete which is the commonly used construction material becomes important. In the concrete production the aggregates are very important for durability of the concrete structures. The different aggregates as natural stones or minerals are used in production of concrete ( As this subject is very important for health, several works have been performed to obtain linear attenuation coefficients ( In this paper, the linear attenuation coefficients of concrete produced with marble have been measured. The measured results have been compared with the calculation. This will be an interesting work where marble has been used as aggregate in concrete for the first time in our knowledge. The concretes have been produced using Portland Cement (PC) 42.5 type of cement from Goltas plant in Isparta and marble as aggregate. Their chemical composition shown in The linear attenuation coefficients of produced concretes have been measured using the gamma spectrometer which contains a 3″ The spectrometer has been calibrated using gamma-ray energies of 662 The linear attenuation coefficients The measured linear attenuation coefficients ( The linear attenuation coefficients ( The effectiveness of gamma-ray shielding is described in terms of the half value layer (HVL) or the tenth value layer (TVL) of a material. The HVL is the thicknesses of an absorber that will reduce the c-radiation to half, and the TVL is the thicknesses of an absorber that will reduce the c-radiation to one tenth of its original intensity. Those are obtained as: The transmission rate of gamma rays obtained for all types of concrete have been displayed in The comparison measured and calculated linear attenuation coefficients shows good agreement and marbles are important aggregate can be used in concretes. The conclusion can be extracted from this work that the radiation shielding properties of concrete can be improved by using marble in concrete as an aggregate.