Reactive oxygen species mediated oxidative stress play an important role on the injury of tissue damage and increased attention has been focused on the role of free radicals in diabetes mellitus (DM). In the present study firstly superoxide dismutase (SOD) enzyme was chemically modified with two different polymer and physicochemical properties of these conjugates clearly analyzed. Then, the stability of carboxymethylcellulose–SOD (CMC–SOD) and poly methyl vinyl ether-co-maleic anhydride–SOD (PMVE/MA–SOD) conjugates was investigated against temperature and externally added H2O2. Moreover, we investigated the effect of chemically modified SOD enzyme on lipid peroxidation and antioxidant status in streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetic rats. PMVE/MA–SOD conjugate treatment significantly reduced MDA level compared with the control groups, native and CMC–SOD conjugate treated groups in brain, kidney and liver tissue. GSH and SOD enzyme activity in diabetic groups was significantly increased by treatment of CMC–SOD and PMVE/MA–SOD conjugates. The protective effects on degenerative changes in diabetic rats were also further confirmed by histopathological examination. This study provides the preventative activity of SOD–polymer conjugates against complication of oxidative stress in experimentally induced diabetic rats. These results suggest that chemically modified SOD is effective on the oxidative stress-associated disease and offer a therapeutic advantage in clinical use.Diabetes mellitus (DM) is defined as a chronic metabolic disorder. DM affects more than 346 million people worldwide and these numbers are expected to be double by 2030 SOD, Cu,Zn type [EC 1.15.1.1] catalyzes the dismutation of highly reactive superoxide anion radical (O Various strategies have been developed to increase the intravascular half-life of SOD However, the effect of chemically modification of SOD with poly methyl vinyl ether-co-maleic anhydride (PMVE/MA) and CMC polymers has not been reported against streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. PMVE/MA has a great potential in biomedical application due to its biodegradable and biocompatible properties To our knowledge, there is no study published about chemical modification of SOD with PMVE/MA polymer and the role of chemically modified SOD with CMC and PMVE/MA on oxidative stress in DM. Hence, the primary aim of the present study is to investigate the usefulness of the CMC–SOD and PMVE/MA–SOD conjugates for the first time as a protein modifier for improving the functional stability of SOD enzyme. Secondarily, it is aimed to investigate the protective effect of CMC–SOD and PMVE/MA–SOD conjugates on lipid peroxidation and antioxidant status in different tissue on STZ-induced diabetic rats using both biochemical and histological methods. Carboxymethylcellulose (CMC) sodium salt with 90 In addition to Xanthine sodium salt, xanthine oxidase from bovine milk, sodium carbonate, nitrotetrazolium blue, bovine serum albumin and ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid sodium salt purchased from the Sigma Chemical, St. Louis, MO. NaH SOD enzyme was chemically modified with CMC and PMVE/MA polymers by covalent binding procedure which involves water-soluble carbodiimide SOD, CMC, PMVE/MA, CMC–SOD and, PMVE/MA–SOD conjugates were analyzed using size exclusion chromatography (SEC) with a triple detection system. Viscotek TDA 302 detector system with refractive index (RI), right angle light scattering (RALS) detectors was used for on-line SEC signal detection. A separate UV detector obtained from Viscotek was connected to this detector system. OmniSEC4.1 software program was used for the acquisition and analysis of SEC data and calculation of molecular weight of CMC and PMVE/MA conjugates in the solution. Viscotek triple detector arrays were calibrated with BSA monomer peak in a mobile phase of PBS at 1.0 Native SOD activity and SOD activity in the conjugates (CMC–SOD and PMVE/MA–SOD) were measured by the cytochrome c reduction assay using xanthine and xanthine oxidase as an O The conjugation reaction yield was estimated using both protein content analysis and GPC analysis results. Maximum conjugation yield was obtained in CMC–SOD2 (55%) and PMVE/MA–SOD1 (75%) according to our results, these conjugates (CMC–SOD2 and PMVE/MA–SOD1) were used in-vitro animal studies. The stability of the native and chemically modified SOD (5 The SOD inhibitor H Sprague Dawley rats (12 weeks old; 350–380 The rats were randomly divided into 5 groups with six animals in each group. Experimental diabetes (Groups II, III, IV and V) was induced in 12 Group I, non-diabetic (Normal Control) rats; Group II, Diabetic Control rats; Group III, native SOD treated diabetic rats; Group IV, CMC–SOD conjugate treated diabetic rats; Group V, SOD-PMVE/MA conjugate treated diabetic rats. Both native SOD and SOD–polymer conjugates administered intraperitoneally (i.p.) two times with a dose of 5560 For biochemical evaluations, brain, kidney and liver biopsy samples were washed in cold (+4 For biochemical evaluations, brain, kidney and liver biopsy samples were washed in 1 For biochemical evaluations, brain, kidney and liver biopsy samples were washed in 1 Tissues of brain, liver, and kidney were collected, and immediately fixed with 10% buffered formalin. After deparaffinization in xylene and rehydration in a graded series of ethanols and finally cleared with xylene. The samples were then embedded in paraffin. Paraffin-embedded samples were cut into 5-μm sections and deparaffinized in xylene and rehydrated in a decreasing ethanol series. Afterwards sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (DAKO Corporation, Carpinteria, CA, USA) for histological analysis and they were evaluated by light microscopy and photographs were taken. Data were expressed as mean The present study was designed to compare the effect of native and chemically modified SOD with polymer on lipid peroxidation and antioxidant status in STZ-induced diabetic rats. A carbodiimide conjugation procedure was followed to obtain SOD–polymer conjugates as described previously. SOD-PMVE/MA or SOD–CMC were then conjugated at the different weight ratios of polymer/SOD16, 24, 32 using water-soluble EDC as a zero-length cross-linker. In the first hand, all conjugates were characterized with SEC in order to identify if the conjugation occurred successfully. Detailed information about physicochemical properties of SOD–polymer conjugates were obtained from SEC, RI and RALS detectors that are sensitive to concentration and molar mass, respectively, whereas UV absorbance detector is sensitive to protein content of samples SEC chromatograms of free SOD and SOD–polymer conjugates with PMVE/MA ( In According to Molecular weight of the native SOD and SOD–polymer conjugates (for different ratio of polymers) were determined from molecular mass-sensitive-light scattering (RALS) detectors and exhibited in Although weight-average molecular weights of CMC–SOD conjugates increased linearly with the increase in the weight ratio of polymer/SOD, weight-average molecular weight of PMVE/MA–SOD conjugates increased non-linearly. When evaluating the changes in chromatograms and increases in molecular weight of all components we can say that SOD and polymers (both PMVE/MA and CMC) were covalently conjugated successfully. Furthermore, we examined the effect of chemically modification of SOD on the specific activity using xanthine and xanthine oxidase methods and obtained results were given in In this study the enzymatic stability of PMVE/MA–SOD and CMC–SOD conjugates against temperature or externally added H The stability against externally added 0.4 As it can be seen from The levels of non-enzymatic antioxidants (GSH) in brain, kidney and liver were represented in  SOD is an important protective enzyme that accelerates the dismutation of superoxide anion radicals to hydrogen peroxide acts as a primary defense The balance between oxidant and antioxidant systems is extremely important in the pathogenesis of diabetes mellitus and in the progression of tissue injury. Tissue sections of kidney, liver and brain were examined histopathologically. Examined kidney sections present normal glomerular and tubular morphology in non-diabetic (normal control) rats (Group I) ( In microscopic examination slight, degenerative changes were observed in glomerular interstitial and renal tubular epithelial cells of the kidney in STZ-induced diabetic rats (Group II, Histopathological observation of the liver sections of native (Group III), CMC–SOD (Group VI) and PMVE/MA–SOD (Group V) conjugate treated groups diabetic rats showed similar morphology with control group (Group I) ( Diabetes mellitus in rats is a useful and successful model for observing the protective effects of investigated agents rapidly on diabetes-induced damage. It has been clearly described that the levels of lipid peroxidation and antioxidant stress increased in diabetes mellitus This is the first study in which SOD enzyme conjugated PMVE/MA polymer and physicochemical properties of these conjugates clearly characterized. In addition, for the first time SOD–CMC and SOD–PMVE/MA conjugates were used against the complication of oxidative stress in diabetes mellitus. The results have shown that chemical modification increased resistance the enzyme against to temperature and oxidative inactivation by H This work was supported by