This chapter is an introduction to dirty water physical process design, including consideration of various technologies, used for transfer, screening, comminution, flow equalization, grit removal, settlement, flotation, filtration, gas transfer, stripping, adsorption, and UV disinfection.Plug flow: Completely mixed Partial treatment Introduction Flow Measurement Pumping Airlifts Racks and Screens Bar Screens Screens Comminution Grit Removal Grit Chambers Vortex Separators Suspended Solids Removal Screens and Filters for Residual Suspended Solids Removal Flow Equalization Primary Sedimentation Final Settlement Tank Design Flotation Filtration Gas Transfer Stripping Adsorption Other Physical Processes Physical Disinfection  Flow measurement devices for wastewater treatment plants may be conveniently divided into open channel and pipeline devices. The inlet and often the outlet of a wastewater treatment works will tend to carry wastewater in open channels, and pipelines will tend to be used within treatment processes after the inlet works. The most common flow-measuring device on wastewater treatment plants is the flume ( A weir-type device works in much the same way. There are other types of open channel devices, including magnetic, velocity head, and dilution types. There are any number of flow measurement devices for closed systems, based on differential head over an obstruction, moving fluid physical effects, or positive displacement. These have a range of applications based on their type. For example, units based on obstructions to flow or small orifices are unsuitable for early stages of treatment, where there are high levels of gross solids still within the wastewater. Pumps used for dirty water are rated by solids handling capability, as well as flow and head requirements. The larger and harder the solids a rotodynamic pump can handle, the lower its efficiency. Rotodynamic pumps are still, however, usually favored where possible, and are often of the submersible type rarely used in other areas. The tables in An unusual pump type common in this area is the airlift ( Although the airlift pump was invented in 1797, knowledge of how to design it is not widely held, so I have included guidance here, based upon long-standing heuristics. In the following discussion:      The minimum pipe size is 4″/100 If used with RAS, or similar, the line size can be selected from the The discharge line velocity should not exceed 1.1  The percentage submergence ( The fluctuation in percentage submergence in service should not be less than 1%  The distance from the tank invert (point 11 in The distance from the airline entry (point 5 in The pipe at point 9 of A pressure-reducing valve or air bleed valve should be provided on the incoming airline (point 1 on Now, we can size the airlift pump as follows: Choose a suitable line size from Choose a degree of submergence from Find the ratio of air required to liquid flow at this degree of submergence from the other graph above Knowing Add 25% to the theoretical requirement Allow the blower head requirement at point of supply in mWG as depth of submergence Allow an additional 0.5 Often the first process in treatment is to remove gross particles by passing the wastewater through holes either in a sheet, or between wires. The holes tend to be of uniform size, usually a few millimeters. The requirement for screening of wastewater prior to treatment is becoming progressively finer over time, from perhaps 15 Modern screens tend to be mechanically cleaned, often either by raking, or by means of water jets. Hand-cleaned screens tend to be limited to smaller plants and the coarse screens used in storm systems. In addition to the screens used in pretreatment, finer screens are gaining popularity for tertiary treatment applications. The oldest type of screen is the bar screen ( There are several variants on the inclined screen, standing at an angle within a channel used for pretreatment. These may be fixed, usually mechanically raked, or rotary, with cleaning usually by water jets. Less commonly, drum screens may be used for pretreatment. Variants on the inclined screen ( The different grades of screens, from coarse bar screens to fine inclined or drum screens, remove successively finer particles. Hence the bar screen removes plastic, wood, paper, and rags, with some fecal contamination, but fine screens remove all the above plus fine solids, fats, oils, and greases. Screenings tend nowadays to be washed of fecal material, compacted, and bagged by automated processes, to avoid offensive odors, and manual handling. Hand-raked screens rarely find much application on modern works of any size. They are, however, sometimes to be found on smaller works or, sometimes, on storm overflows. Much more common nowadays are mechanically raked units. The most common of these is the chain-raked type, of which there are many variants. There are also reciprocating-rake, catenary, and cable-raked types. Each of these types and their variants suffer to a greater or lesser degree from problems of jamming, corrosion, and the problems of having underwater bearings chains and sprockets. Screens comprising either perforated plates or wedge wire panels range from the simple rundown screen to inclined or drum types. These can give far finer screening than bar racks, but can have additional problems of grease build up. Finer and finer screening prior to treatment is becoming the norm. The finer screens used more recently trap grit as well as the other components and, in the case of rotary disc and drum types, they may be used as an alternative to primary settlement. Experience, however, suggests that such substitution does not always work as well in practice as hoped. Comminutors can be installed instead of screens, although this is a less common approach in recent years. Rather than removing the solids, they are shredded to Hard, dense (mostly mineral) particles that can cause excessive wear of downstream process units and settle out in pipelines are removed either by a form of gravity settlement or by a combination of gravity and centrifugal effects. The first principle is used in grit chambers, and the second in vortex separators. Velocity-associated “centrifugal” forces may be used to enhance gravity separation. As well as the centrifuges used in sludge thickening, this is an important process in the “Pista” type grit separator. Some form of washing is recommended for collected grit. Unwashed grit may be 50% organic matter, and rapidly becomes obnoxious if stored in unwashed form. These units are basically designed to provide a large enough area to slow down particles to the point where they settle out under gravity. They may be of a simple rectangular, or more commonly nowadays a raked circular design. Grit removal and washing is commonly by means of a reciprocating-rake mechanism. A common variant is the aerated grit chamber, which is like a rectangular grit chamber, except it has a line of air diffusers down one side. The rolling motion induced by one-sided aeration, combined with the forward motion of the wastewater, produces a spiral movement of the channel contents. This results in both grit removal and washing in a single operation. In these circular units, a vortex is produced either by tangential introduction of wastewater, and/or by means of a turbine blade. In either case, grit is thrown to the walls of the unit. The grit collects at the base of the unit, and is either removed by airlift pump, which has the advantage of further washing the grit, and is removed by grit pump or grit conveyor. Engineering the removal of solids from treated wastewater is complicated by the nature of these solids. These solids are largely composed of the microorganisms that treated the effluent rather than original effluent solids, which have escaped the preceding settlement stage. They are consequently fine, soft, even sticky particles. This makes them hard to filter out, and makes subsequent cleaning of the filter of the collected solids a challenge. Very fine mesh screens, sand filters, and membranes have all been used successfully for tertiary solids removal. In each case, they tend to be bought as a complete proprietary system incorporating the associated cleaning mechanism. Sand or multimedia filters may be used to remove residual suspended solids and solid biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), as described earlier. Less common than granular media filtration, design of microscreens will be a matter for the supplier of the units. The considerable variability in both flow and load already discussed must be accommodated in the design of the plant. It is, however, not likely to be economically viable to arrange for a plant to treat the maximum possible flow arising at the plant under all conditions. While it would be more likely to be practical to design the plant to cope with the maximum load possible, the variability in concentration between the maximum load and minimum load situations would be likely to become a problem. In flow equalization, we therefore have two aims: accommodating maximum flow and, ideally, controlling the range of load concentrations we must deal with. It is possible to have an inline flow equalization system, where we blend incoming effluent with a large volume of stored effluent. This gives a high degree of load balancing, but may have problems when dealing with high storm flows. Any discharges from the mixed tank will have relatively high strength, even when the incoming wastewater to the tank is highly dilute storm water. This system also usually involves pumping the whole process flow to treatment. This system is therefore more common in systems with high load variability, and small storm flows, such as onsite treatment plants for industrial facilities. It is most common for municipal effluents to have an offline system of storm tanks, where flows above a certain limit are sent to tanks where they are held until the flow through the works has dropped back to the point where the tanks can be pumped back through the system. Only these returned flows need to be pumped, and any overflow arising from the tanks will have received some settlement in the storm tanks, and will therefore be more dilute than if arising from Storm tanks and other flow equalization tanks usually have a sloping bottom, to facilitate removal of any settled sludge, and may have one or more inclined sloped sides to allow vehicle access. The main difference between offline and inline systems is that offline systems are often designed to operate as settling tanks, so that flows greater than their capacity are discharged to the watercourse having had substantial solids removal. Inline tanks are usually designed to balance incoming load, and hence approximate completely mixed systems. Complete mix tanks whether online or offline will tend to be either circular or square, and tanks providing a degree of settlement will tend to be an elongated shape. Mixing may be by means of propeller, surface aeration, or venturi jet mixer. These last two types can also answer the requirement for aeration to prevent septicity of the stored effluent. Whether designed in or not, all types will see some solids settlement, and several systems are available to remove any accumulation of sludge in the tank. These may be tipping buckets, water, or water/air jets, or simply vehicle access to allow a tractor with a blade to enter the tank. Having removed gross solids by screening and coarse settlement, it is then desirable to remove as much of the denser material as is practical by simple settlement. There are two design considerations. Firstly, the upflow velocity needs to be less than the natural settlement velocity of the particles we are trying to remove. Secondly, the hydraulic retention times (HRT) should be sufficient to allow natural flocculation to increase the size of a substantial proportion of particles in the wastewater to the point where they settle out. Primary tanks may be circular or rectangular. The circular design ( The commonest arrangement is for incoming flow to enter a central “stilling baffle” from where it is distributed radially into the tank, to be collected by a peripheral weir. The bridge scraper and the sloping tank floor drive sludge into a central hopper, from where it is collected either by pumping or more commonly by hydrostatic means. Smaller units use a half-bridge scraper (as shown in Rectangular designs have either a traveling bridge scraper (analogous to that used in circular tanks except it moves back and forth, rather than round and Primary settlement tanks designed at a rise rate of no more than 1.5 Design criteria for primary settlement tanks are summarized in Expert opinion differs on whether or not surplus activated sludge (SAS) should be co-settled with primary sludge. Some think SAS should ideally go direct to consolidation and storage, but there are sites where co-settlement In 1975, the United Kingdom’s Water Research Council produced a Technical Report (TR11) about settling of activated sludge, which many engineers of my generation still use to design settling tanks. I am not aware of anything that has superseded it, although it can be hard to obtain a copy of TR11. It discusses the basic approach based on HRT and rise rate, a more sophisticated approach based upon a common and easy laboratory test known as sludge volume index (SVI), and recommends an approach based on a novel laboratory test (SSV) and mass flux theory. While its discussion of theory is excellent, the most sophisticated approach suggested in TR11 may be very difficult to put into practice, as a budget will almost never be available for the requisite laboratory tests. In practice, I am rarely even able to determine SVI, never mind to carry out novel tests. Designing on the basis of SVI (volume of sludge after 1 The minimum rate of sludge return required can be calculated by     The following approach should be used with caution, and examined in the light of commonsense. Tank shape, flow regime, and SS of the mixed liquor (MLSS) concentration are determined during the design of the aeration tank. Once the type of activated sludge has been selected, design values may be selected from The design recycle ratio should now be selected from The recycle ratio from the table is used as follows: The required area of the final settlement tank should be determined based upon compatibility with aeration tank, and required final effluent quality. The lesser value of In all cases where final effluent SS standards better than 15 Should the minimum retention at maximum flow be less than 2 Flotation is the process in which particles are floated to the surface of water by means of attachment to the particles of fine gas bubbles. The main deliberate application of this process in wastewater treatment is the Dissolved Air Flotation sludge thickener, although nondeliberate use of the process may lead to problems in aerated biological systems, and final settling tanks. In dissolved air flotation, the differential solubility of air with respect to pressure is used to create microbubbles of air within the body of the sludge to be treated, creating a floating high-solids layer that may be skimmed off after allowing it to self-thicken further by drainage. It is common to add polymeric substances to enhance sludge cohesiveness, and therefore dryness of the floating layer produced. A recycle stream of clarified underflow is taken from the body of the thickener, saturated with air at up to 9-bar pressure, and released through small nozzles within the body of the unit in such a way as to create bubbles of a few microns in size. These bubbles have high surface charges, and adhere readily to sludge solids particles. Coarser bubbles have been used to float sludge solids less effectively, in a process called Induced Air Flotation. This process is, however, of most use in enhancing scum removal in grit traps. A vacuum may be used to generate bubbles from a wastewater or sludge previously saturated with gas. This may be especially useful in applications like the deep shaft process, where the arisings are already naturally saturated with gas by the high operating pressures. Sludge thickening dissolved air flotation has far higher recycle ratios than when the process is used in drinking water treatment. The recycle stream should have at least 100% of the incoming flowrate. The introduction of filtration to wastewater treatment is relatively new. The most common application is at present the enhanced removal of suspended solids (including particulate BOD) from effluent prior to discharge. Sand filters are most commonly used for these operations. The types of sand filters used are largely based on those that are commonplace in potable water treatment. There may be additional media used in conjunction with the sand, such as anthracite or garnet. These media differ in density from sand, and may be graded in size such as to arrange in a stratified way upon backwashing. This arrangement of different particle sizes allows extended filter run times by preventing premature clogging of the sand bed. The three types of sand filter on which wastewater filters are based are known as pressure filters, rapid gravity filters, and slow sand filters. The first two types operate in an intermittent basis, and the last type on a continuous basis. Rapid gravity filters operate in downflow mode for a period, until either a maximum time has elapsed or the headloss through the filter or outlet turbidity becomes excessive because of solids deposited within the body of the filter medium. The filter is then taken offline, and backwashing is carried out to recover the filter to a clean state, ready to be brought back into service. Sand filters should be expected to reduce SS by 80%, BOD by 60%, and coliform bacteria by 30%. Pressure filters operate in the same way, but instead of being open to the atmosphere, the filter is contained within a pressure vessel and pump pressure rather than static head drives operation. Slow sand filters build up a surface filtration layer that is removed periodically, the sand washed clean of dirt and redeposited. These are used in an unmodified form to treat effluent from oxidation ponds. The most common wastewater treatment version of this process, the traveling bridge filter, fully backwashes individual areas of the bed while the remainder of the bed remains flooded and in use. A more recent refinement operates in upflow, with sand passing down the column toward the dirty end of the process, and wastewater passing upward. Sand that has reached the bottom is carried upward through the center of the bed to washing at the top of the filter, prior to redeposition on the top of the moving bed. The most common gases deliberately transferred in wastewater treatment are oxygen, carbon dioxide, methane, and chlorine. The first two of these are of importance in aerobic treatments, the second and third in anaerobic treatment, and the last in disinfection. Aeration of sewage may be achieved by bubbling air through water, or by throwing water through air by means of surface aerators ( When bubbling air through water, the finer the bubbles, the more efficient aeration is, as summarized in Where consents to discharge specify high dissolved oxygen levels, aeration of the outgoing effluent may be required. Where there is sufficient head available, The most important application for deliberate stripping of gases from wastewater is the reduction in levels of ammonia. This is especially useful in reducing ammonia levels in returned liquors from sludge treatment, which may be very high in ammonia. It will be necessary to re-dissolve the stripped ammonia in water or acid, rather than simply venting to atmosphere, to avoid odor problems. The unintended stripping of odorous compounds and VOCs (especially those having greenhouse gas potential) by aeration processes is becoming something of a concern. The most common adsorption process in wastewater treatment is granular activated carbon treatment. Activated carbon is produced from charring coconut or other nutshells, coal, or wood in a controlled manner. This process results in a very open-textured carbon material, full of macroscopic and microscopic channels throughout its bulk. The action of the carbon in removing dissolved substances from solution and attaching them to its surface happens mostly within the microscopic channels, which make up the bulk of its surface area. The material is used either as a fine powder (“powdered activated carbon” or PAC) or alternatively in a granular form, (“granular activated carbon” or GAC). PAC tends to be added directly into the water to be treated, and GAC held within a vessel, and a flow of wastewater passed through the vessel. The retention of GAC means that it may be recovered, and regenerated for further use, whereas PAC used is lost, usually in sludge production. Onsite regeneration is, however, rare. Usually at a site level, the process is one of removal of “spent” GAC, and its replacement with virgin material. The process is one of nonselective adsorption of all substances that are adsorbed by GAC, until the available binding sites are exhausted, and contaminants break through the end of the bed. The time to breakthrough is the most important consideration, and is theoretically determined by means of adsorption isotherm data available from GAC suppliers. In practice, empty bed contact time is the main design parameter, as theoretical approaches are overwhelmed by the number of wastewater contaminants. In addition to the fine screens previously discussed, flotation might be used as an initial solids removal technique. This is a very unusual application of the technique, more commonly used to treat smaller, stronger flows, but it can be used in the primary stage. The units would be far smaller than the equivalent gravity settlement tanks, but energy costs would be far higher. Preaeration may be carried out for septicity control, or as part of other activities such as grit removal. Mechanical coagulation/flocculation may be used but it is far less common than chemical dosing (see Physical treatments tend to be energy intensive, but have the virtue of leaving no residual toxicity to contaminate the discharge point. Heat has been used at small scale, and is an intrinsic feature of sludge digestion processes. UV light is becoming the most popular technique for final disinfection, and is becoming increasingly specified as a discharge consented parameter in Europe. Other electromagnetic radiation, including gamma radiation, has been used, but this last is unpopular, despite its effectiveness, due to the difficulty in handling radioactive materials.