In the still vibrant story of fluid-bed arts, (1) a review of historic successes, failures, surprises, debates, and (2) some suggestions of “where next?”I will treat the word “perspectives” in my title as license both to look back and look ahead. First, I beg your indulgence for some memories of my involvement with fluid-particle systems—an involvement, I should quickly add, that often brought me great satisfaction; but there were bits of grief along the way. I joined Hydrocarbon Research (HRI) in June 1946 after four years at The M.W. Kellogg Company working under Manson Benedict on the Manhattan Project – years of enjoyment and professional satisfaction Stanley Wetterau of HRI's laboratory introduced me to the fluid bed. Stan had been a key player in the development of fluid catalytic cracking (FCC). For my instruction, he placed a Group A powder When I joined HRI, the company had already made key design decisions for a plant it built at Brownsville, Texas, for hydrocarbon synthesis. In 1949, as time for Brownsville start-up grew near, we became nervous – no, that understates it – we became almost certain that the Brownsville reactors would not perform as advertised. They had been designed on data from a 4-inch fluid bed, but Stanolind's 8-inch (Tulsa, Oklahoma) and Texaco's 12-inch (Montebello, California) showed a worrisome decline in yield. In mid-1949, attributing this to greater gas bypassing at the larger bed diameters, I proposed a baffle I hoped would “break up bubbles.” HRI hired Gilliland at MIT to build a large two-dimensional bed for tests of my baffle. Traveling to Cambridge, I encountered a disappointment: my baffles did not do much bubble-breaking. Worse yet, I had never seen such frighteningly large bubbles. (My baffle was a slat, disposed horizontally lengthwise, and inclined somewhat from vertical. The baffles occupied a square array, in which each baffle had four closest neighbors, these inclined in a direction opposite to that of the given baffle From the Brownsville experience I became a “true believer” in the value of large-scale visual modeling for understanding fluid-particle systems. Mooson Kwauk and I were able, early in the 1950s, to build a model that may still be the largest two-dimensional bed ever studied. Under license from Mobil, HRI had contracts to build several installations of Thermofor catalytic cracking (TCC). These were in fact the last large TCC units built, for the handwriting was on the wall. Although TCC survived at small capacities, FCC's advantages at large sizes were about to drive out TCC. In a TCC for 50,000 barrels per day, the regenerator design was complicated in the extreme, while FCC, it seemed, could grow in capacity without limit. Moreover, FCC can come in below 100 feet in height, while TCC needs more like 250. In the TCC, catalyst beads move downward by gravity. Although we understood the physics of the design, no one could see how to simplify it, or lower its height, absent drastic change. Kwauk and I hoped to improve the TCC by employing a sidewards flow of beads at just a bit above minimum fluidization velocity. We built a model some 15 feet horizontally, some 6 feet in height, and 4 inches across. To our surprise, at just a little above minimum fluidization, we saw shallow voids, perhaps an inch or so high, extending almost the full horizontal distance that the model afforded. Not the well-formed bubbles I had seen at MIT in 1949. Kwauk and I dropped our idea. The experience reinforced my understanding that particle size as well as particle size distribution – the TCC beads we studied were substantially uniform in size – are crucial variables in setting fluid-bed behavior. In 1963, after leaving HRI and taking up life as a consultant, I wrote a paper under the title “Species of Fluidization” Although I applauded the physical insights workers in Great Britain gave us in the 1960s, I was not happy that so much of their early work focused on bubble behavior in Group B ballotini of uniform particle size. In 1963, I did not make myself popular at a London meeting of the Institution of Chemical Engineers when I urged that bubble studies expand to higher velocities and powders more representative of industrial practice. Back in 1946, Stan Wetterau had astonished me with another phase transition. He showed how a tiny increase in gas rate – just a tweak of a valve – could cause a perfectly normal looking bed to fly away, in an instant, from the top of his column. This was bed behavior at what Lewis and Gilliland called the “blowout velocity” in publications of 1949 and 1950 I reached a breaking point at the Kashikojima Conference of 1983. There, the number of bubble papers was large, and only a very few reported work at velocities I considered important for industrial practice. I did a “no–no.” I circulated widely an angry critique of the Conference, urging that future conferences offer a better balance between studies at low and high velocity. At the next Conference, in Denmark in 1986, my circular seemed to have exercised the effect I desired. Even so, an attendee (himself a student of bubbles) attacked the relevance of the CCNY effort. There followed one of the most satisfactory moments of my career. Terry Shingles of South Africa's Sasol responded with an encomium of CCNY's fast bed studies, saying they had helped Sasol more than anything else he knew. Terry gave me another great moment. Sasol was obtaining good conversions of synthesis gas in a large, fixed fluid bed, much like the beds HRI had installed for Brownsville. If we had only specified a Group A catalyst powder from the outset – if funds had been available to buy grinding equipment after our coarse powder gave poor yields – then Brownsville might have been an engineering success. But not an economic success: pipelines to the Northeast had made South Texas natural gas far too valuable. Brownsville's owners would have shut it down, earning the profits Indiana enjoyed. By 1986, I had already spent nearly 10 years at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University. I had worked with members of Virginia Tech's Department of Chemistry on studies of coal chemistry This brings me to a look ahead. Chemical process development that involves handling large throughputs of powders has been out of fashion. From the papers we heard in San Francisco in November, 2003, I am encouraged to think that perhaps the industry's attitude toward such work is changing. Hoping this to be so, I recommend two papers now in press at I promised to return to conversion efficiency. My critique of Kashikojima deplored a paucity of reports in the refereed fluidization literature on a point of view toward fluid-bed design already deeply imbedded in industrial practice A success of my team at Virginia Tech has been to demonstrate a vibrated-bed microreactor capable of determining a reaction's sensitivity to Peclet Number I have plans for the time still at my disposal. One goal is to clean up some earlier writings on the history of fluidization. A paper of mine for a joint CIESC-AIChE meeting in Beijing [This paper expands upon remarks at the November 2003 meeting of the AIChE in San Francisco.]