The paper deals with a novel method of obtaining nanocarbon-conjugated polymer nanocomposites (NCPC) using nanocarbon colloids (NCC) and polyethylenimine (PEI) for water purification from metal ions. Size of NCC, process of NCPC synthesis, its chemical characteristics, ratio of NCC and PEI in NCPC, speed of coagulation of NCPC, mechanism of interaction of metal ions with NCPC, ability of removing metal ions from water by NCPC against pH have been studied. NCPC has a bonding capacity of 4.0–5.7mmol/g at pH 6 for most of the divalent metal ions. Percent of sorption of Zn2+, Cd2+, Cu2+, Hg2+, Ni2+, Cr6+ ions is higher than 99%. Lifetime of NCPC before coagulation in the treated water is 1s–1000min and depends on the ratio of polymeric molecules and carbon nanoparticle concentrations. Results of laboratory tests of the method are described.An extensive use of metals and chemicals in process industry has resulted in generation of a large amount of effluent containing high levels of toxic heavy metals. Furthermore mining and mineral processing procedures are known to generate toxic liquid waste. The presence of different organic and heavy metal contaminants in waste water has a large environmental, public health and economic impact. Most of the traditional methods such as solvent extraction, activated carbon adsorption, ion exchange, biological degradation and precipitation techniques are rather efficient, but often are costly and/or time-consuming. Application of carbon nanoparticles and nanotubes for removal of metal ions (Cd In order to improve the separation of carriers of metal ions from treated water, the metal ions can be bound to polymeric molecules and carbon nanoparticles forming nanocarbon-conjugated polymer nanocomposites (NCPC) in water that is able to precipitate rapidly. The idea of the technique described in the paper is to add water-soluble polymeric molecules and carbon colloids to water in such a way as to bind metal ions and simultaneously form NCPC. That leads to significant increase of the size of NCPC species with follow-up formation of precipitates. This sediment can be easily removed from water by filtration or centrifugation with follow-up procedure of extraction of the metals. Copper sulphate pentahydrate (CuSO NCC was prepared by the electrochemical method that we described earlier ( The NCC preparation process was executed in two stages: anode activation and the carbon nanoparticle generation. In the first stage the electrolyte has low conductivity, value of electric current density is small, about 0.1–0.2 The size and the shape of nanoparticles were determined with transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (LEO-912-OMEGA, Carl Zeiss, Germany). The size values were averaged over more than 200 nanoparticles from different TEM micrographs of the same sample. Conductivity and pH of solutions were measured with WTW bench Multiparameter MultiLab 540. The concentration of PEI in solutions was determined by neutron activation analysis. Water samples were irradiated by the Fast Neutron Generator of the Institute of Nuclear Physics (Tashkent, Uzbekistan). NaJ(Tl) 63 Radionuclides used as the label of ions during the study of water purification process are given in The bonding capacity For studies of NCPC bonding capacity, distribution coefficient and the removal ratio, solutions containing NCPC were passed through syringe filters with a pore size of 20 The process of metal ion removal from water comprises the following stages: i) capture of metal ions by PEI and NCC and simultaneous formation of NCPC, ii) sedimentation of NCPC, iii) removal of sediments containing NCPC with metal ions by filtration. Two methods of NCPC formation have been studied: a) the NCPC formation by adding PEI solution with the concentration from 60 The typical TEM image for NCC obtained is shown in Equilibrium reaction for water solution of NCC can be written as: NCC with carboxyl groups on its surface interacts with divalent metal ions. In aqueous solution PEI combines with a proton according to the following equilibrium reaction: The mechanism of PEI interaction with metal ions M The reaction of NCC with PEI in water solution leads to formation of NCPC ( When NCC is added to PEI solution, the conductivity When PEI solution is added to NCC, conductivity Experiments have shown that at the point D of The speed of NCPC coagulation process As it was mentioned above the process of metal ions removal from water solutions involves an interaction of metal ions with PEI and NCC. Simultaneously the positively charged complex M–PEI combines with carboxyl groups of NCC with the NCPC formation as follows: i) by hydrogen bond between carboxyl group of NCC and amine group of PEI which have not formed coordination bonds with M The ability of the method to remove metal ions Zn(II), Cd(II), Cu(II), Hg(II), Ni(II), Cr(VI) was investigated. In these tests the mean size of NCC was 20 Time courses of metal ion adsorption were conducted using solutions of 10 Laboratory tests were conducted to reveal the efficiency of NCPC for purification of contaminated water. For this purpose 200 The method of obtaining nanocarbon-conjugated polymer nanocomposites using nanocarbon colloids and polyethylenimine has been studied and a simple, rapid and reliable method of water purification from metal ions was developed. The process of metal ion removal from water solutions involves the following stages: i) sorption of metal ions by PEI and NCC with simultaneous formation of NCPC, ii) coagulation of NCPC containing metal ions and iii) removing the coagulated NCPC by filtration or centrifugation in order to recover the metals. The contaminated soil can be remediated due to the coagulation of NCPC forming insoluble compounds with metal ions. The metal ions interact with NCPC via ion exchange and complexation mechanism. Studies of NCPC sorption properties show that the composition has high bonding capacity of 4.0–5.7 Laboratory tests have shown that when water is contaminated by metal ions at the level of 1–10