Two new succinimide compounds such as 3-butyl-1-methyl-1H-imidazol-3-ium 4-(dioctylamino)-4-oxobutanoate ([N88SA]−[C4min]+) and 1-butylpyridin-1-ium 4-(dioctylamino)-4-oxobutanoate ([N88SA]−[C4Py]+) were synthesized as task-specific ionic liquids (TSILs) for the extraction of metal ions. The extraction behavior of Co(II) and Ni(II) from chloride solution was compared between these TSILs and Bif-ILs synthesized from Aliquat336 and organophosphorus acids such as Cyanex 272, PC 88A and D2EHPA. The extraction percentage of Co(II) and Ni(II) by TSILs was eight times higher than that by Bif-ILs at the initial pH of 4.0. Moreover, the extraction percentage of Ni(II) by the TSILs was slightly higher than that of Co(II). However, Bif-ILs extracted more hydrogen ions than TSILs. The extraction of Co(II) and Ni(II) by [N88SA]−[C4min]+ was higher than that by [N88SA]−[C4Py]+. The addition of TBP to TSILs reduced the extraction of metals but the loss of TSILs into the aqueous was significantly decreased. Succinimide ionic liquids can be employed for the extraction of metals from weak acidic solutions.Ionic liquids (ILs) are defined as organic salts with a melting point below 100 °C In hydrometallurgy, ILs are used as solvents or extractants in recovery of metals The properties of ILs such as hydrophilicity, hydrophobicity and miscibility with organic solvents or water can be modified by replacing alkyl substituents in the components of ILs or by changing anionic or cationic components. Therefore, many ILs have been designed and synthesized for specific purposes, which can be called task-specific ionic liquids (TSILs) The synthesis of ILs based on the commercial extractants such as Aliquat336 or Cyphos IL 101 (tetradecyl(trihexyl)phos- phonium chloride) has attracted interest owing to some advantages like simplicity in synthesis. The combination of Aliquat336 or Cyphos IL cations and anions containing functional groups will generate bi-functional ILs (Bif-ILs), which can act as both cationic and anionic extractants. The extraction characteristics of metal ions by Bif-ILs such as [A336][P204], [A336][P507], [A336][C272], [A336][C302], [A366][CA-12], [A336][CA-100], Cyphos IL 104 and Cyphos IL 167 has been reported In this work, new succinimide ionic liquids as TSILs were synthesized for the extraction of metal ions. The components of these TSILs included imidazolium and pyridinium cations and succimide anions containing the functional groups like amide and carboxylate. The combination of these ions would increase the metal extraction. These ILs were employed for testing the extraction of Co(II) and Ni(II) from weak chloride media. In general, solution pH has a profound effect on the extraction of metal ions from weak acid solution. Therefore, solution pH was varied from 3.0 to 6.0 in this work, while reaction temperature and time were fixed. Besides, the effect of adding TBP to these ILs as a modifier and a synergist was investigated. In addition, the extraction of Co(II) and Ni(II) by these TSILs was compared with that by the Bif-ILs (R Chemicals used for the synthesis of TSILs, such as succinic anhydride, dioctyl amine, sodium hydride, and butyl bromide were purchased from Sigma Aldrich, whereas methyl imidazolium and pyridine were obtained from DaeJung Chemicals, Korea. All chemicals were of reagent grade and used without further purification. Solvents were dried according to standard procedures and stored over molecular sieves. The synthetic solutions of Co(II) and Ni (II) were prepared by dissolving appropriate amounts of CoCl The commercial extractants such as Aliquat336 (ALiCl, BASF Co., 93%), Cyanex 272 (H-CY, Cytec Inc., 85%), PC 88A (H-PC, Cytec Inc., 95%), and D2EHPA (H-D2, Cytec Inc., 95%), TBP (Cytec Inc., 99%) were used without any purification. Organic phases were prepared by diluting synthesized ILs in kerosene. The structure of ILs are presented in The extraction experiments were carried out by mixing equal volume of aqueous and organic phase (each 20 mL) in a screwed cap bottle for 30 min using a Burrell wrist action shaker (model 75, USA) at ambient temperature (22 ± 1 °C). The shaken solutions were allowed to stand in a glass separatory funnel for phase separation. The concentration of hydrogen ion in the aqueous phases before and after extraction was determined by Orion Star thermal scientific pH meter (model A221, USA). The structures of synthesized compounds were identified by Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy (NMR) and Fourier Transform Spectroscopy (FT-IR). The synthetic process is presented in     The Bif-ILs were prepared by mixing an equimolar concentration of Aliquat336 and organophosphorus acids in kerosene and these mixtures were treated by NaHCO In order to elucidate the structure of these Bif-ILs, FT-IR spectra of organophosphorus acids, Aliquat336 and Bif-ILs were compared. The analysis was mainly based on the change of characteristic bands in three main types of functional groups, including P The peaks in range from 1105 to 1292 cm The bands of dimeric peaks of hydrogen bond between molecules of organophosphorus acids were also observed at 1698.2, 1671.2, and 1686.9 cm The extraction of Co(II) and Ni(II) by TSILs was investigated in the initial pH range from 3.0 to 6.0. The concentration of metal ions in the feed phase was fixed at 100 ppm. The concentration of ILs in the organic phase was controlled to 0.01 M in kerosene. According to literatures reported The results showed that TSILs are efficient for the extraction of Ni(II) and Co (II) from the chloride solution. However, decreasing the limpidity of aqueous phase after the extraction was observed in both extractants as pH values increased. The solubility of TSILs in water was ascribed to this phenomenon. The loss of TSILs components will be disadvantageous in solvent extraction process. Therefore, the effect of adding TBP as a modifier to the ILs will be investigated. In order to investigate the effect of the addition of TBP on the extraction of metals by TSILs, the extraction experiments were done at the same experimental conditions in the previous sections. When the concentration of TBP in the organic phase was controlled to 15 vol%, the aqueous phase has become clear after the extraction. In order to compare the extractability of metal ions between TSILs and Bif-ILs, the concentration of ILs was fixed at 0.01 M in kerosene. The concentration of Ni(II) and Co(II) ions in the feed phase were 100 ppm and initial pH was controlled to 4.0. The solvent extraction reaction of metal ions by R The solvent extraction reactions indicate that the extractability of metal ions by Bif-ILs depends on the structure of their anions, which could form complexes with metal ions. The formation of stable complexes between metal ions and [N The change in pH values before and after extraction is listed in Two new succinimide ionic liquids with non-fluorine which can act as TSILs for the extraction of metals were synthesized. The spectroscopy methods such as Taking into consideration that Co(II) is selectively extracted over Ni(II) from weak acid solution by most extractants, the selectivity of the TSILs for Ni(II) could be employed for the separation of Ni(II) and Co(II). Moreover, the extraction of hydrogen ions could circumvent the necessity of the saponification of organophosphorus extractants for the extraction of metal ions from weak acid solution.  The authors report no conflicts of interest. The authors alone are responsible for the content and writing of the article. This work was supported by a grant from