Due to the obvious differences of particle size, the ore particle segregation and stratification like fine interlayers (FIs) widely appeared in non-agglomerated heaps. In this paper, stratified stacks were set up by inserting FIs at the top, middle and bottom positions of stack, which were named TFIs, MFIs and BFIs respectively. The effect of these fine interlayers on copper extraction, pore evolution and surface damage were studied via the CT and SEM-EDS scanning methods. The results showed that the inserted FIs could be detrimental to the extraction efficiency. The peak extraction rate reached 73.2% in C4 (a uniform coarse stack), which was obviously higher than the peak extraction rate in stacks containing FIs, especially C3 (BFIs, 58.2%). Even though the average porosities of C1~C5 all increased after a 60-day leaching period, the bottom porosity of the stack tended to decrease whereas the top porosity increased, especially for the TFIs in C1. The damage to the ores surface negatively correlated with the located depth of FIs and was classified as severe damage (TFIs), extensive damage (MFIs) and pore-dominated damage (BFIs). This result shows that selective dissolution of minerals could have much more severe consequences in TFIs than in BFIs. Ore agglomerations that formed spontaneously during the leaching process could easily be observed in regions with undeveloped porosity especially in the BFIs.Differences in ore size, stacking and porosity in non-agglomerations commonly result in the ore particle segregation and stratifications such as fine interlayers (FIs) ( Currently, two common situations can easily promote the spontaneous appearance of FIs at different heights inside heaps ( The effect of FIs located at different depths of stratified heaps on the leaching efficiency was evaluated from surface morphology and heap porosity evolution, macro-column leaching, and meso- and micro-scale scanning tests. Stratified stacks were obtained by inserting fine interlayers into the top, middle and bottom position of heaps filled with coarse ores. X-ray CT combined with FE SEM-EDS tests to compare the extraction efficiency, porosity, and surface morphology under different stack conditions. The research findings provide a reference for further studies that could, for example, relate the liquid holdup to the segregated structure. The ores were sampled from the Zijinshan Copper Mine in Fujian Province, China ( The bacteria are collected from the acid mine drainage of the Zijinshan Copper Mine. Different stacking structures were obtained using two types of diameters ores, which are known as fine ores (2 mm < The total weight of each group was 200 g, and the weight of inserted fine ores was 50 g, accounting for 5% of the total weight. To prevent the undesirable phenomena of the lockage of downward paths by fine particles and the formation of regions of the excess liquid reserves at the bottom of column, the coarse ores were always stacked in the L4 as shown in The effect of the stacked structure on the meso- heap porosity and the micro- ore surface morphology was investigated by scanning C1~C5 with the The bacteria concentration was directly counted using an optical microscope (Carl Zeiss Axio Lab A1, Germany). The chemical composition of samples was obtained by processing the samples with nitric acid, hydrochloric acid, dilute hydrochloric acid and hydrochloric acid. The ICP-AES test was utilized to determine the copper ion concentration. A pH meter (pHS In this study, it was verified that bacterial colonization was strongly affected by the segregated structure, eventually leading to undesirable mass transfer and leaching efficiency (  The pore structure is the basic skeleton of a heap and formats the mass transfer channels of flow, gas and heat ( The pore evolution of the cross-sections was caused by flow channels formation, fine particle movement and minerals dissolutions ( The heap porosity obviously changed according to the location of the FIs. After leaching solution with acid solution and bacteria penetrated the FIs, the cross-sectional porosity of the FIs increased under scouring and the downward percolation of leaching solution. The fine particles of the FIs could immigrate downward and even moved into regions parked by coarse ores and the small tributaries that was converged into the preferential flow ( In non-segregated stacks, As Under the coupled effects of liquid scouring, minerals dissolution and fines deposition, the spontaneous ore agglomeration (OAs) consisted of ores, gangues and reactants, insoluble remainders and passivation appeared extensively inside the stacks, as shown in As The segregation and stratifications commonly appear in heaps without agglomerations ( The rate of minerals dissolution in stacks with inserted FIs was much slower than in heaps stacked with coarse ores. The extraction efficiency was inversely proportional to the depth of the FIs, especially for BFIs. The development of heap porosity heavily depended on the FIs location of stack. The porosity decreased at the bottom of the stack and increased at the top of the stack. The ore surface damage inside the FIs clearly changed from severe damage, to extensive damage to pore-dominated damage as the depth of the FIs increase. The heap compaction became serious as the located depths of the FIs increased, which was considered to be related to mechanical activity, such as fines migration driven by overlying gravity pressure and liquid drags. OAs spontaneously appeared throughout the interior of the stacks, especially when FIs existed. Even though the results of this study have verified the significantly effects of FIs on leaching, the particle size was slightly smaller than the industrial size. Research studies on the effect of segregation on leaching kinesics and liquid holdup are in progress. None. The authors sincerely acknowledge financial supports from