Friction stir processing (FSP) has evolved as a viable technology to fabricate surface composite layers. Hybrid composites have attracted the attention of researchers to minimize the wear of counterface materials. In this work, AA6360/(TiC+B4C) hybrid surface composite layers (SCLs) with various volume ratios of TiC and B4C were synthesized by FSP. The particles were compacted into a groove of width 0.5mm, depth 5.5mm and length 100mm cut on the surface of the aluminum plate. The FSP was carried out at a tool rotational speed of 1600rpm, traverse speed of 60mm/min and axial force of 8kN. Two passes were applied in opposite directions. The microstructure and sliding wear behavior of the fabricated SCLs were evaluated. TiC and B4C particles were distributed homogeneously in the SCLs. Both the particles behaved as one type of reinforcement particle during FSP. There was little or no comminution of ceramic particles. Addition of TiC and B4C particles enhanced the wear resistance of AA6360. 50%TiC+50% B4C hybrid SCL exhibited lowest wear rate due to the formation of a thin tribo film. Detailed characterization of the worn surfaces and the wear debris was also reported.Aluminum matrix composites (AMCs) are one of the advanced engineering materials which have drawn the attention of aerospace and automotive industries due to outstanding combination of high specific strength and improved wear resistance SCLs are fabricated using conventional liquid phase processing methods such as high energy laser melt injection, plasma spraying, cast sinter and electron beam irradiation Friction stir processing (FSP) is a novel solid state processing technique to fabricate SCL which has received much attention recently Some studies on hybrid SCLs fabricated by FSP have been reported in the literatures Titanium carbide (TiC) is an attractive reinforcement for aluminum composites because of its high elastic modulus and grain refining effect In the present work, an attempt has been made to apply FSP technology to fabricate AA6360/(TiC Aluminum alloy AA6360 plates were used in this study. The chemical composition and optical photomicrograph of AA6360 are respectively presented in Specimens were prepared perpendicular to the FSP direction from all the plates. The specimens were prepared as per standard metallographic procedure and etched with Keller's reagent. The digital image of the macrostructure of the etched specimens was captured using a digital optical scanner. The microstructure was observed using a scanning electron microscope and an optical microscope. The sliding wear behavior of the SCLs and matrix alloy was measured using a pin-on-disc wear apparatus (DUCOM TR20-LE) at room temperature according to ASTM G99-04 standard. Specimens of size 5 AA6360/(TiC It can be seen in The distribution of ceramic particles inside the SCL is depicted in The wear rate of mono, hybrid SCL and friction stir processed matrix alloy is depicted in Orowan strengthening due to fine dispersion of ceramic particles. Grain and substructure strengthening. Quench hardening resulting from the dislocations generated to accommodate the differential thermal contraction between the reinforcing particles and the matrix. Work hardening due to the strain misfit between the elastic reinforcing particles and the plastic matrix. According to the characteristics of the microstructure, the major contributions to the wear resistance of the SCLs fabricated by FSP are (1) the fine grain size of the matrix alloy and (2) the Orowan strengthening due to the fine dispersion of TiC and B It is also evident from The worn surfaces of wear specimens are presented in The morphology of the wear debris is shown in The iron content in the wear debris obtained by EDAX analysis is shown in In the present work, AA6360/(TiC The SCL was symmetric about the tool axis and well bonded with the matrix alloy without the presence of defects. The width of the SCL reduced along the depth due to the resultant material flow induced by tool shoulder and pin. The distribution of TiC and B There was little or no comminution of ceramic particles due to the initial morphology of particles having fewer sharp corners and smaller in size. The wear resistance of the fabricated SCLs was superior to that of matrix alloy. 50%TiC The incorporation of TiC and B The morphology of the wear debris of AA6360 and friction stir processed AA6360 exhibited thin sheet or plate like structure whereas the wear debris of SCLs showed fine equiaxed as well as flaky debris. The iron content in the wear debris of 50%TiC The authors are grateful to the Management and Department of Mechanical Engineering, Coimbatore Institute of Technology, Coimbatore, India for extending the facilities to carry out this investigation. The authors acknowledge the financial support rendered by the