The effect of particle shape on true flotation has been widely reported. The present paper presents results obtained in investigating the effect of particle shape on the entrainment of particles during the flotation process. Different hydrophilic minerals with particles of varying aspect ratios were used and their shape determined using rheological tests and auto-SEM-EDS (QEMSCAN). Their entrainment properties showed a close relationship to their shape with the recovery due to entrainment increasing as the aspect ratio of the particles increased. The effect of surface charge, by changing pH, and size of particles showed that the effect of shape was sustained at different pHs and particle sizes. Proposals are made to explain these observations in terms of the known relationships between drag coefficients and terminal velocities and shape. Since it has been previously reported that different milling procedures can affect particle shape, these results indicate that it is possible that such different procedures may result in increased entrainment of hydrophilic minerals.As is well known and has been extensively reviewed, the recovery of particles during the flotation process is achieved either by true flotation or by entrainment. Entrainment in particular refers to particles being recovered by being mechanically transported to the froth phase and then carried by the froth to the launder without attachment to the air bubbles. There is a close linear correlation between the mass of water recovered and the mass of particles entrained ( Apart from the fact that milling procedures are aimed at increasing the liberation of valuable minerals while at the same time increasing the amount of fines in the product, it has also been observed that different milling procedures may also produce particles with different shapes or morphologies (e.g. Defining the shape of particles is a non-trivial challenge, especially in ensuring that the measurement is not sensitive to changes in image resolution ( The aim of the present study was to investigate more specifically the relationship between the recovery via entrainment of a range of different hydrophilic mineral particles and their shapes. The only reagent used was a frother. In the case of talc, its natural floatability was first fully suppressed using previously reported methods ( The minerals used in the present study were mica, vermiculite, wollastonite and talc as well as glass ballotini (synthetic SiO Batch flotation tests to determine the mass of solids, i.e. mass entrained, and water recovered were carried out in a 3 The particle size distributions of all samples used had a    These results sustain the hypothesis that particles with higher aspect ratios are more readily entrained than those with a more rounded shape. In order to address the question of the relative roles of shape as opposed to particle size, tests were carried out on ballotini and wollastonite at a It is also well known that the zeta potential of minerals such as those studied here are pH dependent. In order to investigate the effect of surface charge, further tests were thus carried on ballotini and wollastonite at pH As shown above, particle shape has been estimated using a variety of methods. The mineral types used were known to be naturally hydrophilic (in the case of silica, mica, wollastonite, vermiculite) or, in the case of talc, could be so rendered by prior treatment with a depressant such as guar gum ( As indicated above, the particle size distribution of the mica, vermiculite, wollastonite and talc were relatively similar, viz. Surprisingly, mica which has a shape apparently similar to wollastonite produced a lower solids recovery than spherical ballotini. It was speculated that this may be due to the effects of surface charge. In order to investigate the possible role that surface charge may play, ballotini and wollastonite recoveries were determined at pH The question now remains as to the reason why, in general, the entrainment of particles of high aspect ratio is greater compared to relatively spherical particles for similar particle size distributions. It is useful to consider the effect of drag forces on particles of different shapes. Drag force can be described by the following relationship as shown in Eq. It has recently been shown in a study of the influence of particle shape on hydrocyclone classification that coarse fractions of plate-like particles viz. polytetrafluoroethylene and glass flake did not always report to the underflow and the misplacement of these particles to the overflow was ascribed to the fact that the particle shape had a greater effect on settling velocities than particle size ( The question also remains regarding the effect which different milling procedures will have on particle shape. This paper has shown that particles with different shapes in the same size classes have different entrainment properties. In particular when using near-spherical ballotini particles and elongate wollastonite particles it was shown that notwithstanding the smaller particle size of the former they showed the lowest extent of entrainment. Particles with a less well-defined shape i.e. mica, talc, and vermiculite generally followed the same trends. In all cases the classical linear relationship between solids and water recovered confirmed that entrainment was the main mode of recovery. The effect of shape was found to be dominant even when surface charges were different at different pHs as indicated by referenced zeta potentials. As expected coarser particle sizes resulted in a lower recovery but the relative effect of particle shape was sustained. These results illustrate that when using different milling devices and/or procedures it is important to determine whether this may result in the product particles having different shapes since that could influence the extent to which particles are entrained during the flotation process. This work is supported in part by the The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support of the members of the Reagent Research Group at the The contribution of V. Munyongani and T. Chidzanira, who conducted the rheology measurements, is appreciated.