In this study, high purity SiC powders (~ 99.3%), which were recycled from the kerf loss sludge using hydro-cyclone, classifier and direct carbonization and which have purity similar to the commercial SiC powders used to fabricate structural components, were used to investigate the effect of B4C addition on the microstructure and mechanical properties of the sintered SiC. B4C phase and graphite were observed on the grain boundaries between SiC grains, and the amount of B4C phase at the grain boundaries was increased with increasing B4C contents. Both the phases on the grain boundaries impeded the growth of SiC grains and led to the high porosity, which resulted in the decrease in density and hardness. The addition of B4C was found to have negative effect on the density and hardness of SiC. The fracture toughness, however, was enhanced with the increase in the B4C content. The impediment of crack propagation by the B4C phase was found to be related to the improvement of fracture toughness as the amount of B4C content was increasedIn the photovoltaic (PV) industry, nearly 90% of the PV electricity is produced from the solar cells based on silicon wafer Silicon carbide (SiC) powders were prepared from the recycling of the kerf loss wafer sludge which consists of silicon carbide (SiC), silicon (Si) swarf, diethylene glycol (DEG) and metal contaminants. The sludge was separated into solid and liquid using a hydro-cyclone method. The solid part contains SiC, Si and metal contaminants. Si and SiC were further separated using a classifier. The kinds and amounts of elements present in the recycled SiC powders were analyzed using the inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES, Optima 5300 The B The density of each sintered specimen was measured by the Archimedes method, and their theoretical densities were calculated from a simple mixture rule (the theoretical densities of the SiC and B The hardness (HV) values were measured using Vicker's hardness tester (Dura Scan 70, Emco-test) using a load of 1 E, H To investigate the kinds and amounts of composition in the SiC powders prepared from the recycling of the kerf loss wafer sludge, ICP-OES and C/S analyzer were used, and the results were compared with commercial SiC powders of 99% purity, which is shown in  To investigate the effect of B     The SiC powders with purity of 99.3%, which is similar to that of commercial SiC powders which are used to fabricate structural components, were recycled from the kerf loss wafer sludge using the hydro-cyclone, classifier, and direct carbonization to gain environmental and economic benefits. And the effect of B The density and hardness of SiC containing high B This work was supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 