Many previous studies have investigated the influence of microwave pre-treatment upon coal grindability. In most cases these studies showed that significant increases in coal grindability could be achieved after periods of exposure to microwave energy. Unfortunately, few of these workers considered the effect of the microwave treatment upon the chemical or more importantly the petrographic properties of the coal. Although it is already clear that microwave pre-treatment of coals increases their grindability, it is vital from a process point of view to understand how the coals are altered in the process, with respect to burnout and potential burnout problems.
                  Five different coals from around the world were ground and sieved into a +1.18–3.00 mm size fraction and then treated with high electric field strength microwave energy for 0.1 s at four different power settings (3, 7.5, 10 and 15kW). 200–300 g of each coal was treated in a Te010 single mode cavity using a pneumatic system to control the residence time of each sample in the cavity. This study looks at how the coals fundamental properties change as a result of exposure to relatively high levels of microwave energy. The properties investigated include moisture content, fuel ratio petrography and intrinsic reactivity as determined by a thermogravimetric analyser.Grinding coal at a power station prior to injection into a pulverised fuel (PF) boiler requires a significant amount of energy. The variables of coal including moisture content The energy required to grind a standard bituminous steam coal to PF in a Babcock Hitachi 10E10 coal pulveriser was found to be 266 Microwave heating has been shown to be an attractive method to improve the efficiency of the comminution or breakage processes. Various authors have shown that differential heating within heterogeneous ores can induce thermal fracture In mineral ore, components such as pyrite heat very quickly (and selectively) in microwave fields as they have a high loss factor compared to the rock-forming mineral that surrounds them The reason why coal has poor microwave absorbing properties can be related to the proportion of the organic carbon (low loss factor) to other materials (high loss factor). Water has a high loss factor compared to most materials, approximately 12 Due to the poor microwave absorbing properties of coal it takes a significant amount of power to cause ignition. However, ignition has been achieved using microwave generated and supported plasmas Whilst it is also likely that higher heating rates would have a more significant effect on formation of cracks in the coal it is the electric field that is generally responsible for heating the material, particularly if the material is not ferromagnetic. In fact, it has been shown that power density (volumetric adsorption of microwave energy, W/m A previous publication by the authors showed how treatment of a single UK coal in a single mode microwave cavity operated at 8 This study details the impact of microwave pre-treatment across a range of power settings on five different coals in order to determine any changes in the chemical characteristics or petrographic composition with coal type. Microwaves were generated using a variable power (3–15 To achieve very short exposure times, the residence time was controlled by using a pneumatic piston in which the speed of the return stroke could be controlled. Samples were placed in 75 mm ID cylindrical glass tubes, which were then passed through the single mode cavity to give the appropriate cavity residence time. In all tests there was approximately 0.2–0.3 kg of material within the microwave-heating zone, the actual mass being dependent on particle size. In all tests, samples were treated in air and no attempt was made to measure temperature as no truly accurate method exists to do this for coarse granular material, particularly when the heating is volumetric. Five coals were selected for these tests and dry sieved into a single size fraction between 1.18 and 3.00 mm. The coals were chosen to represent a variety of petrographic types and ranks. Tower is a UK anthracite, La Loma a Venezuelan sub-bituminous coal, Blair Atholl a high inertinite Australian steam coal, Kuzbass a Russian steam coal and Welbeck is a UK low inertinite coal. The proximate analysis for these coals is given in Proximate analysis was carried out using a Pyris 1 Perkin Elmer thermogravimetric analyser. The intrinsic reactivity of each coal sample was also measured using a non-isothermal program A Leitz Ortholux II POL-BK microscope was used for all petrographic tests with a 32× magnification oil-immersion lens and non-fluorescing oil from Leitz. The reflectance of the whole coal was measured using the image analysis technique described by Lester et al. After treatment at all power settings, condensation could be seen on the walls of the glass tube used to hold the sample. The quantity of moisture, purely on a qualitative basis, increased with increasing power. However, it is interesting to note from This is in agreement with Marland et al. The implication is that coals are difficult to ‘dry’ using microwaves regardless of the power applied. Whilst microwave energy appears to mobilize the moisture within the coal matrix, it does not readily liberate the majority of moisture from inside the particle. After treatment at the higher power settings a small amount of volatiles were released equating to the loss of volatile matter from inside the coal matrix. If significant quantities of volatile matter were lost prior to combustion, it is likely that the degree of burnout and possibly the flame stability would be affected. However, as with moisture loss, the fuel ratio (fixed carbon (dafb)/volatile matter (dafb)) across the five coals did not appear to change significantly, as shown in The implication as with the moisture content, is that despite some displacement of volatiles, the overall fraction within the coal particles is not changed significantly. The low residence time is almost certainly the reason for the nominal changes reported in The maceral analysis in A full maceral histogram plot shown in  The results reported in this paper are particularly significant as they show for the first time that previously reported increases in grindability may be accompanied by no or little change to the coal structure. This provides the way forward for potentially significant improvements in the coal grinding process which will not only improve the economics of power generation but also reduce its environmental impact. The expansion of moisture with the coal matrix is suggested to be the mechanism for causing cracks and breakage. These faults in the particle will inevitably lead to an increase in grindability. However, it is apparent from these studies that driving moisture from the coal is not straightforward. Moisture can be mobilized to move around the coal matrix but expelling the moisture entirely is difficult and will probably only result from significant amounts of heating to the particle rather than the moisture. A similar story is seen with volatile content. Whilst some volatiles are emitted during treatment, the quantity, based on proximate analysis, is minimal. The net changes in intrinsic reactivity imply that reactivity is affected by microwave treatment but the severity of these changes appears to depend on coal type. Certain coals (Blair Atholl, La Loma) show minimal changes in peak and burnout temperatures whilst others (Tower, Welbeck) show more marked changes. The residence time inside the microwave field will probably be found to be the most significant factor. Microwave treatment does increase the % unreactives, which would lead to a reduction in the burnout performance of the coals. However, this change is small, even at 15 The paper was written to show how a single mode microwave operating at industrially relevant power levels affects coal properties during industrially relevant residence times. However, further work investigating the significance of increased residence time would be interesting in order to verify at what point coal properties do begin to significantly change. Further work would also investigate how changes in grindability can be quantified readily, even with relatively small coal particles.