The transformations occurring in the sub-stoichiometric Ti(C,N) – W system processed by high energy ball mill were investigated. The transformation stages and mechanisms of alloying are discussed with respect to the changes in crystal structures of the powder constituents. The milling atmosphere had an effect on the lattice strain of milled products, and hence on the kinetics of solid state dissolution between the powder constituents, but it did not affect the fracturing process. The release of the stored crystallite lattice strain energy was the major determinant in mechanical alloying, with particle size reduction playing a necessary, but less significant role.The mechanical alloying process by high energy ball milling has received much attention as a powerful tool for the fabrication of several advanced materials including equilibrium, non-equilibrium and composite materials An equivalent time approach based on the dynamics of a single ball into a planetary ball mill has been described by Ipus Hellstern The free energy increase due to the grain size decrease was modeled thermodynamically by Froes The present study investigated the mechanisms of alloying and transformations in systems containing sub-stoichiometric titanium carbonitrides and tungsten processed by high energy ball milling in argon and in nitrogen atmospheres. The kinetics of alloying and the intermediate transformations were examined using XRD, SEM, EPMA, TEM and nitrogen analysis. Transformations were studied on two powder mixtures. The first contained Ti(C The mixtures thus prepared were processed in a Retsch PM 400 MA-type planetary high energy ball mill at a constant rotation speed of 400 The powder samples for XRD were analysed in a Philips X'Pert powder diffractometer with Ni filtered Co-Kα radiation. The crystallite sizes ( where θ and δ(2θ) are the diffraction angle and the corresponding full width at half maximum (FWHM) of the peak, and λ is the wavelength of the X – ray. Crystal structures of the phases present in the milled products were confirmed by electron diffraction pattern generated in a JEOL transmission electron microscope. The phases’ distribution in the particles of milled powders and their respective compositions were analyzed in an ESEM-FEG XL30 Philips instrument equipped with an EDS detector. The samples for SEM analysis were prepared by cold mounting in resin, grinding on successive grit papers and polishing with diamond paste to 1 The particle size distribution of the milled products was determined using a Malvern Mastersizer 2000. Nitrogen contents in the milled powders were analysed in an ELTRA ON-900 Oxygen / Nitrogen Determinator. The evolution of the X-ray diffraction patterns of the products milled in a nitrogen atmosphere ( The broadening of the peaks and their reduced intensities was attributed to the crystallite refinement, and to the straining of crystallites. The intensities of the W peaks decreased quickly on milling for 12 Similar trends were observed during the milling of the powder mixtures in argon. The evolution of the calculated crystallite sizes and the lattice strains of the Ti(C The lattice strains were higher after processing in argon, and the corresponding crystallite sizes were smaller than in nitrogen. This effect is explained by the dissolution of nitrogen in interstitial sites of the Ti(C The evolution of the nitrogen contents shown in A maximum lattice strain of 0.528% was attained after 24 The crystallite size of W milled in nitrogen decreased from 41  The starting Ti(C The The size reduction of the powder particles occurred by a mechanism of fracturing along favorable planes or surfaces and is dependent on the bulk and mechanical properties such as hardness, tensile and shear strengths. The effects of the milling atmosphere on the process are of different types. Viscosity and density decrease the transmission of the energy from the milling balls to the powder particles, whereas adsorption and reactivity can improve the fracturing mechanism by disintegrating the grain boundaries of the particles. The quasi - absence of the effect of the milling atmosphere on the particle size evolution was therefore attributed to the low density and viscosity and the inertness of the argon and nitrogen. The elongated spots in the electron diffraction patterns of the milled products also indicated an intermediate product with a deformed FCC crystal structure which formed after milling for 12 The selected area diffraction patterns (SADP) of the products milled for 24 In samples milled for shorter times, more grains with higher dislocation densities were observed than for similar samples milled for longer times (e.g. 48 SEM analysis of the starting powder mixtures showed that tungsten particles were agglomerated during the manual mixing ( Cross sections of the milled powder particles ( The cross sections of particles obtained after 48 The evolution of the crystal structure, microstructure and alloying was investigated by the same means as previously for the Ti(C The particle size distribution of the Ti(C It was observed in The small particles with homogeneous composition were generated by fracturing the alloyed rim parts of the large particles. This process had two effects: the generation of new finer particles of the alloy and the refinement of Ti(C,N) particles and formation of fresh surfaces. Thus, the resulting particle size distribution was bimodal for the alloying process. However, it was observed that the two mode values of the distribution were closer in milled powders than in the initial mixtures. Thus, a single mode distribution would be expected in milling times longer than those used in the current experiments. The initial particle size of the Ti(C The crystallite size of Ti(C The lattice strains developed in Ti(C The milling atmosphere affected the lattice strain of milled products, and the kinetics of solid state dissolution between the powder constituents. This effect was attributed to the nitriding of the material milled in nitrogen, or de-nitriding when milled in argon. Mechanical alloying by substitution of Ti with W atoms lead to a slight shrinkage of the titanium carbonitride FCC crystal lattice, and restricted access of nitrogen atoms to the interstices. The nitrogen content of the powder mixtures processed in an argon atmosphere subsequently decreased with milling time. The lattice strain induced by high energy ball milling enhanced the solid state diffusion between the powder constituents. The refinement of the crystallite size alone did not play a determinant role in the solid state dissolution process. The release of the stored crystallite lattice strain energy appeared to be the major determinant in mechanical alloying. Particle size reduction plays a necessary, but less significant, role in solid state alloying.