Nitrogen-doped DLC coating was deposited on AISI H13 substrate by DC-pulsed PACVD technique. The Response Surface Method (RSM) was applied to optimize the temperature of deposition and nitrogen flow rate in order to attain the lowest wear rate and friction coefficient. The Chemical composition and structural variations of the coatings were evaluated by X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy and visible Raman spectroscopy. Furthermore, the wear behavior of the coatings was studied using ball-on-disk tribometer. It was observed that the optimum parameters were achieved at a deposition temperature of 117.1 °C, and nitrogen flow rate of 10 sccm to reach the best tribological behavior.Carbon is one of the essential elements to all aspects of our life undoubtedly. The use of carbon in manufacturing of electrodes DLC coatings are produced in a variety of techniques, which can be divided into two main categories of physical vapor deposition (PVD) [ The internal stress in DLC coatings is one of the most crucial factors in damaging the adhesion of the coating to the substrate [ The importance of a comprehensive study of the nitrogen effect on the structural, mechanical and wear behavior of the DLC coatings deposited by the PACVD method has been an attractive topic for researchers in this field. Nevertheless, limited comprehensive studies in this area has been done, none of which has been evaluated by the Response Surface Method (RSM). In the current study, the RSM procedure was applied to estimate the influence of the temperature of deposition and nitrogen flow rate on the structural, mechanical and wear properties of the DLC and nitrogen-doped DLC coatings not having been discussed in any article. Then, the optimum deposition parameters in the coatings were calculated in order to attain the lowest wear rate and friction coefficient. The RSM method was applied to design the experiments and determine the optimal deposition conditions to attain the lowest wear rate and friction coefficient for the DLC and nitrogen-doped DLC coatings. The relationship between the variables and responses are estimated by RSM. The responses in this method were the ratio of D and G peak intensity (I The samples made of steel tools (AISI H13) were cut in 20 mm diameter and height of 10 mm. The specimens were heated at 1040 °C for 60 min, then were quenched in oil and finally were tempered in oil at 650 °C for 45 min. The DC-pulsed PACVD was utilized to carry out the nitrocarburizing process. The plasma nitrocarburizing process was performed at 550 °C and for 3 h in the atmosphere of methane (6 sccm), nitrogen (75 sccm), and hydrogen (25 sccm). The substrate hardness was around 950 HV after plasma nitrocarburizing. The coatings were deposited on the substrates which were plasma nitrocarburized in accordance with the designed parameters in The X-ray diffraction (XRD) was carried out to access the nitride phases in the substrate which was nitrocarburized by Philips X-Pert diffractometer (Cu-Kα radiation). Raman spectroscopy (Horiba Yvon Xplora) was utilized at the wavenumber range of 800 to 2000 cm The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (Gammadata-scienta ESCA 200) was applied with 10 The Rockwell C test (diamond 120° tip, cone shape) was performed on the coatings surface (normal force of 1500 N). In order to evaluate the adhesion of the coatings to the substrate after Rockwell C indentation test according to VDI 3198 standard, the field emission scanning electron microscopy (MIRA3 TESCAN) was utilized. The coating hardness was measured by nanoindenter (TriboScope system, cube corner). The ball-on-disk test with a silicon carbide ball (diameter in 5 mm) was carried out on the specimens with a perpendicular force of 5 N. The wear test conditions were the wear track diameter of 10 mm, sliding distance of 500 m, and sliding speed of 140 rpm. The wear volume and consequently wear rate were calculated by profilometer (BRUKER, Dektak XT). The cross-section of three different types of DLC coatings were deposited at 120 The Influence of the nitrogen flow rate and deposition temperature on structure evolution, and also mechanical, and wear properties of the DLC coatings were accessed by response surface method (RSM). The experimental parameters along with the measured responses for each of them are tabulated in  On the other hand, at the constant temperature by purging the nitrogen gas into the chamber which leads to the participation of nitrogen atoms to plasma reactions, the sp  The FESEM micrographs from the surface of the DLC (point 3 in the The changes in the flow rate of nitrogen and deposition temperature on the friction coefficient and the wear rate of the coatings are shown in In this case, the detachment of DLC coating from the substrate during the wear test, increase the wear rate and friction coefficient. The structural variations (as a result of changing the nitrogen gas flow rate and deposition temperature) influence the coating hardness as well as the tribological behavior. An increase in the coating hardness gives rise to a reduction in ductility of the coatings leading to nucleation and growth of cracks in coatings. However, increasing the amount of nitrogen in the coating improves its adhesion to the substrate, and leads to higher stability in friction coefficient. This indicates that not only the coating hardness is an important factor in improving the wear properties, but also the proper adhesion to the substrate is of great importance. Response surface method is an effective approach in the determination of the optimal conditions. As it was stated previously, the final target of this study was to predict the optimum deposition conditions based on the lowest wear rate and friction coefficient. The desirability of the coatings as a function of deposition temperature and nitrogen flow rate is illustrated in The effect of the nitrogen flow rate and temperature of deposition on the mechanical, structural, and wear behavior of the DLC and nitrogen-doped DLC coatings are estimated by Response Surface Methodology (RSM). By nitrogen incorporation into the DLC coating, the transformation of sp We the undersigned declare that this manuscript entitled “RSM study on the influence of nitrogen flow rate and deposition temperature on the tribological properties of nitrogen doped diamond-like carbon coating” is original, has not been published before and is not currently being considered for publication elsewhere None.