A series of high-chain fatty acid esters of 1-tetradecanol (myristyl alcohol) were synthesized via esterification of 1-tridecanoic, 1-pentadecanoic, 1-heptadecanoic and 1-nonadecanoic acids under vacuum and in the absence of catalyst. The esterification reactions were controlled by FT-IR spectroscopy. Differential scanning calorimeter (DSC) and thermo-gravimetric analyzer (TGA) were intensively used to determine the thermal properties of the presented novel organic phase change materials (PCM). The thermal properties were given in terms of phase change temperature, enthalpy, specific heat (C
                     
                        p
                     ) and thermal decomposition temperature with related statistical calculations. The thermal reliability of the synthesized PCMs, which is an important property for utilization, was determined via measuring the change in thermal properties after 1000 thermal cycles. The DSC analyses indicated that the melting points of the novel organic PCMs were between 40 and 50°C with phase change enthalpy above 200kJ/kg. The results showed that these thermal storage materials were favorable for low temperature heat transfer applications with superior thermal properties and reliability among the known PCMs.Today, energy is a crucial topic because its usage has increased significantly in the last decades as a result of increased industrial production and increasing use of energy intensive applications. Oil, coal and natural gas, which are named as “fossil fuels” in general, have been the primary source of energy since the nineteenth century. However, the disadvantages of the primary energy source overcome its advantages in terms of environmental issues and depletion of fuel reserves. Due to decrease in present fuel reserves and cost of searching new ones, the cost of retrieving fuel increases and this form of energy production gets more expensive. It has been widely accepted that the portion of fossil fuels has to be decreased with increasing utilization of renewable energy. Solar energy is a potential candidate to meet global energy requirements in a sustainable way for heating. However, it can be affected by various factors such as cloud cover or seasonal variation in solar radiation. Thermal energy storage systems can reduce the effect of these factors by providing energy to the systems during decrease in solar intensity. Therefore, there is an increasing interest related to design of thermal energy storage units and new latent heat storage materials to enhance the efficiency of such systems Latent heat storage is a more effective way than sensible heat storage. The amount of energy involved in latent heat storage can be represented by comparing the sensible heat storage of rock (1 In addition to the basic properties of PCMs, a proper PCM should have long lasting thermal performance with regard to its thermal reliability depending on the number of thermal cycles. It is desirable to observe minimum changes in latent heat values and phase change temperatures after repeated melting and freezing cycles. In this sense, accelerated thermal cycle tests are important to study the changes in phase change temperature and latent heat before utilization of the materials in actual systems. Inorganic PCMs, such as salt hydrates, have disadvantages due to their chemical and thermal instability after repeated thermal cycles. They tend to lose their crystal water and show corrosive behavior which affects the durability of the encapsulation materials. Due to the instability of their crystal structure, these materials show supercooling which affects proper heat transfer. Sharma et al. The fatty acid esters are rather new organic PCMs and limited data is available in literature. The low-chain fatty acid esters of stearic and palmitic acids are mostly covered in literature and they have phase change enthalpy lower than 200 The high-chain fatty acid esters are a new material class of organic PCMs other than the given limited low-chain fatty acid esters. They can be synthesized straightforward under vacuum and in the absence of catalyst according to the given procedure in literature. The main advantage of this method is its high reaction yield of up to 94 (w/w)% and its simplicity, compared to the acid catalyzed Fischer esterification Fatty acid esters are mostly used in cosmetic industry as emollients in care product formulations and their thermal properties have not been intensively investigated yet. In contradiction to the fatty acids given in literature, the high-chain fatty acid esters are more stable with higher phase change enthalpy and they can preserve their thermal properties after several thermal cycles In addition to the given even carbon number esters of myristyl alcohol in literature The high-chain fatty acid esters of myristyl alcohol with even carbon number were prepared and purified according to the published literature procedure FT-IR spectra of the synthesized high-chain fatty acid esters were recorded on Perkin Elmer FT-IR Spectrum 100 spectrometer with universal ATR accessory between 4000 and 380 Perkin Elmer Jade DSC was used for the calorimeter analyses of the novel PCMs. The measurements were carried out under inert nitrogen atmosphere at 20 DSC analyses were conducted according to the ASTM standard test methods with designation numbers E 792-06 and D 2766-95, explaining the determination of enthalpies of fusion and freezing and specific heat of liquids and solids, respectively Perkin Elmer STA-6000 was used for the thermo-gravimetric decomposition of the novel PCMs with temperature, including the decomposition behavior, onset and 5% weight loss temperatures of the materials. The analyses were carried out under inert nitrogen atmosphere at 20 The analyses were conducted according to the general principles given in BS EN ISO 11358:1997 In this research, Bio-Rad MJ Mini DNA thermal cycler was used to provide automated 1000 thermal heating and cooling cycles in order to observe the thermal performance of each PCM. Each PCM was cycled in the temperature interval of 25 The high-chain fatty acid esters were prepared according to the given procedure in literature. The method of esterification under vacuum and in the absence of catalyst was chosen due to its simplicity and higher reaction yield than Fischer esterification method. It has been stated in literature that the synthesis method worked very well in the production of several high-chain fatty acid esters of C10–C20 fatty acids The FT-IR spectra of the synthesized esters show that the final products do not contain unreacted alcohol and fatty acid impurities. The crystallization of high-chain fatty acid esters with acetone and ether is effective to remove unreacted impurities. The absence of oxygen–hydrogen stretching vibrations of fatty acid and alcohol between 2500–2700 and 3230–3550 The melting temperatures of the presented four esters vary between 40 and 50 Besides the low supercooling degree and melting temperature range of 40–50 The phase change behaviors of the introduced PCMs are quite uniform and they have one single peak of solid–liquid phase change at defined temperatures. The absence of secondary peaks in The phase change temperature of the PCMs with odd carbon number increases with increasing carbon number of fatty acids. However, the enthalpy has the turning point at 217.19 Most of the papers in literature give just the latent heat values of proposed new PCMs. However, specific heat is another thermal property which should be determined at temperatures where no phase change occurs even if it has limited contribution to thermal energy storage. The specific heat values of the materials are presented as a function of temperature for both solid and liquid phases. The reliability of the presented data is ±3%. The equations are generated according to the measured data between 10 and 85 Thermal reliability of PCMs is a very important property for engineering approaches and minimum changes after extended thermal cycles are favorable to provide long term employment of the thermal units in larger scale. The introduced materials have very good thermal reliability and they succeed in preserving their original thermal performances. They show insignificant changes in phase change temperature and enthalpy after 1000 thermal cycles. The heat flow curves are not affetced and the changes in the onset temperatures and enthalpies are lower than 1%, i.e. the materials do not decompose or loose their thermal performance by any means. Along with the high phase change enthalpy of the materials, their thermal reliability make them suitable candidates for low temperature thermal applications. The changes in phase change temperatures and enthalpies are given in TGA data is important to determine the temperature at which the material can withstand without chemical decomposition. The onset decomposition temperatures should be taken into consideration in choosing the encapsulation type and application area for utilization of PCMs. According to the TGA graphs given in World's crucial topic is energy and its demand has increased drastically since the last two decades. The environmental issues and cost of energy production are two major factors questioning the future of primary energy sources. However, renewable energy sources and enhanced thermal efficiency are promising opportunities to lower the ratio of primary sources in energy production. Concerning the energy efficiency issue, “thermal energy storage” plays an important role in energy conservation and today, PCMs are important tools of energy storage. The melting temperatures of the introduced materials vary between 40 and 50 Another superior property is that they have reproducible melting and freezing behavior and they freeze with insignificant supercooling tendency which also make them suitable for engineering approaches together with the high latent heat values and proper phase change behaviors. The reliability of the thermal properties of the materials after several phase change cycles is very important for the sustainability of the designed systems in practice. The thermal reliability of the introduced materials is quiet good with less than 1% change in phase change enthalpy and temperature after 1000 thermal cycles. They preserve their thermal performances after thermal cycling. Moreover, the PCMs are found to be stable up to high temperatures according to the TGA data. Therefore, these materials are suitable for exothermic micro- and macro-encapsulations. Based on the presented results, it can be concluded that the introduced high-chain fatty acid esters of myristyl alcohol with odd carbon number are promising PCMs for low temperature thermal energy storage. This research was supported by the