We used vital staining with tetracycline to detect viability of bone at the bone–cement interface in 11 stable ICLH femoral surface replacement prostheses that were retrieved at revision surgery for acetabular loosening. The resected femoral heads were processed for undecalcified ground sections with the prostheses in situ. All sections showed direct bone-to-cement contacts. Bone in direct contact with or close to the cement sometimes showed an abnormal staining, indicating that the bone was not fully mineralized. Areas with fluorescence were observed within all femoral heads but never in direct bone-to-cement contact. From this study, we conclude that the mechanical stability of these cemented femoral surface replacement prostheses depends mainly on the original bone present at the time of primary operation.Analyses of retrieved prosthetic implants are mostly of material obtained at revision surgery after intercurrent aseptic loosening of the components. Under such conditions, observations reflect the loosening process, and conclusions are limited because initial changes may be concealed by secondary events. Analyses of retrieved stable implants are assumed to give more valuable information about the processes in nearby tissues Microscopic studies of retrieved well-fixed cemented prostheses have shown areas of direct bone-to-cement contact The study was approved by the local ethical committee, and written informed consent was obtained from every patient in the trial. Eleven patients, admitted to the hospital for conversion of an ICLH double-cup arthroplasty (Protec, Ltd, Berne, Switzerland) (Fig. 1) to a conventional total hip prosthesis with a stemmed femoral implant, were included in the study. All patients had aseptic loosening of the acetabular components; the femoral components preoperatively were considered stable. During the primary operation, the femoral head had been shaped like a cylinder, and the head prosthesis had pressurized its cement (Palacos [Schering Plough, Vehrheim, Germany] with gentamicin and zirconium oxide). No systemic antibiotic prophylaxis was given Patients were given 2 g of tetracycline hydrochloride orally on day 5 and day 4 before the revision. The resected femoral heads were fixed in 4% neutral buffered formaldehyde, gradually dehydrated in ethanol and embedded in methyl methacrylate, which then was polymerized. Sections were cut through the surrounding undecalcified bone with the prostheses All sections showed bone-to-cement contact (Fig. 2) with a median direct bone contact along the interface of 12% (range, 2-28%). Empty osteocyte lacunae often were found in the abnormally stained bone, and no osteoblast seams were observed nearby. Empty osteocyte lacunae frequently were seen in bone trabeculae in direct contact with bone–cement. Because of the thickness (30-50 μ) of most of the sections, it was not possible to quantify the amount of empty osteocyte lacunae in all these trabeculae, but in those in which it was possible, 55% (range, 25-75%) of the osteocyte lacunae were empty. Empty osteocyte lacunae were observed in other trabeculae not in contact with the bone-cement, but this was only occasional. When bone at or extending 2 to 3 mm away from the bone-cement was excluded, we did not observe any difference in viability regardless of location and distance from the bone-cement. In UV light, fluorescent areas were seen at different locations over the femoral heads. Fluorescence usually was observed at the edge of normally stained bone trabeculae or around vessels in the bone trabeculae (Figs. 5B and 6). Surface replacement is considered an interim procedure in young patients to relieve symptoms and to defer total hip arthroplasty To our knowledge, this is the first investigation of retrieved stable human prostheses in which undecalcified ground sections were examined after vital staining. The femoral head prostheses were mechanically stable at revision and showed bone-to-cement contact. Similar to other investigators Vital staining is a method to show if bone is viable The bulk of the nonfluorescent bone is most likely still alive. The fact that the bone is not fluorescent means only that it was not in active formation during the period the tetracycline was administered. Together with our observations of abnormal staining and high numbers of empty osteocyte lacunae close to the cement, however, the absence of vital staining at >100 contact areas supports our hypothesis and implies nonviable bone at the interface. At the interface or close to it, we often observed bone with abnormal staining indicating incomplete mineralization. Similar observations of such partially mineralized bone at the interface have been reported by several authors One would expect abnormal staining to be distributed uniformly throughout the sections if it was caused by artifacts of tissue preparation. Abnormally stained bone was found mainly at or near the bone–cement interface. We cannot say why this interface bone loses mineral, but a type of degenerative process in this bone (eg, owing to local acidity) might be responsible. Animal experiments indicate that bone–cement has a reduced biocompatibility: Even around stable implants of prepolymerized bone–cement, a thin layer of soft tissue is observed between bone and cement Late aseptic prosthetic loosening is thought to be initiated by cellular activity as a reaction to particles at the interface If bone at the interface is not viable but has persisted since cementation, it could explain why modern cementing techniques result in better long-term survival of prostheses. Better survival is due to better primary fixation of the cement into the bone tissue We have not observed vital staining of bone at the bone–cement interface and conclude that this might be avascular original bone that has been there since cementation. It may be that nonvital bone in contact with the cement is to be found in all cemented prostheses. Our study also has shown, however, that this concept is compatible with stable fixation for many years despite biomechanically unfavorable components.