Refractory wear in furnaces is a key cost driver in pyrometallurgical processes, leading to periodical relining that involves maintenance and increased operational costs. One of the main factors in refractory wear is the chemical attack by the molten phases from the bath. This chemical interaction generates new phases in the refractory, producing different properties and causing spallation due to the aggregate effect of the thermal and mechanical shocks during operation.
                  This paper uses thermodynamic databases (Fact Sage® software) to study the interaction between the molten phases and the magnesia-chromite refractory in the conversion step of the copper-making process. Input data were taken from an industrial furnace at Atlantic Copper S.L.U. (Huelva, Spain) and the calculations were conducted at different temperatures and oxygen partial pressures (pO2). These thermochemical calculations allow the chemical degradation of the refractory to be evaluated.
                  The results show the characterization of the new phases (mainly spinel and olivine) formed after the chemical interaction between the molten phases and the refractory. Since the composition and mass distribution of the new phases change, the degree of refractory wear is calculated for each scenario designed.Copper-making by the pyrometallurgical process is based on extracting elemental copper (Cu°) from a multicomponent system of polymetallic sulphides in four steps: fusion, conversion, fire refining and electrolytic refining Fusion of the concentrates is a continuous oxidative process. Slag and matte are produced and separated by decantation (density difference) Conversion is a batch process. The matte from the smelting step is refined into blister copper (99–99.5 wt% Cu) by blowing the bath with air through 45–55 tuyeres. The conversion has two sub-steps: the slag and the copper blows (SB and CB). In the SB, the FeS is removed, producing slag and off-gas. The remaining Cu Fire refining is a batch process in which blister copper is refined. The air is injected via one or two tuyeres into the bath to remove the residual S (ppm). The refined copper is casted to produce anodes (> 99.5 wt% Cu). Electrolytic refining is a batch process in which cathode copper (99.99 wt%Cu) is obtained from anodic copper. The fusion, conversion and fire refining take place in furnaces usually lined with magnesia-chromite refractory Physical interaction between the refractory and the molten phases: the refractory is physically modified when in contact with molten phases due to infiltration. Chemical interaction between the refractory and the molten phases from the bath: the chemical degradation of the refractory components (MgO and magnesia-chromite spinel) by the molten phases from the bath results in the formation of new phases on the hot face of the refractory, diminishing its refractory properties. Temperature gradient: refractory materials face continuous temperature gradients that increase progressively because of wear. Thermal shock: continuous thermal shocks occur in the bath processes (i.e. conversion) resulting from the operational cycles (filling and empting furnaces) and the high exothermic reactions that take place in particular areas (tuyeres). Erosion: due to the movement of the molten bath caused by continuous agitation during blowing, and the movement of the furnace when rolling during the charging or pouring operations. Experimental works regarding the multicomponent Fe-Si-O system Despite resistance to chemical attack from the molten phases, this is still the main cause of refractory wear. As a result, the refractory is damaged due to the changes that occur in its properties, such as volume expansion and internal crack formation. Thermal and mechanical stress further damage the lining caused by the chemical attack, because internal micro-cracks widen and spalling appears, which add to refractory wear Recently, multiphysics modeling has been used to predict wear; for example, in the study of bath movement in furnaces (erosion), and in the study of thermal shocks to predict crack formation and spalling in the refractory Laboratory tests and post-mortem analyses demonstrate that copper phases have very low wear capacity, and that the slag phase has the greatest chemical interaction with the refractory, resulting in greater wear capacity Some authors have carried out industrial post-mortem analyses in different furnaces and processes Researchers have made thermodynamic calculations This work focuses on modeling the chemical interaction between the magnesia-chromite refractory lining of a Peirce Smith Converter (PSC) and each molten phase in the conversion step of the copper-making process (matte, slag, white metal and final slag) by using thermochemical calculations (Fact Sage® databases Additionally, samples of worn refractory were collected from a PSC at Atlantic Copper (Huelva; Spain). They were analyzed using SEM-EDS and EPMA in order to support the thermochemical calculations. This study is part of a larger project in which the goal is to identify, predict and understand the degradation pattern of magnesia–chromite refractory bricks in copper-making furnaces. One of the main factors that causes refractory wear is the chemical interaction of the molten phases from the bath contained in the furnaces The Gibbs energy difference remains between the refractory and the molten bath (thermodynamically unstable) when they are in contact, so the system will try to compensate this difference in order to achieve the equilibrium (the activity of refractory elements in the molten bath is very low). The result is the dissolution of the refractory components in the molten bath, to obtain the saturation state and, subsequently, the refractory wear as a result of this process. Thermochemical calculations (using FactSage® 7.1. version) were used to evaluate the chemical interaction between the refractory and the molten phases in the conversion step. FactSage® software FactSage® is based on thermochemistry (related to complex phase equilibria). The software is divided into modules that allow the user to calculate thermochemical equilibria and phase diagrams in different conditions by means of a general Gibbs energy minimization algorithm, with access to the internal thermochemical databases. Inorganic databases are presented in two main groups: compound (pure substances) and solution (mix of substances). Data are in the form of functions of pressure, temperature and composition. Compound databases contain approximately 5000 substances and provide information on stoichiometric solid, liquid and gaseous species including allotropes, isomers and non-integer stoichiometry. Solution databases are focused on solid and liquid alloys, carbides, concentrated aqueous solutions, oxides, salts, slags, mattes, etc. The data are stored in the form of Gibbs energy functions for the phase constituents and temperature-dependent model parameters For each solution database, there is a corresponding coupled pure compound database that contains data for all stoichiometric solid compounds that have been optimized to be thermodynamically consistent with the data in the corresponding solution database. The most up-to-date thermochemical databases have been used for this work (FT oxide, FT misc and FACT PS). The FToxide database is one of the most important databases in FactSage. FToxide contains consistently assessed and evaluated thermodynamic data for the molten slag phases, numerous extensive ceramic solid solution phases and all the stoichiometric compounds The analysis of the samples from a one-month operation period at the Atlantic Copper smelter was used as input data for the thermochemical calculations, and the process temperatures and pO Real data were taken from a PSC at Atlantic Copper during a one-month operation period (1200–1350 °C); they are in accordance with the literature The pO The effects of the molten phases on the magnesia and spinel phases of the refractory are presented as key references for the chemical degradation of the refractory. Several bricks from a PSC at Atlantic Copper were collected and used for post-mortem investigation to support the thermochemical calculations. The equipment used (at the University of Huelva) to study these samples was as follows: Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) FEI-QUANTA 200 with an Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (ESEM-EDS) system. The accelerating voltage is 0.2–30 kV with a resolution of 3.5 nm. It has a secondary Everhart Thornley detector (ETD) to enable viewing of the surface image, a solid state backscattered electron detector (SSD) to determine the compositional difference and an X-ray dispersion digital microanalysis system (EDAX Genesis 2000) with SiLi detector for quantitative analysis. This equipment is used to determine bulk species and operates with a fine electron beam that illuminates the sample and generates high-energy primary backscattered electrons (BSE), low-energy secondary electrons (SE) and characteristic X-rays that are used for analysis. The operating conditions for the EDS pictures were 20 kV and high vacuum atmosphere. The spot was 5.0–5.5 µm, with a working distance of 10 mm. For quantitative analysis, the Electron Probe Micro-Analyzer with a wavelength-dispersive spectrometer (EPMA-WDS) JEOL model JXA-8200 was used. The accelerating voltage was 15Kv and the current 20nÅ. The spot was 1.0–5.0 µm. ImageJ 1.50i scientific imaging software was used for processing BSE images in order to set the porosity and pore diameter of the as-delivered refractory. ImageJ is an open source Java image processing program that can display, edit, analyze and process images The evaluation of the pO Matte: molten phase from the smelting step that is the feed for the conversion step. Slag: molten phase that is the product of the slag blow in the conversion step. White metal: molten phase that is the product of the slag blow in the conversion step. Final slag: molten phase that is the slag produced at the end of the copper blow and recirculated to another converter as feed in order to recover the copper it contains. Reverts: solid material with high-copper content. This is added to the converters during the slag blow for temperature control. Blister copper: copper produced at the end of the copper blow. The results from the mass and energy balance ( These pO In this study, the chemical interaction between each molten phase contained in the PSC in contact with the refractory was calculated using thermochemical calculations. Each phase has a corresponding pO In the case of the slag and matte, the initial and final pO Since the white metal (WM) is formed at the end of the slag blow (or the beginning of the copper blow), the pO The final slag (FS) is produced only at the end of the copper blow, so the pO The evaluation of the as-delivered refractory is a common practice prior to post-mortem and laboratory studies, as a starting point for the evaluation of refractory degradation. Datasheets contain information on its properties but analysis of the as-delivered refractory prior to examining degradation is worthwhile The as-delivered refractory used for this work was analyzed as a reference of the non-attacked refractory. The raw materials used in the refractory-making process were identified using BSE images ( The phases contained in the refractory ( The thermochemical calculations enabled the quantification of the magnesia, spinel and olivine in the refractory ( The Fe/Mg in the spinel was 0.50 ± 0.04 (mole ratio) for all scenarios studied. The spinel was mainly MgCr The bonding between the refractory grains (Mgs, Chr and EMC) in the inner structure should be “direct”, but in many cases intergranular phases can be found The pores are the means of transport for the species from the bath to the refractory. The penetration of any liquid phase in the refractory pores is determined by the following issues Type of molten phase. The penetration capacity of the matte, slag or copper differs because they have different physical properties, such as wetting angle, viscosity or the solidus. The size of the pores; the bigger size, the easier the penetration by a liquid phase. Type of porosity: open or closed. Penetration extends further through open pores because they are connected. Operating conditions, such as the hydrostatic pressure of the molten bath and temperature (proportional to the viscosity). The refractory is a porous material with a complex microstructure. The internal channels are in the form of zig-zags, and their sections vary. Representative samples of the as-delivered refractory were analyzed by SEM, and the BSE images obtained were processed with ImageJ software to determine the porosity of the refractory and the diameter of the pores ( The infiltration velocity of the molten phases to the refractory through open porosity is a consequence of the imbalance between gravity, capillarity, internal pressure and inertial forces Ec. 1 shows infiltration velocity in a porous medium The variables used in Ec. 1 are the following: A: Normal pressure a: Pressure constant g: Gravity H: Height of the liquid L: Pore length P R: Pore radius x: Penetration into the pore (Infiltration) σː Surface tension ρː Density of the molten phase θː Contact angle (wettability) μː Viscosity of the molten phase χː Pore correction factor. For ideal conditions, such as high open porosity, sufficient pore diameter, high hydrostatic pressure or low wetting angle, the maximum penetration capacity is determined by the solidus All the molten phases had the same figure for the crystallization fraction as a function of the temperature: there is a short temperature range in which the crystallization fraction drastically changes, from more than 0.90 to less than 0.15. The crystallization of the final slag happens at the lower temperature and, by contrast, the crystallization of the slag occurs at the higher one (very close to the working temperature). According to the values of the crystallization fraction as a function of the temperature ( As a consequence of the infiltration capacity, the final slag and the metallic copper can reach intergranular areas where the monticellite is located. The BSE images of the post-mortem samples ( New phases are formed as a consequence of the chemical interaction between the slag (or the final slag) and the refractory, but all are located on the surface, creating a reaction layer, so no penetration of the refractory is found. The literature Thermochemical calculations were carried out in order to evaluate the distribution of the resulting phases in the reaction layer from the different scenarios of slag, matte, white metal and final slag in contact with the refractory at different temperatures and pO Since the area of the hot face on the refractory and the area of the molten phase from the bath in contact are the same, the differential volume ratio used is 1 (this is supported by the BSE images from the samples collected from the PSC). The volume ratio equals 1, and the density of the phases determines the mass of each phase in contact with the refractory for a differential volume on the hot face. The density of each molten phase was determined beforehand: slag 3.61 kg/cm The following observations can be made from the thermochemical calculations in Most of the matte and white metal remain after the chemical interaction with the refractory, as evidence of their low chemical reaction capacity with the refractory phases, so low wear capacity on the refractory is expected. The same occurs for the residual content of matte in the slag (3.65–3.70 wt%); most of this remains after the chemical interaction with the refractory. This residual content of matte in the slag (even lower in the white metal; No slag remains after the chemical interaction with the refractory; the same effect occurs in the scenario of the refractory in contact with matte (the original matte contains 1.97 ± 0.90 wt% of slag for the scenarios studied). A fraction of the final slag remains after the chemical interaction with the refractory. A considerable fraction of the final slag is fayalitic slag and magnetite spinel that chemically interact with the refractory High Mg# olivine is formed as a consequence of the SiO The remaining matte phase after the interaction of the matte (or white metal) with the refractory increases when the temperature rises. This is because the coordination of the Fe/Mg ratio in the solid solutions of the refractory (olivine and spinel) at high temperature decreases. Hence, the transference of the iron from the matte into the refractory decreases. For scenarios with higher pO Magnesia removal from the refractory is a sign of the chemical degradation of the magnesia-chromite refractory by the molten phases from the bath in a furnace. The literature The magnesia that remains after the chemical interaction between the molten phases and the refractory is quantified in this work by using thermochemical calculations ( The magnesia phase contained in the as-delivered refractory is 56.21 ± 1.18 wt% ( Magnesia removal decreases for lower pO The results show that the magnesium is distributed in four phases: slag liquid, magnesia, spinel and olivine. This distribution depends on the phase in contact with the refractory ( The literature Since the MgCr The Fe/Mg mole ratio in the spinel is calculated as an additional indicator of spinel modification after the chemical attack from the molten phases on the refractory ( From these indicators of the spinel degradation in the refractory, the following observations can be made: The chemical degradation of the spinel phase of the refractory is lower than the chemical degradation of the magnesia phase previously described in this work. The chromium as MgCr The matte and the white metal have no qualitative influence on the spinel phase of the refractory. The chromium distribution and the Fe/Mg ratio are not modified (not included in The big increase in the Fe/Mg ratio is mainly a consequence of the iron incorporated in the spinel ( The thermochemical calculations are in accordance with the literature In an industrial PCS, the molten phases are in continuous contact with the refractory lining. These molten phases are renewed continuously in the furnaces due to operation, hence recursive chemical attacks on the hot face of the refractory lining should be considered. Thermochemical calculations were used to evaluate this effect (there are no references in the literature). Since it is demonstrated that the slag is the most damaging molten phase for the refractory, recursive slag attacks on the refractory are studied in this work. The slag-refractory volume ratio equal to 1 is considered (the same volume of slag and refractory in contact) and, after each chemical attack, the resulting solid phases are repeatedly placed in contact with new slag (the same initial amount with the same composition). This procedure was performed five times to simulate the recursive attack. The compositional variation (Fe/Mg weight ratio) of the spinel and the olivine in the refractory, and the chromium content in the spinel as MgCr The chromium in the as-delivered refractory features mainly as MgCr Some authors have carried out refractory degradation tests with a known amount of molten slag or other molten phases Thermochemical calculations were used to obtain the Fe/Mg ratio in the spinel of the refractory for scenarios with different proportions of slag-refractory in contact (chart in Since the slag has high chemical degradation capacity on the refractory, the influence of the slag composition (Fe/Si ratio) and the amount of the slag in contact with the refractory (measured as slag-refractory volume ratio) was studied in this work using thermochemical calculations. According to the literature The observations from the results are: The magnesia in the refractory decreases for the lower Fe/SiO No qualitative variations in the Fe/Mg ratio and the magnesium number (> 96) in the olivine have been observed in any scenario ( The spinel phase suffers from wide compositional variations, mainly due to the presence of slag (the Fe/SiO Thermochemical databases are a useful tool for evaluating the chemical interaction between the molten phases (slag, matte, white metal and final slag) and the refractory materials used for lining the pyrometallurgical furnaces in the copper-making industry in different operating conditions. Since, in many cases, it is impossible to carry out an evaluation of the interaction in the industry, this work has shown that thermochemical calculations are a useful tool for this purpose. The chemical interaction between the refractory and the molten phases from the bath modifies the distribution of the phases ( In the case of the slag attack, no slag phase remains after interaction with the refractory ( In the interaction with the matte (and the white metal), most of the matte is not incorporated in the refractory (a large amount of matte remains; The final slag is produced at the end of the conversion process as a consequence of the increase in the pO2 due to the low presence of Cu The infiltration velocity calculated using the Young Laplace equation (Ec. 1; Since the penetrating capacity of the most chemically damaging phase (the slag) is almost zero ( The metallic copper and the final slag (with high copper oxide content) easily penetrate internal areas of the refractory through open porosity and the intergranular areas filled with monticellite ( Since the most damaging molten phase is the slag, recursive scenarios with slag have been analyzed using the same thermochemical methods. A recursive scenario was designed to simulate the permanent renewal of the slag in the bath of the PSC and, after the second attack, the refractory was considered totally modified. The slag composition (Fe/SiO The combination of the thermochemical calculations with the BSE images of a worn refractory from an industrial PSC has been shown to be a useful tool in determining the diffusion of a molten phase in the refractory (described as the equivalent slag-refractory weight ratio in contact; This work was carried out with financial support from