Purpose
                  The purpose of this study was to evaluate functional results and the frequency of complications in the distal fibula Danis-Weber type B fractures caused by supination-external rotation injury in a group of lateral and antiglide plate fixation.
               
                  Methods
                  This prospective study evaluated 44 patients with a minimum of one-year follow-up. Patients were divided into two groups: one lateral plate group (24 patients) and group with an antiglide plate (20 patients). The patients of both groups were always positioned supine, and lateral approach was used. In the lateral plate group, the fracture was anatomically reduced, an optional anteroposterior lag screw was placed perpendicular to fracture line, and then the one-third tubular plate was applied on the lateral fibular site. In the antiglide group, the palate was implemented on the posterolateral surface of the fibula and the fracture was anatomically reduced. An optional lag-screw was used. Distal screw fixation was applied deliberately. Functional assessment according to the American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society hind foot-ankle score (AOFAS) were performed at one year after surgery. The complications were recorded.
               
                  Results
                  According to Lauge-Hansen classification of supination-external rotation injury, a total of 27 (61.4%) patients was classified as stage 2, 2 (4.5%) patients as stage 3 and 15 (34.1%) patients with stage 4. In the lateral plate group, there were 13 (54.2%) male and 11 (45.8%) female patients. In the antiglide plate group, men comprised 12 (60%) and women 8 (40%) of patients. The AOFAS in the lateral and antiglide group performed one year after surgery was, on average, 93.7±6.1 (range 85–100) and 94.5±6.0 (range 85–100) points respectively. There were no statistically significant differences in both groups (p=0.37). Complications were observed in 7 (29.3%) patients of lateral plate and 3 (15%) patients of an antiglide plate (p=0.31). There was no case of tendinopathy. Revision surgery was performed in one patient with superficial infection.
               
                  Conclusion
                  In the present study, the outcome of the surgically treated Weber type B fractures caused by supination external rotation injury was comparable in both groups. The antiglide plate fixation showed no signs of peroneal tendinopathy, low rate of complications. We believe this technique is safe and a good method of fixation as well as traditional lateral plating.Danis-Weber type B ankle fractures are the most commonly occurring fractures which are mainly the result of a supination-external rotation (SER) injury characterized by the oblique shape of the fracture line. Between March 2014 and June 2015, we prospectively identified and treated patients with lateral malleolus fractures with Danis-Weber B type. The fractures had to be closed and caused by a supination-external rotation mechanism according to Lauge-Hansen classification. The fractures could be in the second (isolated lateral malleolus fracture), the third (lateral malleolus and posterolateral tibia fracture) or in the fourth (lateral malleolus, posterolateral tibia, and medial malleolus fracture) stage of a supination-external rotation injury. Patients younger than 18 years of age, polytraumatized, with additional lower limb injury, old and pathological fractures were excluded. We also excluded patients who did not attend the scheduled controls. Finally, we have evaluated 44 patients with a minimum of one-year follow-up. Basic demographic data (age, gender), time data (operative time, duration of hospitalization) were recorded. Patients were divided into two groups: one lateral plate group and group with an antiglide plate. Divisions were based on the operating surgeon preferences. Surgery was performed by surgeons experienced treatment of ankle fractures. All patients had their surgery within 14 Postoperatively, the ankle was immobilized for a maximum of 3 weeks only if the fracture of posterior malleolus was present. Passive motion in ankle joint was allowed on the second postoperative day with the active motion after three weeks. Partial weight bearing was allowed three weeks after surgery with full weight bearing after six weeks in the antiglide group. In the patients in the lateral plating group, any weight bearing was allowed after six weeks. This division was implicated from the perspective that antiglide plate positioning is on the posterolateral part of the distal fibula, the same as direction of fracture dislocation. Radiological evaluation was performed at six weeks, three months, six months and one year after surgery. Functional assessment according to the American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society hind foot-ankle score (AOFAS) were performed one year after surgery. All complications were recorded. Peroneal tendinopathy was diagnosed when there was a pain to palpation directly on the peroneal tendons and if pain presented in foot inversion and dorsal flection. If patients showed no pain but only some tenderness over the plate, this was recorded as hardware irritation. Hardware removal was advised to all patients at one year postoperatively and was undertaken anytime in symptomatic patients who wished to remove it. Data were compared using an independent T – test, Mann-Whitney, and Fisher exact test. Testing was performed at a significance level of alpha equals 0.05. Statistical evaluation and interpretation of results used statistical programs: IBM SPSS Statistics 23. A total of 44 ankle fractures (24 in the lateral and 20 in the antiglide plate group) with Weber type B injury was evaluated in this study. According to Lauge-Hansen classification of supination-external rotation injury, a total of 27 (61.4%) patients was classified as stage 2, 2 (4.5%) patients as stage 3 and 15 (34.1%) patients with stage 4. The posterolateral tibia fracture was treated only in one case by anteroposterior cancellous bone screw fixation. The medial malleolus fractures were fixed by single 3.5 Supination-external rotation type of fracture is the most common pattern of ankle fractures. The first structure to rupture is the anterior tibiofibular ligament; however, it is discussed Since 1982, when Brunner and Weber described antiglide plate technique, many authors encourage and recommended this fixation. Lateral plating has traditionally been performed for fibular fracture fixation, although there are well-known weaknesses. The screws in the distal fragment often have poor purchase, can loosen and cause loss of fixation. The posterolateral approach was used in several studies as the preferred method for antiglide plating. Peroneal tendinopathy is frequently discussed complication associated with posterior plating. Only one study showed the higher incidence of peroneal tendinitis, while 30 of 70 (43%) patients had discomfort or signs of peroneal tendinitis. Wound dehiscence rates are higher in the lateral plate group. Lamontagne et al. reported 4 (3.7%) cases in lateral versus 1 (1.2%) case in the antiglide group. In general, the clinical outcome of plating fixation of displaced Weber type – B fractures is satisfying. The fear of peroneal tendinopathy is too effusive and therefore can lead to the lesser use of the antiglide plate fixation. In the present cohort, we did not find any significant differences between both groups. We did not observe peroneal tendinopathy and also other complications were not frequent. We believe that the use of the antiglide plate in a posterolateral position, without using unreasonable distal screws, is an appropriate method of fixation in every short oblique lateral malleolus fractures. The authors have none to declare. All authors contributed equally to the conception and design of this paper. M.K. and P.C. carried out literature searches, quality assessments, data extraction and statistical analysis and was responsible for drafting of the manuscript. J.L. also carried out quality assessments. R.Z. and S.V. were responsible for supervision, including interpretation of data and critical revision of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Grant KEGA 071UK-4/2016