Manganese leaching from a low-grade ore (8.52% Mn) from Sinai was investigated by using hydrochloric acid in the presence and absence of hydrogen peroxide as a reducing agent. Sample characterization by XRD showed the presence of a variety of manganese minerals mainly cryptomelane, chalcophanite, pyrolusite, and crednerite. The presence of iron minerals like goethite, hematite, and minor quantities of pyrite were also observed, as well as gibbsite and dolomite. Although pyrite can act as a reductant for the tetravalent manganese minerals, it was necessary to use H2O2 as an additional reductant to realize over 97% Mn leaching. Both Zn and Cu that are present in the manganese minerals chalcophanite and crednerite respectively, were simultaneously leached.
                  The relevant leaching factors were optimized as 2 M HCl and 0.4M H2O2 for 1 h when using a solid–liquid ratio of 1/12 at 60–95 °C. Under these conditions, the leaching efficiencies were >97% Mn, 98% Zn together with about 81% Al and complete leaching of Cu; whilst iron dissolution did not exceed 14%.Manganese is a strategic element that has several industrial applications such as steel production, carbon–zinc batteries production, fertilizers, as well as colorants for bricks, dyes and medicines ( Various hydrometallurgical methods have been suggested in the literature for treatment of low grade manganese ores. Such ores can be treated either by reduction roasting followed by acid leaching ( The high grade Paleozoic manganese deposit of south west Sinai has essentially been exploited. Nevertheless, extensive tonnages of low grade ore material still exist and require developed technologies for their economic processing. A proper mineralogical sample of this low grade ore was therefore collected from Abu Zeneima locality (11.00% MnO) and was subjected to processing via reduction leaching. For this study, a mixture of hydrochloric acid and hydrogen peroxide was used for the first time. The redox chemistry of the latter in aqueous solution shows that it is a strong oxidizing agent in either acid or basic solution as shown from the following equations ( However, H This study examines the different relevant factors affecting the leaching of manganese and other impurities from the ore. These factors involved the concentration of both acid and H To define the mineralogical composition of the working ore material, the bulk and sieved samples were subjected to X-ray diffraction analysis. For this purpose, a Philips X-ray diffractometer, model PW 223/20 was used where the copper tube was operated at 40 kV and 20 mA. The obtained diffractogram was properly interpreted using standard diffraction mineral patterns. The obtained results revealed the presence of several manganese minerals such as cryptomelane, chalcophanite, pyrolusite and crednerite associated with some iron minerals — as well as the aluminium mineral gibbsite and the carbonate mineral dolomite. The ore material was also chemically analyzed for its major and minor elements ( From the obtained analytical and mineralogical results, the following potential mineralogical composition of the working Abu Zeneima low grade Mn ore material is indicated ( The ore sample was first crushed to − The leaching efficiency was calculated by referring the leached metal amount in the leach liquor to its original input value. The ore material was completely analyzed for its major and minor constituents after its complete dissolution in HNO A series of leaching experiments was carried out at different HCl concentration (1.25 to 3.25 M). The other leaching conditions were fixed at 0.4 M H In order to evaluate the effect of H The other leaching conditions were fixed at a solid/liquid ratio of 1/12 at 95 °C for 2 h and using − It can be concluded that reduction of manganese(IV) minerals to the bivalent state is necessary before their dissolution, but manganese(II) minerals are readily leached. However, in the ore minerals, manganese is present in both the bivalent and tetravalent states. In a trial to improve the leaching conditions, another experimental leaching series was performed using < In order to reduce the heat energy and in turn the leaching costs, three further leaching experiments were carried out at room temperature, 60 °C and 85 °C under the same leaching conditions previously used at 95 °C. Working with the fixed concentration of 2 M HCl and 0.4 M H A reductive leaching process for Sinai low grade manganese ore material has been successfully demonstrated for the first time using an optimum mixture of hydrochloric acid and hydrogen peroxide as reductant. In the proposed leach system, relatively little iron was leached from the goethite matrix but other associated metal values were leached; namely Al present in gibbsite as well as the Cu and Zn values replacing some Mn in its minerals. The studied leaching factors were optimized as 2 M HCl and 0.4 M H