Oxygen bubbles are formed on the anode in the copper electrowinning process. Burst of the bubbles produces acid mist in the tankhouse. While it is well acknowledged that the amount of acid mist is related to the size of the bubble, no systematic measurements have been made to quantify bubble size and its relationship with materials and process variables. This paper presents results of bubble size measurement under different operating conditions. For each of the operating conditions tested, bubbles were detected in a wide size distribution ranging from 20μm to more than 400μm in diameter. Statistical analyses on the measurement results showed that addition of FC-1100, a surfactant widely used in copper electrowinning to suppress acid mist, and solution temperature were the two most influential test parameters on the bubble size followed by the age of the anode. In contrast, current density and solution acidity had negligible effect.Electrowinning is an electrochemical process that is used to extract and refine metals such as Cu, Zn, Ni, Mn and Cd from their solutions. In most cases, the solution is acidic and oxidation of water molecules at the anode is the common counter reaction which results in the liberation of oxygen bubbles: The generation of oxygen bubbles generally requires a high overpotential and accounts for a considerable percentage of the energy consumption in metal electrowinning tankhouses. Moreover, the generated oxygen bubbles burst at the air/solution interface, producing highly acidic droplets of which the fine ones become airborne and form an acid mist throughout the tankhouse of the electrowinning plant. Acid mist is highly corrosive and results in the corrosion of cathode plates, anode hanger bars, tankhouse equipment and building structures. It also poses a serious health hazard and causes extreme discomfort to the skin, eyes and respiratory systems of tankhouse workers. The effects of different process parameters on the amount of acid mist have been discussed in detail in our earlier publication ( Previous research results suggest that the amount of acid mist being generated is related to the size of the bursting bubbles ( This paper reports results of bubble size measurement under different operating conditions. It also examines, quantitatively, the relationship between the median bubble size and five operating parameters in copper electrowinning. These parameters are anode age, electrical current density, solution temperature, sulphuric acid concentration of the solution, and the presence of a typical chemical mist suppressant such as FC-1100. The copper electrowinning process was replicated in a bench-scale tank (EW cell). The equipment used in this investigation and its arrangements are shown in A peristaltic pump and four submersible heaters were used to maintain consistency in the composition and temperature of the solution for the duration of each test. To replicate industrial operations Pb–Ca–Sn alloy and 316 For each set of experiments a fresh batch of solution was synthesized containing 45 To measure bubble sizes via image analysis, the generated oxygen bubbles were transferred from the EW cell to a viewing chamber. A high-speed camera (RedLake MotionXtra HG-100K) with a special macro lens and super bright blue LEDs were utilized to capture images of the rising bubbles in the viewing chamber. The main goal of the present work was to compare, quantitatively, the effect of different operating parameters on bubbles sizes during a typical copper electrowinning process. To fully explore the main effect of each individual parameter as well as any possible interaction effects, the 2 The values shown in Based on the 2 For each of the 64 experiments, at least two sets of high resolution photos were taken by the high-speed camera. The images were taken at 10 A flexible silicon tube (sampling tube in The high speed camera was then used to capture 800 A thin copper wire, 130 To ensure the accuracy of the developed bubble sizing program, ImageJ (an open source image analysis software) was used to manually determine the bubble sizes of three randomly selected images. The results of the automated and manual bubble sizing were statistically identical. In total, more than 54,000 bubbles were sampled and their sizes measured. The diameter of the bubbles ranged predominantly from 26 There was a relatively strong positive skewness (1.7 on average) in all the collected data samples, similar to that shown in  A 5-way ANOVA analysis was performed on the raw experimental data to determine the full effect of test parameters on the average bubble size. To quantify the magnitude of the effect of each of the 32 parameter combinations, Pearson's r value was calculated for each case based on its ANOVA's mean square value ( FC-1100 and solution temperature, having the highest r values in The full factorial ANOVA analysis not only examined the effect of individual parameters but also all the possible parameter interactions. This analysis returned an R To assess the effect of individual test parameters on the bubble size, the average median bubble diameter for each level of a parameter was calculated. Each bar in FC-1100 was the only parameter that had a large effect, based on Cohen's classification, on the average bubble sizes. The presence of FC-1100 in the solution reduced the average bubble diameter by 9.3 The bubble size distribution, in addition to the average bubble size, was also considerably reduced in the presence of FC-1100 ( Solution temperature with a Pearson's r value of 0.30 was the second most influential parameter in determining the final size of a bubble ( Similar to the presence of FC-1100, when temperature of the solution was raised from 30 The experimental results shown in It was likely that the small cavities and cracks on the surface of the old anode provided much higher number of nucleation sites for the bubbles, leading to “forced” coalescence of the bubbles during their growth on the anode immediately prior to their detachment due to insufficient distances between neighbouring bubbles on the anode. Similar observations were reported by Huet where mean detachment radius of electrolytic bubbles increased with the surface roughness of nickel electrodes ( It is important to note that, regardless of the age of the anodes or operating conditions, bubble size distribution was relatively large, ranging from 20 It is worth noting that, within the ranges tested in this study, both the solution acidity and the current density had negligible influence on the bubble size. Solution acidity could affect the bubble size only through the change it could cause in the solution viscosity. Kazakis et al. reported a noticeable difference in the average bubble size only when the viscosities of the test solutions were considerably different, e.g. the difference between their viscosities was more than 600% ( Based on Faraday's law, increasing the electrical current density would increase the amount of oxygen produced at the anode ( Few publications in this field studied the interactions that exist among the test parameters. The full factorial ANOVA analysis showed that more than 22% of variations in bubble sizes recorded in the test series were due to the interactions between the test parameters. With a Pearson's r value of 0.20, the anode age–temperature interaction (G It can be seen that, on an old anode, increasing the temperature of the solution from 30 The G The decrease in the average bubble size and its distribution with temperature rise was due to surface tension reduction as explained earlier. Consistent with observations made by other researchers ( The effect of the anode's surface morphology (i.e. anode age) on bubble size and its distribution was much more evident at low solution temperature ( One of the other important interactions was the T Surface tension and viscosity were both known to influence the final size of a bubble ( It is general knowledge that surface tension of a liquid is a function of not only its composition but also its temperature. Measurements showed that surface tension of a low acidity solution was higher than that of a high acidity solution at 30 The surfactant–solution acidity (S In the absence of FC-1100, although bubble size distribution was slightly larger in high acidity solutions, the average bubble sizes generated in the low and high acidity solutions were very similar. In the presence of FC-1100, bubbles generated in high acidity solutions were on average 0.101 standard deviations smaller in diameter than those generated in low acidity solutions. Xu et al. also reported similar observations when studying the effect of NaCl concentrations on bubbles generated from a sparger in the presence of fixed amounts of sodium dodecyl sulphate surfactant ( A high-speed camera and image analysis software were used to measure the size of the bubbles generated during the copper electrowinning process. Measurements, made under a variety of operating conditions, showed that of the five test parameters, FC-1100 and solution temperature had the most significant effect on the average size of the oxygen bubbles. Bubble size and bubble size distribution were noticeably reduced in the presence of FC-1100 or when the solution temperature was increased. FC-1100 and solution temperature both influenced bubble sizes by reducing the overall surface tension of the solution. To a lesser extent, anode age also influenced the detachment size of bubbles. Older anode generated larger bubbles and wider bubble size distributions mainly due to its surface roughness variations. The data produced by the present work can be used to investigate the correlation between bubble size and the amount of acid mist, facilitating the design of strategies for minimizing acid mist generation in the tankhouse. The data can also be used to calculate the rate of bubble generation and release under a variety of operating conditions. Such information would be extremely useful in simulating the flow pattern of electrolyte solution between electrodes, which can be utilized to enhance the design of the electrodes and cells leading to improved electrolyte flow and copper quality at higher current densities. The authors gratefully acknowledge the partial financial and technical support of