Background and hypothesis
                  Radial head arthroplasty (RHA) is a reliable procedure to manage complex injuries of the elbow, but complications due to inadequate sizing have been observed. Radiocapitellar morphometry has been studied widely, but RHA preoperative planning is not yet well defined. We hypothesized that specific morphologic parameters of the radiocapitellar joint measured with simple clinical software for radiographic analysis could be useful tools for clinical practice to predict RHA size preoperatively.
               
                  Methods
                  Radiologic radiocapitellar joint dimensions (humeral condyle diameter [HCDi], radial head diameter [RHDi], and radial head height) were analyzed on true anteroposterior and lateral radiographs, using commercial picture archiving and communication system software, in 43 patients with non-osseous pathology of the elbow and 24 patients with RHA. Interobserver concordance was studied, and a regression model to relate different parameters was developed.
               
                  Results
                  Interobserver concordance was greater than 0.8 for HCDi and RHDi on the lateral view and RHDi on the anteroposterior view for the general population. The parameter with the best correlation with the radial head arthroplasty diameter (RHADi) size was HCDi on the lateral view. A regression model was calculated and defined as follows: RHADi = 6.99 + 0.733 × HCDi on lateral view. This model allows prediction of RHADi in 67% of cases.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Radiologic radiocapitellar parameters show good interobserver reliability. RHADi can be calculated preoperatively from HCDi on the lateral view in 67% of cases.Radial head arthroplasty (RHA) has become a reliable procedure for treating radial head fractures when stable osteosynthesis is not feasible. The radiocapitellar compartment of the elbow has a particular morphometry. It is a condylar-type joint (radiohumeral joint) allowing for flexion-extension of the elbow and pronation-supination of the forearm. In addition, it should have enough congruity and precise articular contact to enable force transmission while being sufficiently stable during the entire range of motion. Although the size of the RHA should always be assessed intraoperatively, few studies have focused their attention on the preoperative planning of implant size. In our study, we aimed to describe the radial head and capitellum dimensions on simple radiographs with simple clinical software for radiographic analysis and to determine whether there was a correlation between them in the general population. After that, we tried to confirm that this measured correlation is useful for accurately predicting RHA size preoperatively. First, we designed a study focused on defining the radiologic dimensions of the radiocapitellar compartment of the elbow and tried to establish a correlation between different parameters. Fifty biplanar simple radiographic studies were randomly selected from the general population of patients who attended our emergency department for non-osseous pathology of the elbow. A correct anteroposterior (AP) view should match the following criteria: (1) the articular edges of the radius, humerus, and medial cubitus were not superposed; and (2) the bicipital tuberosity was visible on the medial surface of the proximal radius, reflecting complete supination. A correct lateral view was defined when (1) the articular edges of the proximal radius and distal humerus were not superposed; (2) an about 90° relationship between the humerus and cubitus was present; and (3) the articular surface of the capitellum, trochlea, and epicondyle matched concentric circles. In the second phase, we selected postoperative radiographs of patients in whom a circumferential RHA (Evolve; Wright Medical Technology, Memphis, TN, USA) had been implanted for those who had sustained an isolated radial head fracture that could not be fixed. The studies of patients who had concomitant condylar or distal humeral fractures, who had injuries that could alter the radiocapitellar compartment, or who received an RHA for other reasons were discarded. The same radial head and capitellar dimensions were measured on appropriate images, and we attempted to establish a correlation. Afterward, we aimed to develop a prediction model of RHA size using the correlation between the analyzed parameters. We selected all the patients with an RHA implanted in our unit between 2009-2013. We initially selected 32 patients, but only 24 matched the correct radiologic criteria for the study. In both phases of the study, pure lateral and AP views were used. The image was amplified 4 times before being measured. In the first group (nonoperative group), the analyzed parameters were as follows: On the lateral view, the humeral condyle diameter, radial head height, and radial head diameter were measured ( On the AP view, the humeral condyle diameter, radial head height, and radial head diameter were measured ( In the operative group, the analyzed parameters were as follows: On the lateral view, the humeral condyle diameter (oHCDiL), radial head height, and radial head diameter were measured ( On the AP view, the humeral condyle diameter, radial head height, and radial head diameter were measured ( Image analysis was done with a commercial software pack for clinical use (AGFA RIS-PACS; Agfa HealthCare, Mortsel, Belgium). Each parameter was measured 3 times independently by 3 orthopedic surgeons (2 senior trainees in orthopedics and 1 senior surgeon focused on elbow surgery). The average value of each measure was used for statistical analysis. For cases after an RHA, measurements done by investigators were compared with the real size of the prosthesis recorded from clinical records to calculate radiographic image magnification accurately. Statistical analysis was done with SPSS software (version 16; SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA). A descriptive study was done. Interobserver reliability was measured with intraclass correlation coefficients with Bonferroni adjustment. A correlation coefficient greater than 0.80 was considered good. The level of significance was set at 5% ( In the first phase of the study, 43 radiographs from the general population were analyzed, comprising 22 male and 21 female patients. There were 25 right and 18 left elbows. The mean age was 48.7 ± 18.05 years (range, 17-84 years). Morphometric results and interobserver concordance on the AP and lateral views are shown in In the second phase of the study, radiographs from 24 patients with an implanted RHA were reviewed. Calculated radiographic magnification was 100% ± 3%. The mean age was 52 ± 18.6 years (range, 22-87 years). The median diameter of the implanted RHA (recorded from the surgical notes) was 22 mm (range, 20-26 mm). In this part of the study, interobserver concordance greater than 0.8 was achieved for RHA diameter on the AP view (0.966), RHA diameter on the lateral view (0.971), humeral condyle diameter on the AP view (0.849), and oHCDiL (0.885). In the correlation analysis, the parameter with the best correlation with radial head arthroplasty diameter (oRHADi) was oHCDiL (0.82). A prediction model of oRHADi was calculated from these results and was defined as follows: oRHADi = 6.99 + 0.733 × oHCDiL. This model allows prediction of oRHADi from oHCDiL in two-thirds of the cases (67% ± 1%, with confidence interval of 95%). RHA has become an accepted procedure for treating complex injuries of the elbow, Correct surgical technique and proper arthroplasty size selection are determinant factors to obtain good outcomes. In our study, we have observed that the definitive radial head arthroplasty diameter could be inferred from the humeral condyle diameter on the lateral view when using an RHA with a round head design in more than two-thirds of the cases. This finding has some limitations. First, we have used simple radiographs and commercial software for clinical use. It is probable that accuracy in measurements could be improved with CT or magnetic resonance imaging scans and complex software, but the effects of these differences, if they exist, are yet unknown. In addition, the use of simple radiographs could represent an advantage regarding costs and applicability in daily clinical practice, as many of these injuries do not require CT evaluation. Even if accuracy could be improved, CT scans and complex analysis are not always available. Second, our results are based on 43 and 23 cases, and it is arguable that concordance could be improved with a larger sample. However, our sample size is similar to that of other studies reported in the current literature. We have observed poor correlation in many parameters on the AP view. The explanation could be that a pure AP view requires full extension of the elbow, which may be difficult to achieve for a patient with a painful, traumatic elbow, and thus minimal changes in the position of the elbow could affect the reliability of our measurements. In contrast, most patients with elbow injuries can maintain the elbow flexed at a right angle for an appropriate lateral view. We used a circumferential model of RHA in our study, which has the same diameter on the AP and lateral views. Perhaps similar results can be achieved if the measurements are done with an anatomically shaped RHA, but additional studies on the short and long axis of the radial head are necessary. Finally, some factors influencing the RHA size, such as the presence of associated injuries or surgeon preferences, have not been taken into consideration, but the surgical technique was consistent (all surgical procedures were performed by surgeons specializing in elbow surgery) and the method for templating the radial head was the same for all cases analyzed in this study. The RHA diameter can be predicted preoperatively in two-thirds of cases from a simple measurement of the humeral condyle diameter with an appropriate lateral view of a simple radiograph. The radial head diameter and humeral condyle diameter using simple radiographic analysis with commercial software are reliable and showed high interobserver concordance. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.