The fundamental mechanisms that govern bone mineralization have been fairly well evidenced by means of experimental research. However, rules for the evolution of the volume and composition of the bone tissue compartments (such as the mineralized collagen fibrils and the extrafibrillar space in between) have not been provided yet. As an original contribution to this open question, we here test whether mineralizing bone tissue can be represented as a thermodynamically closed system, where crystals precipitate from an ionic solution, while the masses of the fibrillar and extrafibrillar bone tissue compartments are preserved. When translating, based on various experimental and theoretical findings, this mass conservation proposition into diffraction–mass density relations, the latter are remarkably well confirmed by independent experimental data from various sources. Resulting shrinkage and composition rules are deemed beneficial for further progress in bone materials science and biomedical engineering.Neutron diffraction spacing Dessication degree Volume fraction Mass Mineralization degree Amount Fluid-to-organic mass ratio Time Volume Mass density Change of variable due to dehydration … of collagen … of dried tissue … of extracollagenous space … of extrafibrillar space … of extrafibrillar fluid … of extrafibrillar mineral … of fibrillar space … of fibrillar fluid … of fibrillar mineral … of fluid … of hydroxyapatite Maximum of … … of tissue (at the extracellular scale) … of wet tissue at the beginning of the mineralization process at the end of the mineralization process partially dehydrated at time instant inside the fibrils in the extrafibrillar space temporal derivative of Bone mineralization is a very complicated process where several microns-sized osteoblastic cells release, through budding from their membranes, so-called matrix vesicles (sized tens of nanometers) into the extracellular space ( This short summary clearly shows that, up to now, bone mineralization has been mainly studied experimentally, aiming at the deciphering of fundamental mechanisms. Wishing to foster the current trend in biomaterial science to develop theoretical and computational approaches to further pervade the matter, the present paper is concerned with finding mathematically formulated rules behind the aforementioned mineralization process within and outside the collagen fibrils. These rules will be strictly validated against a variety of physically and statistically independent experimental data collected from the rich literature on the topic. While the systems biology of bone, or the hierarchical microstructure of mineralized bone and its emerging mechanical properties have been studied quite successfully by theoretical and computational approaches ( We wish to check, whether the structural evolution of bone tissue during mineralization can be explained by means of fluid–solid phase transitions in two thermodynamically closed systems. Therefore, we consider a piece of extracellular bone tissue (at a scale of some tens of micrometers) with properties averaged over a classical bone sample measuring one to a few millimeters, as accessible through standard experimental protocols ( Thereafter, the ions swimming in the fluid start to form hydroxyapatite minerals (referred to by suffix “HA” in the sequel). If both the fibrils and the extrafibrillar space are closed thermodynamic systems ( In particular, at the end of the mineralization process (at time “ Eq. Consequently, the remainder of this paper will be devoted to deriving, from Eqs. The conservation of mass during the phase transformation from ionic fluid to solid hydroxyapatite, taking place under closed thermodynamic conditions according to Eq. The most pronounced shrinkage effect of the compaction of mineral ions during precipitation of hydroxyapatite takes place at the level of the extrafibrillar space, which is, prior to mineralization, entirely filled by the ionic solution. The corresponding volume change can be quantified through The mineralization-induced shrinkage of the bone tissue according to Eq. As a complementary check of our mineralization rule, we consider partially dehydrated and fully dried tissues (indicated by superscript "dh" standing for dehydrated), whose water-to-organic mass ratios In Eq. We here derive mathematical expressions for the tissue compartment volume changes as well as for the constituent volume fractions, as functions of the mineralization degree, defined as: Similarly, the extrafibrillar volume change due to mineralization follows from the insertion of Eq. When accounting additionally for Eq. As to derive a mineralization degree-dependent expression for the extrafibrillar volume fraction In In order to get access to the expression As in Eq. with Finally, the volume fraction of fluid inside the fibrils reads as: The volume fraction of mineral in the extrafibrillar space In order to check the relevance of representing mineralizing bone tissue as a thermodynamically closed system, in which hydroxyapatite precipitates from an ionic solution filling all extracollagenous spaces (both intra- and extrafibrillarly), we compare the mathematical model-predicted neutron diffraction spacings in mineralized tissues at different hydration states, according to Eqs. Given this excellent confirmation of hydroxyapatite precipitating under closed thermodynamic conditions from an ionic solution in the fibrillar and extrafibrillar spaces of bone tissue, the corresponding evolution Eqs. All these shrinkage and compaction phenomena are schematically illustrated in Fibrillar volume change is closely connected to the evolving equatorial diffraction spacing Still motivated by the excellent model prediction capabilities shown in Within the fibrils, the fluid volume fraction, starting from around 50% in the unmineralized osteoid, is reduced by one third in the case of low-mineralized tissues [see In the extrafibrillar space, mineral volume fractions increase overlinearly with the mineralization degree, the more so the more highly the tissue is mineralized [see This contribution showed that the volume and structure changes in mineralizing bone tissue can be mathematically predicted when considering the tissue as a closed thermodynamic system, in which crystals start to precipitate from a supersaturated solution, while the mass conservation law is continuously fulfilled. The corresponding mathematical formulation incorporated earlier general findings on collagen swelling ( In the bone tissues identified as closed thermodynamic systems, the volume of ionic solution involved in the precipitation process is fully replaced by the volume of newly formed mineral, and the potential relevance of such a replacement process of an originally larger volume of a low density substance, by a then smaller volume of a high density substance, was at least partially perceived by some researchers for quite some while: e.g., Deakins ( Quantification of tissue volume and composition Mineralizing bone tissue acts as a closed thermodynamic system undergoing a fluid-to-solid phase transformation in the extra-collagenous space. The corresponding rigorous mathematical approach was successfully validated through neutron diffraction and physical chemistry tests, and gives unprecedented access to compositional and structural changes in mineralizing bone tissue, at all final collagen-to-mineral ratios found in Nature. Besides from its impact on fundamental bone science, this approach promises to open new avenues in computer-aided biomaterials design, by delivering so far inaccessible input data needed for realistic modeling of the scaffold-tissue interaction. Financial support of the The initial tissue volume follows from the initial tissue mass Analogously, the final tissue volume follows from the final tissue mass The final constituent masses can be expressed in terms of constituent volume fractions Use of The extrafibrillar and collagen volume fractions in unmineralized tissues, Mineralization-induced shrinkage of the tissue according to Eq. At any time instant In order to get access to the volume fraction Next, we express the right-hand term of Insertion of In order to get access into the first of these two unknowns, the volume fraction of hydroxyapatite in the extrafibrillar space, Insertion of Integration of Eq. Now, we are in the position to finally get access to the extrafibrillar mineral volume fraction, through dividing Eq. Evaluation of In order to downscale (15) to the fibrillar level (where we seek experimental validation through diffraction data), we need to know how the lost fluid volume The mineral mass ratio in (D.3) can be determined as a function of the volume fractions in unmineralized tissue, thanks to Eqs. Integration of