Mineral carbonation (MC) is one of the most important methods to sequester CO2 due to the advantages of permanently storage and abundant mineral resources. This work was designed to investigate the MC chemistry and kinetics in order to further develop carbonation technology. The comprehensive effects of all factors on MC of olivine were investigated. The mechanism of the reaction has been elucidated and can vary under different conditions. With high addition of sodium salts and high CO2 partial pressure (PCO2), the rate of MC was controlled by chemical reaction between H+ and olivine no matter how the other variables were changed. The H+ concentration in the void between the well-crystallized carbonates formed by carbonation and the non-reacted olivine was believed to be the same as that in the aqueous bulk solution. The decrease in particle size, increase in temperature, HCO3
                     − concentration and ionic strength in solution can dramatically enhance the carbonation. With little addition of sodium salts, the MC was controlled by diffusion through the Si-rich layer surrounding the olivine core. In contrast, with high addition of sodium salts but low PCO2, the MC was controlled by diffusion through the dense carbonate layer. The addition of sodium bicarbonate can dramatically increase the ionic strength and aid the dissolution of Si to temporarily aqueous H4SiO4 followed by decomposition to amorphous silica and consequently the removal of Si-rich layer. Under low PCO2, there was a limited supply of CO3
                     2− ions, which resulted in the formation of a dense and poorly porous carbonate layer between a layer of well-crystallized carbonates and non-reacted olivine.Since the 1990s ( At present, the mitigation of global warming has become increasingly challenging and urgent ( However, the MC process is limited by kinetics mainly by one of the three possible steps: the dissolution of CO The rate of the process was controlled by the diffusion of Ca In addition to reactions The whole process was controlled by the chemical reaction with activation energy of 15 kJ/mol, followed by the diffusion of Ca   The detailed kinetics and mechanism of how the carbonation proceeds, however, are still not very clear. The successful application of a MC process must be profitable and require the detailed understanding of the kinetics and mechanism for optimal application. It is necessary to systematically study how the various factors of mineral carbonation (e.g. temperature, particle size, addition of salts and additives, carbon dioxide overpressure) affect the kinetics. The improvement of the MC theory provides the opportunity to economically enhance the process. This focus of this work is the MC of olivine, which represents the focus of the majority of the ex-situ MC published research. This research investigates MC using narrowly sized particles of olivine and lower CO A high grade natural olivine, provided by Sibelco Europe, was used in this fundamental research. In the following context, this sample is referred to as pure olivine. The chemical composition of the pure olivine was analyzed by Inductively Coupled Plasma - Optical Emission Spectrophotometry (ICP-OES) method after lithium borate fusion ( High purity CO In order to carry out kinetic research, the pure olivine was ground by a rod mill under the conditions of 60% solids and 1 kg samples/16.5 kg rod charge for 35 min. After the grinding process, the samples were wet screened to 500 mesh, 400 mesh, 270 mesh, 200 mesh and 170 mesh. The narrow-size particle screen fractions 0–25 μm, 25–38 μm, 38–53 μm and 53–75 μm were collected for carbonation. The apparatus used in this research was a 600 mL stainless steel autoclave (No. 5103) from Parr Instrument Company, as shown in The narrow-size particles of olivine were used throughout the fundamental research. Firstly, the factor of particle size was studied at the conditions of 185 °C, 34.5 bar of CO In order to quantify the MC efficiency, the Leco CS230 instrument was used to analyze the carbon contents of the solids after the MC. It is noted that there is no carbon in the pure olivine. During the continuous sampling MC, the MC efficiency based on the mass of solids of the MC after specific time is difficult to be calculated. Alternatively, the change of carbon contents of solids before and after the MC was used, as shown in Eq. The detailed particle size distribution of narrow-size particles was analyzed by a laser method of the Malvern Mastersizer 2000. A scanning electron microscope with an energy dispersive X-ray detector (SEM-EDX) analysis was used to investigate the process of the MC. The surface and the transverse surface of particles are the analysis targets. To analyze the surface of particles, the dry particles were firstly coated by gold-palladium through the Denton Desk II sputter coater, followed by the SEM-EDX analysis. To analyze the transverse surface of particles, the samples needed to be prepared for in the following steps. The carbonated solids after MC were firstly dispersed well by mixing with pure carbon powders as the mechanical dispersant to prevent particles from sticking together. Then the EpoFix resin and hardener were added with the weight ratio 25/3, followed by subsequently mixing with the solids and carbon powders. The mixture was then vacuumed to remove air bubbles which remained in the mixture and then left under ambient conditions for more than 48 h to cure. The polishing steps started with the 400 grit sand paper, followed by 600 grit, 800 grit and 1200 grit sand papers until there was no obvious scratch on the polished surface. Subsequently, the 6-µm grade sand paper was further used to polish the mixture with 6-µm monocrystalline diamond suspension, followed by washing with soapy water. The 1-µm grade sand paper was also used to further polish it with the 1-µm monocrystalline diamond suspension, followed by thorough washing with soapy water. After further washing by ethyl alcohol, the mixture was coated by carbon to make the sample conductive during the SEM-EDX analysis. The FEI Quanta 650 instrument was used for the SEM-EDX analysis. The particle size distribution of 0–25 μm particles and the effects of particle size on the mineral carbonation efficiency are shown in The SEM of the carbonation solids of 0–25 μm particles at the conditions is shown in The SCM means that the overall particle size for the sphere remains constant but the size of the unreacted olivine core decreases with time. The solid layer outside of the unreacted silicates is the solid product. There is also a stagnant film for the reacting aqueous ions moving from the aqueous solution to the surface of the solid sphere, which cannot be observed through the simple SEM analysis. In this research, the unreacted silicates were mainly the olivine particles. The product layer was mainly the carbonates. The stagnant film would be for the reactive H The effects of temperature on the MC efficiency has been investigated under the conditions of P The MC efficiency increases with reaction time for all particles and at all temperatures. Through the plots of mass transport control, To determine whether the MC was controlled by mass transport or chemical reaction the Arrhenius activation energy was calculated. The calculation of activation energy is based on Arrhenius Eq.  The effects of CO The further kinetic fitting of the data, shown in In order to confirm the change of the control mechanism, further SEM-EDX analysis was used, shown in Therefore, the mechanism the MC reaction process under the conditions of 185 °C, 10% solids content, 1 m NaHCO The effects of NaHCO According to SEM-EDX analysis was adopted to identify the change of chemical compositions and particle-product structures, which are shown in  As to the reasons why NaCl can enhance the MC process, the further kinetics analysis ( The effects of rotation speed on the MC efficiencies under the conditions of 0–25 μm, 185 °C, P The effects of solids content on the MC efficiencies under the conditions of 0–25 μm, 185 °C, P The above results and discussions show that all the reactions under all above conditions were controlled by chemical reaction except for reactions under low CO The preliminary mechanism of the mineral carbonation of olivine can be summarized from the above results and discussions and is illustrated in the schematic diagram, Furthermore, the chemical reaction mainly means that the H The effects of CO The theoretical equilibrium pH value and the ionic strength were theoretically only 5.47 and 0.0144 mol/Kg H In order to further verify the effects of the increase of the ionic strength on the MC, the systems with only NaCl addition were considered in No. 14–15 and No. 9. It is obvious that the pH was increased but not significantly when NaCl was added compared to the system without any additives. But the ionic strength was dramatically increased, from only 0.0144 mol/Kg H Compared the No. 16 and 17 to No. 4, there was no large difference of the pH values and the ionic strength. Thus, there is no obvious effect on the MC efficiency either, neither enhancing the well-crystallized carbonates layer removal by attrition force between particles nor hindering the supply of the reactive H In this paper, the comprehensive kinetic research has been carried out on the effects of various factors on the MC of olivine for CO With low addition of sodium salts, the MC process was controlled by diffusion through the Si-rich layer. The preferential dissolution of Mg resulted in the formation of Si-rich layer where Si-O remained as the incomplete silicate structure. The Si-rich layer prevented the diffusion of reactive H With high addition of sodium salts and high CO The authors thank the