Sausages were extended with common bean flour (CBF) at levels of 2.5%, 5.0%, 7.5% and 10.0% of the weight of meat in the sausage. The proximate composition of the products was significantly (P<0.05) affected by the addition of CBF. Water holding capacity (WHC) and pH increased and cooking losses decreased with increasing levels of added CBF in the emulsions. Sausages extended with CBF at levels of 5.0%, 7.5% and 10.0% were lighter than control sausages. Using CBF decreased shear force and hardness of the cooked products. In general the addition of CBF at level of 2.5% had no significant effect when compared with the control sausage.Legumes such as common bean ( Non-meat proteins from a variety of plant sources including sunflower protein ( Meat batters with corn germ protein flour additives showed increased water holding capacity (WHC) and yield and decreased cooking losses ( The objectives of this study were to evaluate the effect of substitution of CBF for beef on proximate composition, WHC, pH, cooking losses, colour and instrumentally assessed textural properties of beef sausages. The meat used for the sausages was obtained from the hinquarter cuts of three older (2–4 yr) beef animals of unknown sex. These hinquarter cuts included the topside, silverside, rump and knuckle and the muscles involved were the semimembranosus, adductor biceps femoris, semitendinosus, gluteus medius, vastus lateralis and rectus femoris. Common bean ( Muscles were removed from the carcass after 24 h chilling at 4°C, trimmed of visible fat and connective tissue, and ground through a 3-mm plate using a meat grinder (Moulinex 505, France). The ground meat was sealed in The ground meat, nitrite salt, spice (commercial sausage spice, La Bovida, France) and 1/3 of the total water were chopped in a Stephan UMC 5 Electronic cutter (Marne-la-Vallee) for 3 min. CBF was added, separated with another 1/3 of the total water, and the mix was chopped for another 3 min. The remaining water was added and chopping was continued for about 8–10 min. Final chopping temperature did not exceed 15°C. The sausage batters were stuffed into 22-mm natural sheep casings using a hand operated stuffer (VLA 13- France) and formed into links of 15 cm in length. The sausages were cooked at 85–90°C in a water bath for about 45 min to an internal temperature of 72°C. They were then rapidly chilled to 15–20°C with a cold water shower for 10 min, peeled and stored in polyethylene bags in a cooler at 4°C for 48 h before analysis. Three replications of each treatment were made. Proximate analysis of the cooked sausages was performed according to pH was measured on raw sausages immediately after preparation and on cooked sausages stored at 4°C for 48 h. pH was measured by making a 10% (w/v) homogenate of each sample in distilled water using a Waring microblender (1 min at 1900 g), pH was measured with a Tacussel Electronic pH meter, Model PHN 850 (Villeurbanne, France). The Samples were weighed before and after cooking. Total weight loss in sausages after cooking was expressed as cooking losses. Approximately 20 g cooked sausages, which had been finely ground with a food processor (Moulinex 505, France), were spread evenly in petri dishes of 60 mm diameter. The products were evaluated for Textural analysis of the sausages was performed on the Instron Universal Testing Machine (Model 1122, Wycombe, England). A randomized block design was used. Three observations of each replication were analyzed in this study. Data were subjected to analysis of variance and Duncan's multiple range test ( Mean values for proximate composition of the beef sausages are shown in Mean values for pH, WHC and cooking losses are presented in  Results of the instrumental determination of textural properties of the cooked sausages are given in The results showed that the incorporation of CBF increased the yield of cooked sausages by reducing cooking losses. The addition of CBF increased the WHC of the raw sausage formulations. Moisture and protein contents of the cooked CBF extended beef sausages decreased with increasing levels of CBF extension. Beef sausages with 5.0% and 10.0% CBF were lighter than the control. Hardness of the cooked beef sausages decreased as the level of CBF in the formulation increased. CBF appears to have potential as an extender in finely ground meat products.