Coeliac disease predisposes to metabolic osteopathy. The entity of bone loss is higher in patients with malabsorption at diagnosis but it is also present in asymptomatic or poorly symptomatic patients, occurring in roughly half of them. Calcium malabsorption and the release of proinflammatory cytokines, activating osteoclasts, represent the main mechanisms responsible for bone derangement. In coeliacs, the presence of an increased fracture risk was recently questioned and its importance on clinical grounds was reconsidered, in view of the fact that gluten-free diet generally improves bone mass and, consequently, reduces fracture risk. However, gluten-free diet rarely normalizes bone mass and the co-administration of mineral active drugs may be useful in a subgroup of coeliacs. bone loss is extremely frequent in coeliacs patients with overt malabsorption show a more severe bone mass derangement than patients with subclinical disease gluten-free diet improves bone mineral density but does not normalize it in all patients  the pathogenesis of bone loss depends on both systemic and local factors calcium malabsorption has a pivotal role to induce a complex network of events leading to bone demineralization production of proinflammatory cytokines, responsible for osteoclast activation, is the key point for a local-acting mechanism bone derangement in coeliacs should be considered as a high turnover osteoporosis as increased resorption is not compensated by enhanced neoformation  in adult patients on gluten-free diet since childhood, bone mineral density is normal gluten-free diet improves but rarely normalizes bone mineral density in patients diagnosed in adulthood  in coeliacs with malabsorption symptoms bone mineral density should be measured at diagnosis and after a year of strict gluten-free diet. Then, mineral-active drugs should be associated with dietary treatment if bone mass gain is not satisfactory in asymptomatic coeliacs bone mineral density should be measured after a year of strict gluten-free diet CD women should undergo bone mineral density measurement in the peri-menopausal period coeliacs on gluten-free diet from childhood should not undergo bone mineral density measurement  the effect of mineral-active drugs on bone mineral density and fracture risk in adult coeliacs is not known there is no agreement on the bone mineral density treatment threshold Osteoporosis is ‘a systemic skeletal disease characterized by a low bone mass and microarchitectural deterioration with a consequent increase in bone fragility and susceptibility to fracture’. Studies dealing with the prevalence of bone loss in CD should be considered with caution, as differences in terms of age of the population studied, duration of disease, diagnostic delay and skeletal site of measurement may affect the results. Several papers agree in reporting that more than 75% of untreated adult coeliacs suffer from a loss of bone mass. The pathogenesis of bone damage in CD is multifactorial and both systemic and local mechanisms may play a role. Intestinal malabsorption secondary to mucosal lesions leads to calcium malabsorption and subnormal levels of serum calcium. The subsequent pathogenetic step is represented by the hypersecretion of parathyroid hormone (PTH), as a response to hypocalcemia. The evaluation of serum markers of bone remodelling shows that metabolic osteopathy of CD is characterized by an enhancement of the markers of both bone synthesis (osteocalcin, propeptide of type I procollagen, bone-specific alkaline posphatase) and resorption (telopeptide of type I collagen, urinary crosslinks, urinary hydroxyproline). However, bone resorption is faster than bone neoformation, resulting in a net bone loss. Recently, local mechanisms of bone derangement have received attention. In particular, inflammatory and immunological alterations, by means of cytokine production, may contribute to bone mass reduction. Cytokines are involved in the mechanisms of cell-to-cell communication and some of them are implicated in both normal and abnormal bone remodeling. The RANKL/RANK/Osteoprotegerin (OPG) pathway is now considered the most potent regulatory system, coupling osteoclast and osteoblast activities. In female coeliacs the role of associated gynaecological disorders should also be considered. Amenorrhoea is a frequent finding in female coeliacs Another intriguing observation is represented by the detection of bone-specific antibodies in sera from coeliacs. The diagnostic accuracy of symptoms related to the presence of bone damage in CD is very poor. In fact, in the absence of clinical symptoms or signs, a significant bone defect may be present in subclinical patients or even in patients diagnosed during screening programs. Bone mass measurements may be expressed in two different ways: (a) Densitometric criteria for diagnosis of osteopenia are −2< It is known that the relative risk of fracture increases by a factor of about 2 for each SD decrease in BMD. The prevalence of osteoporotic fractures increases with age and women are more affected than men. Fractures occur in sites where trabecular bone predominates and are associated with minimal or moderate trauma. Although, as already stated, bone involvement in CD was first reported several years ago, the true clinical magnitude of the problem was ignored for a long time and epidemiological information on fractures in coeliacs has only recently been acquired. In a case-control, cross-sectional study Unfortunately, the reported prevalence was mainly established among patients diagnosed on the basis of the presence of malabsorption symptoms and, therefore, not representative of the whole CD population where the number of subclinical and silent patients may be 8–10 fold greater than the number of patients with malabsorption. To overcome this problem, a subsequent study analyzed the relationship between bone fractures and CD exploring a cohort of 148 consecutive patients, 53% of whom were patients with overt malabsorption and 47% subclinical or silent patients, compared with 296 healthy controls. This study showed that the prevalence of fractures in the peripheral skeleton was significantly higher in symptomatic coeliacs (42%) compared both with controls (14%) and subclinical/silent cases (20%). In this latter group the prevalence of fractures did not differ from that of healthy controls. A recent study on a small cohort of coeliacs failed to show abnormalities of serum parathyroid hormone, serum vitamin D or calcium intake as responsible for bone fractures. Two recent population-based reports showed a slight increase of fracture prevalence in coeliacs. Finally, a recent study by West et al The results of these studies were recently criticized. However, since an increased risk was shown in coeliacs with overt malabsorption and not in asymptomatic patients, apart from correct considerations regarding the difference in study design, the power of the study, the method of defining or diagnosing fractures, what probably affects the results of previous studies seems to be the composition of the various case studies, i.e. the actual number of subjects with overt malabsorption and, therefore, a higher risk of fracture. On the other hand, in the study by West et al, In short, the importance of bone derangement in coeliacs has to date been attributed to the possible induction of an increased risk of fractures. While on one hand, several data suggest that this problem may be overestimated, on the other it is also true that osteoporosis, by itself, may represent a clinical and practical problem for patients. In post-menopausal osteoporosis, as expected, patients with fractures show a significantly reduced health-related quality of life than patients without fractures, but the mere presence of low values of bone mineral density induces a reduction of quality of life. We have no data about health-related quality of life in coeliacs concerning the presence of osteoporosis or bone fractures, but we cannot avoid thinking that low bone mass may have similar consequences in these patients. In a recent paper, As far as the need to measure bone mineral density in coeliacs is concerned, several doubts are present. It is not clear which patients should undergo bone mass measurement, when the first and subsequent measurements should be performed, but also why measurement should be performed. A general agreement on the positive effect of the treatment with a gluten-free diet is evident, as reported by prospective studies. However, while treated patients increase bone mass significantly, such restoration rarely reaches sex- and age-matched values for the control population in patients diagnosed in adulthood. The availability for adult patients of a treatment able to restore bone mineral density values at normal levels, like gluten-free diet for children, would allow the same statement to be made for adults. In the meantime, in coeliacs diagnosed in adulthood, a different approach according to clinical presentation should be followed. The presence of an overt malabsorption, but not of subclinical or silent disease, makes it possible to select a subgroup of patients at higher risk for osteoporosis and bone fractures. On the contrary, the presence of subclinical or silent disease could allow elimination of the need for bone measurement at diagnosis. On clinical grounds the evaluation of bone mass after the first year of strict adherence to gluten-free diet does in fact seem of much greater use: the decision to begin therapy with mineral-active drugs would thus be taken on the basis of dietary regimen efficacy. The lack of knowledge about the efficacy of mineral-active drugs in coeliacs does not make it possible to draw up a strategy for managing post-menopausal coeliacs. This subgroup has a higher risk of suffering from osteoporosis and bone mass measurement will, therefore, be more sensitive in detecting a bone defect. We have to consider that the efficacy of anti-resorptive therapy started later in life is lower than early treatment and screening at presentation allows diagnosis of bone loss at early stage. As the efficacy of mineral-active drug treatment on fracture risk is unknown in this subgroup of patients, it was suggested that bone mass should be measured at diagnosis, as patients will have suffered malabsorption for many years. These guide-lines were recently criticized Once a diagnosis of osteoporosis has been made or if the specific treatment with a gluten-free diet is ineffective for promoting remineralization, additional secondary causes of osteoporosis (hypogonadism, thyroid dysfunction, hyperprolactinemia, medications [anticonvulsivants, corticosteroids]) should be ruled out. The role of lifestyle factors should be not underestimated in the prevention of osteoporosis: in a recent paper, Little attention has been dedicated to other therapy regimens in CD. In an early longitudinal study, the co-administration of 25-hydroxycholecalciferol did not induce any significant modifications in BMD of the distal two-thirds of the forearm after 12 months of GFD. The list of drugs for treatment of osteoporosis is growing and although they have been demonstrated to have a place in the treatment of postmenopausal osteoporosis there are no studies of comparability in coeliacs. We therefore have no information on which subgroup of patients should follow this therapeutic approach, nor on which is the best therapeutic strategy, in terms of drug, dosage and duration. It seems appropriate to prescribe an association with mineral-active drugs in cases presenting a severe densitometric alteration or when a past clinical history of osteoporotic fractures is reported. There is no agreement on the BMD treatment threshold and a Osteoporosis is a complex chronic disorder that may progress without producing symptoms until a fracture occurs. Moreover, relatively few people are diagnosed in time for effective therapy to be administered. Diagnosis of CD gives an opportunity for suspicion of osteoporosis and, therefore, for preventive action. General advice to coeliacs in order to protect and maintain bone health is necessary. Among recommendations, explanations to the patient about the risk of osteoporosis, the necessity of strictly adhering to a gluten-free diet and the effect of treatment on bone remineralization in the event of established bone involvement are particularly important. Although all general measurements have proved to be effective in the general population and in postmenopausal osteoporosis, none of them have been proved in patients with CD. Education on the importance of lifestyle changes such as regular exercise and stopping smoking should be given. Regular calcium intake needs to be recommended (1.2 Renal hyperconversion of 25-hydroxyvitamin D to 1,25-hydrohyvitamin D secondary to increased PTH levels Despite the more recent advents in the knowledge on CD osteopathy, the story is far from over. We now have information on the prevalence and how to diagnose and prevent the problem. We still need to improve our knowledge on the pathophysiological mechanisms, as the aspects connected with malabsorption must be associated with those linked to local factors. Bone mineral density measurement seems unnecessary in all patients, although a better evaluation of cost compared with benefits is required. Despite the fact that treatment seems to be largely dependent on gluten restriction from the diet, more information on therapeutic alternatives is needed. Bone homeostasis is frequently affected in coeliac disease. More insight into the pathophysiology of bone damage will allow us to understand the relative importance of local and systemic factors, at present partially unknown. Diagnosis of metabolic osteopathy makes use of bone densitometry, but when to perform the measurement and which patients should undergo to measurement is a matter for discussion. A suitable strategy envisages bone mass measurement at diagnosis in symptomatic patients and, in fully compliant patients, a second measurement after one year of gluten-free diet. In asymptomatic patients, bone mass measurement may be delayed until after one year of gluten-free diet; women should be tested in the perimenopausal period. In childhood coeliac disease bone mass measurement seems of little use, since gluten-free diet normalizes bone mineral density. Doubts have been expressed as to the presence of an increased risk of bone fracture. Bone mineral density values do not discriminate between patients with and without fractures, suggesting that other parameters are also important in fracture occurrence, such as bone architectural modifications. Mineral-active drug co-administration may represent an effective measure, but no data are yet available on the effect on bone mineral density and fracture risk modification.