Some local features usually have to be formed on the sheet metal parts for further usage, e.g. assembly. Stamping has been extensively applied to form the local features, but in an inconvenient and inefficient way. In this paper, a novel forming technique named clamp forming is proposed as an alternative to stamping to form the local features on base sheet metal parts. Taking the step feature on a hat-shaped rail as an example, the clamp forming technique is illustrated and implemented. Based on a force magnification apparatus, the clamp forming can enlarge the traction force by tens of times into a large forming force. The finite element model of the clamp forming is established and forming quality is numerically evaluated through simulation. The influences of the key process parameters, including die radius, over-bending angle, die arc radius and driving force are numerically investigated, and the optimal process parameters are finally determined. The forming apparatus is developed and forming experiments are carried, and excellent forming quality can be achieved by employing the optimal design. The clamping forming technique provides a more load-saving and economical method than stamping to form local features on sheet metal parts.A sheet metal forming process often consists of several procedures, among which some small or local features, such as steps, holes, pyramids, etc., are formed on the basis of a previously-formed base part (see Stamping has been extensively applied to form those local features, but usually in an inconvenient and inefficient way if energy consumption ( The incremental forming, which was originally developed to form sheet metal parts into final workpieces by a series of small incremental deformations ( In the present work, a novel forming technique named clamp forming is proposed to form local features on sheet metal parts, as another alternative to stamping. As shown in The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The mechanism of the clamp forming is introduced in Section The proposed clamping forming apparatus consists of driving and forming sections, as shown in (1. hydraulic cylinder; 2. pillars; 3. roof; 4. upper mounting plate; 5. upper linear guideway; 6. upper support plate; 7. upper die; 8. lower die; 9. lower support plate; 10. lower linear guideway; 11. lower mounting plate; 12. base plate) Load saving is the most competitive advantage of the proposed clamp forming. As shown in For components with local features at both ends, two forming apparatuses can be symmetrically arranged to improve productivity, as shown in Firstly, the flat die blocks as shown in The surface of the step feature is expected to be flat enough and parallel with the flange. However, as a result of springback, they tend to be warped (see In the current work, three indicators,   Since springback is the primary cause of the unparallelism,  A HEXAGON’s bridge-type 3D coordinate measuring machine (CMM) is used to measure deformed configuration (see The dimensions of the demonstrative hat-shaped rail and the step feature to be formed are shown in The 3D finite element model of the clamp forming process is developed by using the ABAQUS/Standard software. Due to the symmetry, only half of the rail and die blocks are modeled, as shown in The material of the present hat-shaped rail is SUS-301 stainless steel. Its true stress-true strain curve is presented in The slope of the upper and lower die blocks’ trajectories is set as 1:40, and displacement boundary conditions are adopted. The rail is initially set stationary, and the upper and lower die blocks are given displacements equal in magnitude but opposite in directions to approach and contact with the rail. Then the rail is set free, while die blocks’ degrees of freedom (DOF) are all restrained except for translation along the slope direction. The concentrated force is applied on the die blocks along the Z direction. Finally, die blocks are withdrawn and springback occurs. The simulation result of the clamp forming process by using the flat die blocks is shown in Three additional simulation with different friction coefficients (between the die and the blank) assumed are performed to investigate the influence of friction on the forming force magnified. It can be seen from In this section, the process parameters are selected and their effects on the forming quality indicators are studied by means of DOE. Considering springback compensation, the die blocks are redesigned as shown in Because the over-bending angle The simulation is performed according to the DOE matrix, and the height difference The DOE simulation results show the independence of the design factors’ effects on forming quality. Furthermore, multiple linear regression models for  The relative effect of each design factor on the three quality indicators can be calculated as: The calculation results are listed in Because the three design factors show independent effects on the three quality indicators, they will be studied separately. In addition, as the driving force It should be noted that the displacement boundary condition is applied in the aforementioned base FE model, since no force loading is involved. As shown in The FE models with different The DOE results show that As shown in As mentioned above, plastic deformation on the step surface can be avoided, and it is unnecessary to evaluate flatness error when NSGA-II ( In order to determine the optimal driving force, the FE model with a concentrated force instead of the displacement boundary condition is used. All the optimum values of the process parameters are determined and listed in  It can be found that all the quality evaluation indicators meet the design requirement listed in New die blocks are fabricated according to the optimal parameters obtained, and the experimental setup is shown in The experimental results show good agreement with the simulation ones. Compared with the initial forming test by using the flat die blocks, the optimal design leads to much better performance of clamp forming. Moreover, the clamp forming tests show good repeatability and the standard deviation of each quality indicator is very small. In this paper, a novel clamp forming technique is proposed to form local features on sheet metal parts. Taking a st ep feature on the hat-shaped rail as an example, this technique is studied by numerical simulation and experiment. The following conclusions can be drawn. The clamp forming can amplify driving force greatly to provide a large forming force in an efficient way. The force amplification coefficient is The influences of the processing parameters, including three dimensional parameters and the driving force, on forming quality indicated by the height difference, the parallelism error and the flatness error, are investigated by means of DOE. Their effects on the forming quality indicators are found to be independent. The forming apparatus is developed, and good forming quality is achieved by employing the optimal processing parameters. The proposed clamp forming provides an efficient and load-saving method to form local features on sheet metal parts. The authors would like to acknowledge the support of