The majority of proximal humerus fractures are minimally displaced and good outcomes can be achieved with nonoperative treatment strategies. However, controversy exists regarding the best management of highly comminuted and displaced proximal humerus fractures that occur in elderly patients with poor bone quality. Although surgical options including open reduction and internal fixation or hemiarthroplasty can restore excellent function, the rate of catastrophic failure remains high measuring between 20% and 40%. Reverse total shoulder arthroplasty has recently been introduced as a means for treatment of these fractures with intermediate results demonstrating improved range of motion, functional outcomes, and lower rates of revision.Proximal humerus fractures account for 5.7% of all fractures and demonstrate increased incidence with advanced age Displaced fractures in patients with minimal comminution and good bone quality have demonstrated excellent outcomes with open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) In the elderly patients with poor bone quality, ORIF has demonstrated an unacceptably high rate of failure. The mode of failure in this population is related to the bone quality and vascular perfusion with high rates of screw penetration, loss of fixation, malunion, and avascular necrosis of the humeral head Reverse total shoulder arthroplasty (RTSA) has recently been advocated in the management of comminuted proximal humerus fractures. Its design allows function in the absence of an intact rotator cuff making it appealing as a more reliable method of treatment to address the dichotomous outcomes observed following HA This review presents evidence in support of the role of RTSA for the treatment of comminuted proximal humerus fractures and compares this method to plate osteosynthesis and hemiarthroplasty in the elderly population. In 1934, Codman While other classification systems are available for use, the remainder of this review will refer to fracture parts using the Neer classification In 1990, the anterior humeral circumflex was proposed as the dominant blood supply of the humeral head through its terminal branch, the arcuate artery A nihilistic view exists regarding surgical management of proximal humerus fractures in elderly patients due to high failure rates reported following osteosynthesis and HA. This has led some authors to suggest that surgical intervention provides no benefit over nonoperative management in this patient population A meta-analysis Plate osteosynthesis of three- and four-part proximal humerus fractures in elderly patients results in an increased risk for complications including avascular necrosis, screw cut-out, malunion, and non-union Jost and colleagues Hemiarthroplasty has been the traditional treatment for fractures deemed high risk for a poor outcome following osteosynthesis including three- and four-part fractures in elderly patients Anatomic tuberosity healing has been shown to result in significantly better forward elevation and overall function Humeral head height can be referenced 5.6 Hemiarthroplasty should be recognized as a technically challenging procedure where anatomic restoration of tuberosity position, humeral height, and humeral version is critical to achieving a good outcome. If these parameters cannot be achieved intraoperatively, conversion to RTSA should be strongly considered to avoid early tuberosity displacement and poor functional outcome following HA. RTSA was originally described by Paul Grammont as a treatment method for severe glenohumeral arthritis with rotator cuff insufficiency A RTSA is indicated in elderly patients with three- and four-part fractures with non-reconstructable tuberosities or pre-existing rotator cuff deficiency. These patients are at high risk for poor functional outcome following osteosynthesis or HA. Relative contraindications include patients with an associated acromion or scapular neck fracture, open fractures or those with an axillary nerve palsy, or deltoid dysfunction. RTSA has emerged as a reliable means to restore forward elevation and achieve a good functional outcome in elderly patients with comminuted proximal humerus fractures. In a retrospective review, Lenarz et al. The consistent restoration of good function following RTSA for fracture likely reflects the fact that good outcomes can be achieved even in the absence of anatomic tuberosity healing ( A randomized trial was performed comparing RTSA to HA in patients over the age of 70 with three- and four-part proximal humerus fractures. Patients who received a RTSA demonstrated significantly greater active forward elevation (120.3° versus 79.8°; The apparent superiority of RTSA over HA demonstrated in the early clinical trials is supported by a recent meta-analysis Although a functioning rotator cuff is not required for active forward elevation of the arm following RTSA, repair of the greater tuberosity is essential to maintain functional external rotation which is required for daily living activities An optimal outcome is achieved when RTSA is performed for fracture as the primary procedure in the acute setting The incidence of complications following RTSA varies significantly in the literature with reports as high as 68% Commonly reported complications include instability, intra- or postoperative fracture of the humerus or acromion, component loosening, neurologic injury, and infection Reverse shoulder arthroplasty is a reliable and predictable means for treatment of comminuted proximal humerus fractures in elderly patients with poor bone quality. When compared to HA, RTSA has demonstrated significantly greater mean forward elevation, external rotation, and functional outcomes with a lower rate of implant failure and revision surgery at 3 years. RTSA also provides the potential advantages of early mobilization and fewer rehabilitation requirements. However, it should be recognized that RTSA performed for fracture in osteoporotic bone is a technically challenging procedure and surgeons with experience in this method of treatment will have a more reproducible outcome. The authors have nothing to disclose that is relevant to this publication. Each author certifies that his or her institution approved the human protocol for this investigation and that all investigations were conducted in conformity with ethical principles of research. There were no grants or other sources of funding utilized for completion of this manuscript. Investigation performed at the Boston Shoulder Institute.