Introduction
                  Distal radial fractures are one of the most common fractures that are presented to the emergency department (ED). The management of non-emergent cases often involves closed reduction and immobilisation before referral to orthopaedic services. Surgical intervention is offered based on the criteria for instability. This can be predicted from the initial and post-manipulation radiographs. The purpose of this study was to assess the role of various predictors of instability in the requirement for surgery, based on specific evidence-based criteria.
               
                  Patients and method
                  We audited 87 consecutive distal radial fractures that had been manipulated by the ED and analysed what factors predicted instability.
               
                  Results
                  The most significant predictor of instability and hence further surgery was the failure to anatomically restore the volar cortex (VC) (p
                     =0.002) during the manipulation. Other significant factors were increasing age (p
                     =0.006) and fracture of the ulna styloid (p
                     =0.028). If the VC was restored or remained intact during the manipulation, only 38% required further surgery. If the VC was displaced or not restored, 65% required further surgery.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The restoration or maintenance of volar cortical alignment during the manipulation of distal radial fractures offers patients the best chance of avoiding the need for further surgery. This factor should be taken into account in the decision-making process for these fractures.The operative fixation of distal radial fractures is becoming increasingly common. There are now a plethora of fixation methods available with an obvious trend towards domination of volar locking plate technology. This trend, however, has inevitable implications on the cost of treatment and the potential for surgical complications The decision regarding operative intervention is based on the inherent stability or ‘personality’ of the fracture. This can be judged by the initial instability factors Defining the predictive criteria for fracture instability has been the subject of several publications Our null hypothesis in this observational study was that the restoration of the VC would make no difference to the subsequent instability of distal radius fractures manipulated in our emergency department (ED). The initial ‘first-aid’ treatment of displaced distal radial fractures in our unit involves closed reduction and immobilisation All manipulations are carried out by consultant emergency physicians with the aim of achieving anatomical reduction and avoiding surgery. We prospectively collected data on 87 fractures in 87 patients who were manipulated non-emergently over two consecutive months. We documented the age and sex of the patients and reviewed their initial radiographs and fluoroscopy images. Displacement was documented in terms of dorsal tilt from neutral, translation or comminution dorsally or volarly, radial shortening from neutral variance, presence of ulna styloid fracture and presence of any intra-articular component of the fracture. It must be noted that fractures with intra-articular displacement >2 We then used the Web-based Picture Archival Communication System (WebPACS) to establish the time between initial diagnosis and manipulation. We also documented whether the VC had been restored during the manipulation and maintained in plaster after radiographs in the fracture clinic. This was defined as anatomical restoration if there was <5° of angulation. Any translation in the anteroposterior direction was deemed a failure. After the MUA, patients were followed up in the fracture clinic at 1 week with a repeat radiograph. These radiographs were used to establish early instability defined by radial shortening >4 The decision to operate was made by one of the two senior authors after discussion with the patient. The following factors affected that decision: patient factors (such as risk of anaesthesia due to co-morbidities and need for high-demand job or hobbies), the energy involved in the injury, the degree of initial displacement If there was no early displacement and the reduction had been acceptable, the back slab was completed with Scotchcast (3M, St. Paul, MN, USA). Subsequent X-rays were taken at 2, 3 and 6 weeks from the initial injury There were no other associated injuries noted in this cohort of patients. A total of 87 patients who presented to the ED with distal radial fractures had MUAs over a 2-month period. Of these, 77.3% ( All fractures were dorsally angulated. Fifty-eight fractures (65.9%) had >1 The percentage of patients requiring surgery depending on the state of the VC after the MUA is represented in There were 36 intra-articular fractures with <2-mm step before MUA. Intra-articular fractures are inherently more unstable Analyses were performed using SPSS 8.0 for Windows software (SPSS Inc, Chicago, IL, USA). Importantly however, in the binary logistic regression, intra-articular extension of the fracture, as an independent predictor of instability, did not reach significance when predicting which patients subsequently underwent surgery ( Using the binary logistic regression Enter method, the only statistically significant findings for predicting whether further surgery was needed were age ( If the VC is not restored, the positive predictive value (of requiring surgery) is 74.5% and the negative predictive value is 76.7%. The odds of requiring further surgery are 7.5 (95% confidence interval (CI) 2.16–26.10) if the VC is not restored and 3.6 (95% CI 1.15–11.12) if there is an ulna styloid or head fracture. All other initial instability factors documented were not statistically significant in predicting the need for further surgery ( We have shown that anatomic restoration of the VC during an MUA of distal radial fractures can help reduce the risk of early instability. This also applies to intra-articular fractures although the risk of displacement and requirement for surgery is higher. Increasing age and the presence of an ulna styloid or head fracture are also predictive of early instability requiring operative intervention. Initial first-aid management of most distal radius fractures should include a manipulation and a POP cast. The majority of MUAs have traditionally been performed by junior (senior house officer) or middle-grade doctors It should be stressed that this MUA is not merely good first-aid treatment but it also has the potential to spare the patient further operative interventions. One of the major determinants in the decision to offer operative intervention is early instability Advancing age and >4 This study does have its limitations. It is a retrospective review with relatively small numbers of patients. We included intra-articular fractures that were amenable to manipulation but the inherent instability may have biased the results. We did not analyse the adequacy of the MUA other than in terms of restoration of the VC. Greater initial displacement can predict instability Initial and early predictors of instability for distal radial fractures are crucial to their management and outcome. Anatomic restoration during initial manipulation can have a profound impact on future stability. Those undertaking such procedures should be aware of these predictors and address them during the MUA. We would advocate restoration of the VC as an additional parameter to be addressed during the manipulation of these fractures. The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest. None.