Understanding the entrainment behaviour of gangue minerals in the presence of nanobubbles is necessary for the application of nanobubble technology in froth flotation. In this study, the entrainment of kaolinite particles in flotation with nanobubble water produced by decompression, and tap water, was investigated. Compared to tap water, nanobubble water enhanced the entrainment of kaolinite particles in flotation. Rheology measurements together with settling tests were further employed to examine the effect of nanobubbles on clay particle association and its correlation with the entrainment of kaolinite particles. The presence of nanobubbles appears to induce and stabilise E–E contacts of kaolinite platelets, resulting in the formation of porous three-dimensional structures. These open structures with abundant interstitial voids had a low settling velocity and therefore were more readily recovered by entrainment.In froth flotation, where valuable minerals are separated from unwanted gangue minerals, entrainment occurs simultaneously with true flotation and is an undesirable mechanism by which particles suspended in the pulp are mechanically pushed up into the froth by ascending air bubbles [ Bulk nanobubbles in aqueous solution, referred to as gas-filled nanocavities with a diameter from 10 to 200 nm [ Kaolinite, a typical fine gangue mineral, is commonly found in a wide range of industrial ores including potash, bauxite, phosphate and iron ores. It is a non-swelling 1:1 structured clay mineral with low chemical reactivity [ Given the advantages of applying nanobubble technology in flotation and the widespread occurrence of kaolinite in various types of ore deposits, improving the understanding of the entrainment behaviour of kaolinite in the presence of nanobubbles is important to the mining industry. Therefore, the objective of this study was to investigate the effect of bulk nanobubbles (tap water versus nanobubble water) on the association and subsequent entrainment of kaolinite particles in flotation. The experimental results are expected to provide a valuable reference for dealing with other fine gangues when using nanobubble technology. The clay sample was obtained from Jiangsu Province, China and pulverized once received. Quantitative XRD analysis shows that it contains 88.9 wt% kaolinite with 5.6 wt% alunite, 3.4 wt% muscovite and 2.1 wt% quartz. Kaolinite in the clay was found to have medium crystallinity with a Hinckley index of 1.06. As the predominant mineral phase was kaolinite in the clay sample, it is hereafter referred to as “kaolinite” in this study. The particle size distribution of the kaolinite was measured by Laser Diffraction (Malvern Mastersizer 2000). D50 (cumulative particle size at 50% distribution) and D90 of the kaolinite were 2.3 and 9.7 μm, respectively ( Tap water and nanobubble water were used in the study in parallel. Nanobubble water was prepared by decompressing 50 mL of tap water in a bottle in a vacuum drying oven (model DZF-6050, Shanghai Yiheng Scientific Equipment Co., Ltd) at a low pressure of 0.1 atm for 10, 20, and 30 min. The low pressure was achieved in 100 s by using a vacuum pump (2XZ-2, Linhai Tanshi Vacuum Equipment Co., Ltd) and then maintained over time. This decompression method has been reported to generate abundant bulk nanobubbles which remained stable in water for a long time [ NTA is a new method that can accurately measure particles ranging from 30 to 1000 nm in suspension based on their light scattering capabilities and Brownian motion [ Flotation of kaolinite in tap water and nanobubble water was conducted at natural pH on a XFD 0.5 L laboratory flotation cell. For each test, 30 g of kaolinite was pre-mixed with each water and the resultant slurry was then transferred to the flotation cell, followed by the addition of the same water to make up the flotation pulp. The pulp was conditioned with octanol (160 g/t) for 2 min. After conditioning, flotation was operated at an air flow rate of 0.17 m Rheology measurements were conducted with a Physica rheometer (MCR 301, Anton Paar) at ambient temperature (approx. 22 °C). A Couette geometry with a rotating inner cylinder (bob) and a stationary outer cylinder (cup) was utilized. The rheometer was operated in controlled shear rate mode where the shear rates were pre-set, the resulting torque values were measured and translated into shear stress by computer. Before flotation was commenced, 60 mL of slurry was taken from the flotation cell for rheology measurements. Each measurement required a sample of 15 mL which was transferred by a 20 mL syringe while the slurry was stirred using a magnetic stirrer. Rheograms were generated in the shearing rate range between 4 and 300 s Batch settling tests on 3 wt% kaolinite suspensions in tap water and nanobubble water were conducted at natural pH. For each test after transferring the kaolinite suspension to a 100 mL graduated cylinder, the cylinder was turned upside down four times to uniformly mix the suspension. Once the cylinder was placed on a solid, flat surface, the settling test commenced with no further disturbances permitted. The position of mud lines (solid–liquid interfaces) was carefully observed and recorded as a function of settling time. The typical snapshots of nanoparticles (laser-illuminated nanobubbles) captured by NTA and the concentration of nanobubbles as a function of decompression time are shown in  It is interesting to note that in The form of Eq. It can be seen from The basal and edge surfaces of kaolinite are believed to have different hydrophobicity. Specifically, the basal surfaces of kaolinite particles are hydrophilic due to their hydrogen bonding to hydroxyl groups in water, whereas on the edge surfaces, the broken bonds are abundant and may attract and adsorb gases dissolved in water and in this way, the edges may accommodate nano-size gas bubbles and become hydrophobic [ In a previous study, Zhang, et al. [  In this study, the rheological transition of the kaolinite suspension from a Newtonian to a non-Newtonian fluid when tap water was replaced by nanobubble water could be related to the promoted E–E connection in the presence of nanobubbles. As mentioned earlier, in nanobubble water where the nanobubble concentration was 1.0 × 10 Apart from rheology, the association of clay platelets under different solution conditions can be reflected by their settling behaviours [ In this study, bulk nanobubbles were produced by decompression and their effect on the entrainment behaviour of kaolinite particles in flotation was investigated. It was found that bulk nanobubbles enhanced the entrainment of kaolinite in flotation. Compared to tap water, pulp viscosity was increased in nanobubble water. It was proposed that in nanobubble water, bulk nanobubbles might induce and stabilise E–E contacts of kaolinite platelets, leading to the formation of porous three-dimensional structures. These open structures with abundant interstitial voids had a reduced settling velocity and therefore had an increased chance of being recovered by entrainment. Although further testing on other types of gangue minerals and at industrial scale is still needed, one can conclude that the entrainment behaviour of gangue materials in ore deposits in the presence of nanobubbles should be considered when adopting nanobubble technology in froth flotation. None. The authors appreciate valuable discussion, comments, and proofreading from Dr. Michael Short at the Future Industries Institute of University of South Australia, and gratefully acknowledge the financial support of this study from the