Several low cost biomaterials such as baggase, charred rice husk, activated charcoal and eucalyptus bark (EB) were tested for removal of chromium. All the experiments were carried out in batch process with laboratory prepared samples and wastewater obtained from metal finishing section of auto ancillary unit. The adsorbent, which had highest chromium(VI) removal was EB. Influences of chromium concentration, pH, contact time on removal of chromium from effluent was investigated. The adsorption data were fitted well by Freundlich isotherm. The kinetic data were analyzed by using a first order Lagergren kinetic. The Gibbs free energy was obtained for each system and was found to be −1.879kJmol−1 for Cr(VI) and −3.885kJmol−1 for Cr(III) for removal from industrial effluent. The negative value of ΔG
                     0 indicates the feasibility and spontaneous nature of adsorption. The maximum removal of Cr(VI) was observed at pH2. Adsorption capacity was found to be 45mg/g of adsorbent, at Cr(VI) concentration in the effluent being 250mg/l. A waste water sample containing Cr(VI), Cr(III), Mg, and Ca obtained from industrial unit showed satisfactory removal of chromium. The results indicate that eucalyptus bark can be used for the removal of chromium.Water pollution by chromium is of considerable concern, as this metal has found widespread use in electroplating, leather tanning, metal finishing, nuclear power plant, textile industries, and chromate preparation. Chromium exists in two oxidation states as Cr(III) and Cr(VI). The hexavalent form is 500 times more toxic than the trivalent ( The maximum levels permitted in wastewater are 5 Chromium metal ions are usually removed by precipitation ( The present study is aimed at selection of a low cost biosorbent, which can adsorb chromium from the wastewater. Detailed batch studies with the selected adsorbent, eucalyptus bark has been carried out in the present investigation. The effect of pH, contact time, adsorbent concentration, thermodynamics study, and metal ion/adsorbent ratio were also investigated. All the chemicals used were of analytical grade. K Eucalyptus bark of Finally the bark was air-dried and sieved. Particles in the range of 120–500 Further, ultimate and proximate analysis of the EB adsorbent was also carried out. The detailed characteristics of EB obtained are shown in The chromium concentration in raw and treated effluent was determined by UV (Varian, Australia) spectrophotometer. The wavelength of operation was kept at 540 Stock solution of 1000 The performances of these sorbents were evaluated for the percent removal of chromium. The maximum (87.4%) removal of chromium was achieved with EB. The percent chromium removal with other three sorbents were significantly low as compared to EB (charred rice husk 36%, activated carbon 9% and bagasse 35%) therefore not considered for further investigations. The variation in the sorption capacity between the various adsorbents could be related to the nature and concentration of surface groups responsible for interaction with the metal ions. The selected adsorbents were cellulose based plant fibers having many hydroxyl groups that may bind the Cr(VI) ion. Formaldehyde pretreatment of eucalyptus bark led to crosslinking of compounds in the bark to form a phenol–formaldehyde copolymer that preserved high capacity of the support towards the adsorption of cations. This can be explained by the interactions in the solutions between the cations and the water extracted moieties, leading to complexities that precipitate on the support surface ( The adsorptive properties of activated carbon are due to its porous nature. Over 99% of the active sites for adsorption in GAC are located in the interior of the particle. Activated carbon particles have macropores having diameters 30 to 100,000 Effect of solution pH on removal of Cr was studied using EB as sorbent. As the pH of the solution was increased from 1.5 to 9 the adsorption of Cr(VI) decreased. Increasing pH from 1.5 to 5, percent removal of Cr(VI) decreased 99 to 93, whereas as the pH was increased from 5 to 9 the % removal decreased significantly from 93 to 63. It was observed that the maximum percentage of removal of Cr(VI) was at pH  The kinetic data was fitted to the Lagergren equation ( Adsorption isotherms, which are the presentation of the amount of solute adsorbed per unit of adsorbent, as a function of equilibrium concentration in bulk solution at constant temperature, were studied. The equilibrium data obtained were fitted to Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms. Linear form of Langmuir equation, Freundlich equation indicates the adsorptive capacity or loading factor on the adsorbent, The Freundlich equation is expressed linearly as: The initial Cr(VI) concentrations tested were 200 The Gibbs free energy (Δ The Gibbs free energy indicates the spontaneity of the adsorption process, where higher negative values reflect a more energetically favorable adsorption process. The negative Δ Removal of poisonous hexavalent form of chromium from solutions was possible using selected adsorbents. Eucalyptus bark (EB) was the most effective for which the removal reached more than 99% for Cr(VI) at concentration of 200