We report results from simulations of single-phase flow through digital images of large and complex porous structures. Images correspond to sequences of snapshots captured during sedimentation of glass beads and sand particles in transparent, quasi-two-dimensional sedimentation units well above the compaction line. For the simulations, we use the lattice-Boltzmann method with a nine-speed model on a square lattice. For validation purposes, the lattice-Boltzmann method is compared against an explicit finite-difference method for incompressible flow in simpler geometries. Simulating Poiseuille flow through a two-dimensional channel and two-dimensional porous structures of intermediate complexity checked the accuracy of the lattice-Boltzmann scheme used. For the “frozen” structures in the images of sedimenting particles, we calculate permeability as a function of porosity. Vertical porosity profiles suggest that particle-sedimenting columns can be represented by a series of homogeneous layers, each with different but relatively uniform porosity. We use the lattice-Boltzmann scheme to calculate the permeability of the individual layers. The average permeability of the sedimenting columns is then calculated from the series arrays of layers. Reasonably good agreement is found when compared to the overall permeability of the sedimenting column. We find that this simply indicates that the flow through the layers is nearly linear. In addition, we find that one or two low porosity layers located at the bottom of the images control the flow and thus the permeability of the sedimenting structures.Sedimentation, a classical solid–liquid separation process, has myriad applications in the industry, especially in the mining industry where water recovery by sedimentation is a central operation. Sedimentation is extensively used also in the cellulose industry, chemical and pharmaceutical industry, oil and gas industry and wastewater treatment. The first studies in sedimentation were oriented mainly to improve the design of thickeners. The current tendency is to improve the understanding of the mechanisms controlling sedimentation and through this understanding improve process and equipment design. The numerical simulation of the motion of particles in a fluid during sedimentation processes is a very difficult problem that until today has not been solved to its entire satisfaction. Parameters such as permeability, as pore space evolves during sedimentation, are simply not available. Some techniques, notably finite elements Here, in an effort to estimate the permeability of large and complex porous structures from first principles, we solved the Stokes equation, which describe creeping fluid flow, by two different methods: a classical finite-difference technique and a lattice-Boltzmann method. The former is a direct numerical integration of the partial differential equations, whereas the latter solves a discretized Boltzmann equation that is equivalent, macroscopically, to solving the Navier–Stokes equations. Results from the finite-difference method available only for simpler geometries are used here to verify the correct performance of our lattice-Boltzmann scheme. We next use the lattice-Boltzmann method for modeling single-phase fluid flow through digital images or real though “frozen” sedimenting particles. Images correspond to sequences of snapshots captured during sedimentation of glass beads and sand particles in transparent, quasi-two-dimensional, sedimentation units well above the compaction line. Here, we look at sedimenting particle columns as sequences of quasistatic particle configurations for which we calculate their corresponding permeabilities. Related work on single-phase flow through porous materials can be found in The lattice-Boltzmann method produces accurate flow fields when compared to rigorous direct finite-difference computations. This paper demonstrates this for various random porous structures. In addition, permeability from lattice-Boltzmann simulation agrees well with the permeability derived from the finite-difference calculations. We found that the sedimenting column can be divided in layers of relatively uniform porosity. Calculated permeability for the series array of layers is almost always very close to the value of the permeability calculated for the structure as a whole. This simply indicates that the flow through the layers is nearly linear. In addition, we found that one or two low-porosity layers located at the bottom of the column control the flow and thus the permeability of the sedimenting structures. The steady-state flow of a single incompressible fluid phase through a porous medium can be calculated by solving the Stokes equation, i.e., the slow-flow linearized version of the complete Navier–Stokes equations, The lattice-Boltzmann method is a numerical scheme for stimulating fluids with complex interfacial dynamics and boundaries No-slip wall conditions are implemented by imposing bounce-back reflection of the populations In our two-dimensional simulations, we consider an orthogonal lattice with eight moving populations and one rest population. The orthogonal nine-speed model is abbreviated by the symbol The equilibrium populations for the The density Lattice-Boltzmann and finite-difference methods are used to calculate single-phase flow through digital images of sedimenting particles. Images correspond to sequences of snapshots captured during slow sedimentation of particles in oil in transparent, quasi-two-dimensional, sedimentation units. The observation window is fixed well above the compaction line, so as to capture the so-called second sedimentation front where the concentration of solids is high, particles form large clusters and most of the fluid flow follows just a few winding paths. As sedimentation progresses, the structure becomes looser, but even then, the flow paths are few and extremely tortuous. In large areas, fluid remains stagnant or slowly circulating. The image capture process ends when the sedimentation front passed the lower end of the observation window and solid concentration becomes zero or nearly so. The thickness of the units was chosen to allow sedimentation with minimum wall–particle interaction and particle overlapping. We used two kinds of materials, glass beads and sand particles. The glass beads were nearly spherical and homogeneous in size. Average bead diameter was 0.8 mm. The sand particles had a broad distribution of sizes and shapes; mean diameter was 1.0 mm. The snapshots were converted into bitmap files. The digital images were then discretized according to the numerical method used to solve the flow field. Several numerical experiments were carried out to verify the correct performance of the lattice-Boltzmann scheme employed here. Below, we present results for fluid flow through a two-dimensional channel, plane Poiseuille flow and through various two-dimensional random porous structures of intermediate complexity. First, our implementation of the lattice-Boltzmann method was tested with the theoretical plane Poiseuille flow in a two-dimensional channel for different width of the channel (lattice units) and a pressure gradient of 0.0001 (mass unit)×(lattice unit) The conditions derived from these simple experiments need to be satisfied in simulations of flow in complex porous media. Minimum discretization of the computational domain is determined by the smaller pore segments and should not be lower than 6 lattice units in the shortest dimension of the pore. This condition improves the quality of the lattice-Boltzmann solution and the performance of the bounce-back boundary condition. Lattice inclination is not a key factor when the size of the smallest pore is at least 6 lattice units. A second class of numerical experiments with the lattice-Boltzmann method involved the simulation of flow trough two-dimensional porous structures of intermediate complexity. Lattice-Boltzmann results are compared with direct solutions of the Stokes equation by finite-difference methods on a MAC mesh. Our lattice-Boltzmann results for the permeability of the three random porous structures of  The sequence of images in   The sequence of images in  The differences and the transition from one power law to another in  Results are reported in The lattice-Boltzmann method produces accurate flow fields when compared to rigorous direct finite-difference calculations. This paper has demonstrated this for various random porous structures originating in the two-dimensional sedimentation of small particles. The lattice-Boltzmann scheme easily accommodates complicated boundaries. Permeability of digital images of two-dimensional sedimenting glass and sand particles from lattice-Boltzmann simulation agrees well with the permeability derived from the finite-difference calculations. Permeability of sediments is not available experimentally. With the advent of X-ray and NMR microtomography tools, pore space of sediments can be captured and lattice-Boltzmann used for predicting their permeabilities. We found that sedimenting columns can be divided in layers of relatively uniform porosity. Calculated permeability for the series array of layers is almost always very close to the value of the permeability calculated for the structure as a whole. This simply indicates that the flow through the layers is nearly linear. In addition, we found that one or two porosity layers located at the bottom of each image control the flow and thus the permeability of the sedimenting structures. We are grateful to Conicyt for financial support through Fondecyt Projects 2990055 and 1980462, and University of Concepción through Project DIUC No. 97.06.049-1.0.