The austenite formation in 0.2% C and 0.45% C steels with the initial microstructure of ferrite and pearlite has been studied. The effect of conventional (10°C/s), fast (50°C/s–100°C/s) and ultrafast heating rates (>100°C/s) on the austenite nucleation and growth mechanisms is rationalized. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), and Electron BackScatter Diffraction (EBSD) analyses provide novel experimental evidence of the austenite nucleation and growth mechanisms operating at ultrafast heating rates. Two mechanisms of austenite formation are identified: diffusional and massive. It is demonstrated that at conventional heating rates the austenite formation kinetics are determined by carbon diffusion, whereas at ultrafast heating rates formation of austenite starts by carbon diffusion control, which is later overtaken by a massive mechanism. Comprehensive thermodynamic and kinetic descriptions of austenite nucleation and growth are developed based on experimental results.The ferrite-pearlite microstructure is the most produced microstructure in low and medium carbon steels and hence it follows as the most appropriate microstructure for the study of austenite formation. Some pioneering studies Some of the key theoretical aspects of ultrafast heating of carbon steels were recently summarized by Meshkov and Pereloma There have been many attempts to model the anisothermal austenite formation starting from ferrite-pearlite microstructures Heating experiments were carried out on two different steel grades, namely 0.2% C and 0.45% C in the hot rolled condition. The chemical composition of both steels is shown in The microstructure evolution was studied by Optical Microscopy (OM), Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), and Electron Backscattered Diffraction (EBSD). To avoid any effect of temperature gradients along the sample length (i.e. along RD), metallographic specimens were cut from the middle section of each test sample. The characterization was thus performed on the rolling plane at the center of the heat-treated sample, where the thermocouple was placed. The metallographic samples were prepared according to the standard procedure by grinding and polishing to 1 The phase fraction during the anisothermal dilatometric heat treatment is commonly approximated using the lever rule. Such an approach, however, produces significant deviations, which can be some tens of percents, from actual values because of the density difference between pearlite and ferrite Thermodynamic calculations were performed using the software ThermoCalc, database TCFE7. The critical temperatures for both materials are shown in The initial microstructures of both steels are shown in Although austenite nucleation sites cannot be identified on the OM images, it is seen that the formation of austenite is quickly consuming the pearlite colonies at 750 The evolution of the microstructure after heating at 1500 The UFH experiments allow the observation of early stages of austenite formation. Nucleation of austenite is observed to take place at α/pearlite and pearlite/pearlite boundaries. Once austenite has nucleated, it grows in all directions. The rate of growth of austenite into pearlite is distinctly higher than the rate of growth into proeutectoid ferrite. The preferential growth of austenite into pearlite, clearly shown in A clear difference is noticed, however, between the microstructure of samples UFH at 1500 EBSD maps (cf. Microstructural observations indicate that nucleation of austenite is associated with the α/θ interface. When the transformation starts at a certain temperature The driving force At the heating rates of the present experiments, the nucleation of austenite always takes place at a temperature in the intercritical range. As the temperature is raised to a certain value The growth of austenite takes place towards both pearlite and proeutectoid ferrite. When the austenite nucleated at the α/θ interface begins to grow, the newly formed γ/α interface moves towards both pearlite and proeutectoid ferrite. The derivation for the general case of precipitation from a supersaturated phase under local equilibrium conditions has been developed elsewhere It follows from the local equilibrium conditions that the composition of austenite at the γ/θ interface is different from the composition at the γ/α interface. There will be, therefore, a driving force for carbon diffusion through austenite, defined as The growth of austenite during heating at the intercritical range will be controlled by carbon diffusion to the γ/α interface. When the heating rates are low enough, the formation of austenite will be fully accomplished by carbon diffusion and negligible deviations from equilibrium can be expected, as shown in Under continuous heating, the temperature The mixed-mode model The parameter As stated in the previous section, the austenite nucleates preferentially at the α/θ interfaces, and it subsequently grows into pearlite and proeutectoid ferrite. However, the kinetics of austenite growth is different depending on whether it grows into pearlite or proeutectoid ferrite. A mass balance proposed initially by Brandt As described in the previous section, the formation of austenite could proceed in a diffusionless way in UFH experiments when Δ Evidence of massive formation of austenite is shown in Simulations of austenite growth into proeutectoid ferrite at different heating rates were carried out using Dictra. The plots of the simulated austenite fraction versus temperature and simulated interface velocity versus temperature in The change in the slope of the phase volume fraction curve can be estimated by proposing the following variable Further integration in Eq.  In addition to the elevated value of At the initial stages of austenite formation, the γ/α interface in most cases is planar. However, in some cases, the shape of the interface is acicular, irrespective of its advance towards pearlite or proeutectoid ferrite. Both cases are clearly shown in The red arrow in The effect of conventional (10 Austenite nucleation occurs preferably at the α/pearlite interfaces. As discussed in Carbon diffusion governs austenite formation and growth during heating with conventional heating rates. In ultrafast heating regimes, this mechanism is responsible for the growth at the early stages of austenite formation and then a massive mechanism replaces it. This transition occurs at the so-called A simplified kinetic description of the austenite formation is provided. The local chemical composition at the γ/α interface determines the velocity of the moving boundaries below The CONICYT-PCHA/Doctorado Nacional/2013 Ph.D. scholarship for F. Castro Cerda is gratefully acknowledged. Authors appreciate the comments of V. Bliznuk from Ghent University. I. Sabirov acknowledges the