Thermogravimetric (TG-DTG) curves were recorded for 23 different samples of human fossil bones from the El Geili necropolis. An accurate analysis of mass loss of the samples examined at different temperatures during a linear thermal scan between 25°C and 1000°C in dynamic air afforded a data set consisting of the thermal parameters of the decomposition processes of collagen and carbonate; this data set was then processed by standard chemometric techniques. The results obtained are discussed and attention is focused in particular on the old or modern collagen thermal breakdown and the possibility of formulating an “archaeometric” assessment that takes into account the often untied conclusions reported in the literature.Human and animal bones have long been subjected to investigation, with the majority of studies of course pursuing clinical and medical research objectives In this framework, although several papers have already been published In the present research, the results obtained from the thermal analysis of fossil bones from an important archaeological site are reported. The samples analyzed are from the necropolis of El Geili, on the Middle Nile. According to literature reports 23 different samples of fossil bones from the El Geili necropolis on the middle Nile were subjected to TG and DTG analysis under an air stream (100 Two modern reference standard collagens were used: (a) from Sigma (Collagen Type I, insoluble, from bovine achilles tendon); (b) from SERVA (lyophil. Rein — pure, from bovine achilles tendon). TG-DTG data were processed by PCA analysis using in-house routines written in Matlab (The Mathworks Inc., Natick, MA). The activation energy values of the collagen thermal decomposition process were always obtained starting from the TG and DTG data, which were however processed by means of the multiple linear regression method proposed by Wyden–Widmann By applying the least squares method, the sum of the squares of the differences between the Several bone samples were subjected to TG and DTG analysis and all the main steps in the thermogravimetric curves were analyzed ( First, TG-DTG step “a”, with DTG peak at about 100 In some cases, usually between 560 and 600 If the variation in percentage water content was found to be appreciable in the various samples, this would be of considerable interest as reported by C.A. Miles and M. Ghelashvili The main thermal data (temperatures of DTG peaks, mass loss, recorded in the principal steps and the values of TG residue at 1000 Since the data contained variables of different nature, autoscaling was used to pretreat the matrix prior to PCA analysis, which resulted in a model including two principal components, as estimated on the basis of cross-validation. The PCA representation obtained using these data evidenced a good separation of all the samples studied into two different main clusters ( The projection of the samples onto the first two principal components, which cumulatively explain 73.05% of the total variance (scores plot) is shown in In particular, since separation occurs along the first principal component, the evaluation will be based essentially on the loadings along this component. The first consideration that can be made based on the loadings plot in Specifically, considering only the first principal component, the samples in cluster 1 may be said to be characterized by systematically greater values of TG residue at 1000 The fact that several transitions are present only in some samples and not in others meant that the matrix containing the basic thermoanalytical data ( This second data matrix was then analyzed by PCA, after mean centering pretreatment. In particular, two principal components (accounting for 93.44% of the total variance) were deemed to be significant, as evaluated by cross-validation. The corresponding projection of the samples onto the two significant principal components – PC1 (explaining 88.86% of the total variance) and PC2 (explaining 4.57%) – is shown in Inspection of the figure evidences, also in this case, the presence of two clusters of samples, which appear to be even better separated than in the previous PCA representation reported in On the basis of studies published by G. Szoor However, it needs to be pointed out that the fossil bone samples examined by G. Szoor are much older than those we studied, at least according to the bibliographic information gleaned from the literature Moreover, in a well-known article L.F. Lozano et al. In agreement with the foregoing, in both cases two DTG peaks related to collagen decomposition are observed distinctly. One of the peaks, which actually occurs at higher temperatures, at 530 Further experimental confirmation of the interpretation that the collagen, which decomposed at higher temperatures, is more extensively crosslinked, in our opinion may also be obtained by observing It should be noted that, as in the case of the first process, which occurs at a lower temperature (330–350 The same table also shows the This is a point to be further clarified, although it will be possible only by comparing fossil bone specimens of ascertained different ages, taken exclusively from a well-defined part of the human skeleton. This is what we propose to do in future research. Lastly N. Nastro et al. Furthermore, also a detailed study of the thermal decomposition of the carbonate revealed additional elements that seem to support the idea that the two clusters observed in The chemometric (PCA) processing of experimental data obtained by thermogravimetry (TG-DTG) allows us to classify all the samples analyzed in only two well-defined and separate clusters that are more satisfactory. Therefore, on the basis of the criteria set by G. Szoor However, our view is that the main merit of this research is to have made it possible to link up, interpret, clarify, confirm or discuss a series of results and observations contained in different investigations focused on the thermal analysis of collagen, bones and of ancient bones in particular, cited in the present article. The picture emerging from the available information obtained using this type of technique is therefore currently quite exhaustive. This work is funded by the