From the Editorial Board of In our work we presented ultrahigh-pressure (UHP) indicators from the Rhodope metamorphic province. The UHP indicators include: Multicrystalline polygonal quartz aggregates included in garnet from amphibolitized eclogite (our figure 2A). Minute carbon cubes and octahedra, mainly included in garnet porphyroblasts from garnet–biotite–kyanite gneisses and garnet–biotite–staurolite–chlorite schists (our figure 2B–E). Rods (or needles) of silica, rutile and apatite exsolved in sodic garnet porphyroblasts in garnet–biotite–kyanite gneisses (our figure 2F–J). Relics of supersilicic garnet (Si=3.053 for 12 oxygens) rich in Ti, P and Na (our table 1). The carbon inclusions in garnet have been optically characterized, verified with electron microprobe analyses (pure carbon), and investigated in situ with laser Raman microspectroscopy in polished thin sections. The Raman spectrum, given in our figure 3, shows the typical graphite band at 1581 cm BC argue that the Raman spectrum of our figure 3 does not indicate both the presence of graphite and diamond but only disordered graphite. For comparison they give a Raman spectrum (in their figure 2b) of graphitized diamond inclusion within garnet from the Kokchetav Massif, in which the characteristic band of 1580 cm Based on the interpretation of this Raman spectrum, BC suggest also that the rest of the mineral indicators, which according to our opinion provide strong evidence for an UHP metamorphic event in Rhodope, are not sufficient indicators. Sodium-rich garnets with high P, Ti and Si contents, like that presented in our table 1, are observed only in high/ultrahigh pressures and high temperatures (see their references 22–26). These garnets also have exsolutions of quartz, apatite and rutile, a further evidence of their UHP origin. The oriented inclusions of rutile needles and quartz and apatite rods (see also BC report in their comment that the oriented inclusions in garnet, e.g. those presented in our figure 2F,H and those additionally given in Textural evidence of UHP metamorphism in Rhodope has also been reported by Liati et al. Krohe and Mposkos The UHP indicators reported in our work and published in