The use of binary extractants based on carboxylates and dialkylphosphates of secondary and tertiary amines and their mixtures for the separation of lanthanide (III) ions has been investigated. It is established that the solutions of these extractants in non-polar organic solvent extract lanthanide chlorides from aqueous phase according to the laws of binary extraction. The synergetic effect for the system of di-(2-ethylhexyl)carboxylate, caprinate of di-n-octylammonium and tri-n-octylammonium has been found.The purification and separation of lanthanides are a difficult chemical and technological problem. Their preparative separation and purification use is made of the sorption, deposition methods, ion-exchange chromatography, recrystallization and extraction ( Cation-exchange extractants based on dialkyl ethers of phosphorous acid (D2EHPA) are among the most selective ones in the lanthanide separation. However, these extractants have high coefficients of lanthanide distribution. Therefore, concentrated mineral acids are required for re-extraction of the metals. Applying binary extractants based on D2EHPA could solve this problem. Binary extractants are salts formed from organic acids and bases. The D2EHPA binary extractants consist of the salts formed from D2EHPA and organic amines (secondary/tertiary amines or quaternary amine bases) in organic solvent. For these extractants, re-extraction of lanthanides can be done by water ( Binary extractants can be prepared based on stoichiometric mixtures of the common cation-exchange and anion-exchange extractants. For the binary extraction systems the interphase transition of the cation and anion of an inorganic salt is conjugated, allowing for re-extraction by water. The selectivity of the binary extractants is determined by the nature of the organic acids and bases that were originally used in the synthesis. In the case of metal cation separation, the selectivity is comparable with the selectivity of cation-exchange extractants that are used for obtaining the binary extractants. The distribution coefficients of inorganic salts depend both on the nature of the cations and of the anions. Therefore, it is possible to vary the distribution coefficient of the cation by choosing an appropriate inorganic anion ( Few previous studies were focused on separation of lanthanides by extractants based on ionic liquids ( Another problem connected with the extractants based on D2EHPA is the formation of low-soluble compounds in the organic phase with the lanthanide concentration higher than 0.005 In this paper we investigate rare-earth chloride extraction with dialkylphosphates and carboxylates of secondary/tertiary amines, as well as with their mixtures. The change of the extraction selectivity depending on the organic phase content is investigated. Reagents of chemically pure grade were used. Initial solutions of lanthanide chlorides were prepared by dissolving the corresponding salts in water. Exact concentrations were determined by titrimetric analysis ( The X-axis of the extraction isotherms represents the equilibrium concentrations of metals in water phase, while the Y-axis represents the concentration of metals in organic phase. The equilibrium concentrations of metals in both phases were determined by chemical analyses (after reaching the extraction equilibrium and separation of phases). Initial concentration of metal in water phase was equal to the sum of its concentration in both phases at equilibrium (when ratio between volume of organic and water phase is equal to 1:1). The binary extractants, di-(2-ethylhexyl)phosphate of tri-n-octylammonium (R The pH of the solutions was determined as other potentiometric measurements were made using a pH-meter–ionometer “Expert-001”. Spectrophotometric measurements were carried out using a photometer KFK-3. In the case of the lanthanide mixture extraction the element concentrations in aqueous phases were analyzed by mass-spectrometry with inductively-coupled plasma using ICP-MS Agilent 7500А. The extraction equilibria were studied at 298 Solutions containing combinations of 14 lanthanide chlorides with equal molar concentration of each metal were used in order to study the selectivity of the lanthanide extraction. The lanthanide concentration in the organic phase was found by the concentration difference in the initial and aqueous phases. In the case of low distribution coefficients, the lanthanide concentration in the organic phase was determined after re-extraction with 0.2 In our earlier investigations it is shown that the process of extraction of lanthanide inorganic salts (chlorides, bromides, nitrates) using di-(2-ethylhexyl)phosphates of secondary, tertiary organic amines and quaternary organic bases proceeds in accordance with the binary extraction regularities ( The binary extraction reaction with amine carboxylates can consequently be written in the form of Eq.  According to Eqs. A cation and an anion are extracted into the organic phase in stoichiometric proportion, as in the salt extraction with neutral extractants. This allows, on the one hand, enhancing the extraction of metal salts with salting-out agents being present, and, on the other hand, stripping salts from the organic phase using water. The formation of two compounds, LnA As contrasted to the cation exchange extraction the metal distribution coefficients in these systems are slightly dependent on pH of the aqueous solutions, at least, in a quite wide range of рН. For D2EHPA systems this range is equal to 3.5–6. At lower pH values the competitive binary extraction of HCl is possible ( The selectivity of the binary extraction of metals is determined by the nature of the organic acid of the binary extractant being used and that of anions — by the nature of the amines being used. The experimental isotherms of the extraction of the lanthanum, gadolinium and thulium salts using di-n-octylammonium (tri-n-octylammonium) di-(2ethylhexyl)phosphate and di-n-octylammonium carboxylate as well as their mixtures in various ratios are shown in The X-axis of the extraction isotherms represents the equilibrium concentrations of metals in water phase, while the Y-axis represents the concentration of metals in organic phase. The equilibrium concentrations of metals in both phases were determined by chemical analyses (after reaching the extraction equilibrium and separation of phases). Initial concentration of metal in water phase was equal to sum of its concentration in both phases at equilibrium (when ratio between volume of organic and water phase is equal to 1:1). For the extractants NR  The data presented show that the interphase metal distribution in the systems under study, at least, at the qualitative level, follows the regularities of the binary extraction of metal salts. Moreover, the quantitative description of this type of processes is, as a rule, not a simple one since the extraction is accompanied by various secondary interactions in the organic phase which influence the extraction dependencies. The following should be referred to such interactions: solvatation of the organic metal salt by the excess of the binary extractant with the formation of (LnA formation of the associates of the lanthanide organic salts with amine chlorides (LnA Besides, in the systems with amine salts their self-association is always observed. At the excess of the extractant the most possible type of the solvates is (LnA The arbitrary constant of the equilibrium of heterogeneous reaction For the case of the great extractant excess and in the absence of the salting-out reagents in the aqueous phase (chlorides of other metals) and in the initial organic phase (amine chloride) it is not difficult to obtain the dependencies of the metal distribution coefficients (D  In the case of the mixed binary extractants (NR For the mixtures of the binary extractants on the basis of the tertiary amine ( In the systems with the secondary amines ( At the binary extraction of lanthanide chlorides using both carboxylates and di-(2-ethylhexyl)phosphates of amines and their mixtures the growth of the distribution coefficients is observed as the atomic number of the metal increases ( Mixtures of NR It was found that the extraction of lanthanide salts by mixed extractants on the basis of di-(2-ethylhexyl)phosphates and carboxylates of organic amines follows the regularities of the binary extraction: The isotherms of the salt distribution are linear in the initial section. This section is related to the range of the low metal concentrations in the organic phase; The addition of a chloride ion (in the form of a chloride of a respective amine) into the organic phase of the binary extraction system that is based on carboxylate and amine, leads to a drastic decrease of the distribution coefficients of the lanthanide ions (the salting-out effect is observed). The pH of the aqueous phase changes insignificantly (by less than 0.5 with respect to the initial solutions) during the extraction by di-(2-ethylhexyl)phosphates, carboxylates of tertiary/secondary amines and their mixtures. The study of GdCl Relatively high coefficients of the lanthanide pair separation are observed for all extractants that were studied in this research. Based on the values of the lanthanide pair separation coefficients and their trend related to change of the lanthanide atomic number, it can be concluded that extraction is primarily determined by the formation of metal carboxylates, with di-(2-ethylhexyl)phosphates of amine being the solvating reagents. Thus, for the mixture of two binary extractants the selectivity of lanthanide extraction is governed by extractant that has highest distribution coefficient in its individual form. Kalyakin S. N. thanks Ryan R. Zaari for his critical reading of and feedback on this paper.