Background
                  The purpose of this study is to investigate how different diameters of radial head replacement affect posterolateral translation with a valgus and supination force. We hypothesized that there would be less posterolateral rotatory translation with larger implant diameter.
               
                  Methods
                  Eleven cadaveric arms were stressed at 30 and 60° of flexion with a consistent supination and valgus stress force under five conditions: native radial head, radial head excision, and with 3 sizes of radial head prosthesis. Displacement of the radial head posteriorly in relation to the capitellum on radiographs was measured. Displacement was expressed as a percentage relative to the average of the maximum and minimum native radial head diameters.
               
                  Findings
                  The native radial heads had average minimum and maximum diameters of 23.3 mm and 25.2 mm, respectively. The angle of testing did not significantly change translation of the radial head. There was increased posterior translation relative to native head as the radial head sizes decreased from 24 mm to 20 mm and with excision of the radial head. Compared to the native head, the differences in displacement were statistically significant for the 20 mm radial head, but not for the 22 mm or 24 mm replacements. Radial head translation significantly increased after radial head excision.
               
                  Interpretations
                  This cadaveric study illustrates that patients treated with radial head excision and radial head prosthesis with undersized diameters have increased posterior translation with a valgus and supination stress. The larger the radial head prosthesis (closer to native radial head), the more closely it approximated the amount of translation of the native radial head.Fractures of the radial head constitute approximately one third of fractures about the elbow and 1.7% to 5.4% of all fractures ( The decision regarding size of radial head prosthesis is challenging. Previous studies assessing radial head replacement have demonstrated consequences associated with lengthening or “overstuffing” the radial head ( There are less clear guidelines regarding selection of prosthesis diameter. Traditionally, surgeons put the comminuted pieces of the radial head back together to estimate the proper size of the radial head prosthesis. When the estimate is between two available sizes, some authors suggest to select the smaller of the two ( There are limited studies evaluating the effects that an improperly sized diameter of the radial head prosthesis has on elbow biomechanics ( The purpose of this study is to investigate how radial head excision and different diameters of radial head replacement affect posterolateral translation. We hypothesized there would be less posterolateral rotatory translation as the diameter of radial head implant increases. Eleven cadaveric arms including the distal half of the humerus to the fingers were included. The specimens were disarticulated at the wrist, leaving the distal radioulnar joint intact. There were 6 males and 5 females whose age averaged 61.3 and ranged from 42 to 76 years. Of the eleven elbows, 6 were right elbows and 5 were left elbows. Calculations of precision versus sample size showed that a sample size of 10 was both necessary and sufficient to produce 90% margins of error on the means of less than 0.60 standard deviations in magnitude. We added an eleventh elbow in order to assure that a sample size of 10 would be maintained in case one elbow failed before the complete series of radial heads could be implanted in succession. Fresh-frozen cadavers were allowed to completely thaw prior to any intervention. A lateral Kocher approach was made extending the incision proximal up the lateral ridge of the distal humerus, being careful to protect the lateral collateral ligament (LCL) and annular ligament. No LCLs or annular ligaments were injured during the approach. Once the LCL was fully exposed, osteotomies of the elbows were performed at the lateral epicondyle of the humerus and supinator crest of the ulna. These osteotomies allowed complete visualization of the radial head for excision, and ensured that the LCL and annular ligament could be reattached anatomically. See The apparatus and technique used to apply a posterolateral rotatory stress on the radial head was designed based on the apparatus used in Dr. Schneeberger's article ( A rigid radial head implant was used due to previous literature showing that a rigid radial head implant restores better stability than does a floating or bipolar prosthesis ( The translation was calculated by measuring the displacement of the long axis of the radial neck/head in relation to the center of rotation of the capitellum on a lateral radiograph. The lateral radiographs of each specimen's elbow with an intact native radial head and osteotomies fixed back to their anatomic position were printed. On that radiograph, the patient's trochlear groove and olecranon/coronoid fossa was marked and the radial neck axis was drawn intersecting the center of the capitellum using a permanent marker ( Measured displacements from each subject were expressed as percentages relative to the average of the subject's maximum and minimum native radial head diameters. The resulting normalized displacements were analyzed via 2-way repeated-measures ANOVA with Condition and Angle as the within-subject factors. An alpha = 0.05 significance level was employed for all hypothesis tests. The post-hoc analysis focused on comparing displacements of non-native heads to that of the native head (as reference) at each setting of angle. An unadjusted alpha = 0.05 significance level was employed for the post-hoc comparisons despite the multiple testing, in order not to inflate Type II error in this exploratory study. The eleven native radial heads in the study had an average minimum diameter of 23.3 mm (range: 20 mm–26 mm) and an average maximum diameter of 25.2 mm (range: 22 mm–28 mm). The average difference between the maximum and minimum diameter was 1.9 mm. ( Our objective was to quantify the posterolateral rotatory translation of the radial head and neck under the 5 conditions (native head, no head, and 24 mm, 22 mm, and 20 mm sizes of prosthesis) with the elbow in 30 and 60° of flexion. This translation was significantly increased after excision of the radial head, as expected. The effect of testing angle (30 or 60° of flexion) did not significantly affect translation (main-effect In this cadaveric study, we evaluated the effect that radial head excision and radial head replacement with different prosthetic diameter sizes had on posterolateral rotatory translation. While Morrey et al. describes the radial head as a secondary constraint in elbow instability when a valgus force is applied to the elbow If the radial head provides increased stability by tensioning the LCL, then a larger size radial head prosthesis should provide improved stability for an elbow undergoing radial head arthroplasty with an intact LCL. None of these studies compared more than one size of prosthesis for the radial head diameter. While there are multiple studies demonstrating the negative consequences of “overstuffing” or over-lengthening the radial head prosthesis ( While increasing the radial head diameter causes increased pressures at the IOM and possibly the PRUJ, it will also cause tensioning of the LCL. If the LCL is not tensioned properly, this could lead to PLRI, thereby causing pain and discomfort. Our study is the first study we are aware of to test posterolateral translation with different sizes of radial head prosthesis, and our research showed reduced radial head stability with decreased radial head implant size. Our average radial head minimum diameter was 23 mm and with a radial head prosthesis diameter of 22 and 24 mm reproduced the native radial head translation. The more significant finding was that there was significantly increased translation with a radial head prosthesis diameter of 20 mm, which was the minimum diameter of only one of our native radial heads tested; while the other prosthesis used were larger and similar in size to the minor and major diameters of the excised radial heads. Since the largest diameter radial head prosthesis available to test in the system we used was 24 mm, we are unable to comment about the effects of a truly oversized radial head prosthesis diameter. Hall and McKee published a case series of patients who had lateral elbow pain after a radial head resection for a comminuted fracture who developed symptoms consistent with PLRI ( Overstuffing the radiocapitellar joint may also lead to difficulty repairing the LCL. We had no trouble re-attaching the osteotomies in our cadavers at any sized radial head. Although it is generally accepted that during a radial head replacement, if one is between sizes of radial head prostheses, one selects the smaller size, our results show that under-sizing a radial head prosthesis with an uninjured LCL can lead to increased posterior translation, which could potentially have negative clinical consequences. Additionally, radial head implants with diameters similar to the maximum and minimum cadaveric radial head had little effect on posterolateral translation during our testing. As with any cadaveric models, there are limitations. A cadaveric model limits the ability to assess contributing muscular dynamic stabilizers. Also, our study was limited to only 11 specimens. There is also an amount of error that must be factored in regarding the ability to measure the posterior displacement on repeated lateral x-ray during stress testing as well as the quality of the lateral x-rays. However, for each radial head size only one rotational force was applied using the torque meter and only one trial was performed for each condition. This force was applied by the same person throughout the entire experiment in an effort to keep the force consistent. There could be an “operator error” which may be present in any cadaveric study. Another limitation of this study is that we are unable to directly correlate the significance of translation of the radial head on the capitellum to true instability symptoms that a patient would clinically experience. Our hypothesis that there will be less posterior translation as the diameter of radial head implant increases was supported. This cadaveric study illustrated that elbows treated with radial head excision have increased posterior translation, and that the larger diameters of radial head prosthesis more closely approximated the amount of translation of the native radial head. This study does not demonstrate that one radial head size is better or worse than another, but this study does demonstrate the biomechanical effects of radial head size on potential elbow instability. In conclusion, our study suggests that under-sizing the prosthesis diameter for radial head reconstruction will potentially place patients at risk for posterolateral rotatory instability, a potential cause of pain, discomfort and potential need for revision surgery. None. The University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences Institutional review board reviewed the study protocol and determined no approval was needed, as the research did not involve human subjects. Biomet Manufacturing, LLC, Warsaw, Indiana, United States of America – Granted $5,000.00 for purchase of the cadavers and provided the radial head prosthesis used in this study.