Uranium at less than 1wt% is leached from uranium bearing ores by either acidic or basic processes to produce a pure uranium oxide product. For use in nuclear applications, the radioactive 235U isotope, which comprises 0.7wt% of natural uranium, is separated from 238U by diffusion or centrifuging after conversion to the hexafluoride. The hexafluoride is reduced to metal by reduction with Mg. Plutonium is made by irradiation in nuclear reactors. It and its oxide are dissolved in nitric acid aluminum and nitrate solution and recovered by solvent extraction using tributylphosphate in kerosene followed by stripping using an oxalic acid solution. The oxalate product is heated to form the oxide, which may be reduced to metallic plutonium by calcium reduction of the fluoride.Isotopes of uranium and plutonium are the only major fissionable elements. As summarized in Uranium is estimated to comprise approximately 2 Total U.S. 2014 mine production of uranium (as U The methods employed to process uranium ore are as varied as the mineral deposits mined for uranium. Each ore body has its unique characteristics including the nature of the uranium-bearing minerals, the associated mineralogy including morphology, and the regional resources and the regulatory restrictions for processing the ore body. An exhaustive treatise of uranium ore mineral processing is far beyond the scope of this writing; therefore, an outline of processing methods is presented here from which readers may pursue particular interests in greater detail. The All mining requires concentration of the mineral deposit. This may be done by leaching diffuse uranium compounds in-situ and concentrating the dissolved uranium by solvent extraction or ion-exchange adsorption. Heap leaching unconcentrated ore from mining operations is common in the copper and gold industries and may be economic for uranium depending on the type of mineral deposit and mining procedures. Ore not leached in this way must undergo some form of mineral concentration process before leaching. This begins with crushing and grinding unit operations that will liberate the valuable uranium mineral from the worthless gangue. Since comminution is a very energy intensive process, the cost of processing rises substantially with decreasing liberation size. Once the mineral is liberated, there are a wide range of methods to concentrate minerals including flotation, gravity methods, electrostatic, and electromagnetic. Flotation involves forming a thin water slurry containing the valuable and gangue minerals, adjusting the chemistry (pH, activation and surfactant species concentrations) of the slurry so as to render the surface of the uranium-bearing mineral hydrophobic, entraining air into the slurry to form microbubbles that attach to the valuable mineral floating it, and sweeping the floated mineral into a recovery channel from which it is subsequently dewatered. Gravity methods take the form of shaker tables, jigs, sink-float media, and Humphrey spirals to name a few. They all rely on the difference in density of the valuable uranium particles compared to the normally less-dense gangue minerals. Electrostatic and electromagnetic separations capitalize on differing electrostatic and electromagnetic properties of minerals. The liberated, usually dry, ore is conveyed by a belt to an electrostatic or electromagnetic generator that propels differently the valuable and gangue particles as they fall off the conveyor belt. By adjusting baffles at the end of the conveyor, the operator can collect a concentrated fraction. Some ores require drying before leaching and some are roasted to improve leaching efficiency. Pilot plant work is performed to determine the best process for a particular ore. Roasting is a process by which heat is used to cause chemical reactions in the ore concentrate. The purpose of roasting is to render minerals into forms that are selectively soluble compounds that may be subsequently separated by dissolution in selected leach solutions. For example, carnotite ores from Colorado contain uranium vanadate (K Uranium is typically recovered from ore by either a sulfuric acid or sodium carbonate leach process. The sulfuric acid process allows leaching of somewhat larger particle sizes so may have lower comminution cost. Sulfuric acid leaching requires oxidizing conditions assured by oxidants such as sodium chlorates, magnesium dioxide, oxygen (air), ferric ion, and H Purification of the oxide from the leaching process is carried out by solvent extraction ( Uranium oxide with a Gibbs energy of formation at 298 The UO Uranium metal is then produced by the Ames Process from the UF  The Ames Process follows the earlier work by Uranium metal for fission requires concentration of the The UF Since plutonium is a man-made material, its extractive metallurgy is confined to the processing of plutonium metal and salts produced in nuclear reactors. The recovery of a pure Pu is greatly complicated by the need to ensconce the radioactive element. Much of the processing and recovery involves materials that come from reduction processes, melting and forming operations, contaminated gloves and wipes, and crucibles to mention a few. Plutonium is an electropositive element that exhibits five oxidation states: Pu(III), Pu(IV), Pu(V), Pu(VI), and Pu(VII). This polyvalency makes Pu’s chemistry quite complex. For example, it is the only element that can have substantial quantities of aqueous species in four different oxidation states simultaneously. Dissolved Pu is concentrated by ion exchange. At the Savannah River facility located in South Carolina, Pu(III) is recovered using 50–100 mesh Dowex 50 polystyrene–divinylbenzene resin charged by acid. The resin is stripped using a 5.7 Mg is not used for Pu reduction as in uranium reduction since Pu forms alloys with Mg. As shown in As shown in Electrorefining may be used to separate Pu from U to produce a pure Pu. Tungsten cathodes are sufficiently resistant to attack by the liquid Pu. No discussion of Pu would be complete without mention that it is an extreme radiation hazard. Less than 0.6