The objective of this study was to prepare scaffolds based on cellulose-graft-polyacrylamide composed of different contents of nano-hydroxyapatite (n-HAp). To this end, polyacrylamide was grafted onto cellulose in the presence of n-HAp through free radical polymerization. Then, the scaffolds of the dispersed grafted polymer nanocomposite powder were fabricated by the freeze-drying method. The grafted polymer nanocomposite scaffolds were tested and characterized using tensile test instrument, Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis. Finally, bioactivity and apatite formation on the surface after immersion in a simulated body fluid (SBF) were determined by XRD and SEM analysis. According to the results, as the n-HAp content in the scaffold structure increased, the porosity, elastic modulus and compressive strength were increased. In addition, apatite was deposited very well on the interconnected irregular pores on the surface of the scaffolds after incubation in SBF, while the size of precipitated apatite was reduced by increasing the soaking time. The results indicated that the prepared grafted polymer nanocomposite scaffolds have a great potential as biocompatible materials for use in bone tissue engineering.Hydroxyapatite (Ca Scaffolds composed of HAp have shown that despite achieving supporting cell attachment and biointegration, they have failed to demonstrate suitable mechanical properties (i.e., strength and elasticity). To solve this problem, varieties of natural and synthetic polymers as flexible reinforcing agents have been combined with HAp to reduce the scaffold brittleness. HAp-reinforced degradable natural polymers, such as chitosan In this study, an efficient scaffold of n-HAp embedded in the network of cellulose-graft-polyacrylamide was synthesized. Cellulose is an abundant renewable polysaccharide consisting of a linear chain of (1→4) linked β-D-glucopyranose units aggregated to form a highly ordered structure due to its chemical constitution and spatial conformation Cellulose, a neutral biocompatible polysaccharide, is a promising natural material for bone, cartilage tissue engineering, and tissue engineering in post-injury brain tissue The objective of this study is the synthesis of scaffolds based on a cellulose-graft-polyacrylamide/n-HAp nanocomposite. In the previous work, the effect of polyacrylamide in the properties of the cellulose-graft-polyacrylamide/n-HAp nanocomposite scaffolds was investigated The synthesis of the nanocomposite scaffold was achieved using microcrystalline cellulose (Aldrich) with a viscosity of 20 Polyacrylamide was grafted onto cellulose backbone via the free radical polymerization method. For this purpose, cellulose (2% w/v) was dissolved in a lithium chloride/dimethyl formamide solution (8% w/v). Then, potassium persulfate (3 For fabrication of the nanocomposite scaffold, 2 To verify the synthesis of the nanocomposite scaffolds, FTIR spectra of the samples were obtained (Thermo Nicolet, USA, Nexus 670 Fourier transform infrared spectrophotometer) in the range of 500 to 4000 The porosity of synthesized scaffolds was determined by using a liquid displacement method The ability of apatite formation was investigated by soaking the prepared scaffolds in SBF solution, which was prepared according to the procedure described by Kokubo and Takadama In addition, X-ray diffraction is a convenient method for determining the mean size of precipitated crystallites in the structure of scaffolds. Therefore, the size of the crystallites in this study was calculated using the XRD data to determine the Full-Width Half Maximum (FWHM) In this study, the cellulose-graft-poly(acrylamide)/n-HAp nanocomposite scaffolds with different n-HAp contents were synthesized in two steps ( The FTIR spectral analyses of the prepared scaffolds were performed to show the graft polymerization of acrylamide onto cellulose and to reveal the presence of various n-HAp amounts ( The morphology of the pores of the prepared scaffolds is one of the most significant parameters for the assessment of scaffolds in bone-tissue engineering. Exact porosity and pore sizes cannot be suggested as a general guide for optimal bone-tissue outcomes, due to the wide range of bone features in vivo and the diversity of biomaterials, cells, and cytokines used in vitro and in vivo Bone is a composite material consisting of ~67 The elastic modulus (the slope of the initial linear portion of the stress–strain curve of  By using the  In this study, cellulose-graft-poly(acrylamide)/n-HAp nanocomposite scaffolds were synthesized with different ceramic contents. The prepared scaffolds were characterized using FTIR, SEM and XRD. The presence of grafted polymer and n-HAp in the structure of the scaffolds were confirmed. The porosity and pore size of all prepared scaffolds were calculated. The results confirmed that by increasing the HAp nanoparticles amounts in the structure of scaffolds, the pore size decreased while the porosity (%) increased. In addition, their mechanical properties were evaluated, and the results showed that the elastic modulus and the compressive strength values of the nanocomposite scaffolds were improved by increasing the amount of HAp nanoparticles. After characterization, all of the scaffolds were soaked in SBF for 7, 14 and 28 days. The results revealed that apatite particles were deposited very well on the interconnected irregular pores in the surface of the scaffolds. The size of precipitated apatite was reduced by increasing the soaking time. Finally, the surface morphology of the sample with the highest amount of n-HAp showed a denser appearance with small-sized precipitate apatite. The results suggest that synthesized polymer-grafted nanocomposite scaffolds are feasible and bioactive and can be used as highly efficient carriers for the delivery of cells, drugs, and genes into the body.