Background
                  Few studies have analyzed the relationship between bone mineral density (BMD) and coronary artery calcification (CAC) in older men, and it remains subject to debate. The present study was designed to evaluate the age-related acceleration of osteoporosis and CAC, as well as the relationship between BMD and CAC in Chinese elderly men.
               
                  Methods
                  Participants included 120 men older than 60 years. CAC was measured with high-definition computerized tomography. It is a highly sensitive technique for detecting the CAC and provides the most accurate CAC scores up to date.
               
                  Results
                  Mean (standard deviation) age was 73 (8.5) years. For osteoporosis, there was a strongly inverse correlation between age and BMD of all scanned body parts (p < 0.05 for all) except the lumbar spine 1–4 (p > 0.05 for all). For CAC, there was a moderately positive correlation of agatston, volume and mass scores with age. CAC was present in 67% of participants. There was no significant correlation between all kinds of CAC scores including agatston, volume and mass scores, and BMD of all scanned body parts including lumbar spine 1–4, femoral neck, femoral trochanter and total femur (p > 0.05 for all). BMD of all these body parts had no ability to identify the CAC (p > 0.05 for all). Furthermore, on multiple linear regression analysis, the relationship between CAC scores and BMD remained statistically non-significant.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Age constituted an important factor common for loss of BMD and development of CAC detected by HDCT, and no direct relationship was observed between osteoporosis and CAC in Chinese elderly men.Osteoporosis is a common feature among the elderly. It represents a major public health problem that affects both men and women, usually as they grow older. Coronary artery calcification (CAC) is also a highly prevalent condition among the elderly, and its development has been demonstrated to be associated with future cardiovascular risk ( Participants included 120 men older than 60 years who visited Chinese People’s Liberation Army General Hospital. Criteria for exclusion included: 1) patients receiving percutaneous coronary intervention, coronary artery bypass graft, cardiac valve replacement or cardiac pacemaker implantation; 2) patients with a disorder influencing bone and calcium metabolism, such as thyrotoxicosis, hyperparathyroidism, chronic renal failure, neoplastic or infectious diseases; and 3) patients consuming drugs interacting with bone and calcium metabolism, such as glucocorticosteroid, estrogen and bisphosphonate. Each participant underwent a complete physical evaluation by the well-trained staffs. Height was measured in the standing position using a wall-mounted measuring tape and body weight was measured with a digital scale wearing a standardized health check-up clothes. Body mass index (BMI) was calculated as weight in kilogram, divided by height in meter squared. Mean systolic and diastolic blood pressure (MSBP and MDBP) was measured using a standard mercury sphygmomanometer, with participants in a seated position after having rested quietly for 10 min. Standard echocardiogram was performed and left ventricular ejection fraction was calculated. BMD was evaluated by dual energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA; Lunar Prodigy, GE Healthcare, Wisconsin, USA) with the software (enCORE 11.20.068) provided by the manufacturer in the lumbar spine (L1–L4) and femur (femoral neck, femoral trochanter and total femur). All analyses were performed according to the consensus of two observers blind to clinical aspect of participants. For DEXA measurements there was limited intra-observer variation, with observers being on average within 3.1% of the pooled mean value. Similarly, there was good interobserver agreement, with an average variation of 2.2%. CAC was measured with HDCT (Discovery CT 750 HD, GE Healthcare, Wisconsin, USA). CAC scores were determined using the Agatston, volume and mass scoring systems on a three-dimensional workstation (Advantage Windows Workstation 4.5, GE Healthcare, Wisconsin, USA) with the software (Smart score 4.0, GE Healthcare, Wisconsin, USA) ( Blood samples were taken in the morning, after participants fasting for all night long, and then delivered to the central laboratory in Department of Biochemistry, Chinese People’s Liberation Army General Hospital. Lipid profiles, including triglyceride (TG), low density lipoprotein-cholesterol (LDL-C) and high density lipoprotein-cholesterol (HDL-C) levels, were measured using the enzymatic method by an automatic analyzer (Cobas Hypertension was present when participants had MSBP ≥ 140 mmHg, MDBP ≥ 90 mmHg or received medications for the treatment of hypertension. Diabetes mellitus was present when participants had FBG ≥ 7 mmol/L or received oral hypoglycemic agent/insulin. Coronary artery disease was characterized by the presence of myocardial infarction and angina pectoris after positive diagnostic procedures including stress test, computed tomography, radionuclide image and coronary angiography. All data were expressed as mean and standard deviation for continuous variables with normal distribution and as numbers and percentages for categorical variables. To evaluate the age-related changes, the total participants were classified into two groups according to 75 years. Comparison for different groups was undertaken by Student’s Mean (standard deviation) age of the total participants was 73 (8.5) years. As designed, all participants were men more than 60 years. Age range was 60–89 years. Compared with the subgroup younger than 75 years, BMD at the level of femur (femoral neck, femoral trochanter and total femur), but not lumbar spine 1–4, were strongly or marginally lower in the subgroup older than 75 years (  Regardless of the kind of CAC scores, CAC was present in 67% of participants. There was no detectable difference in BMD of all scanned body parts (femoral neck, femoral trochanter and total femur) between participants with CAC and without CAC (p > 0.05 for all). As shown in HDCT is a highly sensitive technique for detecting the CAC and provides the most accurate CAC scores up to date. The study presented here advocated that osteoporosis and CAC detected by HDCT were considered to be age-related process, and no direct relationship was found between BMD and CAC in Chinese elderly men. Osteoporosis is a change easily seen in the elderly, and CAC is also a highly frequent abnormality for the elderly. They both represent the public health problems that affect both men and women, usually as they grow older. Effect of advancing age on osteoporosis has been documented in previous reports for women ( Recent clinical researches have identified a relationship between osteoporosis and vascular calcification, including carotid artery plaque, aortic calcification and arterial stiffness ( Age constituted an important factor common for loss of BMD and development of CAC detected by HDCT, and no direct relationship was observed between osteoporosis and CAC in Chinese elderly men. This work was supported by grants from The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. The authors are grateful to all study participants for their participation in the study. This work was supported by grants from the