A monotonic relationship is expected between energy absorption and fracture surface area generation for brittle solids, based on fracture mechanics principles. It was hypothesized that this relationship is demonstrable in bone, to the point that on a continuous scale, comminuted fractures created with specific levels of energy delivery could be discriminated from one another. Using bovine cortical bone segments in conjunction with digital image analysis of CT fracture data, the surface area freed by controlled impact fracture events was measured. The results demonstrated a statistically significant (p
                     <0.0001) difference in measured de novo surface area between three specimen groups, over a range of input energies from 0.423 to 0.702J/g. Local material properties were also incorporated into these measurements via CT Hounsfield intensities. This study confirms that comminution severity of bone fractures can indeed be measured on a continuous scale, based on energy absorption. This lays a foundation for similar assessments in human injuries.Bone fracture classification systems are the conventional means for clinically stratifying fracture severity, but they are not well suited for distinguishing among situations involving comminution. Part of this shortcoming no doubt arises from the intrinsic subjectivity in assessing severity of comminution as a categorical variable For several decades, fracture mechanics principles have been utilized to examine various aspects of bone failure Computed tomography (CT) images, nowadays routinely a component of the standard of care in major orthopaedic trauma, provide the opportunity for quantitative analysis of interfragmentary surface area on a continuous scale. Inference of energy absorption from measured interfragmentary surface area therefore affords the basis for objectively quantifying comminution. Toward that goal, impactions were conducted on excised bovine cortical bone segments. Using the same clinical CT protocol to image the specimens before and after impact, we tested the hypotheses that fragment sets from replicate impacts having similar energy absorption would have similar interfragmentary area, and that de novo fragment surface area would increase linearly with energy absorption Thirty-six 70-mm long segments were cut from the diaphyses of fresh-frozen tibiae, harvested from skeletally mature cows. The ends of these segments were then milled to produce two transverse parallel faces. CT scans of the bone segments were acquired prior to impaction using a standard orthopaedic protocol (a helical scan at 235 Using an instrumented drop tower ( All fragments were collected post-impact. They were then suspended in a specially prepared resin (Wood Epox Surface area measurements were extracted from the CT data, slice by slice for each fragment, using a digital image analysis algorithm developed expressly for this purpose Fracture toughness parameters are material-dependent, and are known to vary in a prescribed way with apparent bone density The thirty-six pre-fracture specimens ranged in weight from 65 to 149 Bovine segments impacted with 0.423 A statistically significant difference in fragment count was found between groups with ANOVA, but closer scrutiny with a Tukey’s post hoc test revealed that fragment counts for the middle and high-energy groups were not significantly different from one another ( The quantity of de novo surface area ( The data presented in As one would expect, there was considerable scatter in our bovine impact data (both liberated surface area and efficiency of surface production), substantially more than in analogous studies Bovine test energy dosages were delivered in drop tower experiments on a per-gram basis, in lieu of delivery per unit volume. Rabl and colleagues Despite scatter, linear regression demonstrated that bovine fracture specimens do indeed follow fracture mechanics principles in terms of a linear trend of energy versus surface area ( Because the constant of proportionality between energy delivery and liberated surface area is a material-dependent property The spatial distribution of the material in a bone will govern how well it resists crack propagation due to mechanical stresses. To that end, the correlation between apparent bone density and bone fracture toughness is well established One potential cause of difference between bovine versus human bone fracture propensity is the former’s plexiform structure. Plexiform bone is orthotropic, and possesses superior stiffness and ultimate strength as compared to remodeled Haversian bone Microcracking during macroscopic crack propagation is one mechanism contributing to bone’s fracture toughness In summary, the results of the current study demonstrate, for the first time, that fracture severity for impacted cortical bone can be characterized on a continuous scale, based on CT-apparent energy absorption. Obviously, utilizing this energy relationship in the clinical domain will involve dealing with a number of complexities that were absent from these tests of isolated bone segments. Also, the clinical severity of a comminuted fracture injury involves important considerations of soft tissue damage, in addition to the bony fracture per se. Nevertheless, this fragmentation energy approach introduces a physically justified basis for quantification in an area which has been until now purely the domain of subjectivity. Financial support provided by NIH grants AR46601 and AR48939, an Iowa Fellowship, an Arthritis Foundation grant, and a grant from EBI, Inc. Ms. Christine R. Bertsch, Mr. Yasser M. Dahab, and Ms. Helen J.A. Fuller assisted in specimen preparation, testing, and data processing.