Artificial neural network (ANN) simulation is used to predict the rejection of two salts (NaCl and MgCl2) at typical seawater concentrations in a cross-flow nanofiltration membrane process. Rejections are predicted as a function of feed pressure and permeate flux with the salt concentration as a parameter. ANN predictions of the two salts’ rejections are compared with experimental results obtained using three different nanofiltration membranes (NF90, NF270 and N30F) in a cross flow filtration set-up. The experimental program spans a concentration range of 5000 to 25 000ppm for NaCl solution and of 5000 to 20 000ppm for MgCl2 solution at pressures covering the range of 2–9bars. The effects of the training algorithm, neural network architectures and transfer function on the ANN performance, as reflected by the percentage average absolute deviation are discussed. A network with one hidden layer comprising four neurones is found to be adequate for mapping input–output relationships and providing a good interpolative tool. Algorithms based on the conjugate gradient, regularization and quasi-Newton principles were found to outperform those based on the gradient descent and variable momentum gradient descent. The former algorithms gave an average absolute percentage deviation up to 5% whereas deviations up to 20% are obtained from the latter algorithms. For most of the cases considered, the ANN proved to be an adequate interpolation tool, where an excellent prediction was obtained for some concentration levels not represented in the training data set. For very limited cases, the ANN predictive performance was poor. However, the network's performance in these extreme cases didn’t improve even with increasing the data points in the training data set.Nanofiltration (NF) membranes are a type of pressure driven membranes that have properties in between those of ultrafiltration (UF) and reverse osmosis (RO) membranes. NF membranes have the advantages of providing a high water flux at low operating pressure and maintaining a high salt and organic matter rejection ( The performance of NF membrane separations is important for the design and optimization of filtration processes. This will reduce the number of experiments and subsequently save time and money. Since most commercial NF membranes are electrically charged, their performance depends heavily on the sieving (steric-hindrance) effect and Donnan (electrostatic) effect. Therefore, the removal of neutral components (such as organics) results from size exclusion (solute and pore size), or differences in diffusion rates in a non-porous structure, which depends also on molecular size ( The above mathematical models were derived from physical descriptions and understanding of the NF process. These models are mathematically complex, computationally expensive and they ideally require a very detailed knowledge of filtration process as well as characterization of the membranes ( Artificial neural networks (ANNs) are another type of black box models. ANNs, however, are capable of modelling highly complex and non-linear systems with large numbers of inputs and outputs. Therefore, ANNs offer a more attractive alternative to conventional black box models in dealing with complex phenomena ( From the early 1990s, ANNs have been widely applied in many research areas such as modelling ( In this study, ANN analysis will be applied to provide a means of modelling NF process performance. In particular, the rejections as a function of pressure and permeate flux of single salts (NaCl and MgCl ANNs may be described as a group of simple processing elements called neurons arranged in parallel layers that are fully interconnected by weighted connections. There are several types of ANNs mentioned in the literature ( The architecture of the feed-forward ANN with a single hidden layer of S neurons is shown in The neurons output vector There are usually four steps involved in ANN modelling: (1) assembling the training data of input (independent variables) and output (dependent variables), (2) deciding the network architecture, (3) training the network, and (4) simulating the network response to new inputs. The training process is simply an optimization process which aims at finding the set of weights and biases associated with each layer that will minimize the error objective function related to the deviations of the ANN predictions from the target values. The error objective function is usually the sum of squared errors between the targets and ANN outputs. ANN weights and biases in this process are updated in a systemic way by means of minimizing an error function using any of the well-known optimization techniques. The most widely used is the back propagation algorithm ( The algorithms used here fall in four categories: Training algorithms based on the batch steepest descent (traingd): The weights and biases here are updated in the direction of the negative gradient of the performance function in which the learning rate is held constant throughout training. Based on the same algorithm but with variable learning rate, another training algorithm (traingdx), which is another example of high performance batch steepest descent training algorithms, is used. This algorithm is known to converge from 10 to 100 times faster than the previous traingd. Training algorithms based on the quasi-Newton (secant) method, which, in minimizing the error objective function, track the steepest descent direction but do not require calculations of the Hessian matrix. The one-step-secant algorithm (trainoss) have been utilized as an example of this algorithm. Training algorithms based on the conjugate gradient principle, which follow a path in the direction of conjugate gradient in their search for the minimum. The Polak–Ribiere algorithm (traincgp) has been as a representative for this family of algorithms. Training algorithms based on modifying the performance function by adding a term to the sum of squares of the network errors. This term consists of the mean sum of squares of the network weights and biases. Automated regularization (trainbr) is an example of this training algorithm, which is based on Baysian principles ( The experimental set-up used in this study for the cross flow filtration experiments has been described in a previous published paper ( The feed-forward ANN (perceptron network) has been used in this work with single hidden layer and using pure linear transfer function for the output layer. Different network architectures and two sigmoidal transfer functions (logsig and tansig) for the hidden layers have been studied in seeking the best network in describing the experimental data. The network architectures investigated are 2:1, (i.e., one hidden layer with two neurones and one output layer) 3:1, 4:1, 5:1, 3:3:1 and 2:2:1. Towards the same objective, different back propagation training algorithms have been explored. In this work, ANN algorithms as programmed in the neural network toolbox of Matlab 6.5 have been used to predict rejections versus pressure and rejections versus permeate fluxes for NaCl and MgCl Salt filtration using membranes is a highly complicated and non-linear phenomenon due to the complex ion–membrane and ion–ion interactions that occur near and through the membrane. In the following sections, we present our results of applying ANN in the modelling of NF membranes using two training algorithms as programmed in Matlab. In all ANN analysis performed in this study, the output sought was the rejection percentage ( In each case, two different partial training datasets were used; the first training set contained only 12 training data points from some of the available constant-concentration experimental data, i.e., 5000, 15 000 and 25 000  The ANN's prediction of salt rejection as a function of pressure for NaCl solutions using the three investigated membranes will be considered in this section. The ANN prediction, as well as the experimental data, is shown in  The experimental rejection data, as well as the ANN predictions for MgCl From It is thus evident that the ANN technique, which is an easy-to-use black box method of correlation, is able to quantitatively describe the rejection data of the two investigated salts using three different membranes without the need for analysis in terms of effective pore radius, effective thickness/porosity ratio and effective membrane charge which may be difficult to relate to real physical parameters. The ANN predictions of salt rejection as a function of permeate flux for NaCl solution and the experimental data for the three investigated membranes at different salinity levels are shown in The ANN predictions of rejection with permeate flux and the experimental data using NF270 and N30F are shown in The experimental rejection data, as well as the ANN predictions for MgCl The application of artificial neural networks to the modelling of crossflow nanofiltration of NaCl and MgCl This work has been accomplished as part of a research project sponsored and funded by the Middle East Desalination Research Center (MEDRC).