Super-hydrophobic films were synthesized on the Mg alloy AZ31 by modifying in-situ grown Mg-Al layered double hydroxide (LDH) films with stearic acid (SA), sodium laurate (SL), myristic acid (MA) and 1H, 1H, 2H, 2H–perfluorodecyltrimethoxysilane (PFDTMS). These films exhibited a static water contact angle of 150.6°, 153.7°, 152° and 145.5°, respectively. Mg-Al LDH-SA, Mg-Al LDH-SL and Mg-Al LDH-MA films were produced by the neutralization reaction of the fatty acid and Mg(OH)2 whereas the Mg-Al LDH-PFDTMS film was produced by the hydrolysis reaction of PFDTMS along with the condensation polymerization reaction. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), the hydrogen evolution data as well as long-term immersion tests indicated that Mg-Al LDH-PFDTMS provided better barrier protection to improve the corrosion resistance of AZ31 Mg compared with the Mg-Al LDH-SA, Mg-Al LDH-SL and Mg-Al LDH-MA films, because the SiOH groups and the hydroxyl groups on the surface of the film were combined to form CF3(CF2)7(CH2)2Si(O-Surface)3, which decreased the surface energy and improved the corrosion resistance.Magnesium (Mg) alloys have been widely employed in various applications in aircraft, automobiles and the computer industry due to their low specific weight as well as high strength-to-weight ratio [ Layered double hydroxides (LDHs) are lamellar crystals with positively charged brucite-like host layers with interlayer regions containing charge compensating anions and solvation molecules [ To date, super-hydrophobic films have been produced by modifying the surface using massive low-surface-energy reagents, such as stearic acid (SA) [ This work directly produced Mg-Al LDHs on an anodized magnesium alloy AZ31 using a simple method to form a nanostructured roughness. Afterwards, the typical low-surface-energy reagents, SA, SL, MA and PFDTMS, were used to modify the Mg-Al LDHs in order to enhance the corrosion resistance of the filmed AZ31. Furthermore, the corrosion behaviors were evaluated using electrochemical measurements, hydrogen evolution data and long-term immersion tests. The results indicated that PFDTMS provided better corrosion protection for AZ31 than SA, SL and MA. AZ31 Mg alloy had the following composition Al 2.5–3.5%, Zn 0.6–1.3%, Mn 0.2–1%, Ca 0.04%, Si 0.1%, Cu 0.05%, and balance Mg. The substrate surfaces (10 mm × 10 mm × 5 mm; 20 mm × 20 mm × 5 mm) were ground with SiC papers up to 2000 grit, ultrasonically cleaned in ethyl alcohol, along with dried under a stream of air. All chemical reagents were analytical grade. The schematic of the film preparation is illustrated in Afterwards, the specimens with a Mg-Al LDH film were modified by immersion in a 0.01 M SA aqueous solution, a 0.01 M SL ethanol solution, a 0.01 M MA aqueous solution and a 0.01 M PFDTMS aqueous solution at 60 °C for 2 h, rinsed with deionized water and dried at room temperature. These specimens were designated as SA, SL, MA and PFDTMS, respectively. The crystal structure of the substrate with an Mg-Al LDH film were evaluated using powder X-ray diffraction (XRD; D/Max 2500X Rigaku, Japan). The morphology of the samples was characterized using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM; JSM-7800F; Japan) at 5 kV. Roughness data were measured using the atomic force microscope (AFM; Asylum Research MFP-3D-BIO, USA) in a tapping mode. The water contact angle (CA) was assessed with a contact angle meter (WCA; Dataphysics OCA20, Germany) on six different positions for each specimen surface. The volume of an individual water droplet was fixed at 2 μL. The chemical groups in the films were evaluated using Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR; Nicolet IS5 Thermo Scientific, USA) in the wavenumber range of 400–4000 cm A three-electrode cell system was used for the electrochemical tests in 3.5 wt% NaCl solution at room temperature, with the specimen as the working electrode, a platinum plate as the counter electrode and a saturated calomel electrode (SCE) as the reference electrode. The electrochemical impedance (EIS) measurements were carried out in the frequency range from 10 mHz to 100 kHz with an AC sine wave perturbation of 20 mV.   The SEM appearance and the corresponding EDS of the as-prepared films are presented in These results indicate that the surface of film had changed after modification with the low-surface-energy reagents and that the thicknesses of modified films were similar to that of the unmodified LDH films. The morphology and roughness of films modified by SA, SL, MA, and PFDTMS were evaluated using AFM. The three-dimensional AFM topographical images (20 μm × 20 μm) of the modified films are presented in The hydrophobicity of LDH films and modified films were characterized by the water contact angle measured at ambient conditions. Untreated Mg is hydrophilic with a water contact angle of 36° [ The Mg-Al LDH specimen and the four modified specimens were placed face-down to a 2000-mesh sandpaper to begin the sandpaper abrasion tests. The specimens weighing 100 g were driven to move along the rulers in two perpendicular dimensions for 100 cm each (  FT-IR spectrum of modified films is presented in The XPS and FT-IR analysis indicated the presence of SA, SL, MA and PFDTMS successfully self-assembled on Mg-Al LDH films, which can explain the hydrophobic properties of modified film based on the bonding of CH The above results indicate that the production mechanism of the modified films occurred in two steps. The first step formed a nanostructured roughness of the Mg-Al LDH, formed by the following reactions [ In this work, the Al ions in the Mg-Al LDH film were derived from the corrosion of the Al in the anodized layer on the Mg alloy AZ31. Therefore, these anodic films provided enough Mg ions as well as Al ions to fabricate the LDHs [ The second step consisted of modifying the Mg-Al LDHs with the low-surface-energy reagents, by the following reactions [ Eqs. The corrosion resistance of films modified with SA, SL, MA and PFDTMS immersed in 3.5 wt% NaCl solution for 1 h and 14 days was evaluated using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) at room temperature. The equivalent circuit presented in The evolution of the Bode plots is presented in The hydrogen evolution rate, The corrosion rates versus time curves of uncoated AZ31 and the modified films are presented in Subsequently, in the second stage, the corrosion rate increased slowly with increasing time. The corrosion rate of the film modified with PFDTMS was somewhat lower than that of the other films. These results indicate that the film modified with PFDTMS provided better corrosion protection for AZ31 than the films modified by SA, SL and MA. The surfaces of the specimens with modified films immersed in 3.5 wt% NaCl solution for 14 days are presented in In this paper, an Mg-Al LDH film with high surface roughness was successfully manufactured on AZ31 Mg alloy via a facile hydrothermal process, followed by modification of SA, SL, MA and PFDTMS. The conclusion as follows: the superhydrophobic Mg-Al LDH surfaces with anti-corrosion were successfully fabricated by modification of SA, SL and MA, whose static contact angle were 150.6°, 153.7° and 152°, respectively. The admirable hydrophobic Mg-Al LDH surface with anti-corrosion was successfully synthesized via modification of 1H, 1H, 2H, 2H–perfluorodecyltrimethoxysilane, whose static contact angle was 145.5°. The XPS and FT-IR analysis indicated SA, SL and MA were obtained by the neutralization reaction of fatty acid and Mg(OH) the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), hydrogen evolution experiment and long-term immersion tests illuminate that Mg-Al LDH-PFDTMS is a better barrier to improve the corrosion resistance of AZ31 Mg alloys than Mg-Al LDH-SA, Mg-Al LDH-SL and Mg-Al LDH-MA because Si This work was supported by the