Silver nanoparticles have been synthetized and deposited on cp Ti substrates in one-step process by the use of laser ablation in open air. The nanoparticles are produced by ablating Ag foil using two different lasers and an inert gas jet oriented into the interaction zone to prevent oxidation and to direct the ablated material to the substrate. The HRTEM images and FFT confirmed the crystalline nature of the obtained silver nanoparticles with the presence of oxidized ones, while FE-SEM revealed that the nanoparticles were uniformly distributed on Ti substrates. The Ag-containing Ti substrates showed good antibacterial activity against Lactobacillus salivarius.Silver nanoparticles have been recently used in many applications such as photocatalysis, water purification, antifungal and antimicrobial compounds, plasmonic enhancement, etc. The fundamental properties of silver nanoparticles strongly depend on their size, crystalline structure as well as their morphology, which are consequently related to the synthesis process. There is a broad variety of methods and techniques for producing silver nanoparticles, including chemical, physical and biological processes Foils of Ag with 99.99% of purity were used as targets to be ablated by two different laser sources in open air atmosphere. The laser beam was focused on the target to give a spot size about 0.15 mm diameter. The first source consisted of a pulsed Nd:YAG laser operating at 1064 nm, 10 Hz, 3.2 ms of pulse width, and pulse energy of 12 J. The second source was a diode-pumped Nd:YVO The antibacterial activity of the Ag-containing Ti discs was investigated by culturing Representative TEM images of Ag nanoparticles are presented in Although the interaction mechanism is still thermal process, the phase explosion vaporization is also significant as mass removal mechanism All the obtained nanoparticles are crystalline as can be seen from However, silver oxide nanoparticles have been also associated to high antibacterial activity as reported by other researchers The antibacterial effect of the Ti discs with the Ag nanoparticles was evaluated by counting the colonies in the suspension in contact with 5 Ag-containing Ti discs processed by IR laser (AgNps-IR) and G laser (AgNps-G). We have developed a new and reliable method to produce and deposit silver nanoparticles on a substrate in one-step process. Ag foils were ablated in open air using laser and an inert gas jet to direct the nanoparticles to the substrate. The nanoparticles consisted of crystalline silver and silver oxide with rounded shape, which were well anchored on the Ti substrates and exhibited good antibacterial activity against This work was partially supported by the EU research project Bluehuman (EAPA_151/2016 Interreg Atlantic Area), Government of Spain (MAT2015-71459-C2-P (MINECO/FEDER), and Xunta de Galicia (ED431B 2016/042, ED481D 2017/010, ED481B 2016/047-0).