Deforestation and land-use change in tropics have increased over the past decades, driven by the demand for agricultural products. Although phosphorus (P) is one of the main limiting nutrients for agricultural productivity in the tropics, the effect of land-use change on P availability remains unclear. The objective was to assess the impacts of land-use change on soil inorganic and organic P fractions of different availability (Hedley sequential fractionation) and on P stocks in highly weathered tropical soils. We compared the P availability under extensive land-use (rubber agroforest) and intensive land-use with moderate fertilization (rubber monoculture plantations) or high fertilization (oil palm monoculture plantations) in Indonesia. The P stock was dominated by inorganic forms (60 to 85%) in all land-use types. Fertilizer application increased easily-available inorganic P (i.e., H2O-Pi, NaHCO3-Pi) in intensive rubber and oil palm plantations compared to rubber agroforest. However, the easily-available organic P (NaHCO3-extractable Po) was reduced by half under oil palm and rubber. The decrease of moderately available and non-available P in monoculture plantation means that fertilization maintains only the short-term soil fertility that is not sustainable in the long run due to the depletion of P reserves. The mechanisms of this P reserve depletion are: 1) soil erosion (here assessed by C/P ratio), 2) mineralization of soil organic matter (SOM) and 3) P export with yield products. Easily-available P fractions (i.e., H2O-Pi, NaHCO3-Pi and Po) and total organic P were strongly positively correlated with carbon content, suggesting that SOM plays a key role in maintaining P availability. Ecologically based management is therefore necessary to mitigate SOM losses and thus increase the sustainability of agricultural production in P-limited, highly weathered tropical soils.Land-use change and intensification of cultivation are the predominant global changes of this century. This is mainly because of the global socio-economic demand for food, feed, fiber and biofuel driven by population growth ( Indonesia is one of the tropical countries with highest deforestation rates, surpassing the rate in Brazil in 2012 ( Land-use change significantly modifies the physical, chemical and biological soil properties, affects soil fertility, and increases erosion and compaction ( Land-use changes affect P availability for plant uptake either by increasing P losses or by transforming it to more recalcitrant pools. This leads to potentially significant effects on the distribution of P within chemically-defined pools, in turn determining availability and stability ( Various approaches have been developed to study the forms, amount and dynamics of P cycling ( Most studies in Sumatra (Indonesia) on the effects of land-use change and deforestation deal with soil carbon contents and stocks. This reflects the importance of low-carbon agriculture, climate change and general soil fertility issues. Nonetheless, only few studies focus on the effect of land-use change on soil P availability; no studies are available on P fractionation of various forms of inorganic and organic P. Our study is designed to assess the effects of land-use change on inorganic and organic P forms of different availability and on the P stocks in highly weathered tropical soils. We hypothesized that inorganic and organic P fractions of different availability will strongly decrease after land-use change. Likewise, P stocks – the total of all P fractions – will also decrease. The study was carried out in Jambi Province in Sumatra, Indonesia. The climate is tropical humid with an average temperature of 27 To assess the effects of land-use change on P fractions, three replicate sites for each land-use type were selected within a distance of 16 Five grams of air-dried soil was placed in a glass bottle and incubated at field capacity at 24 The One gram of soil was placed into a 50 Total P (TP) and Pi were measured directly from the extracts, while Po was calculated as the difference between the TP and Pi. TP was determined in 5 Bulk density has been measured by another research group. It was done by core method using cylinders measuring 250 P fractions are expressed as the mean of the three field replicates and are presented in mg where Differences in the P fractions, total P, P stocks and C/P ratio between agroforest and monoculture plantations were tested by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). Correlations between soil carbon content and P fractions were assessed by calculating linear regression. All analysis was performed using Statistix v8.1 statistical software. We recorded clear effects of land-use change of jungle rubber to oil palm and rubber plantations on inorganic and organic P fractions ( Easily-available Pi, the sum of H Moderately-available Pi (NaOH-Pi) had the same content in all soils across all horizons. However, moderately-available Po decreased in the top horizon by 18% under oil palm and by 23% under rubber plantations compared to the jungle rubber. Differences between jungle rubber and the intensive plantations were significant ( Most of the total P in soils of each land-use type was inorganic. It ranged between 39 and 106 The soil P stock decreased after conversion of jungle rubber to an intensively managed oil palm plantation at the 0–20 The carbon:organic P (C:Po) ratio calculated using total organic P content ranged between 695 Total Po was correlated with soil C (R Inorganic and organic P forms of different availability are influenced by anthropogenic, biotic and abiotic processes that either increase or decrease the soil P content ( P extracted by 0.5 The importance of plant non-available P forms has been frequently reported ( Soil total P represents the long-term potential of the P supply, whereas easily-available Pi represents the short-term bioavailability. Moderately available and non-available P ( The decreased soil P stocks at 0–20 In tropical ecosystems, the turnover of OM is a very important source of Po that is widely considered to be fundamental in maintaining the P supply ( The C:Po ratios can be used to assess the nutrient status of a site. An adequate supply of available phosphate for plant growth prevents Po mineralization by phosphatases. This result in an accumulation of soil Po and a reduced C:Po ratio ( The forms and distribution of P in various land-use systems is determined by anthropogenic, biotic and abiotic processes. The proportion of Pi was higher than Po in soil under each land-use type. Pi was mainly composed of chemically more stable (NaOH-Pi) and relatively insoluble P forms (i.e., HCl-Pi and Residual-P) rather than available-Pi in all land-use types. The effects of the management after land-use change of jungle rubber to oil palm and rubber plantations on Pi and Po fractions were underlined. Short-term high NPK fertilization increased easily-available Pi in intensive monoculture plantations. At the same time, easily-mineralizable Po decreased due to depletion of SOM. Moderately-available P and non-available P also decreased after land-use change of jungle rubber to oil palm and rubber plantations. Land-use change leads to an overall reduction of P stocks due to a strong decrease of SOM caused by erosion and yield export of rubber or of oil palm seeds. Fertilization did not compensate for the P losses. Fertilization increases solely the available Pi in the topsoil. This maintains or increases fertility only over the short term, but decreases it over the long term by depleting P reserves (e.g., moderate or non-available P). The positive strong correlation between soil C and Po and the C:Po ratio indicates that mineralization from SOM strongly contributes to the available P content. This highlights the potential of SOM in maintaining P reserves. This calls for proper plantation management practices to stop SOM losses. We thank the 