In a governmental funded 3-year research project a recycling process for nickel-metal hydride batteries (NiMH) has been developed. Today the discarded batteries are used in the steel industry as a cheap nickel-source. Cobalt is not paid for and rare earths (RE) are slagged and lost for reuse. Spent NiMH batteries contain 36–42% nickel, 3–4% cobalt and 8–10% mischmetal consisting of lanthanum, cerium, praseodymium and neodymium. The dismantled and processed NiMH are melted in a dc electric arc furnace producing a nickel–cobalt alloy and a slag phase highly enriched with RE-oxides. The key for success in this process was to find a suitable slag system which ensures best separation of NiCo alloy from the rare earth oxides. Different oxidic and halogenic slag systems are investigated on a laboratory and technical scale. The slag systems CaO–CaF2 and CaO–SiO2 were determined to be suitable for subsequent pilot plant trials. In these trials, the CaO–CaF2 system has shown a better melting behaviour than the CaO–SiO2 system. Nickel and cobalt were found nearly completely in the metal phase whereas the rare earths were transferred into the slag as oxides. Pyrometallurgical refining of the nickel–cobalt alloy did not make sense as investigated in technical scale trials. Within the scope of a scenario calculation the economical feasibility was demonstrated for a model scenario.In the past 30 years, the European metallurgy has moved away dramatically from primary production towards recycling of secondary raw materials. In the same period the product variety has also changed. More and more complicated products have been and are still being-produced using newest, complex materials. Examples are computer, CD-player, Walkman, cellular phone, PDA and so on. Most of this technically complicated equipment needs to be used mobile. Thus, a flexible power source is used in this field. In the last 15 years secondary battery systems such as nickel-cadmium (NiCd), nickel-metal hydride (NiMH) or lithium-ion batteries have been developed for the mentioned applications. Disposal of used batteries is neither ecologically nor economically useful due to their high metal content. Furthermore, these batteries are a complex, polymetallic deposit. NiMH are secondary batteries with a high capacity combined with an ecologically friendly disposal behaviour in comparison to the cadmium containing NiCd batteries. Since their market launch in 1991, up to 1500 tonnes in 2003 have been sold in Germany The main parts of a NiMH battery are cathode, anode, electrolyte, separator and the steel case. The cathode is made of nickel coated with nickel hydroxide whereas the anode consists of a hydrogen storage alloy based on mischmetal (mainly cerium, lanthanum, praseodymium and neodymium) and nickel including substituents. A typical alloy is MmNi In cylindrical cells strips of anode, cathode and separator are laminated and are coiled to a helix. The electrolyte is filled into the centre of the cell and afterwards the cell is sealed. Essentially the main difference of prismatic cells is the shape. Single sheets of anode, cathode and separator are laminated or coils are pressed flat. In button cells the electrodes are a tablet-like, compact component. A typical composition of NiMH is shown in the following The world nickel production in 2003 was about 1.2 million tonnes whereas the monthly average (LME) was equal to €9.62 The legal basis of battery recycling is the European directive EU 98/1901/EG (latest version). The national implementation in Germany is the so-called “Batterieverordnung” (BattV) enacted on 27.03.1998. According to the BattV all producers and importers of batteries are committed to take back used batteries free of charge and they must treat the batteries according to the recycling management law “Kreislaufwirtschafts- und Abfallgesetz”. The costs for the recycling system (including the individual operations collection, sorting, recycling and disposal) must be accepted by the producers or importers. Thus, several battery related companies (e.g. Philips, Sanyo, Sony, Varta, …) founded the “Stiftung Gemeinsames Rücknahmesystem Batterien” (GRs Batterien), which is responsible for the fulfilment of the laws. Since their market launch in 1991, the amount of NiMH sold has been increasing steadily up to 10,000 tonnes in the EU for 2003 ( Furthermore, the user keeps the batteries and is hoping for a kind of self-healing process. Average hoarding time is about 2–4 years depending on the application area. Accordingly, the amount of NiMH available for recycling is increasing very slowly. In 2003, about 97 tonnes of NiMH were recycled in Germany. Up to 2007, an increase to 1000 tonnes per annum is expected. As the NiMH are a rather new product the recycling is also still under development. In the literature, no crucial proposal is made for the pyrometallurgical recycling of NiMH. Most of the research work done has focused on hydrometallurgical treatment ( Recapitulating, none of the processes described has been transferred to an industrial scale. The hydrometallurgical processes are difficult to put into practice due to their high complexity. The use of mechanical processing as preliminary stage for a new process is possible. Best available technology (BAT) is nowadays the use of NiMH as a cheap source in stainless steel production. However, the cobalt is not paid for and the REs are slagged and therefore useless. Consequently, the aim of an alternative recycling process is the production of high grade and marketable products. Industrial processes are available for both battery sorting and battery processing. The significant improvement in comparison to both the literature work and the BAT is the complete use of the raw materials potential of NiMH. Therefore, the following approach ( The mechanically processed NiMH will be melted in an electric arc furnace. The produced Ni–Co alloy might already be a saleable product. Possibly a refining step will have to be performed in order to improve the alloy quality. As electrolysis for Ni and Co separation is state of the art, this process is not within the scope of this work. The slag produced is ideally enriched in RE and thus an accepted raw material for the chemical industry. The selection of a suitable slag system was the crucial point within the focus of this research. As the RE are partly metallic they are highly aggressive for common refractory material. Beside this the following needs must be fulfilled: liquid at tap temperature of at least 1460 low vapour pressure of slag components; possibly low viscosity; probably high density difference between slag and metal (minimum 2 high capacity for RE oxides (minimum 20 high capability for Mn, Si and other impurities; low solubility for Ni and Co (maximum 1 minimised content of Fe and other disturbing impurities in the slag components. In general, one distinguishes between the molecular and the ion theory for the explanation of slag structure and reactions In non-ferrous metallurgy, several slag systems are generally investigated. Basically slag systems consisting of mixtures CaF Pure CaF The ternary system CaO–MgO–SiO Again, a similar behaviour of RE oxides to CaO is assumed. RE are able to form compounds of the type RE Especially the behaviour of the slag components with the RE is interesting. It is assumed that neither oxides nor metals are dissolving and that the process temperature is high enough for complete melting of all components. For several metal-oxide systems, the equilibrium reaction has been calculated using a software tool ( As the Gibbs free energy of the RE oxides is significantly lower than that of CO a carbothermic reduction will not occur. Accordingly, graphite crucibles should be suitable. By reduction of SiO This would affect the Ni–Co alloy quality as it would be dissolved or form intermetallic compounds. A similar reaction may be expected for MgO: Due to the low evaporation point of Mg it will evaporate. Its behaviour as a slag component should be investigated as it could be stabilized in connection with other slag components. Generally spoken, magnesia is not suitable as a refractory material. In principle, the same is valid for alumina. However, because of its high oxygen affinity a direct reoxidation is possible. In fact, this will not occur completely due to formation of intermetallic phases. Up to 1700 With fluorine the metallic RE react to RE fluorides according to: Calcium fluoride is relatively more stable in comparison to RE fluorides. It is only reduced by lanthanum at temperatures above 1750 A calculation of the system CaO–CaF A common figure for slag comparison is the so-called basicity, the ratio of base to acid compounds. For the selected slag systems the RE oxides were grouped as bases whereas the RE fluorides were supposed to be acidic. This leads to the following formula for the basicity: Ni and Co are assumed to be slagged to a very limited amount significantly below 1 At first, the selected slag systems were investigated in laboratory scale using a Tamman furnace (300–500 The further parameters obtained were validated in nine pilot plant trials ( In seven trials, the CaO–CaF Except for trial 3, all Ni and Co contents were below 0.8 The reduction of the slag amount to 5 The mass balance shows a poor overall recovery for the first three trials. As these trials were performed in one campaign a 70 However, using the hollow electrode technology resulted in an increased raw material loss as displayed in In order to refine the Ni–Co alloy produced, technical scale trials were conducted. Theoretically, Fe and Mn could be removed from the alloy by selective oxidation ( Neither the required blowing time of 180 Accordingly, the selective oxidation of Fe and Mn was not successful as shown in The basis for the feasibility study was a scenario calculation for a green field plant with a nominal capacity of 1000 tonnes per annum. From four different raw material sources (collection systems, battery producer, hybrid vehicles and others) a yearly increasing amount of batteries up to 1000 tonnes in 2009 could be acquired. Using historical raw material prices and taking typical reduced prices for recycled material into account an average sales revenue of €3400 Since the early 1990s, the market for accumulators has been growing steadily in line with the increase in mobile communication markets. The nickel-metal hydride battery was introduced as part of this development. State of the art in battery recycling for NiMH is the use in stainless steel production as a cheap nickel source. However, by this route neither the valuable share of cobalt is paid for nor are the contained RE recycled. Furthermore, the RE are lost in the slag phase. This investigation is focused on the development of a new, alternative recycling process with almost complete recycling of Ni, Co and RE as saleable products. Initially, the history of NiMH as well as its function, composition and use were described. The major components are Ni, Co, Fe and a mischmetal based on La, Ce, Pr and Nd. The value of the metals contained is about €4–5 Subsequently, important boundary conditions were described including legal framework, market share and recycling potential. The battery recycling of several European countries Europe was compared and a literature review summarised the state of the art and state of research. The existing recycling route was critically evaluated and, from the results, the requirements were derived for a new process. The crucial point for the process development was the selection of a suitable slag system which fulfils demands such as high density difference, low viscosity, pour capacity for Ni, etc. Based on the structure model of liquid slags as well as the related properties of potential slag formers the CaO–CaF In the experimental part of this work the selected slag systems were investigated at first on a laboratory and technical scale. For both systems the CaO proportion was determined to be 35 The NiCo alloy produced was refined in order to remove impurities such as Fe, Mn, Al or C. Due to processing and scale difficulties, only the elimination of C and Al could be successfully accomplished. Neither Fe nor Mn could be removed in contrast to the theoretical calculations. For complete refining, far too little oxygen was blown into the melt mainly as a consequence of processing limits. Based on the results the general use of this method seems to be questionable. By means of a scenario calculation the feasibility of the process could be shown for an assumed mass of 1000 tonnes raw materials in the year 2009. This was determined to be the lower limit for covering the calculated investment costs. However, an industrial implementation as a green field plant seems to be unlikely now because of limited access to NiMH. The major reason for this effect is related to the positive market value of NiMH. As consequence, a non-quantified amount of NiMH is handled outside the official recycling systems. Alternatively, the transfer into an existing enterprise seems to be feasible as far the investment costs can be kept low and the existing infrastructure can be used.