This chapter will focus on the biocompatibility of oral care products including toothpastes, mouthwashes, tooth-whitening products, and denture care materials. Currently available biological test systems used for biocompatibility testing of oral care products are introduced. Various types of toothpastes and mouthwashes are discussed including their compositions, indications, current evidence on their clinical performance and biological concerns associated with the active ingredients as well as laboratory and clinical studies of their biocompatibility. Safety concerns regarding tooth-whitening products and current legislation and regulatory requirements are also included in this chapter. Biocompatibility issues concerning denture care products are discussed and, finally, important recommendations are suggested for dental care professionals regarding appropriate use and prescription of oral care products.Introduction Biocompatibility test systems for the evaluation of oral care products In vitro tests In vivo tests Systemic adverse reaction tests Biocompatibility of toothpastes Composition of toothpastes Biological studies Biocompatibility of mouthwashes Types of mouthwashes Biocompatibility of tooth-whitening products Whitening gels Whitening strips Biocompatibility of denture care products Denture adhesives Conclusions References  There are fewer scientific studies addressing the biocompatibility issues associated with oral care products compared to those reporting on the efficacy of these products. A possible reason for the reduced amount of research in this area is the passive nature of the exposure of the oral tissues to these products. Since oral care products typically come into contact with oral tissues for a short period of time and are then rinsed away following exposure, there appears to be an assumption that any adverse effects on oral tissues are mitigated. In addition, there is a tendency for the manufacturers to sponsor more studies evaluating the positive effects of the oral care products in terms of efficacy and clinical performance compared with studies which would raise concerns on adverse reactions to these products. In this chapter, first we will introduce different biocompatibility test systems that are available for biological evaluation of oral care products, and then we will describe each category of product and discuss specific biocompatibility issues associated with different types of oral care products in more detail. Biocompatibility is defined as “the ability of a material to function in a specific application in the presence of an appropriate host response” ( Localized adverse effects of oral care products on oral mucosa can be investigated using two different types of biocompatibility test systems including in vitro and in vivo tests. In vitro tests are carried out outside of the body. Their objective is to simulate biological reactions to oral care products when they are placed on or into tissue of the body ( In vivo tests are carried out inside a living body. One of the common types of in vivo tests are animal implantation tests, in which the test material is implanted into Systemic adverse effects of oral care products have been investigated using mainly the following test systems: (1) systemic toxicity testing, and (2) allergic reaction testing. Systemic toxicity tests have been frequently used to investigate the characteristics and treatment of acute toxicity caused by ingested fluoride present in toothpastes and mouthwashes ( Toothpastes generally contain the following components: Water (20–40%) Abrasives (50%) including aluminum hydroxide, calcium hydrogen phosphates, calcium carbonate, silica and hydroxyapatite Fluoride (usually 1450 Detergents, mainly sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS) with concentration ranges of 0.5–2% Antibacterial agents such as triclosan or zinc chloride Flavourants including spearmint, peppermint, and wintergreen Remineralizers in some toothpastes containing hydroxyapatite nanoparticles and calcium phosphate Humectants including glycerol, xylitol, sorbitol, polyethylene glycol, and propylene glycol Antisensitivity agents in sensitive toothpastes containing strontium chloride and potassium nitrate or arginine Anticalculus agents such as sodium polyphosphate or zinc citrate. Safety concerns have been raised regarding several commonly used ingredients in toothpastes. Biological studies on toothpastes and reports of adverse reactions have been mainly associated with fluoride, SLS, and triclosan. It has been shown that excessive fluoride concentrations (50–100 Ingesting large amounts of toothpastes containing fluoride can cause acute systemic toxicity which begins with gastric signs and symptoms, and can develop very rapidly. For example, ingestion of only 1.8 Chronic exposure of young children to fluoride during tooth formation can also increase the risk of developing dental fluorosis ( SLS is the most commonly used anionic detergent which is incorporated into toothpastes to improve their cleansing action. It has been shown that SLS can dehydrate, cause irritation and oral mucosal desquamation, and increase the frequency of mouth ulcers in some patients ( It has also been suggested that SLS can potentially cause hypersensitivity to metal ions by increasing the mucosal permeability to sensitizing compounds. SLS has been shown in vitro to interact with the adsorption of fluoride on the enamel and therefore has the potential to reduce the efficacy of fluorides in preventing dental caries ( Triclosan (2,4,4-trichloro-2-hydroxydiphenyl ether) is a broad-spectrum antibacterial agent that is incorporated into toothpastes and mouthwashes to enhance their ability to reduce plaque and improve inflammatory gingival diseases and periodontal conditions. There have been several concerns regarding potential oral side effects of triclosan used in oral care products. In vitro experiments using monolayer cell culture systems have indicated that triclosan can induce apoptosis in human gingival fibroblasts ( It has been shown that triclosan can combine with chlorine in tap water to form chlorinated organics and chloroform, a known human carcinogen ( Concerns have been raised regarding the effects of long-term use of triclosan-containing toothpastes on the function of thyroid gland. However a recent randomized, placebo controlled clinical trial showed that triclosan toothpaste used over 4 years had no significant effect on thyroid function and suggested that 0.3% triclosan in toothpaste can be considered safe and free of significant adverse effects on the thyroid ( A recent Cochrane review which assessed the effects of triclosan-containing toothpastes in long-term control of plaque, gingivitis, and caries in children and adults concluded that there did not appear to be any serious safety concerns associated with the use of triclosan-/copolymer-containing toothpastes in studies of up to 3 years in length. Different types of mouthwashes have been developed for specific intended applications based on their main active ingredients. Fluoride mouthwashes containing 0.05% sodium fluoride are recommended for daily use as protection against dental caries in patients with increased caries risk who require additional fluoride. Antiplaque mouthwashes contain active antiseptic agents such as chlorhexidine, essential oils, cetylpyridinium chloride (CPC), and triclosan. Due to the side effects associated with their long-term use, antiseptic mouthwashes are recommended for short-term use in specific conditions to reduce the amount of plaque and associated inflammation. Desensitizing mouthwashes have been developed for application by patients suffering from dentine hypersensitivity. They contain active ingredients such as potassium nitrate 3–5% or 0.8% arginine. Biological aspects of the main active components of different types of mouthwashes are discussed below. Chlorhexidine is a cationic antiseptic with a bisbiguanide base and a broad-spectrum antimicrobial activity which is used in three forms: digluconate, hydrochloride, and acetate. Chlorhexidine is available as mouthrinse (0.2%), gel (1%), spray (0.2%), toothpaste (1%), root canal irrigant (2%), varnishes, and periodontal chips used as a local antimicrobial agent. Chlorhexidine mouthwash is recommended for short-term use in various clinical situations including: As adjunct aid to oral hygiene following periodontal treatment. For patients with jaw fixation following trauma or orthognathic surgery. In medically compromised patients: blood disorders, following chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and bone marrow transplants. In orthodontic appliance wearers for the first 4–8 weeks. For treatment of oral malodour (halitosis). Numerous in vitro and clinical studies have investigated the efficacy of chlorhexidine in reducing plaque levels and plaque-induced gingival inflammation ( The most common oral side effects of chlorhexidine include: brown staining of teeth, mucosa, and restorations ( Rare type-I allergic reactions have been reported following oral use of chlorhexidine mouthwash. The first case was associated with the use of 1% chlorhexidine gluconate antiseptic dental gel ( Chlorhexidine gluconate has been categorized as a class B substance in terms of teratogenic potential during pregnancy due to the lack of well-controlled human studies in pregnant women. Therefore, chlorhexidine’s use during pregnancy should have clear clinical justification. Mouthwashes containing essential oils have been used for many years and the evidence based on several systematic reviews suggest that essential oils have almost similar short-term and long-term efficacy to chlorhexidine in reducing plaque and gingival inflammation ( Commonly used essential oils in mouthwashes are thymol (0.064%), menthol (0.042%), eucalyptol (0.092%), and methyl salicylate (0.06%). Tea-tree ( The most common adverse effect of essential oil mouthwashes is the complaint of altered taste. Rare allergic reactions to essential oils and reversible local reactions such as palatal erythema have also been reported ( Most of the clinical studies on essential oil mouthwashes have investigated the efficacy of the mouthwashes in terms of prevention of plaque and gingivitis. A recent meta-analysis of clinical trials has demonstrated clinically significant, site-specific benefits of adjunctive essential oil treatment in people within a 6-month period ( In a recent double-blind, prospective, randomized clinical trial of 80 patients ( The author’s research group used a three-dimensional, tissue-engineered. human oral mucosal model to assess biological effects of different types of essential oil mouthwashes. The mouthwashes tested in this study did not cause any significant mucosal toxicity as assessed by tissue viability assays, histological and ultrastructural analysis of the oral mucosa, compared with the positive control group ( Concerns have been raised regarding the carcinogenic potential of alcohol-containing antiseptic mouthwashes. Several systematic reviews and meta-analyses have Benzydamine hydrochloride is the active antiinflammatory ingredient in some mouthwashes which is used to reduce discomfort and inflammation associated with several painful conditions in the mouth, including oral ulceration, stomatitis, aphthous ulcers, radiotherapy-induced mucositis, and following oral surgery. Studies have also demonstrated that benzydamine has some antimicrobial properties as well and can have a dual effects when combined with other therapeutic agents ( Although in vitro studies have suggested that benzydamine can have potential genotoxic effects on some nonhuman species ( Povidone iodine (polyvinylpyrrolidone-iodine) or Betadine (1%) mouthwash has been used as an antibacterial agent in the treatment of acute oral mucosal infections and also in combination with periodontal treatment and oral surgery procedures to reduce the bacterial load in the oral cavity ( Reported adverse reactions with the use of povidone iodine mouthwashes include: Local mucosal irritation and sensitivity reactions. Rare type-I hypersensitivity allergic reaction. Thyroid function impairment caused by excess iodine associated with prolonged and excessive use. Metabolic acidosis and impaired renal function. CPC, used in some types of mouthwashes (0.07%), is a cationic quaternary ammonium compound with antibacterial and antiplaque properties. Systematic reviews show that CPC-containing mouthwashes are useful oral hygiene adjuncts with additional benefits in reducing plaque and gingival inflammation ( Sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO Delmopinol hydrochloride is a surface-active cationic agent that is used as the active ingredient in some mouthwashes (0.2%). It has the ability to disrupt the plaque matrix, interfere with pellicle formation, and reduce bacterial adherence. Clinical studies have shown it is effective as an adjunct measure in reducing plaque levels and gingivitis ( Delmopinol’s side effects are similar to those of chlorhexidine, including staining teeth and transient lingual paresthesia. However, the short-term efficacy of delmopinol is significantly lower than the efficacy of chlorhexidine in reducing oral bacterial counts ( Hydrogen peroxide is an oxidizing agent incorporated into some mouthwashes (1.5%) which are recommended for short-term use to eradicate anaerobic bacteria found in conditions such as necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis or periodontitis. It can also have mechanical cleansing action as it produces oxygen bubbles when it comes into contact with tissues and debris. In vitro genotoxic potential of hydrogen peroxide on bacteria and cultured cells has been demonstrated when the material comes into direct contact with living organisms. However, it does not cause any in vivo genotoxicity as metabolizing enzymes have the ability to reduce or eliminate the genotoxic effects of hydrogen peroxide ( Animal studies have shown that long-term exposure to hydrogen peroxide has dose-dependent tumorigenic effects on the gastrointestinal tract ( Although side effects such as lingual papilla enlargement associated with long-term use of hydrogen peroxide mouthwashes have been reported, the use of low-concentration hydrogen peroxide mouthwashes is considered to be relatively safe ( The active ingredient in most dental bleaching gels is carbamide peroxide, which produces hydrogen peroxide as it reacts with water. The EU Cosmetic Products Regulations in 2012 prohibited the use of products containing or releasing between 0.1% and 6% hydrogen peroxide in children under 18 years of age and concentrations exceeding 6% of hydrogen peroxide remained prohibited for use in adult patients. Hydrogen peroxide at 6% is equivalent to 18% carbamide peroxide. A comprehensive critical review by Dahl and Pallesen outlined important biological aspects of tooth-whitening ( Clinical studies have shown that 10% carbamide peroxide bleaching for 5 weeks can cause increased proliferation of gingival mucosal cells ( Hydrogen peroxide has a weak potential to induce local carcinogenicity possibly through DNA damage caused by releasing free radicals ( Over 90% satisfactory results have been reported with the use of external bleaching techniques using whitening gels ( Studies have shown that external bleaching with 10% carbamide peroxide gel can be successfully used in the long term (up to 3 months) for the treatment of severe tetracycline staining ( Several studies have investigated the effects of light and heat activation on the efficacy and the incidence of side effects of whitening products ( Whitening strips contain flexible polyethylene strips which deliver 6–14% hydrogen peroxide depending on the product. Clinical studies have shown that using whitening strips containing 6% hydrogen peroxide for 2 weeks can be safe, consistent, and as effective as external whitening with bleaching gels ( A recent meta-analysis comparing the efficacy and safety of over-the-counter whitening strips with 10% carbamide peroxide gel tray whitening has demonstrated that tooth sensitivity and gingival sensitivity were similar, regardless of the whitening Denture adhesives have been developed for application on the fitting surface of the dentures to improve their retention and stability. They are classified into soluble adhesives including gels, creams, powders, and nonsoluble adhesives such as pads and wafers. The most commonly used active ingredients in these products are polyvinyl methyl ether maleate copolymer (PVM-MA) and carboxymethylcellulose (CMC). Zinc and calcium salts are also added to some products to improve their adhesion. A recent systematic review of 21 clinical studies of the efficacy of dental adhesives showed that they are effective in enhancing the retention, stability, and masticatory function of removable dentures and that they significantly improve patient satisfaction ( Several concerns have been raised regarding the potential adverse effects of denture adhesives, but there is limited and contradictory evidence in the literature to substantiate some of these concerns as listed below: Microbial and fungal contamination of the adhesive: some in vitro studies have shown evidence of bacterial and fungal contamination of different denture adhesives ( Cytotoxicity and mucosal irritation: different degrees of cytotoxicity in a dose-dependent and time-dependent manner have been associated with denture adhesives in in vitro studies using monolayer cell-culture systems ( Neurological problems associated with hypocupremia and hyperzincemia have been linked to long-term use of zinc-containing denture adhesives ( Although numerous studies have investigated the efficacy and clinical performance of oral care products, there is limited high-quality evidence in terms of their biocompatibility and safety profiles. Adverse reactions to oral care products have been reported and based on the available biological data, manufacturers are constantly updating their products to enhance the efficacy and minimize their potential side effects. Clinicians should familiarize themselves with the various products available on the market, their indications for use, advantages, and potential side effects. Patients must be instructed clearly and carefully by the clinicians on the type of the product, method of use, frequency, and the duration of application of the products in each clinical situation. It is important to be aware of different susceptible groups of patients who are at greater risk of developing adverse reactions to particular oral care products and appropriate precautions to be considered when prescribing these products for the high-risk group of patients, including young children, patients with suspected allergies, pregnant patients, patients suffering from xerostomia, oncology patients receiving radiotherapy or chemotherapy, and other groups of patients discussed earlier in this chapter. Dental care professionals are also encouraged to report any suspected adverse reactions to any of the oral care products used by their patients to help to identify potential harmful products at an early stage of postmarket surveillance. There is a need for further research to produce high-quality evidence on the biocompatibility of currently available oral care products and to further optimize the products’ formulations to reduce their potential local and systemic adverse effects while maintaining and enhancing their clinical efficacy.