The effect of surface treatments, including aggressive milling, rotational burnishing, and nonrotational burnishing, on Ti–6Al–4V DMD (direct metal deposition) parts was investigated. Particular emphasis is on the question of whether these surface treatments could induce the plastically deformed and work-hardened layer that was proven to enhance the fatigue resistance of titanium alloys and was a key step for recrystallization. Through the microhardness examination and microstructure analysis, it was found that the rotational burnishing process was able to work harden the material deeper than 1000 μm, while the work-hardened layer generated by the nonrotational process was ∼600 μm and that for aggressive milling was less than 10 μm. Because surface finish is another critical factor for the resistance of fatigue crack initiation, it was also evaluated for these treatments.The direct metal deposition (DMD) process can be used to construct engineering components in titanium alloys and realize time, labor, and material savings over traditional processes. Due to the high strength and severe temperature rise at the tool-chip interface, titanium alloys are very difficult to machine with traditional processes such as lathe and milling. DMD is capable of producing net-shape parts, so the machining volume is significantly decreased. It is well known that the mechanical properties of titanium alloys are very sensitive to the microstructure. The fully lamellar microstructure of Ti-6Al-4V generated with the DMD process could be recrystallized to the bimodal microstructure, which possesses smaller Commercially pure titanium transfers from the HCP (hexagonal closest packed) structure ( Both the substrate materials and the powder used for DMD were provided by the Boeing Company. The actual composition of Ti-6Al-4V is listed in The DMD system mainly consists of a five-axis CNC machining center, 1.0 KW diode laser, powder feeder system from Bay State Surface Technologies Inc, and a real-time control system from National Instruments. The laser beam is focused on the substrate to form a melt pool, and the titanium powder is injected into the melt pool to generate the deposition. Meanwhile, the substrate moves in the The microstructure of the deposition mainly exhibits the basket-weave Widmanstätten To improve the surface mechanical properties of the workpiece produced with the DMD system, three types of surface treatments are implemented in this study. Moreover, it is known that with the recrystallized finer bimodal microstructure several mechanical properties, including yield stress, ductility, HCF strength, and LCF strength, are improved The milling process was carried out on a Fadal VMC3016L CNC with more aggressive parameters than the parameters commonly used to machine titanium alloys (such as 0.0125 mm/tooth cutting speed and 0.25 mm cutting depth). The cutting speed was separately set to 0.025, 0.05, 0.075, and 0.1 mm/tooth, and the depth of cut was kept constant at 2.5 mm. The coupons were cut with a wire EDM, and Knoop microhardness was tested on the cross section. As the work-hardened layer was too thin to be revealed by the cross-sectional evaluation, the thickness of the work-hardened layer was estimated through the Vickers microhardness test with different loads. The burnishing process was carried out on the same CNC with a tool setup as shown in To evaluate the change of surface properties from the cross section, workpieces were cut into small samples and mounted in epoxy thermosetting material. The scratch-free and mirror-like surface is required by the subsequent microscopy observation and Knoop microhardness test, so samples were ground and polished on a LECO Spectrum1000 automatic polisher. To reveal the microstructure, the samples were etched for 8 s by a reagent composed of 5 parts HNO Knoop hardness is calculated by Eq. The measurement uncertainty is given by Eq. To find the overall uncertainty for the microhardness test, the standard deviation Examined with different loads, the Vickers microhardness of the milled surface is listed in Limited by the size of indentation, the test from this direction cannot reflect the microhardness of the work-hardened layer. But it can be found that the hardness of the subsurface within 50  μm below the milled surface was lower than that of the base material. This softening effect was probably due to the recovery of the material as a result of the high milling temperature produced and retained at this layer. From the plot, no significant work-hardened layer was observed. Therefore, it can be concluded that the deepest work-hardening effect that aggressive milling can achieve on a DMD part is less than 10  μm.  The microhardness for the rotationally burnished samples is shown in In summary, the plastic deformation was created on the workpiece surface with the burnishing process, so the recrystallized layer could be formed with proper subsequent heat treatment. Furthermore, the near-surface work-hardened layer (∼500–1000μm thickness) has proven to be beneficial for the fatigue life of Ti–6Al–4V at both ambient temperature and elevated temperature (450 Surface roughness was measured before and after these surface treatments. The results for aggressively milled samples are listed in Based on the cross-sectional microhardness examination, the rotational burnishing induced the highest degree of work hardening, and the depth influenced is more than 1000 μm. The work-hardening thickness of nonrotational burnishing is about 600 μm, and that of aggressive milling is less than 10 μm. The microstructure changes observed under optical microscopy confirmed the analysis. The enhanced fatigue resistance at ambient and elevated temperature was found to be associated with the near-surface work-hardened layer (∼500–1000 μm thickness) This research was supported by National Science Foundation grants DMI-9871185, IIP-0637796, and IIP-0822739 and US Air Force Research Laboratory contract # FA8650-04-C-5704. The support from Boeing Phantom Works, Product Innovation and Engineering, LLC, Spartan Light Metal Products Inc., Missouri S&T Intelligent Systems Center, and the Missouri S&T Manufacturing Engineering Program are also greatly appreciated.