In this paper, an amino-trisiloxane Gemini cationic surfactant, butane-1,4-bis(dimethyl-(3-(3-aminopropyl trisiloxane-3-yl)-propyl)-ammonium bromide) (BBAB) was prepared, and its flotation potential was assessed on kaolinite, pyrophyllite and illite minerals. The flotation results showed that changes to the pulp pH did not significantly influence BBAB’s collecting power in floating three aluminosilicate minerals. In addition, BBAB was a stronger collector than the conventional monomeric surfactant dedecyl trimethylammonium bromide (DTAB) or dodecylamine (DDA). The results of FTIR spectra, zeta potential measurements and density functional theory (DFT) calculations indicated that the interaction of BBAB with the three aluminosilicates was mainly through electrostatic attraction. BBAB’s unique properties, such as high positive grouping Mulliken charge of –CH2N+(CH3)2(CH2)4(CH3)2N+CH2–, and “parachute” shape structure of [(CH3)3SiO]2SiCH3, resulted in superior collecting powers for the aluminosilicate minerals.The reverse flotation process has been proved to be a very effective desilication technology for bauxite resources ( Hand-picked kaolinite, pyrophyllite and illite were obtained from the geological museum of China, Qing-Tian and Ou-hai of Zhe-jiang province in China respectively. They were drily ground to fine particles by using an agate mortar and pestle and the −0.076 Gemini trisiloxane surfactant butane-1,4-bis(dimethyl-(3-(3-aminopropyl trisiloxane-3-yl)-propyl)-ammonium bromide) (BBAB), as a collector, was synthesized in our laboratory. The structures of products were confirmed by IR and NMR. IR spectra were recorded as a thin neat film on an AVATAR360 FT-IR (Nicolet, USA) instrument. Flotation tests were carried out with a XFG5-35 flotation machine with a 40 The infrared spectra of samples were recorded by Nicolet AVATAR360 FT-IR spectrometer (USA) using the KBr technique. The mineral samples used for this purpose were ground in an agate mortar and pestle to less than 5 Zeta-potentials of minerals were measured using a Brookhaven Zetaplus zeta potential analyzer (USA). The mineral samples used for this purpose were ground to less than 5 Calculations on geometric structure and atomic charges of collectors were made using Gaussian 03 and Chemoffice 2005. The initial molecular modeling of the Gemini trisiloxane group was optimized by the MM2 and PM3 methods in Chemoffice. The obtained geometries were further optimized and calculated with DFT methods at the B3LYP/6-31G (d) level. Gemini trisiloxane surfactant BBAB was prepared by a cobromination protocol ( Intermediary characterization: (3-(N,N-dimethylamino)-propyl)-3- aminopropyl-trisiloxane (3), a colorless transparent liquid, yield 77.34%. 400 Product characterization: Butane-1,4-bis(dimethyl-(3-(3-aminopropyl trisiloxane-3-yl)-propyl)-ammonium bromide) (5, BBAB), a light yellow solid, yield 66.51%. 400  The flotation responses of the aluminosilicate minerals as a function of the initial concentration of collectors were presented in The FTIR spectra of aluminosilicates before and after interaction with BBAB were presented in After interaction with BBAB, new bands at around 2924.42 and 2855.56 Zeta potential of the aluminosilicate minerals as a function of pH in the absence and presence of BBAB were investigated, and the results were shown in  The optimized geometries of BBAB  Kaolinite [Al As the cationic collector BBAB, DTAB and DDA are introduced into pulp of pH less than the isoelectric point (IEP) of the aluminosilicates, their cations might be electrostatically attracted to the permanent negative basal planes on the aluminosilicate surfaces; In a pH range of IEP At pH In the pH range of 7 BBAB is different from DTAB and DDA, it consists of an inorganic siloxane backbone with pendant organic methyl groups. Both the nature of this backbone and the pendant organic groups contribute to the surface activity of BBAB. The prime role of the backbone is to present the available organic groups to their best advantage and this it does by virtue of its unique backbone flexibility ( It is a well-known result of Zisman’s studies that –CH When collectors BBAB, DTAB and DDA are added to the pulp, because of electrostatic attraction between the collector polar portions and aluminosilicate surface sites, the collectors might adsorb on the particles with their non-polar ends orientated towards the bulk solution, thereby converting the surfaces of aluminosilicates from a hydrophilic condition to a hydrophobic condition, which created the required condition for attachment to air bubbles ( In this study, a new Gemini surfactant BBAB bearing the amino-trisiloxane as the headgroup was synthesized. Micro-flotation tests indicated that increasing pulp pH had minor influence on its collecting performance as the floatability of kaolinite, pyrophyllite and illite varied slightly with its change even for pulps with pH Using the density functional theory (DFT), we concluded that the theoretically obtained results were consistent with the flotation tests, FTIR spectra studies and zeta potential measurements, showing BBAB to be superior than DTAB and DDA as a collector agent. The authors express their appreciation for the support of the