From time immemorial people dealt with size reduction processes (mill, mineral liberation, etc.). As time has passed industrial units for comminution processes have become larger and more sophisticated, but still they perform with low efficiencies [1–3]. The strength of a particle is one of its most crucial characteristics due to the mechanical stresses experienced by each particle within an industrial unit. This is because the final size of particles is mostly dependant on the strength distribution of the raw material [4]. In this present study, the ability of a number of statistical formulations to accurately describe the strength distribution of particles was examined. Additionally, selected equations were analyzed and a general expression including the effect of the material and particle size was developed. A number of approaches to define particle strength were considered, and strength in terms of crushing force was chosen. Particle strength in terms of force and in terms of energy was also compared and found to be size independent. Finally, particle strength in terms of stress was examined and compared to the particle strength in terms of force.
                  The ability to describe the compression strength distribution will significantly improve the accuracy of the comminution processes simulation, design and optimization.Size reduction of the product is a common issue in variety of industrial fields, such as chemical industry, pharmaceutical industry, etc., and breakage of particles can be intentional (milling) or undesirable (attrition during handling, storage or transportation). Particle size changes may occur due to particle–particle and particle–wall interactions in different processes such as crystallization, granulation, transportation and storage etc. Numerous studies have been dedicated to the phenomenon of particle degradation. The common requirement among all these studies is the definition and determination of the particle strength Since particles, even of the same material and equal size, are not identical Since initial particle strength depends strongly on the spatial microscopic stress distribution within single particle after coming into contact with the stressing tool, ability to describe it correctly will significantly improve the accuracy of simulation of size reduction processes, and therefore increase efficiency of these units. In the present paper particle strength distribution is based on an extended logistic function of the crushing force of a number of individual particles. Logistic function parameters were investigated and their dependency on the mechanical properties of the particulate materials was found. This part of the research will provide a more convenient method of the estimation of particle parameters within the strength distribution function, for engineering use. In general terms, quality control and efficiency of particle size reduction processes depend not only on the chemical activity, selectivity etc., but mainly on the strength values of particles There are many different compression test systems that are used to determine the strength of particles. In the present study, the strength distribution is measured by using an originally designed and constructed experimental compression system. The strength of the particle is measured by the breaking force applied through compression to the particle when placed between the two parallel platens of the apparatus. The force is applied by a hydraulic piston which is controlled pneumatically, this arrangement of piston activation provides smooth and accurate control of the piston manipulation. The applied force is measured by a load cell, and the displacement measured by a linear variable differential transducer (LVDT) system. All of these measurement devices are controlled by the Labview program that was especially designed for this experimental compression system. The apparatus contains four compression units that operate at various compression force ranges in order to increase accuracy for various strength ranges of particles or particulate beds. The movement of the upper platen was divided into three stages in order to minimize time consume for the tests. The three stages are: 1. fast approach, 2. slow contact to particle, and 3. controlled compression rate. The detailed working principle of this test rig explained in a parallel paper A typical compression force-displacement curve for salt with a size interval of 2.36–3.35 Maximum force defines particles strength — i.e. the force at which it is broken. This force is measured at the point at which there is a sudden large increase of the displacement and an associated decrease of force. This allows the control system to automatically identify the breakage event.  In the present study the experimental data from two different compression testers was used. The first system is developed at the Ben-Gurion University (apparatus BGU) and it was described earlier. The second system is developed in Magdeburg University (apparatus MU) and described elsewhere As mentioned above, in order to have the ability to describe the strength of particles, a function which will model the particle strength distribution (PSD) is required. There are many models that describe PSD, and the most known among them is the Gauss distribution Particle strength distribution can be presented in terms of: crushing force — the force at which the particle breaks; breakage energy — energy that was applied in order to break the particle; loading stress — the stress required to break the particle or; specific energy — breakage energy per particle mass. The samples of the PSD data presented in these different terms are shown in Note that Researchers have used crushing force, breakage energy or crushing stress to describe PSD and thus, the question is: “which of these methods (force, energy, stress, and specific energy) presents PSD better?” In order to answer this question, one should be aware of how each of these terms was evaluated. The measurement of crushing force is a direct result of the experimental system, in other words, the experimental system detects the force at which the particle breaks. In opposition to this, the breakage energy is the integration of the crushing force with respect to displacement of the particle as demonstrated in Eq. In order to evaluate crushing stress, one has to measure the dynamic changes of the particle dimensions, which are however, difficult to measure accurately due to its minute changes. Moreover, it is complex to determine the contact area for a non-spherical particle. However, one can calculate stress in terms of the average measured diameter of an equivalent spherical particle at a narrow size interval (fraction), leading to an easy determination of the apparent stress as shown in Eq. Finally, specific energy can be defined as the breakage energy required for a particle mass. If one will use the mean interval diameter of the particle as the constant particle diameter, one can easily define its specific energy: The particle strength in terms of energy and stress will be discussed later. PSD, in this current study, will be presented in terms of the crushing force to avoid complex or alternatively over-simplified calculations of particle size. As mentioned above, the strength distribution can be defined either by the crushing force (or stress) or by the breaking energy. The following equations and examples are based on the crushing force. As also previously discussed, three candidate statistical functions to represent PSD: logistic (Eq. In order to emphasize the difference between models (Eqs. Due to the fact that the differences between suitability of the models are small (  Taking into account the above considerations (mathematical simplicity and statistical meaning of the model parameters), the logistic function was chosen to represent the PSD in this study. After the parameters were renamed the logistic function (Eq.  The logistic function fits well not only to results from the experimental apparatus described above (apparatus BGU), but also to results from other experimental apparatus (apparatus MU) that is described in Further analysis was undertaken to simplify the logistics function model, however due to this simplification a reasonable loss of accuracy occurred and was accepted. This analysis was performed in terms of crushing force, breakage energy and crushing stress (which will be discussed further later in this study). Based on preliminary tests, distribution parameters, D  The second parameter (median) was also investigated and found to be linearly dependent on the square of the diameter of particles, as presented in Eqs. ( Based on the above equations (Eqs. The same is found for the equation in energy terms and since the difference is negligible, parameters from the Matlab optimization were further used. Linear fitting parameters can be used as initial estimates prior to the optimization process. Optimized parameters for all the materials experimented upon are presented in As the final validation of the proposed model (Eqs. Please note in the following As can be seen from these figures ( As mentioned above, there is more than one way to describe particle strength or in other words more than one term to describe PSD; with crushing force and breakage energy being the most commonly used. Since the breakage energy can represent PSD as accurately as crushing force (presented earlier), it is also interesting to investigate the relationship between them. The relationship between breakage energy and crushing force can be estimated using the same breakage probability (S It would seem that the force energy relationship has to be dependent upon the mechanical properties of the material and independent of particle size. The result of equalization of the two model expressions (Eq. The most suitable regression for the force-energy dependency was found to be of the power form for each material (Eq. This relationship (Eq. Since the dependence of crushing force on breakage energy is different for each material, comparison of force to energy may provide understanding of the elastic nature of these materials. For instance, the glass particles require much lower energies combined with higher forces and therefore this material can be assumed to be of a brittle kind. Crushing stress is another way to express particle strength. Moreover, researchers usually prefer to use stress terms rather than crushing force or energy as an indicator of strength. This preference is supported by the fact that it is easier to understand the relationship between crushing stress and the size of particles. As can be seen in In order to examine the quality of the logistic function in terms of stress to describe PSD, the same procedure was performed as for crushing force (explained earlier). The logistic function (see Eq. The second parameter, median stress value (σ The correlation of the median parameter is formulated by Eq. The secondary parameters were also optimized by Matlab in order to obtain the most suitable values and the results are presented in Since the final validation of the model in terms of crushing force was the comparison chart, where experimental breakage probability was presented against calculated probability, the examination of the logistic functions in terms of stress was performed in the same way. The comparison chart for the logistic function in terms of stress is presented in As can be seen from This study of particle strength distribution under compression combines an evaluation and testing of a newly developed compression system (apparatus BGU), a systematic series of compression experiments and experimental data processing. The main points to emerge from this study are: The logistic function was examined amongst others and found to be suitable to represent the strength distribution of particles. This choice was based on mathematical simplicity, easy handling and the statistical meaning of the model parameters. Moreover, the logistic function was additionally validated by the experiment data obtained from two completely different experimental apparatuses (BGU and MU). After selecting the logistic function as a PSD representative, the parameter investigation was performed. The distribution wideness parameter was found to only be material dependent, or size independent. In the case of crushing force and breakage energy the median parameter was found to be linearly dependent on the square mean diameter of particles. Furthermore, the dependence of the median parameter of crushing stress was found to be of a power form with the particle size. A specific code was developed at Matlab in order to optimize the logistic function parameters. While the relationship of the median parameters that were found as a result of the regressions may serve as an initial guess. As a result of the discussion presented in this study, it was decided to represent particle strength in terms of force, due to its simplicity and the higher accuracy resulting from the compression tests. The relationship between energy and force was confirmed to be size independent. Through this relationship it is possible to simply convert crushing force to breakage energy and vice versa. Theoretically crushing stress could be a more correct description of particle strength. But unfortunately, the shape of the particle is normally non-spherical and as such limits the ability to calculate the contact area. Therefore, it was decided to represent particle strength in force terms instead of stress.  This research was supported by the