Phenyl(N-methylaniline)ketooxime, (HL), has been designed and synthesized at the Chemical Engineering Research Center—UNSA, following the structural pattern of the LIX compounds, with a yield of 85%. The novel oxime derivative (HL) has been characterized through its physical and physicochemical properties such as: melting point (245–248°C), solubility in water (ca. 2.0g/l), protonation constant (log
                     K
                     p, 5.7 in methanol), and an absorption maximum (λ
                     max) in the UV–visible spectra, at 365nm, in methanol solution.
                  Results obtained from leach experiments indicate that the novel oxime derivative in alkaline and hypochlorite aqueous solution solubilises copper selectively in the form of a neutral copper(II) complex (CuL2), which remained stable during the experimental period in a pH range between 9 and 11 and redox potential (E
                     h) range between −0.145 and 0.047V. The aqueous blue–purple copper(II) complex solution was characterized from its absorption spectra, showing a single peak at λ
                     max
                     =610nm.
                  The use of the novel oxime derivative in the leaching process has enabled the copper to concentrate from 0.82% in the ore to ca. 6.0g/l in the pregnant leaching solution.
                  On the other hand, electrowinning of the leach liquors has enabled the recovery of the copper and the release of the novel oxime derivative as a spent electrolyte, which was reused in a new leach process batch.
                  Finally, by using Phenyl(N-methylaniline)ketooxime for copper hydrometallurgy, it is possible to propose an extraction process, which involves just two stages: leaching and electrowinning, thus requiring lower capital cost and energy consumption.Although conventional copper extraction by pyrometallurgical process, known as smelting, and hydrometallurgy process, such as SX/EW process and bacterial leaching ( The chemicals used throughout this work were AnalaR grade with the exception of HPLC grade solvents such as acetonitrile and methanol. Most of them were purchased from Aldrich and used without further purification. Aniline, pyridine and toluene were distilled and the middle fraction of the distillate was immediately used. The leach reagent (HL) was synthesized in two stages, via the intermediate In the second stage the final product was prepared by treatment of a toluene solution (250 The purity of the HL compound was tested by TLC on precoated silica gel (60) plates with a fluorescent indicator, using a toluene:methanol (5:1) as eluting mixture. The TLC plate showed a single spot with a Potentiometric measurements were carried out with an automatic burette attached to an Extech digital potentiometer and a Russell pH combination glass electrode. All titrations were performed at 25 Absorption spectra data was collected from spectrophotometric measurements performed, first on a methanolic solution of HL and second on an alkaline aqueous solution of the leach reagent and copper(II) ion by using a Perkin Elmer, Lambda EZ150 spectrophotometer over the wavelength ranges between 240 and 520 The copper-bearing ore sample (10 Electrowinning experiments were performed by using the copper complex (CuL HL was designed following the structural pattern of LIX compound, The novel oxime derivative was prepared according to the procedure detailed in the experimental section and obtained in a good yield (85%). The following scheme illustrates the used synthetic procedure Although HL, as crystalline solid, proved to be lightly soluble in water (ca. 2.0 According to the molecular structure, the novel oxime derivative is prone to protonation reaction because of the presence of two nitrogen atoms in its aniline and oxime groups. After that, titration experiments were performed on HL methanolic solution, the potentiometric data was analysed by using a Miniquad program ( On the other hand, the spectra of the solution of HL in methanol (a protic, donor solvent), illustrated in Finally, the spectra of the aqueous alkaline solution containing copper(II) ions and an excess of the novel oxime derivative (HL), illustrated in Taking into account that the position of According to this fact, HL is able to interact with copper(II) ions in an aqueous alkaline medium to produce an aqueous blue–purple copper(II) complex (CuL In order to evaluate the effect of the novel oxime derivative over the leaching of copper from copper-bearing ores, it was appropriate to propose and discuss two leaching models, one of them for representing the conventional process and the other for the novel one, in which HL is present. In this way, and assuming that covellite was the only one sulfide mineral containing copper in the sample, it was possible to propose two redox reactions for representing respectively the two settled electrochemical cells and, from their redox potential, compare the performance of the these two leaching processes. Thus, for the conventional process, in which the leaching of covellite takes place in an acidic aqueous solution in the presence of the oxygen as the oxidising agent, the following redox reaction (Eq. Although different oxidising agents were used in the proposed leaching processes, the process in which the novel oxime participated proved to be thermodynamically more feasible than the conventional one Anodic reaction in absence of HL: In this context, Eq. The data reported in On the other hand, the information collected during the time in which the experimental leaching processes took place gives us an idea about the kinetic behavior of the leaching process. This behavior is illustrated in Copper recovery from pregnant liquor coming from a leaching process in presence of the novel oxime derivative (HL) can be evaluated through the electrochemical reaction, which occurs in the electrowinning process. Taking into account the composition of the leach pregnant solution, it is possible to propose the following reactions: Reduction of the copper-oxime derivative complex (CuL Evolution of the oxygen from OH It is important to underline that associated to the electrowinning of copper, the novel oxime derivative is released as spent electrolyte, ready for use in a new leaching process. From this research we can arrive at the following conclusions: Phenyl( Thermodynamic studies have demonstrated that leaching by an alkaline novel oxime derivative solution solubilises copper selectively in the form of a neutral copper-complex which is stable over a wide range of pH and Furthermore, the use of this leach reagent increases the rate of the dissolution for copper. Finally, copper can be recovered from the leach liquors by electrowinning. Therefore, by using Phenyl(