We present the first high-resolution carbon isotope and carbonate content profiles generated through the thickness of enamel from a steer fed C3- then C4-dominant food. Carbonate contents decrease by ∼2 wt% from the enamel surface to the innermost enamel layer, and each carbon isotope profile shows a mixture of enamel portions mineralized over several months. Downward and outward increasing contribution of C4 food to the enamel δ13C values reveal two components of the mineralization gradient: a vertical component from the tip of the tooth crown to the neck, and a horizontal component from the enamel-dentine junction to the outer enamel. We use our results to infer mineralization parameters for bovines and to calculate expected isotopic attenuations for an array of environmental inputs and microsampling strategies, using the model developed by Passey and Cerling [Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta. 66 (2002) 3225–3234]. Although it seems unlikely that any strategy will perfectly isolate discrete time slices, sampling the innermost enamel layer might offer the advantage of significantly reducing the isotope damping that would become independent of the structure of the input signal.Stable isotope geochemistry has been extensively used to reconstruct rapid change in animal dietary habits, migration patterns, or past climate from hypsodont (high-crowned) tooth enamel (e.g., Pioneer work implicitly assumed that enamel grows by adding new material perpendicular to the tooth length axis, and that discrete amounts of time could be extracted from each individual tooth subsample. Serial microsamples have been collected by drilling or cutting segments perpendicular to the tooth length axis, each sample crossing all of the enamel thickness. But amelogenesis (tooth enamel formation) is a two-step process beginning with the rapid deposition of an organic-rich, mineral-poor matrix followed by a phase of progressive maturation that produces the fully mineralized enamel ( As scientists became aware of this, the question arose as to how much time is actually represented by each horizontal tooth subsample. Determination of precise timing and geometry of enamel mineralization became critical for designing new collecting strategies and for modeling purposes (  This study represents an additional effort at addressing the problem of attenuation of environmental isotopic signals in growing enamel. Here we present the results of an experiment on steers ( This study was conducted on five steers ( Microsampling was performed on one lobe from the lower second molar of individual V3 (V3M2). Six slices were cut perpendicular to the growth axis of the tooth using a diamond saw ( We also milled subsamples from four of the six slices following the conventional sampling method. In each slice, the thickness was split in three, so that each subsample had a volume of ∼1 × 1 × 1 mm, spanning the total enamel thickness ( Samples were roasted under vacuum for 2 h at 200°C. This additional step permits detection of dentine in the subsample by turning organic matter brown: organic matter in dentine is ∼30% by weight as compared with less than 1% in enamel. If the path is not parallel to the two main boundaries (i.e., the enamel surface and the EDJ), the subsampled δ Between 34 and 61 samples are analyzed per slice. The last sample from a profile is the one that remains white after heating which marks the enamel-dentine contact. About 500 μg of each enamel subsample was weighed and reacted in a Kiel III carbonate device interfaced to a Finnigan MAT 253 isotope ratio mass spectrometer in the Saskatchewan Isotope Laboratory, University of Saskatchewan. Carbon dioxide was generated by reaction of apatite carbonate with four drops of anhydrous phosphoric acid in individual reaction vessels at 70°C for five minutes. The carbonate content of each sample was determined by coulometry during acid digestion with an analytical precision of ±0.3 wt% (1σ). Analytical precision for carbon isotopic analyses is ±0.03‰ (1σ), determined from replicate analyses of the Miocene phosphorite NBS120c (δ Carbon isotope values from hand-milled subsamples in individuals V2 to V6 using the conventional sampling method are presented in Introduction of C Measurement of carbonate contents ([CO We developed a two-dimensional map of V3M2 mineralization sequence based on the high-resolution profiles ( We can use our dataset to determine the mineralization parameters for bovines ( In bovines, M2 starts to form when the animal is one month old (day 30), and ends one year later (day 395) ( The predictions of the model are plotted against the isotope dataset for the five steers ( We modeled the isotopic attenuation resulting from different bovine tooth sampling strategies and input signals. Sinusoidal waves are usually thought to be the most representative function to describe environmental signals. For example, they can be used to model annual variations in δ  An alternative sampling strategy consists of micromilling subsamples parallel to the apposition front (oblique to the growth axis). This can be achieved by milling along Retzius lines generated each week during matrix apposition (  For the first time, high-resolution carbon isotope profiles have been generated within the enamel thickness using micromilling techniques. Our sampling strategy has been demonstrated as capable of identifying large variation in δ We would like to thank Elise Dufour, Tim Prokopiuk, Blaine Novakovski, and Chris Wurster for technical assistance at different stages of this research. We also express appreciation to Bruce Eglington, Chris Holmden, and Chris Wurster for constructive comments of an earlier version of the manuscript. We also wish to acknowledge D. R. Cole, B. H. Passey, D. L. Fox, and an anonymous reviewer for their thorough reviews. This research was supported by a grant from the Fondation Singer-Polignac to Antoine Zazzo and a CNRS ACI “jeunes chercheurs ” grant #67053.