Introduction
                  Antegrade percutaneous intra-medullary nailing (IMN) has a poor reputation in the treatment of humerus fractures. The aim of the present study was to assess rotator cuff integrity and shoulder function after IMN in humerus fracture.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  Third-generation humeral nails (straight, small diameter, with locked screws) conserve rotator cuff tendon integrity and avoid the shoulder stiffness and pain incurred by 1st generation (large diameter, without self-blocking screw) and 2nd generation nails (curved, penetrating the supraspinatus insertion on the greater tuberosity).
               
                  Methods
                  Forty patients (26 female, 14 male; mean age, 60 years (range, 20-89 years)) with displaced humeral fracture (23 proximal humerus, 17 humeral shaft) underwent IMN using a 3rd generation nail (34 Aequalis™ (Tornier–Wright), 6 MultiLoc™ (Depuy-Synthes)). Mean clinical, radiologic and ultrasound follow-up was 8 months (range, 6-18 months); 22 patients agreed to postoperative CT scan.
               
                  Results
                  There were no revision surgeries for rotator cuff repair or secondary bone displacement. Mean Adjusted Constant Score (ACS) was 93±22% and the Subjective Shoulder Value (SSV) 77±18%. Elevation was 140±36°, external rotation 48±22° and internal rotation was to L3. Ultrasound found: 5 supraspinatus tendon lesions (12.5%) (2 full and 3 deep partial tears) without functional impact (ACS) 91% without vs. 107% with tear; (p
                     =0.12); 2 of the deep partial tears involved excessively lateral and high nail positioning. Eight patients (20%) had painful tendinopathy of the long head of the biceps (LHB) tendon associated with significantly impaired functional scores (ACS 65% vs. 100%; p
                     <0.001); and 4 cases of technical error: 3 of anterior LHB screwing in the groove, and 1 of LHB irritation due to an excessively long posterior screw.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Supraspinatus tendon lesions following IMN with a 3rd-generation humeral nail were rare (12.5%) and asymptomatic; prevalence was not higher than in the general population in the literature (16%). LHB tendinopathy was frequent (20%) and symptomatic, and due to technical error in half of the cases.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  IV, retrospective study.Antegrade percutaneous intra-medullary nailing (IMN) has a poor reputation in the treatment of displaced humeral fractures due to iatrogenic rotator cuff tendon lesions, causing postoperative shoulder stiffness and pain. This can be explained by the history of the technique, which is still recent First-generation humeral nails were straight, large diameter, with inadequate or no proximal locking, leading to reduction loss, malunion or non-union Third-generation nails were designed to avoid the complications found with the 1st and 2nd generation The aim of the present study was to assess rotator cuff integrity and shoulder function after 3rd-generation IMN in humeral fracture. The study hypothesis was that 3rd generation nails conserve rotator cuff tendon integrity and restore shoulder function, avoiding the complications found with the 1st and 2nd generation. A single-center multi-surgeon retrospective study included all patients with displaced proximal humeral or humeral shaft fractures treated by 3rd generation IMN between November 2016 and July 2017 in a level-1 traumatology department. Proximal humeral displacement was defined according to the Neer criteria Two types of 3rd generation IM nail were used: MultiLoc™ (Depuy-Synthes, West Chester, PA, USA), with lateromedial proximal screw orientation fixing the humeral head in priority, and Aequalis™ (Wright-Tornier, Bloomington, MN, USA), with anteroposterior proximal screw orientation fixing the tuberosities in priority The percutaneous technique has been previously described Postoperatively, the limb was immobilized in a splint for 2-4 weeks. Pendular self-mobilization was initiated the day after surgery, and rehabilitation with a physiotherapist at day 15. Patients were followed in clinics at 6 months for clinical, radiological and ultrasound examination by an examiner (CM) other than the study surgeons. Physical examination screened for rotator cuff lesions (Jobe maneuver) or LHB tendinopathy (pain on pressure on the bicipital groove, palm-up test). Range of motion was assessed, along with Constant score Continuous variables were reported as mean Forty of the 50 eligible patients were included, followed and assessed. There were 5 deaths and 5 refusals, leaving 26 females, 14 males; mean age at trauma, 60 years (range, 20-89 years). There were 17 shaft fractures and 23 proximal humerus fractures: 17 displaced surgical neck fractures (Neer II) and six 3-part fractures (Neer III).  Two shaft fractures were unhealed at 6 months, 1 of which underwent revision at 10 months for decortication, bone graft and screwed plate fixation. One case of painful LHB, tendinopathy was treated by arthroscopic tenotomy without nail removal. One excessively long lateromedial proximal screw in a MultiLoc nail, causing impingement with the glenoid, was removed. There were no cases of surgery for secondary bone displacement or rotator cuff repair.   Nail entry portal was in the humeral head in only 38% (15/40), being lateral (tuberosity-cartilage junction) in 19 cases (47%) and too lateral (tuberosity) in 6 (15%) ( Height was correct in 80% of cases (32/40), low in 5 (12%) and protruding in 3 (8%) ( Except for 2 cases of shaft non-union, all fractures consolidated by 6 months. There was 1 case of ascended greater tuberosity malunion. There were 6 cases of persistent varus: 3 due to insufficient reduction (99° varus preoperatively and 112° postoperatively) and 3 due to secondary displacement with medial comminution and excessively lateral nail entry. Ultrasound found 5 supraspinatus tendon tears (12.5%): 2 full and 3 deep partial tears ( Eight patients (7 with proximal humerus fracture) showed LHB tenosynovitis, defined as abnormal quantity of liquid in the groove on ultrasound. Unlike cuff tendon lesions, LHB tenosynovitis was symptomatic, with significantly impaired Constant score (48 Clinical examination at last follow-up found 2 non-related LHB tears in 2 patients. The absence of technical problems, such as a screw in the groove, and the patients’ advanced age (78 and 85 years) suggest spontaneous LHB tear possibly preexisting the fracture and IMN. The ultrasound, radiographic and clinical findings of this study confirmed the hypothesis: 3 In a cohort with a mean age of 60 years (range, 20–89 years), prevalence of supraspinatus tendon tear on ultrasound following humeral IMN was 5/40 (12.5%): i.e., not higher than in ultrasound series for healthy and asymptomatic subjects (16%) This rotator cuff integrity after IMN confirms the appropriate design of 3rd generation nails. This was expected and unsurprising, as arthroscopy cannulae with a diameter of 8–10 As well as straight versus curved nail design, the entry portal is critical for iatrogenic supraspinatus tendon lesions. In an anatomic study of 16 specimens with 3rd generation nail (Aequalis™), Knierim et al. It is also important to control nail height intraoperatively in humeral IMN. To avoid slanted projection of the summit of the head, causing too high or too low nail positioning, the patient should be seated rather than semi-seated, with the fluoroscope strictly perpendicular to the humerus. In 2 series with ultrasound cuff assessment after 2nd generation IMN using a curved nail, the full-tear supraspinatus lesion rates were 2% and 10% A less expected finding was the 20% rate of LHB tendinopathy on ultrasound, symptomatic, unlike the supraspinatus tears. The good news is that this was due to technical error in half of the cases, and could thus be avoided. In 3 cases, the LHB had mistakenly been screwed in the groove, due to jig rotation error, and in 1 case an excessively long posterior screw irritated the tendon in the groove. The present good clinical and anatomic results suggest that 3rd generation IMN in humerus fracture is a reliable and safe alternative to plate fixation with locking screws The study had certain obvious limitations. It was retrospective, including 2 different 3rd generation nails: proximal, intended to fix the head fragment in the case of the MultiLoc™ and intended to fix the tuberosities in the case of the Aequalis™ nail. Another weak point was the lack of preoperative ipsi- and/or contra-lateral ultrasound evaluation, which could have properly differentiated between preoperative and iatrogenic cuff tendon lesions. This was, however, the first study to assess cuff and LHB status after 3rd generation IMN. The continuous design of the study, with examiners independent of the surgeons, was a strong point. Radiological and clinical follow-up was short (6–18 months), but sufficient to observe rapid functional recovery after 3rd generation IMN in humeral fracture. Functional recovery after 3rd generation humeral IMN (straight, small diameter nail through the supraspinatus muscle) was relatively quick and satisfactory. Cuff tendon lesions were rare (12.5%) and asymptomatic, with prevalence no higher than in the general population (16%). Some were due to avoidable technical errors: excessively lateral nail entry (tuberosity-cartilage junction) and/or protruding nail. LHB tendinopathy was more frequent (20%) and was symptomatic. Technical error was again involved: notably, LHB screwing in the groove due to incorrect jig rotation. The results confirm the appropriate design of 3rd generation nails with transmuscular trajectory, in contrast to the transtendon trajectories of curved 2nd generation nails, notoriously iatrogenic. The results also suggest the need for a learning curve in humeral fracture nailing using these new models: the entry portal has to be strictly medial, in the humeral head cartilage; height has to be controlled by a fluoroscope strictly perpendicular to the humerus; and rotation has to be controlled by correct alignment of the apparatus along the forearm. Pascal Boileau: designer and consultant for Tornier/Wright; outside the present study, Smith & Nephew, Conmed. The other authors declare that they have no competing interest. None. Christophe Muccioli: design, analysis, writing, clinical examination. Mikaël Chelli: supervision, statistical analysis, writing, re-editing. Amandine Caudal: ultrasound examination. Olivier Andreani: ultrasound examination. Hicham Elhor: ultrasound analysis, patient examination, re-editing. Marc-Olivier Gauci: supervision, re-editing. Pascal Boileau: design, methodology, supervision, analysis, re-editing.