Composites of La0.67Ca0.33MnO3 (LCMO), a colossal magnetoresistance perovskite and NiFe2O4 (NF), an insulating magnetic oxide have been prepared in situ using microwave-refluxing technique. Microstructural studies of the composites show that the two phases are uniformly distributed and the grain size of both the phases is identical, in the range 10–40nm. The NF appears as a separate phase for concentrations x
                     >0.10M, where M is the molecular weight of NF in the starting precursor solution. For concentrations <0.1M, the X-ray diffraction studies indicate the presence of only the LCMO phase. Pure LCMO exhibits an insulator–metal transition T
                     MI at 215K whereas the magnetic transition T
                     C occurs at 250K. The transition temperatures T
                     C of this LCMO phase decreases from 250 to 125K for the addition of 0.15M NF while T
                     MI decreases from 215 to 90K for the addition of just 0.02M NF to the precursor solution. The magnetoresistance (MR) magnitude or increase in electrical conductivity of LCMO in the presence of an external magnetic field decreases progressively with the addition of NF. The MR of the composite with 0.01M NF increases with decreasing temperature to ∼16% at 85K in the presence of 8.5kOe external field. The suppression of electrical and magnetic transitions in LCMO is found to be due to substitution of Mn by either or both Ni and Fe. The increasing MR response of the composite is due to the nanocrystalline grain size of the two phases and also partly due to the substitution phenomenon.Perovskite structured manganites, specifically La–Ca–Mn–O, LCMO and La–Sr–Mn–O, LSMO have been studied extensively in the recent past as they exhibit simultaneous magnetic and electrical transitions in certain composition ranges In the present work therefore composite mixtures of La-Ca-manganite and Ni-ferrite a magnetic insulator, have been made in situ using microwave assisted refluxing technique Nanograined composites of (1 Microstructural characterization of the composite was done using a combination of X-ray diffraction and transmission electron microscopy. Cu Kα radiation, The results of phase identification by powder X-ray diffraction are shown in The size of the LCMO and NF grains in the composites was determined from the half width of the diffraction peaks using Scherer relation and is given in The electrical resistivity of LCMO, NF and the composites in the absence of external magnetic field was studied in the temperature range 20–300 The variation of magnetic susceptibility with temperature The phenomenon of colossal magnetoresistance in manganites is due to a combination of magnetic and electrical transition occurring simultaneously. The double exchange process, which mediates these transitions, depends on external factors and is highly susceptible to processing conditions and the chemical composition. In the case of pure LCMO ( The composite synthesized with 0.5 Yan et al. The electrical and magnetic properties of magnetic La–Ca–Mn–O and insulating magnetic Ni-ferrite composites prepared by an in situ technique have been studied in detail. The in situ preparation technique results in the formation of uniformly distributed nanograined composite mixture of the two phases. The La–Ca–Mn–O phase however loses its negative magnetoresistance behavior due to a substitution of Mn with either or both Ni and Fe. The electrical transition is suppressed for The authors wish to acknowledge the Department of Science and Technology, Government of India, for financial assistance.