Interface phenomena between low molecular weight (LMW) carboxylic acids and muscovite was investigated through molecular dynamic simulation and experiment, where the typical monocarboxylic acids including formic acid (C1), acetic acid (C2), propionic acid (C3) and butyric acid (C4) were used as models. Density distribution, adsorption energy, root mean square dynamic (RMSD) of carboxylic acids on water-muscovite interface were calculated through molecular dynamic simulation, and the advanced characterization methods, such as ATR-FTIR spectra, AFM images and contact angle were performed to test and verify the relative simulation findings. The molecular simulation showed that carboxylic acids adsorbed on surface of muscovite through hydrogen bond between H atom of COOH functional group of carboxylic acid and O atom of muscovite, belong to outer sphere adsorption, and ATR-FTIR spectra and AFM images confirmed this finding. Adsorption energy for long carbon chain carboxylic acid (C4) was higher than that for short carbon chain carboxylic acid (C1, C2 and C3) due to the effect of carboxylic acid diffusion on water-muscovite interface. The hydrophilic functional group COOH of carboxylic acids preferably adsorbed on muscovite surface, while the hydrophobic functional groups CH3 and CH2 of carboxylic acids were far from the muscovite surface. So, the hydrophobicity on muscovite surface increased due to the adsorption of carboxylic acids, which resulted in the increase of contact angle of water on muscovite surface.Low molecular weight (LMW) carboxylic acids are most common organic matters in natural world, especially in soil [ In the natural world, there exists also a large amount of minerals, such as feldspar, mica, apatite, pyrite etc, so the interaction between the enriched LMW carboxylic acids and minerals occurs frequently. Moreover, the interaction would promote the release of valuable elements from these minerals. For example, the carboxylic acids promoted dissolution of P bearing mineral [ Generally, interaction mechanism between organic acids and minerals is divided into outer-sphere adsorption and inner-sphere adsorption. Outer-sphere adsorption is organic matter adsorbed on mineral surface by physical electrostatic force, Van der Waals force and hydrogen bond through O (F, N, S or C) and H atoms [ Muscovite with KAl Molecular dynamic simulation was performed in Material Studio 6.0 software (Accelrys, USA). Four kinds of monocarboxylic acids were chosen as models, formic acid (HCOOH, FA), acetic acid (CH Before carrying out molecular dynamic simulation, adsorption models built in Three important parameters including density of numbers, adsorption energy and Root mean square dynamic (RMSD) were calculated in MD simulation to evaluate interaction between carboxylic acids and muscovite. Adsorption energy E Density of numbers was defined as following equation [ Root mean square displacement (RMSD) can be used to determine the adsorption dynamics of carboxylic acid on water-muscovite interface and it was defined as following equations [ Pure muscovite sheets were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Company (China). Rough muscovite sheets were cut into 8 mm × 8 mm and removed by adhesive tape to expose new (0 0 1) surface which was cleaned by alcohol and water. When muscovite sheet was dried, they were mixed with 100 ml 0.1 mol/L different carboxylic acids (AR, >99.5%) into plastic bottles. Then plastic bottles were put into a shaker at 25 °C and 180 rpm for 2 h. After interactions, muscovite sheets were dried at 25 °C in a vacuum drying oven naturally. Dried muscovite sheets were analyzed by ATR-FTIR (Nicolet, 6700, USA). All spectra were obtained using KBr pellets at 25 °C with a resolution 256 scans and 4cm Adsorption behavior of four carboxylic acids, including formic acid (C1), acetic acid (C2), propionic acid (C3) and butyric acid (C4), on muscovite (0 0 1) surface is investigated by molecular dynamic simulation. The adsorption model used for MD simulation contains 300 water molecules and 30 carboxylic acid molecules between two muscovite surfaces in a box or a unit for MD simulation. Before MD simulation, distribution of carboxylic acid in water phase is random as shown in Because the surface properties of minerals would be different in the presence and absence of water [ In order to study whether four carboxylic acids adsorption on muscovite surface is spontaneous or not, the free energy △G is calculated. According to the literature [ Generally, adsorption energy is used to investigate interaction between carboxylic acid and muscovite. From Through MD simulation, it is found that four carboxylic acids can adsorb on muscovite surface. Here, AFM detector is adopted to observe the adsorption phenomena of carboxylic acids on muscovite surface, and the detected AFM images are shown in Furthermore, 3D vertical AFM images of adsorption of four carboxylic acids are shown in Both MD simulation result and  To verify the MD simulation findings, ATR-FTIR spectra detection is carried out to test if carboxylic acids are adsorbed through hydrogen bond, belong to outer-sphere adsorption. Based on moleculor strutural diagrams of carboxylic acids in According to the MD simulation results, it is found that carboxylic acids adsorb preferentially on muscovite surface through hydrogen bond between H atom of Muscovite is a layered dioctahedral aluminosilicate mineral, and LMW carboxylic acids, such as formic acid, acetic acid, propionic acid and butyric acid, can adsorb spontaneously on muscovite surface through hydrogen bond between H atom of The hydrophilic functional group The authors wish to acknowledge