Most patellar fractures are transverse involving the central third. Open reduction and stabilization of transverse patellar fractures is indicated if there is more than 2–3 mm of fragment separation and/or articular incongruity. Arthroscopic-assisted reduction and stabilization of displaced fractures of the patella had been reported as an alternative to open technique.
                  The aim of this study was to report the results of arthroscopic-assisted reduction and fixation of displaced transverse fractures of the patella.
                  Fourteen patients with 14 displaced transverse fractures of the patella were included in this prospective study. Patients were treated by arthroscopic-assisted closed reduction of the fracture with percutaneous screw fixation. Patients were followed up for a mean period of 26 months.
                  All patients were males with an average age of 34 years. All fractures united in a mean period of 7 weeks. Twelve patients regained full knee range of motion and two patients had 10° loss of full flexion. All patients regained full knee extension. Thigh muscle wasting was observed in nine patients with a mean value of 0.8 cm. The mean final Lysholm score was 93.
                  Arthroscopic-assisted reduction and percutaneous screw fixation is an appropriate technique for displaced transverse patellar fractures without major separation or comminution. It offers good functional outcome with minimal complications.Fractures of the patella constitute almost 1% of all skeletal injuries There are few reports of arthroscopic-assisted reduction and stabilization of displaced fractures of patella. This technique combines the advantages of minimal invasive surgery and rigid internal fixation, thereby permitting early rehabilitation The aim of this study was to report the results of an arthroscopic-assisted closed reduction and percutaneous internal fixation of displaced transverse fractures of the patella. This prospective study included 14 patients with 14 displaced transverse fractures of the patella who were admitted at Hai Al-Jamea Hospital, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia and Al-Hadara university hospital, Alexandria, Egypt during the period between June 1998 and June 2005, and were treated by arthroscopic-assisted closed reduction of the fracture with percutaneous screw fixation. Patients should have completed 12 months of follow-up after the procedure to be included in the study with a complete set of medical records, radiographs and videotape recording of the procedure. Four patients with displaced transverse fractures of the patella who presented to both hospitals during the study period were not included in the study; one patient was not included due to missed preoperative radiographs and the other three patients were not included as they did not complete 12 months of follow-up after the procedure. Eight patients with displaced transverse fractures of the patella were excluded from the study due to the presence of; (1) open fractures of the patella that necessitated surgical debridement of the fracture (four patients), (2) neglected fractures of the patella (more than 5 days after the injury) due to the possibility of difficult closed reduction (one patient), (3) transverse fractures of the patella with comminution at the fracture site (two patients), (4) transverse fracture with a major separation of the patellar fragments as these cases are always associated with disruption of the quadriceps mechanism extending laterally and medially from the patella and open repair of the retinaculum is desired (one patient) After being presented to the hospital, all patients were examined for the presence of other associated injuries. Radiographic examination of the knee included an anteroposterior and lateral views of the knee ( Under either general anaesthesia or spinal or epidural analgesia, the patients were placed in a supine position on a standard radiolucent operating table with the knee in full extension. Pneumatic tourniquet was applied to the upper thigh and inflated to control bleeding during the arthroscopic procedure. Under image intensifier control, the fracture was reduced by manipulation and maintained by a reduction clamp applied percutaneously. Arthroscopy was performed through standard anteromedial and anterolateral portals and an ancillary superolateral portal. Haemarthrosis and clots were washed out and the joint was thoroughly irrigated until the fracture was visualized. Small chondral and osteochondral fragments and loose bodies were removed. The reduction of the fracture and articular cartilage congruity were checked by the arthroscope ( The suction drain was removed 24–72 h after the surgery and all the patients were discharged home with an adjustable angle hinged knee brace allowing initial range of motion of 0° to 40°. The flexion angle was increased 15°–20° weekly, with the objective of full flexion at 6 weeks. Quadriceps setting exercises, active knee extension together with gentle active range of motion exercises to be increased sequentially were encouraged immediately after the operation but quadriceps exercises against resistance were delayed for 6 weeks. All patients were encouraged to ambulate with crutches without any weight bearing on the injured limb. Partial weight bearing was allowed 3 weeks postoperatively. Full weight bearing was allowed after the fracture was healed radiographically. After radiographic healing of the fracture all the patients were followed up both clinically and radiographically every 3 months for at least 1 year after the surgery. The final results of the procedure were assessed using the Lysholm knee scoring scale All the patients were males with an average age of 34 years (range 19–52). The right side was affected in nine patients (64%). The causative injury was a fall in flexed knee in 10 patients (71%) and road traffic accident in the remaining four patients (29%). All patients had superficial abrasion and local contusion to the skin with subcutaneous echymosis. One patient (7%) had contralateral fracture of both tibia and fibula that necessitated interlocking nail fixation of the tibial fracture in the same setting of patellar fracture stabilization. The time lag between trauma and surgery ranged from 24 to 95 h with a mean of 55 h. The operation time ranged from 35 to 70 min with a mean of 44 min. The median duration of hospital stay of the patients was 2 days (range 2–5). The patients were followed up for a mean period of 26 months (range 12–50) ( Radiographic examination showed solid union of all fractures in a mean period of 7 weeks (range 5–10) ( Twelve patients (86%) regained full knee flexion. Two patients (14%) had 10° loss of knee flexion. All patients regained full knee extension. Thigh circumference measurement was equal in both the affected and sound limbs in five patients (36%). Thigh muscle wasting was observed in nine patients (64%) with a mean thigh circumference difference of 0.8 cm (range 0.3–1.1 cm) as compared with the contralateral side. Superficial skin abrasions and contusions healed by local care during the early postoperative period. The mean Lysholm score at final follow-up was 93 (range 81–100). No intra- or postoperative complications were observed till the end of follow-up. There was no implant failure and no implant removal was necessary during the follow-up period ( Fourteen patients with 14 displaced transverse fractures of the patella were treated by arthroscopic-assisted closed reduction of the fracture with percutaneous screw fixation. All fractures healed in a mean period of 7 weeks. Thigh muscle wasting was observed in nine patients (64%) with a mean value of 0.8 cm. All except two patients (14%) had full knee flexion and all patients regained full knee extension. The mean Lysholm score at final follow-up was 93. Although open surgical techniques are the standard method for reduction and fixation of displaced patellar fractures The results of the present study compares favorably with the results of other studies using the same technique for displaced transverse patellar fractures Arthroscopic technique is suited to displaced transverse fractures of the patella with articular incongruity but without major separation and comminution of the fragments. Although there are no clear guidelines, fractures that are displaced more than 8 mm are likely to be accompanied by disruption of the extensor mechanism and, therefore, they are not suitable for arthroscopic methods. Such patients require open reduction, internal fixation and open repair of the extensor mechanism In conclusion, arthroscopic-assisted reduction and percutaneous screw fixation appears to be an appropriate technique for displaced transverse patellar fractures without major separation or comminution. It offers good functional results with a very low complication rate. This technique combines the advantages of minimally invasive surgery with minimal soft tissue disruption, ideal visualization of the articular surface congruity during reduction and the stability of the fracture fixation while not disturbing the vascular supply of the patella. It also allows concomitant joint lavage and debridement of any intraarticular loose fragments and facilitates early postoperative rehabilitation. However, it is technically demanding and does not suit all fracture patterns. No benefits of any form have been received or will be received from a commercial party related directly or indirectly to the subject of this article. No funds were received in support of this study.