New development and technological innovations make electrical and electronic equipment (EEE) more functional by using an increasing number of metals, particularly the critical metals (e.g. rare and precious metals) with specialized properties. As millions of people in emerging economies adopt a modern lifestyle, the demand for critical metals is soaring. However, the increasing demand causes the crisis of their supply because of their simple deficiency in the Earth’s crust or geopolitical constraints which might create political issues for their supply. This paper focuses on the sustainable supply of typical critical metals (indium, rare earth elements (REEs), lithium, cobalt and precious metals) through recycling waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE). To illuminate this issue, the production, consumption, expected future demand, current recycling situation of critical metals, WEEE management and their recycling have been reviewed. We find that the demand of indium, REEs, lithium and cobalt in EEE will continuously increasing, while precious metals are decreasing because of new substitutions with less or even without precious metals. Although the generation of WEEE in 2014 was about 41.9 million tons (Mt), just about 15% (6.5 Mt) was treated environmentally. The inefficient collection of WEEE is the main obstacle to relieving the supply risk of critical metals. Furthermore, due to the widespread use in low concentrations, such as indium, their recycling is not just technological problem, but economic feasibility is. Finally, relevant recommendations are point out to address these issues.Metals play a significant role in electronics for their unique physical and chemical properties ( During the past decades, a huge upsurge in the consumption of high-tech products has resulted from the rapid technological progress ( Except for huge demand of critical metals, their deficiency in the Earth’s crust as well as existence in a few regions lead to the serious depletion and supply risks in the future. For example, primary indium production was only 755 tons worldwide. China has been providing 85–95% of the world’s REEs since 1990, while 72% of global cobalt comes from the Congo and 56% of lithium from Chile (USUG, 2015). To address the supply problem, the most reasonable method is to increase the recycling efficiency of secondary resources. Generally, concerning the recycling of critical metals, two major fields should be taken into consideration: production scraps of manufacturing process (called new scraps) and end-of-life products. In the most cases new scraps recycling is much easier comparing with WEEE. The main advantages are higher concentrations of the metal in new scraps, well-known and definited source of waste generation, and continuous new scrap formation ( Undoubtedly, WEEE is the potential resource of critical metals. According to Japan’s National Institute for Materials Science, there are 6800 tons of gold (16% of the world reserves), 60,000 tons of silver (22%) and 1700 tons of indium (15.5%) in Japanese urban mines ( Apart from collection problem, techno-economic problem also exists in recycling critical metals from WEEE. The main reason is that the critical metals are in low concentration in WEEE or they are just a minor composition in a complex material matrix. Sometimes technologies are not the problem, but economic feasibility is. For example, there are various methods to recover indium from waste LCDs ( To evaluate the sustainable supply of typical critical metals, including indium, rare earth elements, precious metals (gold and PGMs), lithium and cobalt, this article reviews the output of critical metals in the 1994–2014, their consumption and future demand in EEE, and their potential recycling from WEEE. To illustrate their potential recycling, the global WEEE management and recycling, current recycling situation and future tendency are also summarized. Finally, relevant recommendations are proposed to raise the metal recycling rates. As a consequence of improving precise technological levels, critical metals are increasingly used but always in small quantities in per application. It means that more and more critical metals will be stored in these products. In 2014, the consumption of critical metals (palladium, platinum, gold, silver, REE, cobalt, lithium, indium) in EEE ranged from 3.65% to 218% of the total mine production, as shown in Owing to the geological reserves and geopolitical constraints, some critical metals are facing serious supply risks ( ITO are composed of In In 2014, there were 6.3 Mt of screens and 3 Mt of small devices with screens, such as mobile phones, calculators, and personal computers became obsolete ( However, the global reserve of indium is about 16–19 thousand tons. The reserve is only 1/6 of gold ( Indium is also critical because of the geopolitical constraints. The REEs are a moderately abundant group of 17 elements comprising the 15 lanthanides, scandium, and yttrium. REEs are key components in almost all technology products, ranging from smartphones and flat screen TVs to all sorts of electric motors, nickel-metal hydride (NiMH) batteries, high performance metal alloys and even automotive catalysts. The usage of REEs is shown in Along with the rapid development of electronic industry, the demand of REEs is increasing dramatically. The global annual mining production of REEs is presented in From 1999 to 2014, China’s production of rare earths increased from 65 Worse still, the reserve of the REEs is not in balance. The general trend is that the elements become scarcer with the increasing atomic number and the elements with an even atomic number are more abundant than elements with an odd atomic number (Oddo-Harkins rule). For example, the reserve of cerium is much higher than heavy REEs like dysprosium, europium and terbium. Because of technological evolutions in applications, the usage of REEs is often not in balance. The result is sometimes a very high demand of a REE with lower concentration in the ore (such as dysprosium), but the demand of abundant REEs (such as yttrium) is relatively much lower ( Commonly, precious metals include gold, silver and the platinum group metals (PGMs). The PGMs are a group of six metals, including ruthenium, rhodium, palladium, osmium, iridium, and platinum. These metals have similar physical and chemical properties. Their properties, such as good electrical conductivity, high melting point and corrosion resistance make them indispensable for many industrial applications ( Gold is predominantly utilized for jewelry and arts, accounting for 75–89% from the year 2000 to 2012. However, due to its conductivity, the consumption of gold in electronic products has increased from 4% in 2000 to 6% in 2012 ( Gold production in the major countries is shown in Compared with gold production, the PGMs was mainly mined in ore deposits in South Africa, Russia, Zimbabwe, Canada and the US. In 2014, world mining production of PGMs was 393 tons. South Africa, Russia, Zimbabwe, Canada and United States accounted for 48%, 30%, 7%, 7% and 4%, respectively, of total global PGMs production in 2014. South Africa produced 94 tons of platinum and 60 tons of palladium in 2014, which accounted for 64% and 30% of the world platinum and palladium production. Moreover, South Africa was also the dominant producer of other PGMs, contributing 78% of the global production. The demand for PGMs is led by the auto-catalyst industry. PGMs are also used in the glass industry, jewelry, chemical industry and in the electronics industry. In 2014, about 65% of palladium was used by the auto-catalyst industry, and 14% in the EEE ( For platinum, about 45% of the total was utilized by the auto-catalyst industry. Owing to lower demand for hard disk drives, the total consumption of platinum in electronic applications was about 5.85 tons in 2014, which was slightly less than that of 2013. About 95% of electronics consumption of platinum comes from hard disks. But new materials that do not need PGMs are applied in hard disks ( Global rhodium consumption in 2014 was 30.5 tons and 84% of rhodium was used in the production of auto-catalysts. Only 1.36 tons was used in EEE. Global consumption of ruthenium was 26.8 tons in 2014. There were 11.5 tons of ruthenium applied in EEE. Due to the change in consumer technology preference to tablets and smartphones from desktop and laptop computers, the consumption of ruthenium declined in the hard disk industry. As a result, there was 21% decrease of ruthenium consumption in EEE compared with 2013. Global consumption of iridium was 6.1 tons in 2014, which was 5% more than in 2013. As a result of decreased demand for iridium crucibles, which are used in the electronic industry to grow high-purity single crystal sapphire, the use in electrical sector decreased by 78% to 1.3 tons compared with that in 2011 ( In general, the usage of precious metals has decreased per product due to the new substitutions with less or even without precious metals. For example, copper wire bonding have been replacing gold in semiconductor packaging industry ( Lithium’s low atomic mass, low coefficient of thermal expansion, high electrochemical reactivity, and other unique properties resulted in the application of many commercial lithium products. Lithium’s properties make it to be one of the most attractive battery materials. LiCoO Lithium and cobalt are found in only a few places, leading to political issues for their supply. Australia and Chile have long accounted for more than 70% of worldwide lithium production, while Congo accounted for about 50% of global cobalt production. For lithium, the global mining production has increased rapidly since 1990s. World lithium production in 2014 was estimated to be 36,000 tons. Most of the known suppliers of lithium are Bolivia, Argentina, Chile, Australia and China. Li-batteries are the largest growing area for lithium consumption. The demand for Li-batteries exceeds that of other rechargeable batteries. Lithium use in rechargeable batteries increased from zero in 1991 to 80% of the market share in 2012. Since in 1992 the Ni-Cd and NiMH batteries have been replaced for the first time ( On a global view, the leading use of cobalt is in rechargeable battery electrodes. In 2013, rechargeable batteries accounted for about 41% of the worldwide cobalt demand. The proportion of cobalt used in batteries is expected to increase in the future. As shown in Over the past decades, there are two major changes in cobalt consumption. The first one is that the demand of cobalt has shifted from the United States and Europe to Asia. The consumption in Asia has increased significantly since 2002, whereas the demand in the United States and Europe has remained relatively steady. For instance, China consumed 31,700 tons of cobalt in 2012, of which two-thirds was used in rechargeable batteries ( With advances in display technology, LCDs are widely used in our life, not only the typical appliances like TV, mobile phones, computers, but also the intelligent household appliances. As a result, the demand for indium will be tremendous. It is estimated that the total demand of indium in China will be up to approximately 350 tons in 2035, while in 2014 the demand is 180 tons ( In the future, the growth in the consumption of REEs will be sustainable in the theory. It is estimated that the total demand for REEs will grow over 50% until 2020 ( Historically, the production of REE has grown rapidly to meet the upsurge in demand. World production growth rate was about 5% between 1994 and 2014. Annual growth rates in recent years have been slowed down since Chinese government has restricted its REE exports. The average annual growth rate is estimated to be 3.7% to 8.6% in the next twenty years ( Precious metals have shown an almost continuous increase of the global demand in electronic industry since 1980, especially the PGMs. In recent years, however, although the electronic appliances are increasing, the usage of precious metals in each appliance has decreased with technological advance. For instance, the platinum demand in EEE refers to be 6.54 tons in 2014 and 40.4 tons in 2000. Li-batteries continue to have the greatest potential growth in the future due to the new application in vehicles. By 2020, the predicted annual production of electric vehicles (EV) is at least 5 million units. The demand of Li-batteries in vehicle transportation applications is expected to increase by 20% per year through 2020 (  For now, the supply is abundant but concerns of global shortages are rising. However, if there are no other materials that could replace lithium and cobalt, nor are battery systems in development that offer similar or better performance as Li-battery, serious shortages of such metals could emerge since the production of millions of batteries for vehicles and electronics. Also, cobalt is expensive and scarce. If it is required in high volume, global shortage would be caused. To relieve the global shortages, the ideal method is to recycle metals from the end-of-life products. WEEE is a kind of special resource for containing both harmful and precious materials ( The StEP initiative, coordinated by the United Nations University, a worldwide leading institute in e-waste research, is paving paths towards solutions of the e-waste problem. In April 2015, an e-waste world-map was presented by the initiative ( In general, e-waste generation per capita in developed countries was much higher than the one in developing countries, ranging from several times to even hundreds. The highest amount of e-waste per inhabitant (28.4 In fact, many countries or areas have realized the significance of WEEE management. By the end of 2014, approximately 4 billion people were covered by the national e-waste legislation ( WEEE is a fast-growing hazardous waste stream which requires special treatment and management. Large quantities of valuable materials are stocked in WEEE ( Early in 2003, EU has passed the WEEE Directive (Directive 2002/96/EC), aiming to promoting WEEE collection and recovery with a view to reduce the quantity of waste for disposal and saving natural resources, in particular by reuse, recycling, recovering energy with regard to environmental and economic effects. In July 2012, EU recasts the WEEE Directive (Directive 2012/19/EC) ( For large household appliances and automatic dispensers, the average recovery rate set to be 80% and 85% until 2015 and 2018, respectively. To get valuable materials, the average target is in the range from 50% to 80%. According to the table, it can also conclude that nearly half of the WEEE or even more has not been effectively recycled. Countries of the EU are taking an active part in WEEE disposal and recycling. Japan is always in the forefront of resources utilization. In 2001, Home Appliance Recycling Act came into force to secure the environmentally sound disposal of waste and effective utilization of resources. Under the Act, the recycling rates of target products varied from 50% to 70%, as shown in According to the report by the China Household Electric Appliance Research Institute ( In Africa, the total e-waste generation was 1.9 Mt in 2014. Few countries have enforced national WEEE related legislation ( Overall, with more and more countries have made efforts on WEEE management and recycling, the amount of recycled WEEE is increasing in the latest years. However, there are still some common problems on WEEE recycling. First, the relevant laws and legislations do not necessarily imply coming into enforce successfully. In many countries, WEEE recycling rate is much lower than the statutory recycling targets. Second, most nation’s legislations do not cover all kinds of WEEE categories. For instance in China, the subsidies only apply to several appointed types of WEEE, which leads to the low collection of other WEEE. Third, as WEEE recycling is a complicated process and sometimes it is may not be economic, the comprehensive utilization requires state-of-art technologies. However, it is absent, especially in developing countries. As a result, about 6.5 Mt of WEEE was reported as formally treated at the global scale, which was around 15.5% of the total generation in 2014 ( Several suggestions are raised to address the problems in the future. The primary task is to make efforts on how to guarantee the implement of the policies. Then, establish a better database on generation, composition and handling of WEEE, specifying recycling categories. It is essential to research the impacts of WEEE on collection, recycling and disposal, directing a reasonable method for WEEE recycling based on the present technologies. Lastly, advanced technologies are required to recycle WEEE environmentally and economically. Generally, metals recycling from WEEE consists of four steps: the first step is to collect, which needs the cooperation of consumers, manufacturers, factories, and even government. The second stage is dismantling, which picks out valuable components from WEEE and classifies them. The third one is pre-treatment, including mechanical crushing or crusher to strip metals from the classified components. The last step is to recover valuable metals from crushed materials with different methods according to their properties. Each step is critical to the final recycling rate of metals. At the present time, WEEE collection is a global problem but the situation becomes better. Intelligent dismantling and pre-treatment is absent in most countries. WEEE is always treated by manual dismantling and primary or none pre-treatment by direct burning or acid leaching in developing countries. In this section, the recycling situation, current problems and future development of typical critical metals have been reviewed. The consumption of indium has largely depended on transparent electrodes in flat-panel displays. When ITO targets are sputtered on glass panels, 30–60% of the indium is deposited on the substrate. The rest 40–70% stays in the remained ITO targets or on the shields of the sputtering chambers. These used targets and grinding sludge from the shields are the most important source of secondary indium. Due to their simple structure and concentrated distribution, indium can be recycled economically from waste ITO targets via a simple acid leaching or hot immersion techniques ( Waste LCD screens are important potential secondary resources of indium, in which the concentration of indium varies between different devices and models. The amount of available indium in LCD screens of televisions is about 102 However, the recovery rate of indium is extremely low at present time. The main reason is that the number of recycled waste LCDs is few. Actually, LCDs began to be popular in China around 2005, but few LCDs can be recycled. The current recycling system for WEEE has not been fully established and the formal disposal system is not standardized. The potential yield of recycled indium from LCDs is evaluated during the period from 2015 to 2030 in China, as shown in Although there are some potential recycling methods, like hydrometallurgical processes ( The REEs are widely used in electronic appliances, where REEs are finely dispersed. The appropriate recycling technologies can only be identified by a detailed analysis for each composition. However, due to the widespread use in low concentrations, REEs recycling becomes difficult in the end-of-life products. When obsolete products containing REEs end up in Electric Arc Furnaces (EAFs) or some other smelters, REEs will typically end up in the slag phases in low concentrations. Rare earth metals can be recovered from the slag using thermodynamically feasible and economically viable methods, which depend on concentration and the recycling costs. As a result, the REEs recycling rate is less than 1% ( In order to increase the current recycling situation, a variety of studies have been conducted for recycling permanent magnets ( The recycling rate of a single metal is determined by the following factors: the collection rate of scraped products and the recycling process efficiency rate ( Their estimation indicates that the total potential recycled REEs ranges between 5633 tons to 10,683 tons in 2020, which is about 19–35% of REEs waste. Their estimation emphasizes that REEs recycling can make a significant contribution for the overall REEs supply, especially for regions without rare earth ores. Compared to the stocked REEs in 2020, recycled REEs only provide 1.3–3%. The low supply rate is that the consumption of REEs in decade ago is far less than that in 2020. However, when the products produced in 2020 end of life, maybe in 2030, their recycling can make a significant contribution to the overall REEs supply. Actually, large amounts of cooperation among researchers, industry and policy makers may realize the recycling goal even better. For example, REEs were successfully recovered from scrap NdFeB magnets via membrane assisted solvent extraction by Idaho National Laboratory. More than 90% of neodymium, dysprosium and praseodymium were recovered through the membrane extraction system ( According to the data from the World Gold Council, gold recycling accounted for 17% to 42% of the total gold supply since 1999, which fluctuated with gold price and economic conditions ( The attraction of precious metals has driven growth in the informal activities of recycling WEEE, especially in some developing countries ( In 2014, the global recovery of platinum from recycled autocatalysts and jewelry was 34.3 tons. However, only 1.48 tons of platinum was recovered from WEEE. For palladium, about 61.3 tons was recovered from autocatalysts in 2014 and 14.0 tons from WEEE. Stillwater Mining Co. (SMC), the only mining producer of PGMs in the United Stated, recovered 14.6 tons of PGMs in 2014. SMC produced 6.9 tons, 4.2 tons, and 0.9 tons of recycled palladium, platinum, and rhodium, respectively. For WEEE, it is suggested that the recovery of silver is only 11.5%, for gold is 25.6%, and for palladium is 25.6% ( Continuing demand for EEE and electric vehicles means the increasing requirement of lithium and cobalt. Waste Li-batteries are significant secondary resources of lithium and cobalt. The distribution imbalance of primary minerals drives the recycling of waste batteries. For example, during the 13th Five-Year Plan for Economic and Social Development of China, waste Li-batteries recycling is a focus problem that to be resolved. Recycling of secondary lithium and cobalt from batteries could significantly contribute towards confining supply risks ( Until now, most of the researches have been in the chemical processes, trying to achieve the complete recovery of valuable metals. The existing methods for recycling spent Li-batteries are mainly pyrometallurgy ( However, only a small fraction of spent batteries was disposed in appropriate ways. In Europe, the recycling rate of spent batteries was 18.03% in 2011, while an overall collection rate of 28.34% was achieved in 2012 ( With the rapid development of technological innovation, large amounts of critical metals are used in electronics. In the last twenty years (1994–2014), world mining production of indium, REEs, Lithium, and cobalt increased from 149 to 819 tons, 64.5 to 133 ktons, 6.0 to 36.0 ktons and 18.5 to 112.0 ktons, respectively. There is not much change on the total output and consumption of precious metals. The output and consumption of indium, REEs, lithium and cobalt will continue to increase in the future. One of the most demand driver is electronic industries. Up to 2014, LCD production consumed more than 80% of total indium. About one third of total REEs are used in EEE. For lithium and cobalt, their consumption in rechargeable batteries increased to 35% and 41% of the global markets, respectively. As for precious metals, although the total amount of EEE increased dramatically, consumption of precious metals kept about 10% of production because of the substitution with less or without precious metals. The higher demands in the future will burden the supply risk of these critical metals. WEEE is an important secondary resource of these critical metals. Their recycling can potentially relieve the supply risk of critical metals, which has raised global awareness. EU, United States, China, Japan, and many other countries have enacted related laws and regulations to encourage WEEE recycling. And some countries even require the minimum recycling rates of target products. The global WEEE management and recycling have made a great progress. In essence, adequate recycling can lead to a reduction in the consumption of primary raw materials and effective collection is a prerequisite for metal recovery. Currently, there is no single solution for effective collection since the situation varies in different countries. Only around 6.5 Mt WEEE was treated in formal system in 2014. Appropriate management of WEEE should be raised by a combination of different stakeholders in governments, manufacturers, the research community, and the public. More efforts are required to guarantee the implement of the policies and realize the official targets. On the global level, the illegal transboundary movement of WEEE from developed countries to developing countries need to be prohibited, preventing the metal loss and environmental pollution caused by improper recycling methods. To maximize the overall recovery of critical metals, efficient and effective dismantling, preprocessing and recovery technologies are also required. For instance, how to separate batteries and LCD screen from cellphones. Sometimes WEEE recycling is not technological problem, but economic problem. It is uneconomic in industry to recover some critical metals from WEEE as they are in low concentration in WEEE. For example, few indium is recycled from WEEE in industry considering its low economic benefits. WEEE contains large amounts of valuable metals. Therefore, advanced facilities and operations that can co-recover many kinds of metals are required. However, the integrated smelters are absent in most developing countries. To recycle critical metals from WEEE, it is encouraged to invest the import of related technologies and facilities. This work was supported by the National Key Project of Scientific and Technical Supporting Programs funded by the