Studies on various compounds of inorganic phosphate, as well as on organic phosphate added by post-translational phosphorylation of proteins, all demonstrate a central role for phosphate in biomineralization processes. Inorganic polyphosphates are chains of orthophosphates linked by phosphoanhydride bonds that can be up to hundreds of orthophosphates in length. The role of polyphosphates in mammalian systems, where they are ubiquitous in cells, tissues and bodily fluids, and are at particularly high levels in osteoblasts, is not well understood. In cell-free systems, polyphosphates inhibit hydroxyapatite nucleation, crystal formation and growth, and solubility. In animal studies, polyphosphate injections inhibit induced ectopic calcification. While recent work has proposed an integrated view of polyphosphate function in bone, little experimental data for bone are available. Here we demonstrate in osteoblast cultures producing an abundant collagenous matrix that normally show robust mineralization, that two polyphosphates (PolyP5 and PolyP65, polyphosphates of 5 and 65 phosphate residues in length) are potent mineralization inhibitors. Twelve-day MC3T3-E1 osteoblast cultures with added ascorbic acid (for collagen matrix assembly) and β-glycerophosphate (a source of phosphate for mineralization) were treated with either PolyP5 or PolyP65. Von Kossa staining and calcium quantification revealed that mineralization was inhibited in a dose-dependent manner by both polyphosphates, with complete mineralization inhibition at 10μM. Cell proliferation and collagen assembly were unaffected by polyphosphate treatment, indicating that polyphosphate inhibition of mineralization results not from cell and matrix effects but from direct inhibition of mineralization. This was confirmed by showing that PolyP5 and PolyP65 bound to synthetic hydroxyapatite in a concentration-dependent manner. Tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (TNAP, ALPL) efficiently hydrolyzed the two PolyPs as measured by Pi release. Importantly, at the concentrations of polyphosphates used in this study which inhibited bone cell culture mineralization, the polyphosphates competitively saturated TNAP, thus potentially interfering with its ability to hydrolyze mineralization-inhibiting pyrophosphate (PPi) and mineralizing-promoting β-glycerophosphate (in cell culture). In the biological setting, polyphosphates may regulate mineralization by shielding the essential inhibitory substrate pyrophosphate from TNAP degradation, and in the same process, delay the release of phosphate from this source. In conclusion, the inhibition of mineralization by polyphosphates is shown to occur via direct binding to apatitic mineral and by mixed inhibition of TNAP.Amongst many other biological functions, phosphate (P Although polyphosphates are now known to be ubiquitous in mammalian cells and tissue fluids, they have been reported to be in particularly high amounts in human osteoblast-like cells, suggesting a potential role in bone biology Early studies performed in vivo over 40 Sodium phosphate glass type 5 (PolyP5) and type 65 (PolyP65) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA), and have been certified to be 5 and 65 phosphates in chain length. All other reagents were obtained from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA, USA) unless otherwise specified. MC3T3-E1 (clone 14) pre-osteoblast cells – a generous gift from Dr. Renny T. Franceschi (University of Michigan) – were maintained in complete media (minimum essential medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Hyclone, Waltham, MA, USA), 0.225 After 12 Mineralizing MC3T3-E1 cultures were treated with 10 A 20 In 50 Osteogenic media was combined with PolyP5 or PolyP65 at the indicated concentrations and allowed to stand for 1 MC3T3-E1 osteoblast cells were cultured in complete media containing either 10 Mineralizing MC3T3-E1 osteoblast cultures were washed three times with PBS, and stained with Bouin's fluid (70% v/v saturated aqueous picric acid/9.25% v/v formaldehyde/5% v/v glacial acetic acid) for 1 Alkaline phosphatase activity was measured by washing MC3T3-E1 osteoblast cultures twice with PBS, and harvesting the cells in 10 RNA from 12-day mineralizing osteoblast cultures was extracted using Trizol®, according to the manufacturer's instructions. RNA was treated with DNaseI (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA, USA), and then analyzed for gene expression of bone sialoprotein ( Expression plasmids containing a secreted epitope-tagged TNAP were transfected into COS-1 cells for transient expression All kinetic measurements were performed in triplicate at 25 In this study, we sought to determine if polyphosphates had an effect on osteoblast culture mineralization. MC3T3-E1 osteoblast cells were cultured with osteogenic media in the presence of PolyP5 or Poly65 for 12 Previous studies in our lab have shown that days 0–6 of culture are involved with osteoblast differentiation and extracellular matrix production, while days 6–12 are predominantly involved with extracellular matrix mineralization. To identify at which stage of osteoblast differentiation and mineralization polyphosphates affect most strongly, mineralizing osteoblast cells were treated with 10 As polyphosphate is a known chelator of calcium ions, we investigated if this effect was enough to inhibit mineralization in osteoblast cultures. Firstly, the amount of free, ionized calcium was measured in osteogenic media after the addition of PolyPs. A lack of mineralization can be due to several factors including cell toxicity or altered expression of genes critical to osteoblast differentiation and mineralization. To investigate if polyphosphates could affect osteoblast cell proliferation, MC3T3-E1 cells were assayed for cell viability using thiazolyl blue tetrazolium bromide over the course of 12 To understand the role of TNAP in polyphosphate-mediated mineralization inhibition, we investigated the kinetic properties of PolyP5 and PolyP65 as a function of chain length and at physiological pH (pH To further investigate the interaction of PolyP5 and PolyP65 with the TNAP catalytic site, competition studies were done with Pyrophosphate has already been well-established as an inorganic mineralization inhibitor in bone In prokaryotes, polyphosphate catalysis occurs via endopolyphosphatases which cleave long-chain polyphosphates into shorter-chain polyphosphates, or by exopolyphosphatases which remove terminal phosphates from long-chain polyphosphates The current paradigm of phosphate regulation of bone mineralization is based on the ratio of phosphate-to-pyrophosphate (P Although mammalian cells have only been reported to accumulate polyphosphates intracellularly in nuclei, mitochondria, plasma membrane and dense-granule organelles Polyphosphates are shown here to be potent inhibitors of MC3T3-E1 osteoblast culture extracellular matrix mineralization. This inhibition of mineralization by polyphosphates is shown to occur via direct binding to apatitic mineral and by mixed inhibition of TNAP — the enzyme that cleaves inhibitory pyrophosphate and generates free phosphate for hydroxyapatite crystal growth. This work was funded by research grants from the