This paper describes a numerical model for the analysis of chemical reactions in a coupled fracture–matrix system at the scale of a single fracture in the presence of fracture–skin. The quartz concentration is computed using simple linear reaction kinetics. Heat transfer within the fracture–skin and rock matrix is modelled as conduction, while heat transport within the fracture includes thermal advection, conduction, and dispersion in the horizontal plane. Fluid is assumed to be injected at a constant rate at the inlet of the fracture. Heat transfer at the interface of the high permeability fracture and low permeability fracture–skin is modelled on a varying grid at the interface. Sensitivity studies have been conducted using different skin thermal conductivities, fluid velocities, and half fracture apertures. We have also analysed the behaviour of the system when there is fluid loss from the fracture into the adjacent fracture skin. Results suggest that, when fluid loss is considered, the rate at which fluid is injected at the inlet of the fracture plays a major role in the heat transfer and chemical reaction within the fracture. When there is fluid loss, the effect of fracture skin formation on the heat transfer mechanism is reduced and this effect becomes much less sensitive to changes in the size of the fracture aperture. The fracture skin thickness affects the attainment of equilibrium temperature within the fracture in terms of its magnitude and distance from the fracture inlet.Hot Dry Rock (HDR) is a potential source of substantial amounts of renewable energy due to its wide-spread distribution and the extent of individual occurrences. The energy is extracted by creating a connected fracture network in the HDR heat reservoir through which fluid is circulated to extract the heat. An effective fracture network allowing sufficient fluid flow (and, thereby, sufficient heat extraction) creates an engineered (or enhanced) geothermal system (EGS). When fluid moves through a fracture it reacts with the adjacent rock–matrix resulting in precipitation–dissolution of minerals due to the high temperature gradient between the high permeability fracture and low permeability rock–matrix. Over the past 30 Most studies on thermal transport in fractured formations do not consider the presence of fracture skins. Moench A conceptual model of a coupled fracture–skin–matrix system In The fracture aperture is much smaller than the length of the fracture. Thermal dispersion is analogous to dispersion of solutes in a fracture matrix system. Convection within the fracture–skin and rock–matrix can be ignored. Temperature at the fracture–skin interface, i.e., temperatures along the fracture wall and along the lower boundary of the fracture–skin are assumed to be equal (at Temperature at the skin–matrix interface, i.e., temperatures along the upper boundary of the fracture–skin and the lower boundary of the rock–matrix are assumed to be equal (at Specific heat capacities are not functions of temperature. Assuming symmetry, the solution is restricted to one half of the fracture and its adjacent fracture–skin and its associated rock–matrix. Thermal conduction is considered both in the fracture, fracture skin and the rock–matrix. There is only one fluid phase. Changes in fluid enthalpy with pressure are neglected. Transverse diffusion and dispersion within the fracture ensure complete mixing across the fracture thickness/aperture at all times. Transport along the fracture is much faster than transport within the rock matrix and fracture skin. The momentum balance states that the flow average velocity is proportional to the pressure gradient: The continuity of the fluid considering fluid loss from the fracture wall into the fracture skin is: The principal transport mechanisms in the fracture include thermal convection, conduction and dispersion, in addition to heat transfer from the fracture into the fracture–skin. As the migration of fluid is faster along the high permeability fracture, transport of heat is assumed to be one-dimensional along the fracture. The coupling between the fracture and skin is ensured by the continuity of the fluxes between them by assuming that the conductive flux from the fracture to the fracture–skin takes place in a direction perpendicular to the fracture. Conductive exchanges in the direction parallel to the fracture plane are assumed to be negligible compared with that perpendicular to the fracture plane. For relatively low injection rates it is reasonable to assume that heat conduction in the fracture–skin is one-dimensional perpendicular to the fracture The thermal transport equations for the coupled fracture matrix system provided by de Marsily Eq. The temperature dependent equilibrium concentration of quartz adopted by Pendergrass and Robinson The temperature dependent dissolution rate constant is given by Robinson The initial condition for pressure in the fracture is given by: In this study, the system is described by a set of three partial differential equations, one equation for the fracture, one for the fracture–skin and one for the rock–matrix. The coupled non-linear equations are solved numerically using an implicit finite difference scheme. Continuity at the fracture–skin interface is achieved by iterating the solution at each time step. A uniform grid is used for the fracture and a non-uniform grid is used for the fracture–skin. A smaller grid size is used in the fracture–skin interface to capture accurately the heat flux transfer at the fracture–skin interface. The dissolution rate constants for fracture ( The initial temperature of the fracture, fracture–skin and rock–matrix is assumed to be 600 The discharge along the fracture is calculated from the assumed discharge rate at the entry to the fracture (inlet) and the fluid loss rate. This information is used to obtain the velocity distribution is along the fracture using Eq. The mineral precipitation in the coupled fracture matrix system with fracture skin is analysed in the presence and absence of fracture fluid loss. The parameters used for numerical simulation are given in The results for the verification of the numerical model for thermal transport are shown in  The temperature distribution along the fracture was analysed for various media and flow parameters such as skin thermal conductivity, fluid velocity, fracture aperture and inlet discharges.      The quartz concentration along the fracture was analysed for various media and flow parameters such as skin thermal conductivity, fluid velocity, fracture aperture and inlet discharges.     In this section we summarise the analysis, for the fluid loss case, the influence of inlet discharge on discharge, velocity and pressure along the fracture.    We have analysed the behaviour of quartz concentration in a coupled fracture matrix system in the presence of fracture skin. Coupled equations for thermal transport have been solved using the implicit finite difference method. A varying grid pattern is used to capture the flux transfer at the interface of the fracture and the fracture–skin. It is assumed that the fractures are saturated. It is assumed that water is pumped at a particular rate with a low temperature at the inlet of the fracture. The effect of fluid loss from the fracture on thermal transport and quartz precipitation has also been analysed in the present study. By considering the combined effects of fracture skin formation and fluid loss, this study has addressed some important practical issues and has produced some very useful results, which extend the work of Natarajan and Suresh Kumar The following conclusions have been drawn from this study. Low fluid velocity provides high residence time for the fluid, which enhances the heat transfer from the fracture–skin to the fracture. On the other hand, high fluid velocity requires a longer time for the fluid to access the heat stored within the fracture–skin and hence the rock matrix. Loss of fluid from the fracture affects the fluid velocity, which in turn affects the heat transfer mechanism and mineral precipitation within the fracture. When fluid loss along the fracture is considered, the rate at which fluid is injected at the inlet of the fracture plays a major role in the heat transfer and chemical reaction within the fracture. The fluid velocity, pressure and discharge follow a similar variation pattern along the fracture for various initial fluid discharges at the inlet of the fracture, though their absolute values are significantly different. When there is fluid loss, the effect of fracture skin formation on the heat transfer mechanism is reduced. Moreover, this effect becomes much less sensitive the variation of the size of fracture apertures, which is an important result from this study. The magnitude of the fracture skin thickness affects the attainment of equilibrium temperature within the fracture in terms of its magnitude and distance from the fracture inlet. None declared.