This paper investigates potential Granger causality among the real GDP, real exports and inward FDI in Least Developed Countries for the period between 1970 and 2009. A new panel-data approach developed in Kónya (2006) [Kónya (2006), Exports and growth: Granger causality analysis on OECD countries with a panel data approach, Economic Modelling, 23, 978–992] which is based on SUR systems and Wald tests with country specific bootstrap critical values has been employed. The results indicate direct, one-period-ahead, unidirectional causality from exports to GDP in Haiti, Rwanda and Sierra Leone, and from GDP to exports in Angola, Chad and Zambia. Considering the FDI–Growth nexus, there is evidence of FDI Granger-causing GDP in Benin and Togo, and GDP Granger-causing FDI in Burkina Faso, Gambia, Madagascar and Malawi. While studying EXP–FDI relations, this paper finds that the causality is from FDI to real exports in Benin, Chad, Haiti, Mauritania, Niger, Togo and Yemen, and from real exports to FDI in Haiti, Madagascar, Mauritania, Malawi, Rwanda, Senegal and Zambia.This paper examines causality relations among the real GDP, real exports and real net FDI inflows as they affect Least Developed Countries (LDCs). Understanding causality relations among economic growth, exports and FDI in LDCs poses an important research question as this group of countries includes the most vulnerable economies of the world, suffering from drastic economic and social problems, extreme poverty, hunger and inadequate levels of human development. Recognizing the special needs of the Least Developed Countries, the United Nations has organized three major conferences on LDCs over the last three decades. The three “Programme of Actions” initiated by these successive UN Conferences served as the main framework of international development assistance provided to the LDCs. The first UN Conference on LDCs organized in Paris in 1981 initiated the first comprehensive “Programme of Action” (PoA), with the aim of improving the deteriorating conditions of the LDCs. The Second UN Conference on LDCs adopted the Paris Declaration and initiated a new “PoA” for the 1990s. The third UN Conference on LDCs was organized in Brussels in May of 2001 and initiated the “Brussels Declaration and Programme of Action for the LDCs” (BPoA) for the period from 2001 to 2010. These three successive PoAs had the intention of reversing the negative economic and developmental trends witnessed in LDCs, enhancing economic growth, and alleviating poverty; while their ultimate aim remained the eventual graduation of targeted countries from LDC status. The BPoA foresaw a series of major policy tools to support development and economic growth in LDCs, including (i) Official development assistance (ODA), (ii) preferential market access and trade related assistance, (iii) Foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows and (iv) debt relief. The BPoA attaches a particular importance to foreign direct investment (FDI) and export revenues to complement Official Development Assistance (ODA) and other international transfers in compensating for the inadequate level of capital accumulation in LDCs. The BPoA is based on the view that sustainable expansion of output in LDCs depended more on foreign demand for exports, rather than domestic demand. In the BPoA, like in the previous PoAs, FDI inflows are seen as a vital source of finance, and a means for acquiring new technology and know-how for LDCs to be able to compete in international markets ( Despite the fact that export revenues and FDI inflows remain at the core of the major development assistance programs for the LDCs, only a very limited number of empirical studies have targeted their impact on economic growth in this group of countries. Although there exists voluminous empirical literature on both the ‘exports–growth’ and ‘FDI–growth’ nexuses, the bulk of this literature focuses on the case of “developing countries” in general, with no explicit focus on LDCs. The LDCs, however, provide a particular subset of developing countries, as they share very similar developmental problems and characteristics, having been subject to the same development assistance and poverty alleviation schemes for many decades. Furthermore, the body of empirical evidence on the more general case of developing countries still remains to be inconclusive, as the results of existing studies are obviously country- and methodology-specific. Most of the existing empirical works, on the other hand, are taint with severe estimation biases as they employ earlier econometric techniques which do not take into account cross-sectional dependency and heterogeneity issues. There is therefore a need for further research on causality relationships among economic growth, exports and FDI in LDCs. This is what this study strives to do. This paper examines the possibility of Granger causality among real GDP, real exports and real net FDI in Least Developed Countries (LDCs), for the period between 1970 and 2009. While studying causality relations among real economic growth, real exports and real net FDI inflows this study employs a new panel-data approach recently developed in The objectives of this paper can now be stated as follows. The primary objective of the study is to examine the ‘exports-growth’ nexus in LDCs, testing explicitly for both the “export-led growth” and “growth-led export” hypotheses. The findings of Granger causality tests implemented will shed light on the question of whether export revenues contribute significantly to real economic growth or whether it is domestic growth dynamics that trigger exports growth in LDCs in the first instance. Secondly, this paper aims to investigate potential causality directions between FDI inflows and economic growth empirically. At this level, the objective is to see whether FDI inflows from the rest of the world contribute to the growth of LDCs, or rather LDCs with better growth performance attract more FDI. The findings of our causality tests are expected to provide some new information on the determinants of FDI inflows to this group of low income developing countries. In addition to studying the ‘exports-growth’ and ‘FDI-growth’ nexuses, the third objective of this paper is to examine a less scrutinized, but equally important set of relationships between FDI and total merchandise exports in LDCs. The methodology employed in this research allows us to address all these three sets of causality relations simultaneously. In an attempt to study unidirectional and bidirectional causality relationships among the variables at hand, we estimate both bivariate and trivariate systems of equations. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: the second section provides a short survey of the related theoretical and empirical literatures; the third section presents the research methodology employed for testing causality; the fourth section reports on the data employed, and presents empirical findings of the research; the final section provides concluding remarks and some policy recommendations. The relation between export growth and economic growth has long been an area in international and development economics receiving a great deal of research attention. Relying on basic economic theory, one can suggest that exports growth contribute to economic growth first through what is known as the foreign trade multiplier effect (see The causality relation between exports and economic growth can work in both directions; a reverse causality direction, from economic growth to export growth might well exist. This idea is often referred as the “growth-led export” hypothesis and is based on the view that domestic economic growth dynamics is more relevant for explaining export growth (see, for example, Although there exists a wide empirical literature on causality relations between exports and economic growth, there are only a few studies that focused on the case of LDCs in particular. The empirical evidence for the LDCs come either from single country studies or from large panels covering the full set of low and middle income developing countries. The findings of this literature on causality relations between exports and economic growth are mixed. Earlier studies such as There are several potential ways in which FDI can contribute to economic growth. In earlier neo-classical growth models FDI increases the capital stock and promotes economic growth by financing capital formation. In these models the impact of FDI inflows are exactly the same as domestic capital investments, that is, similar to domestic investments, FDI only has a ‘short-run’ growth effect, due to the diminishing returns to capital. In the new growth theory that places the emphasis on technological change, on the other hand, FDI is assumed to have a positive impact on economic growth, both in the short and the long-run ( Similar to the export-growth nexus, the causality relation between FDI and growth is not necessarily unidirectional, and causality can work on both directions. The primary explanation brought by standard economic theory for the possibility of a reverse causality direction (i.e. from economic growth to FDI) is again based on the process of “cumulative causation.” In this line of thinking, a long-term process of economic growth based on the development of productive capacities might well create new economic activities, new markets and a higher demand for new consumer products, which will in turn attract a higher level of FDI. Theoretical literature, however, suggests that the positive relationship between FDI and economic growth may not come true for many reasons. Several theoretical works have shown that the growth accelerating effect of FDI inflows is crucially dependent on the assumption that FDI does not ‘crowd out’ substantial amounts of investment from domestic sources (Herzer et al., 2008: 794). In the case of substantial crowding-out, FDI inflows might well have a growth decelerating impact on the recipient country. Theoretically, therefore, there might also be a negative link between FDI and economic growth in LDCs. Generally speaking, the positive impact of FDI inflows on economic growth is argued to be conditional on a number of factors, such as the level of per capita income, human capital, the degree of trade openness and the depth of the financial market ( Most of the existing empirical literature test bivariate causality relations between each pair of GDP, exports and FDI. Recently, a series of works have examined the relations among the three variables simultaneously. Through utilizing Instrumental variable estimation techniques, The Granger causality test is a useful device to determine whether the lags of a variable, say, With respect to this system, in country When estimating the VAR model above for testing Granger non-causality between the variables, however, one should note that the correlation between lagged values of dependent variable and the disturbance terms should be taken into account (see Homogeneity of slope parameters is a very unlikely assumption in our case, as the LDCs have a high degree of heterogeneity. Again, similar to many other studies working with annual data we don't work with a necessarily large time dimension. We therefore cannot proceed with the GMM estimation methodology for testing possible Granger causality in our case. A second alternative for testing Granger causality among exports, FDI, and economic growth in LDCs is to use the approach developed by We therefore choose to employ in this paper a third alternative recently developed by The systems above are SUR (seemingly unrelated regressions) models which have different predetermined variables whose only possible link is contemporaneous correlation within the systems ( The framework presented above is suitable for testing one-period ahead, direct causality relations in a bivariate setting. Bivariate models for testing Granger causality, however, are tainted with the omittance of all other potential explanatory variables. We therefore add an extension of our bivariate models into a trivariate setting, including a third variable into our analysis. We can formulate the following trivariate variant of the SUR system presented in Eqs. Following Before estimating the models above, we first test for cross-sectional dependency. The test statistic is distributed as A scaled version of Alternatively, In this study we employ the SUR estimator proposed by Prior to estimation we first determine the optimal lag structure. This is a crucial step as Granger-causality tests are known to be very sensitive to the choice of the lag length. For specifying the number of lags in the analysis we follow the procedure proposed in In the bivariate case, first we estimate Eq. Secondly, we re-sample these residuals. In order to preserve the contemporaneous cross-correlation structure of the error terms in Eq. Next, we generate a bootstrap sample of Next, we estimate the following SUR system By repeating the above procedure 10,000 times and stacking the Wald test statistics of each single equation in a different vector at each repetition, we obtain This bootstrapping procedure can be extended to a trivariate case by including a third variable Accordingly, In order to get the bootstrapped Wald test statistics for the hypothesis that there is no causality from The data set comprises annual measures on 18 least developed countries: Angola, Benin, Burkina Faso, Central African Republic, Chad, Gambia, Haiti, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mauritania, Niger, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Togo, Yemen, and Zambia. The selection of this sample of LDCs was made due to data availability. The variables employed in estimations are as follows: real Gross Domestic Product (GDP), real exports of merchandise (EXP) and real net foreign direct investment inflows (FDI). Following the previous works, the data are employed in constant US Dollars (year 2000) and constant exchange rates. All data are taken from the UNCTAD statistical database, available on The results for our first trivariate model, where GDP is the independent variable, EXP and FDI are the dependent variables, are provided in At the 10% level of significance there is no sufficient evidence against the null hypothesis in the case of 16 countries, namely, Angola, Benin, Burkina Faso, Central African Republic, Chad, Gambia, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mauritania, Niger, Rwanda, Senegal, Togo, Yemen and Zambia. We therefore fail to provide empirical support for the exports-led growth hypothesis for these countries. For only in 2 out of 18 LDCs in the sample – Haiti and Sierra Leone – do we find evidence that EXP Granger-causes GDP at the 5% significance level. This finding suggests that in these two LDCs there is direct, one-period-ahead Granger causality from growth of real merchandise exports to economic growth. It should be noted that UNCTAD classified Haiti as a manufacturing exporter, while Sierra Leone is a mineral (diamonds and rutile) exporter ( At this level of the analysis it should be noted that the signs of the regression coefficients involved in the causality tests are crucial for claiming support for the export-led growth hypothesis. In fact, one cannot claim support for the export-led growth or the growth-led export hypothesis unless the regression coefficients involved in the causality tests are positive as both hypotheses imply positive parameters. Both in our trivariate and bivariate specifications regression coefficients are found to be significant and positive in all cases when causality is detected from exports to GDP. We can therefore conclude that in Haiti and Sierra Leone (and Rwanda) there is evidence for the export-led growth hypothesis. Here, it is remarkable that in Haiti, the only LDC in our sample that is classified as a manufacturing exporter, the export-led growth hypothesis seems to hold true. This might reflect that real exports growth is capable of generating real output growth when the case is that exports are composed mainly of apparel and manufacturing products. UN reports evaluating the BPoA as well as the country reports by the Haiti government to the UN, reflect that this country has succeeded in establishing a manufacturing exports base over the last few decades as well as managing to increase manufacturing exports considerably during the same time period. More than 70% of the country's exports are composed of apparel and manufactures. The country has been enjoying in the last few decades increasing tariff free access to the USA which is its primary export destination. Again it should be mentioned that Rwanda, for which we have found evidence supporting the export-led growth hypothesis in our bivariate models, is one of the two services-exporting LDCs in our sample. The Rwandan case is particularly interesting in the sense that in recent UN reports on the outcomes of BPoA, Rwanda was framed as a success story, as it succeeded in establishing a well-developed services industry (tourism, information and communication technologies) in the last decade. Rwanda is also known to have made considerable efforts towards the establishment of a well-functioning liberal market economy and is often shown as an example of good governance in LDCs. The third country for which we have found evidence in support of the export-led growth hypothesis is Sierra Leone, which is a country with an extremely low degree of export diversification. More than 60% of exports of Sierra Leone are composed of diamonds and rutile, and the country's export revenues crucially depend on prices of these two commodities in international markets. It should however, be noted that Sierra Leone has been increasing efforts for establishing domestic diamond cutting and design industries, and for attracting FDI in these industries so that it may be able to keep as much of the value added within the country. The second column of This finding might be due to the very low levels of FDI inflows as share of national output in LDCs in general. Of these two countries for which we have found evidence for Granger-causality from FDI to GDP, Benin is an agricultural exporter (cotton), and Togo is a mixed exporter. The shares of FDI in national output in both countries are typically low, but still higher than the LDC average. Benin's economic growth performance is above LDC average, while Togo's performance is below the average during the period of analysis. FDI inflows in Benin are directed mostly into agricultural products and food processing sector while the Togon economy is based on export-oriented production of agricultural commodities such as cotton, coffee, cocoa, and phosphate mining. The Government of Togo has been exerting efforts to encourage foreign direct investment by increasing the degree of the country's financial openness in addition to World Bank and IMF guided economic reforms. Country reports to the UN by Togon government also show that FDI to Togo is mainly directed towards seafood and agricultural processing, textile and mining industries. Finally, we test for the joint hypothesis that EXP and FDI together do not Granger-cause GDP in the same trivariate system. The third column of The Granger causality test results for our second trivariate model are given in Considering FDI as the auxiliary variable in the system, and focusing solely on the GDP–EXP relations, we can now test for the null hypothesis that GDP does not cause EXP. Wald test statistics and bootstrapped critical values are provided in the first column of Interestingly, two (Angola and Chad) of the three countries for which we have found evidence in support of the growth-led export hypothesis are classified as oil exporters by UNCTAD. The third country, Zambia, is also a natural resource (copper) exporting LDC, which is classified as a mineral exporter by UNCTAD. This finding might reflect the fact that the economic growth of these natural resource rich LDCs is strongly correlated with the world growth rates, and the rise in exports is associated with the higher world demand for oil and key mineral resources during boom periods. Again, in this group of countries, the cumulative causation process could be working in a stronger and more efficient way. The fact that Angola and Chad are the largest oil exporting countries in the group of LDCs whose domestic economies are almost totally dependent on a single (energy) sector is supportive of the above potential explanations. In the case of the Zambian economy, which is almost totally dependent on copper and minerals extraction industry, the two explanations noted above also seem to be appropriate. Theoretical literature suggests that trade and FDI can be related positively or negatively; the sign of the relation is dependent on the characteristics of the recipient country, types of industries, the nature of FDI, and objectives of foreign investors. Institutional factors such as political and economic stability, transparency regulations and corruption are amongst the factors that determine foreign direct investment inflows in developing countries ( When the findings of our causality tests are considered in light of the signs of coefficient parameters, we can make the following observations on the FDI-exports nexus. The regression coefficients are positive in all cases we considered, except Benin, indicating that there exists a positive relation between FDI and EXP in Haiti, Mauritania, Niger and Togo. Our causality tests, therefore, suggests that in these three LDCs FDI Granger-causes EXP, suggesting that real net FDI inflows generate real growth in total exports of merchandise. We can therefore conclude that only in the case of Benin, (and in Chad and Yemen, according to bivariate model results) FDI is market-seeking, and has a trade-substituting effect. In the case of Haiti, which is a manufacturing exporter, our test results suggest that growth in real net FDI inflows accelerate real export growth, probably as a result of a productivity rise, increasing international competitiveness of Haiti's manufacturing exports through the transfer of technology and know-how, as expected by the three successive PoAs of the United Nations. In the case of Mauritania, which is a natural resource-rich, mineral exporting country, on the other hand, our findings suggest that FDI is trade-oriented. Mauritania has rich deposits of iron ore that account for about 40% of its total exports, in addition to gold and copper. The positive causality relation found between FDI inflows and exports might therefore suggest that FDI is primarily oriented towards the extraction and expropriation of the recipient country's mineral resources. Increased productivity in mining industries and strengthening of the country's competitive power in global markets might be other alternative plausible explanations. The same reasoning also seems to be appropriate in the case of Niger, which is an extremely poor, landlocked nation with one of the world's richest uranium deposits. When we test for the hypothesis that FDI and GDP jointly do not Granger-cause EXP, we reject the hypothesis for a total of 6 LDCs: Angola, Benin, Burkina Faso, Chad, Niger and Zambia. The Wald test statistics and bootstrapped critical values are provided in the third column of The empirical results for our third trivariate model that takes FDI as the independent variable and GDP and EXP as the dependent variables are provided in We first take the GDP as the auxiliary variable in the system in order to be able to test the reverse causality direction in the FDI–export nexus. The Wald test statistics and bootstrapped critical values for the null hypothesis that EXP does not cause FDI are provided in the first column of The signs of estimated coefficients are found to be positive for Haiti and Rwanda, and negative for Madagascar, Mauritania and Senegal (this finding is again in parallel with our bivariate model results). We can therefore conclude that in the case of Rwanda and Haiti, EXP Granger-cause FDI, suggesting that real growth in exports of merchandise attract more FDI in these particular LDCs (which are services and manufacturing exporters, respectively). Next, in this third trivariate model we take EXP as the auxiliary variable in the system, and focus exclusively on GDP–FDI relations. The Granger causality test results for the null hypothesis that GDP does not cause FDI are shown in the second column of FDI into Madagascar has been on rise since the early 1990s. Madagascar has a very open investment regime, with very low corporate and property tax rates, no restrictions on profit remittances or foreign ownership of land. The Government of Madagascar has recently revised the Investment Code and found an investment promotion agency in order to further improve the country's investment climate. Most of the FDI goes into sectors such as textile and apparel, agro-industries and wood products. This finding might be the result of the very low levels of FDI in LDCs in general. However, this finding might also equally reflect that FDI inflows to LDCs do not target the domestic markets in the first instance, as countries in this group have too narrow domestic markets. This might be the reason behind our failure to provide strong evidence in support of a significant causality link that goes from economic growth to FDI inflows. This observation is in conformance with theoretical expectations and previous empirical works on FDI towards developing countries and LDCs. These works claim that FDI towards this group of underdeveloped countries has different objectives, such as access to, or exploitation of, strategic mineral and energy resources. However, it should be noted that the signs of the estimated coefficients are found to be negative for Gambia, and positive for Madagascar (as it was in our bivariate models). This finding suggests that real economic growth enables Madagascar to attract more real net FDI inflows; while, in Gambia FDI inflows accelerate during periods of economic slowdown. Finally, we test for the joint hypothesis that FDI and GDP together do not Granger-cause EXP in the same trivariate model. According to the Wald test statistics and critical values provided in the third column of This study examined causality relations among real GDP, real exports and real net FDI inflows among Least Developed Countries by making use of a newly developed Granger causality testing procedure for panel data sets. We have found general evidence for a multiplicity of causality relations among the variables considered. In only two of the LDCs in our sample, namely the Central African Republic and Liberia, we failed to find evidence for causality in any directions ( The findings of our empirical test of the export–growth nexus are equally supportive of the export-led growth and the growth-led export hypotheses in the case of Least Developed Countries. We identified only three cases in this study in which there is evidence of real export growth Granger-causing real growth in GDP, while, similarly, there are three cases in which real GDP growth is found to be Granger-causing real export growth. Furthermore, we observed that the economic structure of LDCs seems to be the primary determinant of the direction of causality between exports and economic growth. Countries for which we have found evidence supporting the growth-led exports hypothesis are rich in oil or other natural resources. Interestingly, two of the three cases for which we have found evidence in support of the export-led growth hypothesis are manufacturing or services exporters. For the only manufacturing exporter in our sample (Haiti) and one of the two services exporters (Rwanda), we have found evidence in support of the export-led growth hypothesis. When these two findings are considered simultaneously, it can be argued that there is a clear divide between different types of LDCs. This observation suggests important policy prescriptions; for those countries which are capable of competing in international markets for manufacturing products or services, exports seems to be a true source of economic growth. The international community, therefore, should focus more on supporting export-orientation through aid-for-trade, trade-capacity building schemes and other types of policies in order to support the development of export-oriented manufacturing industries in such LDCs. Again, Official Development Assistance and other sources of financial support in the case of these countries might be directed at supporting manufacturing or services exports. Supporting the internationalization of manufacturing firms and the services sector in these LDCs can also be an effective policy in enhancing their economic growth. For agricultural exporters, mineral exporters, natural resources, and particularly oil-rich LDCs, on the other hand, export revenues do not seem to contribute significantly to (and Granger-cause) real economic growth. In this group of LDCs, it seems plausible that domestic growth mechanisms are more significant in explaining export growth, rather than the reverse. The international development assistance programs should therefore more address the domestic growth mechanisms (including investment in human capital, primary and secondary education, good governance and macroeconomic policies etc.), as opposed to promoting trade orientation in this group of LDCs. When it comes to the second nexus examined in this study, our major finding is that real net Foreign Direct Investment inflows contribute significantly to real economic growth in only a very few number of LDCs. A probable reason for this might be the very low levels of FDI in national incomes of this group of countries. Although FDI inflows to LDCs have been constantly on rise during the last two decades, the shares of FDI in GDP remain insignificant in these countries. Furthermore, FDI inflows to LDCs are very highly concentrated in a couple of countries, mainly the largest LDCs, as well as the resource-rich, mineral or oil exporting countries. Despite the many efforts by LDC governments and the emphasis successive UN PoAs have placed on the role of FDI in promoting growth, it seems that in any of LDCs, real net FDI reached beyond a significant threshold. What seems to be noteworthy in our empirical study on FDI-growth nexus is that growth in real net FDI inflows is found to have a positive impact on real economic growth in all cases in which we detected a causality relation in the Granger sense. We did not identify any case in which FDI inflows had a significant negative impact on real GDP. This finding is important in the sense that it suggests that inward FDI does not have a “crowding out” effect on national output in the case of LDCs. The international community, therefore, should accelerate efforts to direct more FDI to LDCs and make FDI reach to a significant share of GDP in this group of countries. This study has also provided many insights on the third set of causality relations considered, that is, the FDI-exports nexus. Test results suggest that only in two countries (Haiti and Rwanda) real exports growth enhances (and Granger causes) growth in real net FDI inflows. We can therefore claim that in the case of manufacturing and services exporters, better export performance is a way to attract more FDI in conformance with theoretical expectations. In the remaining LDCs however, there is no evidence in support of real export growth having a positive impact on real net FDI received. This study has also found evidence that in the case of five LDCs (Benin, Haiti, Mauritania, Niger and Togo) the reverse causation direction (from FDI to exports growth) seems to hold true. This finding suggests that FDI has a trade-complementing nature in the case of LDCs; FDI inflows are not market-seeking and do not have a trade-substituting impact. In the view of these empirical observations, the international community and domestic governments should continue to search for ways to encourage more FDI towards LDCs, particularly in the case of manufacturing and services exporters. It should however be noted that the overall evidence in support of FDI/EXP relations, is weak, potentially due to the very low levels of FDI to LDCs. This study however, shows that in the case of natural resource rich, oil and mineral exporters, although FDI might enhance export performance, the growth in real exports is not accompanied by economic growth. The famous resource curse seems to be striking a blow on these LDCs.