Objective
                  The purpose of this case report is to describe the treatment of a 3-year-old plafond fracture that developed posttraumatic osteoarthritis in a patient with chronic left ankle pain.
               
                  Clinical Features
                  A 65-year-old woman presented with daily anterior, posterior, medial, and lateral left ankle pain. Her initial pain level was 7 of 10 on weight bearing. She had trouble working and walking. She was previously treated with a walking boot, crutches, exercises, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and a steroid injection. She consulted our office approximately 3 years post-injury, at which point her initial disability score was 55 of 104 on the Foot and Ankle Disability Index.
               
                  Interventions and Outcome
                  The patient was subsequently treated with low-level laser, kinesio taping, exercise, and toggle board manipulation of the ankle. After a total of 6 visits, she was able to return to work and was walking with marked reduction of pain. Her pain level was 1 of 10 on weight bearing 1.5 years after her last treatment.
               
                  Conclusion
                  In this case report, a patient presented with 3-year-old ankle pain with an original etiology of plafond fracture. Her pain and disability resolved with a combination of low-level laser, exercises, kinesio taping, and toggle board manipulation. Her disability score after 6 visits was 18 of 104 on the Foot and Ankle Disability Index. This is a possible treatment option for posttraumatic osteoarthritis secondary to plafond fractures.The plafond is the distal ceiling of the tibia, and it articulates with the talus bone to help form the ankle. The word The patient was a 65-year-old white woman who presented with left ankle pain. She was 63 inches tall and weighed 151 lbs. Her history was negative for diabetes, inflammatory arthritis, cancer, stroke, deep vein thrombosis, and cardiovascular problems; however, she was a former smoker and occasional alcohol user. The rest of the patient's history was unremarkable. The onset of her left ankle pain started about 3 years earlier, when she stepped in a hole, turning her ankle. She had no previous history of injury at the site of pain. The pain became chronic over the last 3 years and became worse with walking. The patient reported no abnormal swelling in the ankle or leg. The pain decreased with ice and Biofreeze. She attempted to treat the condition with self-prescribed ibuprofen and Naprosyn; however, this offered little relief, and she was unable to work as a housekeeper and animal caretaker owing to her limited walking ability. The pain was described as dull, sharp, and aching. She had been seeing an orthopedist for 2.5 years before seeking care at our office. According to her prior orthopedist's notes, the patient stepped in a hole 3 months before seeking care. In the original exam, she had swelling around the peroneal tendons and reported pain in eversion and inversion of the ankle. She had a negative anterior drawer test, and her ankle X-rays were negative for fracture or dislocation. She was originally diagnosed with left ankle tendinosis. She was treated with home exercise and a cortisone shot. When she returned 6 weeks later for her follow-up, she reported only 3 to 4 days of relief and noticed swelling in the posterior and lateral ankle. The pain occurred daily and was worse with activities. Full range of motion of the ankle was described, and a magnetic resonance image (MRI) was ordered. Results of the MRI revealed localized periosteal edema of the posterior lateral tibia consistent with a posterior tibial plafond fracture. There was also localized edema in the distal fibula; however, no fracture line in the fibula was noted. Mild lateral soft tissue edema was reported, but the talofibular and tibiofibular ligaments appeared normal. The peroneal tendons were intact. The talar dome was within normal limits and no osteochondral defects were detected. The bone marrow of the other osseous structures was unremarkable, with no osseous destruction. The medial flexor and extensor tendons were intact, and the Achilles tendon and plantar fascia were within normal limits. The conclusion of the radiologist was posterior lateral tibial plafond fracture and associated contusion within the distal fibula ( The patient returned to the orthopedist after the MRI and reported an increase in pain, which was worse with activity and weight bearing, with a decrease in pain when she was off her feet. She was diagnosed with a chronic fracture of the tibial plafond and was instructed to limit her activities, prescribed a walking boot and crutches, and scheduled for follow-up in 6 weeks. Upon her return 6 weeks later, the patient reported some reduction in pain. She had been using the boot when weight bearing was necessary, along with crutches. She had full range of motion. Two-view X-rays of the lower leg were interpreted as showing a subtle cortical irregularity of the distal tibia and fibula that may have been caused by some callus that formed during the healing of radiographically occult fractures. The plan developed by her orthopedist was to stop crutches, but wear the boot for 2 to 3 weeks before discontinuing it. Exercises were discussed, and the patient was instructed to follow up as needed. The patient presented with a 7 of 10 pain score in the left ankle on weight bearing. Her current disability score was 55 of 104 on the Foot and Ankle Disability Index. She walked with a limp. The patient was examined and found to have a blood pressure of 142/80. She was afebrile. She was oriented to time, place, and person. She had no gross contusions, swelling, or redness in the lower leg. Physical examination revealed no gross muscle atrophies. The lower-extremity strength was 5 of 5 bilaterally. The examination revealed deep tendon reflexes of 2 of 2 at the patella and right Achilles. The deep tendon reflex was 0 of 2 at the left Achilles. She had 2 of 2 blood flow at the dorsalis pedis with a pulse of 70. She had a negative drawer sign at the ankles for gross instability. The left ankle was enlarged and measured 24.1 cm, and the right was 23.5 cm. She had lost of left dorsiflexion compared to the right. This was done with the patient supine and the foot in a neutral position. The joint had a hard end feel at the end of passive range of motion in dorsiflexion. She did have pronation of the left foot on weight bearing compared with the right. All other motions of the ankle were similar to the right with no gross restrictions. She had no gross crepitus of the joint on exam. She had mild limited extension of the low back; the other ranges of motion were within normal range for her age. A 3-view X-ray of the left ankle was ordered to evaluate for osteoarthritis, nonunion fracture, or stress fracture. Anterior posterior, oblique, and lateral left ankle revealed moderate degenerative joint disease in the posterior tibiotalar joint. This is consistent with grade 3 osteoarthritis on the modified Kellgren-Lawrence scale. Ossification of the interosseous ligaments was noted. Enthesopathy at the insertional point of the plantar fascia was reported. No gross fractures or dislocations were present ( The patient was diagnosed with posttraumatic osteoarthritis secondary to a plafond fracture. A multimodality approach was recommended over the next 2 weeks. The treatment schedule was 3 times/wk. Repeated MRI was discussed to evaluate ligament instability, occult fracture, or stress fracture, if the patient was unresponsive. She was initially treated with a class-4 K-Laser Cube (K-Laser, Treviso, Italy) for approximately 4 minutes at 950 J. Four different wavelengths of 660, 800, 905, and 970 nm were used. This was applied over the anterior, posterior, medial, and lateral ankle. She performed dorsiflexion of the ankle with a red TheraBand resistant band for 3 sets of 15. She was encouraged to push to the end of range of motion unless she had sharp pain. She had the ankle manipulation on a toggle board with superior to inferior motion to the distal ankle. This was repeated 5 times. She reported no side effects or sharp pain. Three days later she returned with pain at a level of 2 to 3 of 10. There were no problems with care or home exercise. She had loss of eversion and dorsiflexion of the ankle compared with the right. She had repeated K-Laser with the same dosage and location. The toggle manipulation was repeated, and the ankle was also toggled in eversion. This was repeated 5 times in each motion. The patient was prescribed 2 minutes of tennis ball rolling exercise in a seated position with slight downward pressure. She added these to her previous exercise regimen. On the third and fourth visits, the left ankle was kinesio taped. The tape was applied with an approximately 50% elongation of the tape in the middle portion. This tape was applied to the ankle on both sides and the inferior foot up to the approximately 3 in above the ankle with 2 overlapping strips. This was anchored at the top with an additional piece of tape. Toggle manipulation was just in a superior to inferior motion. She had no eversion toggle manipulation. Low-level laser was applied with the previous dosage and location. She had been compliant with her exercise program. She now reported her pain level as 1 to 3 of 10 upon walking. On visits 5 and 6, the low-level laser and toggle manipulation were repeated in the previously described manner. The kinesio taping was discontinued. She noted a marked decrease in pain with walking. She continued her exercises. She had full range of dorsiflexion compared to her right. She was to follow up in a week. On the sixth visit, her Foot and Ankle Disability Index score was 18, down from the original 55. She called and cancelled the appointment. She reported that the pain was gone and she was back working full time. A plafond fracture, also considered a type of pilon fracture, is a fracture of the distal part of the tibia, involving its articular surface at the ankle joint. The incidence of distal tibial fractures is 3% to 10% of all tibial fractures and 1% of lower-extremity fractures. Many patients have some limitation of physical activity; the inability to run is the most common. Fourteen of 31 patients changed jobs owing to the injury. Approximately 80% of ankle osteoarthritis is posttraumatic. No clinical study to date has demonstrated that any conservative or surgical therapies to stabilize the ankle joint after injury decrease the incidence of PTOA. The addition of mobilization with exercise did increase dorsiflexion of the ankle in 1 study. This study was done exclusively on men. Kinesio taping is the application of an elastic tape. Kinesio taping has been used in the treatment of degenerative joints. A review demonstrates that it is superior to no treatment but is not superior to other treatment for chronic musculoskeletal problems. Low-level laser therapy, also called photobiomodulation, involves the use of light energy (generally a 600- to 1000-nm wavelength) to promote tissue healing, reduce inflammation, and relieve pain. Our patient had 4 different wavelengths of 660, 800, 905, and 970 nm applied to the ankle. Low-level laser therapy was more efficient in reducing pain and improving cartilage thickness through biochemical changes than sham in a study of chronic osteoarthritis. The treatment consisted of a combination of therapeutic modalities. Consequently, the combined efficacy of all the treatments makes it impossible to distinguish among the positive effects of toggle manipulation, low-level laser, kinesio taping, and exercises. The measurement of dorsiflexion by comparison to the opposite side without goniometer, inclinometer, or the wall lunge measurement suggests that some of the loss of motion may have originated from the subtalar joint. It is also possible that the patient's symptoms improved spontaneously, and thus it is not possible to say with certainty that the treatment caused the improvement in this patient. This is a single case report, and other patients may not necessarily have the same response to treatment. This patient responded well to a combined treatment of toggle manipulation, low-level laser, kinesio taping, and exercise. Other patients may respond differently. The combination of toggle manipulation, low-level laser, kinesio taping, and exercise is worth a short-term trial treatment in PTOA secondary to plafond fractures in select cases. No funding sources or conflicts of interest were reported for this study. Concept development (provided idea for the research): R.E.B. Design (planned the methods to generate the results): R.E.B. Supervision (provided oversight, responsible for organization and implementation, writing of the manuscript): R.E.B. Data collection/processing (responsible for experiments, patient management, organization, or reporting data): R.E.B. Analysis/interpretation (responsible for statistical analysis, evaluation, and presentation of the results): R.E.B. Literature search (performed the literature search): R.E.B. Writing (responsible for writing a substantive part of the manuscript): R.E.B. Critical review (revised manuscript for intellectual content, this does not relate to spelling and grammar checking): R.E.B.   The report demonstrates rare chronic presentation of nonsurgical plafond fracture. To our knowledge, thrust manipulation has not been used on posttraumatic osteoarthritis in a case of plafond fracture. Use of multiple modality treatment methods maybe helpful in the care of posttraumatic osteoarthritis.