Introduction
                  Total elbow arthroplasty (TEA) is one option in distal humerus fracture in elderly osteoporotic patients.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  The study hypothesis was that, in patients aged 70years or more, TEA provides functional results and ranges of motion compatible with everyday activity, with a complications rate equal to or lower than with internal fixation, and no loss of autonomy or cognitive impairment.
               
                  Material and methods
                  In this retrospective study, 21 patients receiving TEA for distal humerus fracture were included. Mean follow-up was 3.2years, with functional (Quick DASH and MEPS), cognitive (MMSE), autonomy-related (ADL) and radiological assessment (Morrey).
               
                  Results
                  Mean MEPS was 84 and QuickDASH 32.4. Mean extension deficit was 22°, and mean flexion 125°. There was no loss of autonomy or cognitive impairment. The complications rate was 9.5%. There were no revision surgeries.
               
                  Discussion
                  TEA proved reliable in comminuted distal humerus fracture in elderly patients. Functional results were comparable to those in the literature, and the complications rate was lower. Long-term implant survival needs confirmation to validate this option as a treatment of choice in these indications in geriatric traumatology.
               
                  Type of study
                  Retrospective non-comparative, single-center.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  4.Distal humerus fracture in osteoporotic elderly subjects is a surgical and functional challenge. The elbow joint, hinging shoulder and hand, is critical to autonomy in everyday activity. The reference treatment for distal humerus fracture is surgical reduction with stable rigid internal fixation, allowing early mobilization This was a single-center single-operator retrospective non-comparative study. Inclusion criteria comprised: age ≥ Twenty-six TEAs were performed for traumatologic indications between January2009and January 2014. Twenty-one patients were included in the study: 20 female and 1 male. Two patients died with less than the minimum 2 As our center has no emergency department, preoperative assessment was systematically conducted in orthopedic consultation and by the anesthesiologist and mobile geriatric team. All surgical procedures were performed by the same surgeon (DL), using the same implant (Conrad-Morrey, Zimmer/Biomet, Warsaw, IN) Patients were positioned supine, with the upper limb across the thorax, a support on the sternum and the limb fixed by a lateral wedge. Surgery was performed without tourniquet, under general anesthesia with analgesic axillary nerve block. The incision was posterolateral, to shift the scar away from the bony edge of the olecranon and to optimize implant coverage. The first step was to identify the ulnar nerve, which was completely released from the brachial canal up to the anteromedial compartment of the forearm, and left in a medial position. Particular care was taken to spare all the epitrochleo-olecranal groove tissue attached to the nerve, so as to keep a protective sheath isolating it from the future implant ( Patients were followed up in consultation at 1, 3 and 6 Immediate postoperative AP and lateral elbow views screened for leakage, implant malpositioning or protrusion. Ulnar and humeral cementation was checked on immediate postoperative X-rays, and classified in 3 types, following Morrey Implant fixation was assessed on X-ray ahead of each follow-up consultation, and scored 0 to 4, again following Morrey Polyethylene bushing wear at the hinge was classified on X-ray at last follow-up, following Lee and Morrey type 1: normal bushings, with < type 2: partial wear, with 3.5–5° bushing angulation; type 3:complete bushing wear, with > All radiographs were examined for signs of anterior cortical graft integration. Mean follow-up for the 21 elbows was 3.2 One patient died of acute coronary syndrome at 3 There were 2 principal complications (9.5%): 1 case of severe stiffness, and 1 of skin necrosis at the tip of the olecranon. The patient with stiffness had suffered peritonitis at day 18, necessitating 32 days’ admission to the visceral surgery department which, combined with the resulting asthenia, involved extreme immobility and hence stiffness; the patient and family declined revision surgery to release the prosthetic joint, and rehabilitation failed to restore a functional range of motion. The case of skin necrosis followed an in-hospital fall with skin abrasion at the olecranon and shoulder dislocation, which was irreducible due to associated glenoid fracture, for which the patient declined further surgery; the constant pressure of the limb on the olecranon caused ulceration of the abrasion ( There were no cases of infection or of revision surgery. Mean hospital stay was 4.3 days (range, 2–32days). Seven patients were referred to a rehabilitation center, due to their social isolation, and 14 were discharged home. There were no cases of suture detachment at the triceps: active extension was conserved. Mean flexion was 126°, and mean extension defect 22°; pronation-supination was full in 19 cases and impaired by 50% in both directions in 1. Mean QuickDASH was 32 (rang: 15.2–72.4; SD: 14.8) at last follow-up. Mean MEPS was 84 (range: 50–99;SD: 12.6), with pain, mobility, stability and function subscores of respectively 43.2 (30–45), 15 (5–20), 9.7 (5–10) and 19.1 (0–25), and 16 excellent, 3 good and 2 poor outcomes. Functional results are shown in There were no immediate postoperative abnormalities. One patient had type-1 humeral cementation. At 1 year, 1 patient showed type-3 loosening, without clinical or functional impact at 2 We particularly wished to study the management of osteoporotic distal humerus fracture due to its increasing prevalence Functional results were altogether satisfactory, with a mean QuickDASH of 32, MEPS of 87, extension loss of 22° and flexion of 125°. Our hypothesis was confirmed. All patients were able to return home, with mean ADL score > The present results confirm those already published in this indication; sample size was small, but the findings were similar to those of most previous studies. The complications rate was 9.5%, lower than in comparative studies, which favored elbow arthroplasty over internal fixation. McKee reported a 27% rate with internal fixation, in contrast to 12% with elbow arthroplasty Internal fixation remains the reference treatment, and elbow arthroplasty needs to demonstrate functional results that are at least equivalent if it is to be used in this indication. It is probably wise to be cautious, and reserve TEA for type B and C fracture in over-70 year-old subjects, especially as follow-up is lacking in the various reports of elbow arthroplasty in traumatology. In type-A fracture, internal fixation, thanks to the rigidity of locked assembly, is stable despite osteoporosis Even so, some comparative studies reported better functional results with total elbow arthroplasty The present results show similar mean values for extension, flexion and pronation-supination, and contribute an extra series with a respectable sample size, confirming the reliability of these implants in terms of functional recovery in this indication. Another strong point was the inclusion of autonomy and cognitive scores, which are part of standard assessment in geriatrics. A major limitation was the short follow-up, especially regarding late complications and implant survival. Implant survival is, indeed, a legitimate question, which few studies have answered in traumatology. Plaschkeshowed implant survival to be shorter in distal humerus fracture than in other indications, but with overall 10-year survival of 81%, taking all indications for TEAtogether The study hypothesis was that functional results are satisfactory and the complications rate is low, without cognitive deterioration or loss of autonomy, in elderly subjects with distal humerus fracture treated by total elbow arthroplasty. The present results show this option to be well suited to the indication in the geriatric traumatology setting, although longer-term analysis will be needed for effective validation. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. D. Lami occasional consultant in Graftys, JN Argenson occasional consultant in Zimmer-Biomet, deputy editor in Journal Bone Joint Surg Am, Board member in European Knee Society.