Introduction
                  Radial head arthroplasty (RHA) has become one of the mainstay surgical treatment for radial head fracture in certain conditions. Many previous studies compared the superiority of either open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) and RHA with inconclusive result. Our case series aim to evaluate the functional outcome of the patients treated with RHA in our institution.
               
                  Presentation of case
                  We evaluated three patients who had RHA in 2018 and 2019. The function of flexion, extension, supination and pronation of the elbow was evaluated. The range of motion (ROM) was assessed in both active and passive way.
               
                  Discussion
                  An abundant of literatures stated that RHA result is superior than radial head resection and ORIF. Our case series present a satisfying result on pain and a fair result on functional outcome from the range of motion (ROM) evaluation on patient follow-up.
               
                  Conclusion
                  A good follow up for post-operative care plays an important role in management of RHA to minimize the rate of complications. In this case series, the functional outcomes after RHA is good, but a larger number of patient and longer follow up duration is needed for a better analysis.Radial head fractures contribute to one-third of fractures around the elbow joint and 1.5–4% from all fractures. Fall on an outstretched hand in an active young patient has become the most common mechanism in this type of injury [ The aim of this case series is to evaluate the functional outcome of the patients after operative treatment of radial head arthroplasty. All of the surgeries was performed by the author under general anesthesia. The patient positioned supine for lateral access. The surgery performed through lateral Kocher/Kaplan approach to access the radial head. The radial head and neck resected and the neck trimmed to fit the prosthesis. The author inserts the chosen prosthesis which had been measured for its length and stability. Post-operative care protocol was delivered accordingly. We report three patients in this case series. The research work of this study has been reported in line with the PROCESS criteria [ We evaluated the post-operation functional outcome of all three patients who had radial head arthroplasty in 2018 and 2019. The function of flexion, extension, supination and pronation of the elbow was evaluated. The range of motion (ROM) was assessed in both active and passive. A year after the surgery, elbow joint ROM which had been operated was evaluated. From the first patient, active ROM of elbow flexion was 110° ( The second patient is a 53 years old female with close fracture dislocation of left elbow after fall on an outstretched hand in a volleyball game ( The third patient is a 38 years old female with neglected close fracture dislocation of the left elbow (terrible triad injury) ( From the third patient, active ROM of elbow flexion was 80° ( Fractures of the radial head comprises about 5% of all fractures occurring in adults and about 15% of trauma to the elbow [ In 1954 Mason observed the pattern of injuries in 100 patients with radial head fracture and classified them to 3 groups. Mason type I fractures of the radial head involved fractures with no displacement, type II fractures were displaced marginal sector fractures, and type III fractures were comminuted. Later in 1962 Johnston added the fourth classification which comprises dislocation of the elbow as a type IV to the system [ The principle treatment of radial head fracture was determined from its type of classification according to Mason. Type I injuries are treated non-surgically; Type II injuries could be managed conservatively or if displaced with ORIF; Type III injuries with ORIF or radial head arthroplasty. Resection of the radial head is indicated only for isolated radial head fractures without ligament injury [ Radial head arthroplasty (RHA) becoming a more popular option in recent years for the treatment of radial head fracture Mason type III and IV. Many studies state that RHA showed a superior result compared to radial head resection and open reduction and internal fixation, but some were against it, stating that the latter option is better in term of functional outcomes, number of revision surgery and post-operative early and late complications [ A review from Kaur et al., show that RHA has good to excellent functional outcomes in short to midterm follow-up. The postoperative outcomes of RHA varies to some certain factors such as patient-related, socioeconomic, education, work status, etc. Standardized report of complication and revision rate are needed to avoid an under-estimation of the failure rate [ Catellani et al. said that few papers recommend resection as a better option for isolated radial head fractures unassociated with ligaments injuries because of a lack of statistical clinical differences between RHA and radial head resection. No substantial differences in patient outcomes at medium and long-term follow-up [ The limitation of our case series is the small number of patients due to short period of follow up. Patients were satisfied with the results on pain and functional outcomes regarding ROM were fair overall. A good follow up for post-operative care plays an important role in management of RHA to minimize the complications. In this case series, the functional outcomes after RHA is fairly good, but a bigger number of patient and longer follow up is needed for a better analysis. None. The study does not use fund from any sponsors. The study has been approved by the Ethical Committee of Medical Research Saiful Anwar State Hospital, Indonesia. This study has been in accordance with Declaration of Helsinki. Informed consent has been obtained from each patient. This study has been registered with code researchregistry5270. Agung Riyanto Budi Santoso. Editorially reviewed, not externally peer-reviewed.  The authors of this study want to give thank you to all of the support from the colleagues from Orthopaedic and Traumatology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Brawijaya.