The computational cost associated with the use of high-fidelity computational fluid dynamics (CFD) models poses a serious impediment to the successful application of formal sensitivity analysis in engineering design. Even though advances in computing hardware and parallel processing have reduced costs by orders of magnitude over the last few decades, the fidelity with which engineers desire to model engineering systems has also increased considerably. Evaluation of such high-fidelity models may take significant computational time for complex geometries.
                  In many engineering design problems, thousands of function evaluations may be required to undertake a sensitivity analysis. As a result, CFD models are often impractical to use for design sensitivity analyses. In contrast, surrogate models are compact and cheap to evaluate (order of seconds or less) and can therefore be easily used for such tasks.
                  This paper discusses and demonstrates the application of several common surrogate modelling techniques to a CFD model of flocculant adsorption in an industrial thickener. Results from conducting sensitivity analyses on the surrogates are also presented.For many industrial fluid dynamics problems, it is impractical to perform experiments on the physical world directly. Instead, complex, physics-based simulation codes are used to run experiments on computer hardware. Accurate, high-fidelity computational fluid dynamics (CFD) models are typically time consuming and computationally expensive, this poses a serious impediment to the successful application of formal sensitivity analysis in engineering design. While advances in High Performance Computing and multi-core architectures have helped, routine tasks such as visualisation, design space exploration, sensitivity analysis and optimisation quickly become impractical Sensitivity analysis of model output aims to quantify how a model depends on its input factors. Global sensitivity determines the effect on model output of all the input parameters acting simultaneously over their ranges. Most global sensitivity techniques are variance-based methods and determine the fractional contribution of each input factor to the variance of a model output. The main difficulty with global sensitivity analysis is that the number of model evaluations required is often large. As a result, CFD models are often impractical to use for design sensitivity analyses. The objective of this paper is to discuss and demonstrate the application of several common surrogate modelling techniques to a case study of a CFD model of flocculant adsorption in an industrial thickener. A sensitivity analysis is then conducted on the produced surrogate models. Radial basis function (RBF) models use linear combinations of radially symmetric functions to interpolate samples data points. The simplest form of these models is Artificial neural networks (ANN) are massively parallel highly interconnected simple processors (neurons). A typical ANN structure consists of an input layer into which the independent variables are fed, the output layer that produces the dependent variables and one or more hidden layers. The hidden layers link the input and output layers together and allow for complex, nonlinear mapping from the input to the output. The mapping is not specified but is learned. An artificial neural network can be described in terms of the individual neurons, the network connectivity, the weights associated with the interconnections between neurons, and the activation function of each neuron. A typical architecture, known as the multilayer feed-forward network, is shown in The network is trained by minimising the mean-squared error between the output of the output layer and the target output for all the input patterns. An artificial neural network starts out with random weights, and the weights are adjusted until the required degree of accuracy is obtained, this process is called learning. A number of learning schemes are available to train an ANN The theoretical background of support vector machines (SVM) is mainly inspired from statistical learning theory The parameter set consists of vector It is essential to assess the accuracy of a surrogate for prediction before it can be used for sensitivity analysis studies. Model accuracy is usually assessed by comparing some response data produced by the analysis code (CFD output) with corresponding response data predicted by the model. An error measure is calculated based on these two sets of values to quantify the degree of accuracy. After a model is built, a straightforward way to assess its accuracy is to run the analysis code at a large additional set of sample points and compare the output with those predicted by the model Cross-validation works by estimating a model accuracy measure with only a limited number of samples points. The computational cost of cross-validation (i.e. generating While cross-validation almost always performs very well Sensitivity, in this context, is a measure of the contribution of an independent variable to the total variance of the dependent data. Sensitivity analysis allows addressing questions such as Can we safely fix one or more of the input variables without significantly affecting the output variability? How can we rank a set of input variables according to their contribution to the output variability? If and which parameters interact with each other? Does the model reproduce well know behaviour of the process of interest? There are alternative approaches for sensitivity analysis, differing, for example, in scope (local versus global), nature (qualitative versus quantitative), and in whether they assume a particular model. In this paper we discuss the application of the Fourier amplitude sensitivity test (FAST), a variance-based non-parametric approach for analysis applications. FAST is a sensitivity analysis method which works irrespective of the degree of linearity or additivity of the model The main idea of the FAST method is to convert the Saltelli et al. The indices from Extended FAST are used within this paper and were calculated using the MATLAB version of SimLab distributed freely by the Joint Research Centre ( CFD modelling of process unit operations is a tool that is being used increasingly within the minerals processing industry to reduce operating and capital costs and increase throughput, one such unit operation where CFD has been applied is gravity thickening Understanding the flows within a feedwell is of critical importance to the overall thickener performance, as this is where most flocculation is induced, with the degree of turbulence a major factor in determining the structure and size of aggregates formed The aim of this study was to build a surrogate utilising the outputs from the CFD model detailed in Owen et al. The feedwell geometry investigated in this study is a generic open feedwell with an attached shelf and a single feed inlet system entering the feedwell tangentially clockwise. The feedwell is 4.0 The parameters relating to the flocculant sparge location ( Radial angle between flocculant sparge and feed pipe ( Vertical location of flocculant sparge ( Distance from feedwell wall to flocculant sparge (C). CFD computations were performed with the CFD software package PHOENICS (CHAM, London, UK) using the model described in Owen et al. The approach detailed in Owen et al. Each of the input variables, This approach is compared against a second, in which sequential design is used to improve the sample distribution and tailor it specifically towards the problem at hand Sequential design further improves on this approach by transforming the one-shot algorithm into an iterative process. Sequential design methods analyse data (samples) and models from previous iterations in order to select new samples in areas that are more difficult to approximate, resulting in a more efficient distribution of samples compared to traditional design of experiments. For the second experiment, the LOLA-Voronoi sequential design strategy was used All of the surrogate models were built using the SUrogate MOdelling (SUMO) MATLAB toolbox The GA as implemented in the MATLAB GADS toolbox was used to search the parameter space of possible models. Each model type has a set of hyper-parameters, the parameter space searched by the GA for each of the model types was: RBF optimal basis function combination and the parameters of each selected basis function. ANN the initial weights (from which to start the back propagation training) and the network topology (number of neurons per hidden layer and number of hidden layers). LS-SVM the regularization constant ( The population size of each model type is set to 10 as is the maximum number of generations. The cross over fraction was set to 0.7. The error function used to measure the fitness of each model is defined as: From Once the surrogate models have been created they can be used for many purposes, including visualisation of the relationship of models inputs to output. One such method of visualisation is the generation of 2D contour slice plots. In these plots the contour variable is the model output and the axes represent different model inputs. While it is well established that variations in flocculant sparge location can have a significant impact on feedwell flocculant mixing and adsorption Let us take into account the results of Extended FAST. We can see that the most important factor is Adding up the three sensitivity indices we can see their value is much less than 1. This means the model is non-additive with significant interactions between variables. The majority of interaction is occurring between parameters Three types of surrogate models (RBF, ANN and LS-SVM) have been described along with the approach to optimising their parameters. The output from a CFD model of thickener feedwells that incorporates flocculant adsorption has been used to produce surrogate models of the adsorption process within thickener feedwells. A space filling method was used for three model types and an adaptive sampling method was used with an ANN model to allow comparison between the two sampling approaches. For this particular case study it was found that the adaptive sampling offers no real benefit over the space filling sampling due to the uniformly non-linear behaviour of the response. Both ANN models (space filling and sequential design) are similar from an error perspective. The resulting network structure of the sequential design ANN is too complex because not enough pressure is applied to the modelling process to keep the model complexity down. The produced surrogate models have been used to investigate the sensitivity of the model output (flocculant loss) to the various models inputs ( The sum of the main effects indicated the models are non-additive with significant interactions between variables. The most important parameter is The support of the Parker CRC for Integrated Hydrometallurgy Solutions (established and supported under the Australian Governments Cooperative Research Centres Program) is gratefully acknowledged.