The influence of solution pH and polymer molecular weight on the stability of mixed alumina-silica oxide suspension in the absence and presence of polyacrylic acid (PAA) was studied. The composition of the adsorbent was: Al2O3 (96%) and SiO2 (3%). To obtain changes in the stability of the investigated systems as a function of time the turbidimetry method was applied. It was shown that the suspension without the polymer was characterized by the smallest stability at pH 9, whereas at pH 3 and 6 the systems are successively stable. PAA with the molecular weighs 2000 at pH 3 (large deterioration of system stability conditions) and PAA (all molecular weights) at pH 9 (considerable improvement of suspension stability) have a great effect on the alumina-silica stability. The specific conformation of PAA chains on the solid surface which depends on solution pH and polymer molecular weight is responsible for the stabilization–flocculation properties of polyacrylic acid in the colloidal suspension.The state of colloidal dispersion is essential for many technological applications. However, the colloidal particles tend to aggregate due to van der Waals attractions. The polymer addition is a very good way to obtain the improvement of stability conditions of such systems. If polymer chains undergo adsorption on the solid particles the steric repulsion appears leading to steric stabilization The stabilization properties of polymers are widely used in production of paint (i.e. stabilization of titania particles The polymer presence in the colloidal suspension can also cause its destabilization The most important application of destabilization process in the presence of polymer is industrial and drinking water purification The polymeric flocculants are also used in petroleum refining Such huge demand for efficient stabilizers and flocculants of colloidal suspensions in industry, water treatment and agriculture makes that basic studies of the stability mechanism of solid suspension in the presence of macromolecular compound relevant and necessary. Thus, the main aim of this work is to determine the changes in stability of mixed alumina-silica oxide suspension in the presence of anionic polyacrylic acid (PAA). Due to the fact that conformation of PAA macromolecule depends on solution pH and polymer molecular weight, their influence was investigated. The samples of mixed alumina-silica oxide of the chemical composition: Al Polyacrylic acid (PAA, Fluka) with the weight average molecular weights 2000, 100 All measurements were carried out in the presence of NaCl solution (1 The stability measurements of silica-alumina suspensions without and with PAA were carried out using Turbiscan Lab The analyzed suspension in a glass phial (7 Based on the transmission and backscattering data the stability parameters were calculated. The stability parameters are: the rate of particles (aggregates, flocs) migration [μm/min], the particle (aggregate, floc) diameters [μm], thickness of formed sediment [mm] and the turbiscan stability index (TSI). These data were calculated using the programs TLab EXPERT 1.13 and Turbiscan Easy Soft. The calculation of migration rate used multiple light scattering theory and the particles diameter calculation was based on general law of sedimentation, that is Stokes' law extended to the concentrated dispersions The sample stability can be estimated and compared using turbiscan stability index (TSI). This parameter takes into account all single measurements during experiments and the TSI value is obtained from their averaging. All processes taking place in the sample including thickness of sediment and clear layer as well as particles settling were summed up. This coefficient was calculated with the special computer program Turbiscan Easy Soft from the following formula: The TSI values changes in the range from 0 to 100. The higher the TSI is the more unstable the system is. The schematic picture of the measuring phial with the suspension and backscattering changes on its different heights are presented in  Additionally, Additionally, As follows from The addition of PAA 2000 at pH 3 significantly deteriorates stability conditions in the SA 96 suspension ( The analysis of the transmission and backscattering curves at pH 6 ( The addition of polyacrylic acid ( The behavior of the studied suspension at pH 9 is different ( The polyacrylic acid presence in the alumina-silica suspension at pH 9 ( The analysis of polyacrylic acid functional groups ionization and SA 96 surface charge density as a function of solution pH is very helpful to explanation of obtained changes in stability of alumina-silica suspension in the absence and presence of PAA. Each segment of PAA ([ The analysis of the data in The addition of PAA 2000 at pH 3 drastically deteriorates stability of the solid suspension. As can be seen in Such steric repulsion probably takes place in the case of higher molecular weight of PAA (100 The behavior of SA 96 suspension in the absence of PAA at pH 6 is similar to that at pH 3. It remains stable. The absolute values of surface charge density (6.98) and zeta potential (26.5 The addition of polyacrylic acid practically does not change the stability conditions of the suspension. The polymer functional groups are almost completely dissociated at pH 6. The mutual repulsion between these groups causes more stretched conformation of adsorbing macromolecules. On the other hand, the adsorbent surface is still positively charged. The bonded with the surface Large instability of the alumina-silica suspension without the polymer at pH 9 is probably caused by the lowest absolute value of zeta potential under such conditions (1.5 The pronounced improvement of suspension stability at pH 9 in the presence of PAA was observed. The polymer chains were characterized by total dissociation of their functional groups (α The effect of anionic polyacrylic acid presence in the mixed alumina-silica oxide (SA 96) suspension as a function of solution pH and polymer molecular weight was studied. The turbidimetric results as a form of transmission and backscattering curves, as well as calculated stability parameters (TSI, aggregate diameter, rate of migration, sediment layer thickness) indicate that the solid suspension without the polymer is highly unstable at pH 9 (coagulation, very low zeta potential: − Polyacrylic acid addition causes the smallest changes in the SA 96 suspension at pH 6, at which PAA ensures electrosteric stabilization of the examined system due to repulsion between solid particles covered with almost completely dissociated polymer chains. On the other hand, at pH 3 the polymer with low molecular weight, that is 2000 causes great destabilization of the suspension due to solid surface charge neutralization. PAAs with higher molecular weight ensure the electrostatic stabilization of SA 96 system. The presence of polyacrylic acid in the alumina-silica suspension at pH 9 considerably improves its stability. It is a result of strong electrostatic repulsion between the adsorbed polymer chains, whose carboxyl groups are totally dissociated, leading to electrosteric stabilization. The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Community's Seven Framework Programme (FP7/2007–2013) under the