We devised a multi-jet atmospheric glow plasma system and successfully verified a possibility to ignite and maintain an atmospheric pressure discharge using helium, argon or a mixture of helium and oxygen gas. In this study, as an alternative method to the conventional wet cleaning process, the multi-jet atmospheric glow plasma system was applied to clean the ablation debris inside the blind via holes from micro-via drilling process of printed circuit boards (PCBs) prior to electroplating process. Scanning electron microscope images, after the multi-jet atmospheric glow plasma treatment of the PCBs, showed effective removal of residual organic impurities and massive fibrous debris when compared with low-pressure vacuum plasma treatment. Consequently, we demonstrated that multi-jet atmospheric glow plasma system could not only effectively remove organic impurities and massive fibrous debris generated during micro-via drilling process, but also enhance the electroplating process and the wire bondability.The fabrication of micro-via is one of the critical processes in manufacturing compact and high-density printed circuit boards (PCBs). Conventionally, via holes are produced using CNC mechanical drilling machines. These machines are reliable, economical and productive in drilling through-holes that have diameters above 200 μm. For smaller vias, the mechanical drilling method becomes expensive due to frequent breakage of the drill bits and machine downtime. In order to overcome these drawbacks, the laser drilling of micro-via has been investigated and seen limited production worldwide During drilling, drill bits become heated, causing the melting and smearing of the epoxy-resin base material across the inner-layer copper surfaces within the hole barrel to which subsequent through-hole plating must connect. If not corrected, the organic impurity would constitute a dielectric layer between the inner-layer copper surfaces and the plated copper, and the circuit would be defective. The most widely used chemistry is sodium or potassium permanganate for removing the smear and organic impurity. Another important application is the cleaning of soldering and bonding pads. Parts, which have to be wire bonded, are often contaminated with the bled out epoxy glue and other low molecular organic impurity from the whole production steps. Until recently, plasma cleaning was developed as a ‘dry’ and ‘clean’ method for isotropic removal of materials In this study, the use of atmospheric plasma as a method of cleaning a blind via of PCBs prior to electroplating process and soldering is investigated as an alternative method to the conventional wet process. We report the comparison of scanning electron microscope (SEM) results of cleaning a blind via of PCBs using vacuum plasma system to multi-jet atmospheric glow plasma. We prepared two types of PCBs; made of a CNC drilling and CO A multi-jet atmospheric glow plasma system with the RF generated hollow cathodes was used for the PCB de-smear cleaning process. The multi-jet atmospheric glow plasma system is schematically illustrated in Using a multi-jet atmospheric glow plasma source, we have successfully verified a possibility to ignite and maintain an atmospheric pressure discharge in helium and helium based oxygen gas flowing through the hollow-type electrodes. The distance between this electrode and the counter electrode is adjustable between 1 and 10 mm. The forward RF power to ignite an atmospheric discharge can be as low as 12 W. The discharge is stable, volume filling, silent, with no streamers. Discharge conditions are shown in In order to investigate the cleanliness, we used the SEM (JSM-5200, JEOL). In this study, we varied RF power from 40 to 80 W, plasma exposure time to 1, 2 and 4 min, and additive oxygen contents. The treatment condition is shown in  We also note that the plasma treated PCBs show a significant change in morphology compared with the untreated PCBs. Focusing on the image of the bottom, the multi-jet atmospheric glow plasma treated PCBs show a significant change of morphology compared with the vacuum plasma treated sample, and no massive debris remains. The removal of the massive debris can be explained by the gas blowing effect, which was supplied to sustain atmospheric glow plasma. This indicates that the residual organic impurity and massive fibrous debris can be removed effectively using multi-jet atmospheric glow plasma treatment compared to the vacuum plasma treatment. Longer the treatment-time or higher the applied voltage, we observed that the sidewall of blind via was collapsed even with the vacuum plasma treatment. It is not clear why the sidewall of blind via was collapsed with higher applied voltage or longer treatment time. It implies that more applied voltage or exposing time in the plasma treatment may induce thermal damage. In both experiments, higher oxygen content in He plasma, the residual smear of micro-via blind holes effectively removed. These behaviors after plasma treatment coincide with the trends in the samples prepared by CO We invented a multi-jet atmospheric glow plasma system and successfully verified a possibility to ignite and maintain an atmospheric pressure discharge using helium, argon or helium and oxygen mixture gas. Consequently, we can effectively remove residual organic impurity and massive fibrous debris inside the micro-via blind holes by the multi-jet atmospheric glow plasma system. Also this process can enhance wire bondability and molding compound/solder mask adhesion. Multi-jet atmospheric glow plasma source may substantially save the cost of purchasing the vacuum system. For the more, it may replace the chemical cleaning treatment of micro-via blind holes in PCBs by sodium or potassium permanganate agents and atmospheric plasma processing. The authors would like to express many thanks to J.H. Lee, C.S. Lee (DAEDUCK Electronics CO., LTD) and Ph.D. J.M. Choi for valuable advice on the present study.