Plasma assisted vapor deposition has been used to synthesize tin–tin oxide coatings on stainless steel substrates. The effects of plasma assisted vapor-deposition process parameters have been investigated, using statistically designed experiments, the so-called response surface analysis. Substrate temperature, gas ratio and time were chosen to be the parameters, and three levels for each parameter were determined to understand their significance on thin film morphologies and amount of materials deposited. Temperature and time were found to be the effective parameters among the variables chosen. Increase in both temperature and time is seen to increase the coating weight. Oxygen presence in the plasma is observed to affect the surface morphology of the coatings by producing circular deposited clusters in the coatings. Added to this, increasing temperature causes clusters to become smaller, and the increase in time is seen to lead, to a larger cluster size.Among the many thin film synthesis techniques, plasma assisted chemical vapor deposition (PACVD), or plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) technique, has become widely utilized, especially, in applications such as semiconductors, solar cells and gas sensors In conventional CVD, coatings are synthesized by heating the substrates to high temperatures so that, the chemical reaction can take place at the surfaces, and deposits are formed on these substrates. In the case of PACVD, two types of plasmas can be generated; they are equilibrium (isothermal) plasmas and non-equilibrium (non-isothermal) plasmas. The equilibrium plasmas need: low frequency discharge, high temperatures and high pressures (1.3×10 In non-equilibrium plasmas, due to the high electric field, the gases are ionized into electrons and ions. Since the electrons are significantly lighter than the ions, they can be accelerated to higher energy levels quicker than ions, and they do not raise the plasma temperature as much as ions do. Likewise, the ions in high frequency fields are not able to respond to rapid changes, as well as they do in low frequency fields. This helps to maintain low temperatures in non-equilibrium plasmas. Under these conditions, collisions among high-energy electrons and the gas molecules, leads to dissociation and generation of chemical species and initiation of the chemical reactions In PACVD, the energy source for reaction and deposition activation, the so-called plasma, can be generated by using different methods such as radio frequency (RF), microwave induction (MW), electron cyclotron resonance (ECR) or direct current (DC) Tin-oxide coatings have been extensively investigated for gas sensors In the experiments performed, vapor deposition, superimposed with a DC plasma, have been undertaken, wherein, Sn metallic particles have been evaporated in a tungsten boat in vacua. This evaporated Sn was made to react with oxygen of the plasma, and has resulted in Sn The substrate used, in the present work, was type 304 stainless steel at a thickness of 0.05 mm. Type 304 stainless steel sheets were provided from Alfa Aesar, and punched into 12 mm diameter discs, for future tests in Lithium-ion battery applications. Discs were cleaned ultrasonically for 15 min in acetone and weighed using an electronic balance (Sartorius Model 1712 MP8 Silver Edition), with a resolution of 0.01 mg, prior to their placements in a plasma unit for coating. Sn and Sn-oxide coatings were deposited onto these discs, utilizing plasma assisted vapor deposition technique. The schematic of the unit used in this study is shown in For all the coatings, the system was evacuated to 0.13 Pa previous, to the sputtering with argon gas. By introducing the same amount of argon gas to the chamber and attendant pumping, the pressure in the plasma chamber was held constant at 11–12 Pa during, the 45 min of sputtering for all coatings. Following sputtering, alumina coated tungsten boat, in which 99.9% pure and 3 mm diameter Sn metal pellets were contained, was resistively heated to evaporate the tin. Evaporation rate was held constant for each experiment, by turning the variac up to a constant level, where evaporation starts, and substrate temperature was taken to the desired temperature, by changing the plasma voltage in the system. As soon as coating started, oxygen gas was introduced into the plasma chamber, to obtain tin-oxide coatings on the substrates. A fishbone diagram, which is also called the cause and effect diagram, was prepared by considering DC-plasma assisted coating process, and the instruments used in the processing (see Response Surface Methodology (RSM) is used to obtain the number of experiments, depending on the number of parameters and levels agreed upon. RSM is a set of techniques, which are used for finding the best value or values of response, depending on the parameters and levels involved in the design. Although, this design of experiment technique is generally utilized for optimization purposes, it is also utilized as a great tool to understand, the overall response system, for the processes or products investigated Following each run, type 304 stainless steel discs, coated with Sn or Sn Along with the quantitative results above, a series of qualitative analyses were also performed. XRD analyses were made to define the elemental consistency of the coatings. SEM analyses were conducted to see the surface morphology of the coatings. Regression and ANOVA analyses were made to see whether the coating mass data determined were ‘statistically significant’ and ‘which parameter’ can be used to define this coating processes best. Analyses were conducted using Essential Regression 2.218 for Windows 8 The significance of this model is also seen in ANOVA results. The lower the In The best model that defines the relation among independent parameters and coating weight for this system is: Coating weight=3.235+0.270×O+0.673× where O: Oxygen content (%), As seen in the above model, the most important component is found to be the substrate temperature, which has a linear, and a quadratic component in this model. Secondly, the linear component of time on coating weight is determined to be very effective on the results. The other parameter, such as oxygen content, seems to have a linear effect on coating weight. In addition to this, two-linear interactions are seen in this model. The common components of these interactions are time, and other components are oxygen and temperature. Along with the quantitative effects of each independent parameter on coating weight, qualitative SEM and XRD results will also be discussed later on. Quantitatively, substrate temperatures showed the biggest effect on coating weight. As seen in It is noteworthy to mention that, as far as the substrate temperatures in this study are concerned, In the model all grain boundaries were assumed immobile in Zone I, as substrate temperature rises grain boundaries begin to mobilize. Zone II is assumed to be controlled by granular epitaxy and grain growth, and in Zone III extensive grain growth with a concomitant reduction in porosity takes place. At higher temperatures, bulk grain growth and surface recrystallization is assumed to occur In the present study, the experiments made at 150 °C are assumed to represent the middle of Zone III, since the ratio of As is well known, the plasma assisted coating process is actually a continuous sputtering process along with the deposition. While in the sputtering process, atoms on the surfaces are being knocked-off, in the deposition atoms and ions are being attached to the surfaces. Therefore, the balance between these two processes are also very important, where one process could dominate the other, depending on the process parameters such as temperature, voltage, pressure, etc. In the present case, to increase the substrate temperature, the plasma voltage (between the anode and the cathode) is increased. This results in the formation of more ions, neutrals and electrons that collide with each other, and deposit on the substrate surface. At 250 °C substrate temperature, most of the charged particles, with higher energies, were expected to be generated, than those of 150 °C. An increase in substrate temperature seems to dominate deposition process over sputtering, since a definite increase is observed in weight with higher substrate temperatures (see In general, as the deposition duration increases, the mass of coating on substrate surface shows an increase. Added to this expected result, in the qualitative SEM micrographs, As seen in the regression analysis (see In A series of quantitative and qualitative analyses were made on the coating weight of Sn and SnO synthesized by a dc-plasma assisted deposits. The following conclusions can be drawn: Quantitative results show that, temperature and time have a remarkable effect on the coating weight of Sn–SnO thin films. With increasing temperature and time, the coating weights seem to increase. SEM results show that, with increasing temperature, the morphology of the coating changes from bigger particles to smaller particles. However, with increasing time cluster, sizes become larger. Oxygen presence had a slight influence on coating weight as far as the quantitative results are concerned. Nevertheless, qualitatively, oxygen presence showed a remarkable effect on the morphology of the coatings, consisting of much more circular clusters, than those that are irregular in shape, as observed in the case of argon atmosphere alone. Although, the results show that, a statistically designed experiment and systematically conducted study is promising, further cross-sectional SEM studies are needed to see and understand the morphological changes in the coatings with changes in the parameters studied.