The therapeutic applications of titanium dioxide nanotubes as osteogenic surface treatments for titanium-based implants are largely due to the finely tunable physical characteristics of these nanostructures. As these characteristics change, so does the cellular response, yet the exact mechanisms for this relationship remains largely undefined. We present a novel TiO2 NT imaging platform that is suitable for use with live-cell imaging techniques, thereby enabling, for the first time, dynamic investigation of those mechanisms. In this work, fabrication methods for producing transparent TiO2 NTs with diameters of 56 ± 6 nm, 75 ± 7 nm, 92 ± 9 nm, and 116 ± 10 nm are described. To demonstrate the diagnostic potential of these TiO2 NT imaging platforms, the focal adhesion protein vinculin and actin cytoskeletal filaments were fluorescently tagged in osteoblasts and real-time, high-resolution fluorescent microscopy of live-cell interactions with TiO2 NT substrates were observed. The scope of such a platform is expected to extend far beyond the current proof-of-concept, with great potential for addressing the dynamic response of cells interacting with nanostructured substrates.
               
                  Statement of significance
                  Titanium dioxide (TiO2) nanotubes are known to strongly enhance bone/mesenchymal stem cell behavior and, consequently, have gained attention as potential osteogenic surface treatments for titanium-bone implants. The exact mechanism by which TiO2 nanotubes influence cellular function remains controversial, partly due to limitations in existing cellular imaging methods with opaque substrates. This work identifies fabrication conditions for the successful production of transparent TiO2 nanotube arrays with tailorable diameters, as well as their functionality with pre-osteoblast mouse cells (MC3T3-E1) transfected with fluorescent focal adhesion protein vinculin and cytoskeletal filament actin. We demonstrate a means of recording live-cell, cell–substrate interaction mechanisms via high-resolution fluorescent microscopy and customizable, transparent TiO2 nanotubes to begin defining the relationship between TiO2 nanotube features and cell function.Titanium (Ti) and Ti-alloys have been used in orthopedic implants for several decades due to their high strength-to-weight ratio, excellent corrosion resistance, and good biocompatibility Recent advances in live-cell microscopy techniques such as fluorescence-resonance energy transfer (FRET), fluorescence-lifetime imaging microscopy (FLIM), and lattice-light sheet microscopy (LLSM) have enabled accurate, high spatial and temporal imaging of molecular dynamic interactions within live-cells to observe elusive cellular functions In this work we present a novel, live-cell imaging platform that enables the use of fluorescence microscopy with transparent TiO Ti disks were cut from a commercially pure (cp)-Ti rod (99.7% pure, High-Strength Grade 5 Titanium, McMaster-Carr, Elmhurst, IL) and subsequently polished via metallographic grinding/polishing (MetaServ 250 and Vector LC 250, Buehler, Lake Bluff, IL). Specimens were initially ground using progressively finer (i.e. 400, 600, 800, and 1200 grit) silicon carbide grinding paper. Final polishing was carried out with 1.0 μm alumina powder (Pace Technologies, Tucson, AZ) slurry and Lecloth pad (LECO, Saint Joseph, MI), finishing with a colloidal silica/hydrogen peroxide solution and Chem 2 polishing pad (Pace Technologies, Tuscan, AZ). Before anodization, samples were consecutively sonicated in deionized water and methanol for 5 min each. TiO Physical vapor deposition (PVD) was employed to deposit uniform thicknesses of Ti atop 25 mm diameter × 0.17 mm glass cover-slips (Cat. #72225-01, Electron Microscopy Sciences, Hatfield, PA) serving as the transparent base. Glass targets were fixed to an aluminum plate that had been successively sonicated and rinsed with water, methanol, and acetone. Prior to PVD deposition the glass surface was plasma etched at 250 V for 30 min at a pressure of 1.0 × 10 Ti-coated glass samples were first inspected and loaded into the custom electrochemical flat cell, exposing a 3.14 cm The surface of the NT coatings was observed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Zeiss Supra 40VP, Zeiss, Jena, Germany). Top-down images were generally taken at 30k× and 50k× magnification. AFM images were collected using a Bruker Nanoscale 5 AFM with ScanAsyst-Air software in multimode and a 2 nm radius pyramidal tip with 0.4 N/m spring constant (Bruker Nano Inc, Santa Barbara, CA). Characterization of coating/substrate cross-sections were carried out by carefully scratching the anodized Ti sample to examine the fractured and detached TiO The inner diameter (ID), outer diameter (OD), and NT lengths (or TiO DH5alpha strain of Pre-osteoblast mouse bone cells MC3T3-E1 subclone-4 (ATCC, Manassas, VA) were cultured in α-MEM media with 1% penicillin/streptomycin and 10% FBS. 150,000 cells were seeded on coverslips coated with fibronectin or TiO Unless otherwise noted, all experiments were performed in duplicate or triplicate according to sample availability, and all quantitative data were presented as the mean (±) standard deviation. Statistical comparisons were made with one-way ANOVA and Tukey post-hoc analysis using GraphPad Prism v7.00 (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, California, USA). The anodic oxidation process was first optimized to enable fabrication of transparent TiO  To overcome this challenge, the influence of electrolyte water content on initial barrier layer thickness and associated TiO Top-down and cross-sectional SEM micrographs of TiO Increasing water concentration promotes oxide formation, resulting in the formation of a thick, dense NP layer during the initial stages of anodization that protects the underlying NT surface from chemical dissolution, and also permits rapid growth of the NT layer To fabricate transparent TiO To demonstrate the overall transparent TiO To characterize the relationship between transparent TiO When fabricating TiO TiO Thus far, we have demonstrated our ability to control NT dimensions while producing transparent TiO To evaluate the influence of NT dimensions on transparency the average transmittance in the range of 450–650 nm was collected for TiO To demonstrate functionality of the transparent TiO To further test the TiO Cells transfected with fluorescently-tagged actin filaments provided a sufficient model for demonstrating our platform’s functionality for live-cell fluorescence microscopy, as seen in This work began by identifying and establishing the relationship of TiO None. The raw/processed data required to reproduce these findings cannot be shared at this time as the data also forms part of an ongoing study. This material is based upon work supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: