Synthesis gas production provides an excellent opportunity for integration of a turbine expander since the heat is available at very high temperatures (900–1400 °C). This case study considers the integration of a turbine expander with a synthesis gas production process that uses auto-thermal reforming for Fischer-Tropsch synthesis. Auto-thermal reforming technology is a commercialised technology that is well suited to large scale synthesis gas production processes. A methodology that was previously developed and published by the same author is applied in this case study, resulting in an improved flow sheet with significantly improved power output and thermal efficiency improvement. The new flow sheet comprises a unique power production system that uses synthesis gas as a working fluid and wherein the sequence of compression and expansion are reversed in position, compared to conventional power production systems. A conventional steam cycle is also coupled to this synthesis gas power production system to render a combined synthesis gas and steam power production arrangement.
                  Simulation models were created of the conventional and new integrated flow sheets and the analysis focussed on pressure ratio variations across the turbine expander. It is shown how such variations affect other parameters in the system. In one of the cases a 37% improvement in net work was obtained from the new integrated flow sheet compared to the conventional flow sheet. The results are also compared to the results obtained in a recent study on integration of a turbine expander with a steam methane reformer, and further options to implement the synthesis gas power production system for a steam methane reformer are explored.efficiency enthalpy specific heat ratio mass flow rate pressure expansion pressure pressure ratio heat transferred to a cold reservoir heat removed in cooler heat received from a hot reservoir heat input to a heat engine/power cycle heat removed from a heat engine/power cycle portion of reaction heat transferred to generate steam ideal gas constant entropy temperature compressor work net work delivered or required by a system work delivered by process gas system work required by a pump work delivered by a steam cycle turbine expander work auto-thermal reforming boiler feed water compressor Fischer-Tropsch gas to liquids heat exchange reforming high pressure partial oxidation steam methane reforming steam turbine turbine water gas shift pressure swing adsorption vapour liquid separator The concept of using turbine expanders in chemical processes to recover exothermic reaction heat is not new and was investigated extensively by Greeff et al. Recently, in 2016, Li et al. In many of the processes where synthesis gas is the route to convert stranded gas into useful products, it may In this paper a study is therefore presented to integrate a turbine expander with a synthesis gas process wherein changes in operating conditions of downstream processes are not possible, and the approach followed to either decrease downstream pressure, or even increase reformer pressure, as proposed by Li et al The improved flow sheet with integrated turbine expander was developed using the methodology previously proposed by Greeff et al. Conversion of natural gas to chemicals and fuels on commercial scale involves the production of synthesis gas as the first step. Production of synthesis gas is capital and energy intensive, for example in the case of typical gas-to-liquids complexes, 50% of the capital investment is for synthesis gas production. It is therefore of interest to improve synthesis gas production processes and explore new production routes There are a number of technologies that can be used to produce synthesis gas, most notably steam methane reforming, partial oxidation or a combination of these routes. Steam methane reforming (SMR) is the most widely used technology. In SMR the methane reacts with steam over a nickel catalyst, the reactions are highly endothermic and take place at temperatures between 800 and 1000 °C and pressures of 20–30 bar. The SMR requires heat which is supplied externally by combustion of fuel in a furnace. In partial oxidation (POX) methane is exothermically reacted with oxygen to form synthesis gas, at temperatures ranging from 1000 to 1045 °C and pressures of 30–85 bar. The partial oxidation can be carried out in two ways. Non-catalytic partial oxidation (POX) requires high temperatures for complete conversion and soot reduction. In catalytic partial oxidation a catalyst is used and no burner is required, however, commercial application of this technology has not been realised yet. SMR produces synthesis gas with a hydrogen-to-carbon monoxide ratio of 3 whereas in POX the ratio is 1.7–1.8. The hydrogen-to-carbon monoxide ratio requirement varies depending on the desired synthesis. The final composition of the syngas from SMR and POX can be manipulated by changing the process conditions or by adding process steps. However, even with this manipulation neither POX nor SMR is ideal for gas-to-liquids applications. Fischer-Tropsch synthesis requires a hydrogen-to-carbon monoxide ratio of about 2. SMR and POX are used together, either in parallel or combined into one reactor, to overcome this problem. The combination of SMR and POX into one reactor is known as auto-thermal reforming (ATR). In ATR the heat required for the endothermic steam reforming reactions is supplied by the heat released via the partial oxidation of a portion of the feed gas. The ATR reactor consists of a burner, a combustion chamber and a catalyst bed inside a refractory lined pressure vessel. The feed is reacted with a mixture of steam and oxygen in a sub-stoichiometric flame before entering the catalyst bed. Apart from its compatibility with Fischer-Tropsch synthesis, several other factors, such as compactness, lower capital cost and potential for economies of scale, makes ATR an attractive technology for incorporation into gas-to-liquids complexes Most of the synthesis gas production technologies involve heat recovery from the high temperature product gases leaving the reformer, and therefore provides an excellent opportunity for integration of a turbine expander A major disadvantage of conventional steam reforming is that only 50–60% of the fired energy available from the reformer furnace is actually transferred to the process to drive the endothermic steam reforming reactions. The remaining energy is used to generate high pressure steam or to preheat feed streams via an arrangement of additional coils inside the reformer furnace Heat exchange reforming can also be applied in process flow sheets where the outlet gas from an ATR unit is used as a heat source for a subsequent steam reforming unit. This is one way to use the high temperature heat more efficiently, namely to drive further steam reforming reactions. Temperature driving forces for subsequent cooling of the product to generate steam will also be lower, as the synthesis gas product leaving the heat exchange reformer has a lower temperature. This concept is shown in Hinderink et al. Processes in which uncontrolled combustion is reduced, i.e. where furnaces are decreased or eliminated, show a large improvement with respect to exergy utilisation. Besides losses due to chemical irreversibilities, Although heat exchange reforming provides a way of reducing exergy losses, expansion of the hot synthesis gas is another way to achieve this. To expand synthesis gas leaving a reformer is not a new concept, however, the expansion is not necessarily proposed for the reason of wanting to reduce exergy losses in downstream cooling of synthesis gas. For example, Agee et al. The system proposed by Agee et al. however deals with air or enriched air reforming, and nitrogen is then present in large quantities in the downstream processes. The expander is included as a means to provide power for air compression, and not with the purpose of solving the problem of high temperature driving forces in subsequent synthesis gas cooling steps. The system proposed by Agee et al. Another example of proposed synthesis gas expansion found in patent literature; is a patent by Haldor Topsoe, the provider of ATR technology For the purposes of this case study an existing standard flow sheet of an ATR process was used and a turbine expander was integrated. No changes to the operating conditions of the ATR or the downstream reactor were considered. Oxygen is assumed to be available at the required pressure from an oxygen plant, which requires large quantities of power to operate. Such power is typically supplied by using steam turbines driven by energy harvested from the process via steam generation, typically obtained from the waste heat boiler used to cool the synthesis gas and the lower pressure steam generated through cooling of reactors. Fischer-Tropsch, methanol and ammonia processes all include exothermic reactions and the reactors require cooling. The conventional flow sheet for this case study is shown in Integration of the turbine expander into the conventional flow sheet is based on the methodology for flow sheet development presented in previous work by Greeff et al. In order to use hot process gas to generate power it is most important to structure the process analogous to a power cycle. A power cycle includes a number of unit operations in a certain sequence to enable a net power output. Gas power cycles may be open or closed, as shown in Upon placing an expander at the exit of the ATR, as shown in  Cooling and condensate separation takes place on the low pressure side of the integrated system in Dotted lines are used to show the system boundary for the synthesis gas power production system in Process simulation models of the conventional flow sheet and new flow sheet were created using Aspen Plus version 10 and the Soave-Redlich-Kwong method was chosen to calculate thermodynamic properties. Steam tables were used for the water and steam properties. Process conditions at the outlet of the ATR are obtained from the work done by Venter The natural gas composition used in the study by Venter The following assumptions are also made for the process: The synthesis gas is cooled to 50 °C before condensate is separated. The condensate is pumped to 48 bar. The FT reactor operates at 24 bar and 260 °C The dry synthesis gas is heated to 260 °C before entering the FT reactor. The synthesis gas is cooled to 150 °C in the steam generator. For the steam cycle the following assumptions were made: HP pressure boiler feed water (HPBFW) is available at 48 bar and 120 °C. Superheated steam at 40 bar and 450 °C is generated in the steam generator. The superheated steam is expanded to 1 bar in a condensing steam turbine to generate power. Isentropic efficiency of the steam turbine is 80%. For the turbine expander and compressor of the synthesis gas power production system only single stage expansion and compression were considered and the isentropic efficiency was assumed as 80%. It was also assumed that the pressure loss of the synthesis gas through the cooler and separator is negligible compared to the pressure difference across the expander and compressor. The air-standard model equations for the Brayton cycle were used as a guide to determine which parameters would be important in analysing the synthesis gas power production system, as these equations provide valuable qualitative indications. The Brayton cycle is an ideal closed cycle wherein the gas is assumed to be ideal, the compression and expansion are isentropic and heat addition and removal are conducted at constant pressure. In air-standard analysis constant gas composition and mass flow rate through the cycle are also assumed. In the air standard models the thermal efficiency of the cycle depends on the compressor pressure ratio and the specific heat ratio of the working fluid: Note that the above efficiency expression was derived based on efficiency defined as the ratio of work output over heat input. In the case of the synthesis gas power production system this definition of efficiency is problematic as there is no real input of heat, but there is an enthalpy difference between all streams entering and leaving the system, which can be replaced by a hypothetical heat-addition process from an external source. The efficiency can then be defined as the ratio of work output over the enthalpy difference. Another point to note is that the mass flow rate through the expansion and compression steps in the synthesis gas power production system is not the same as condensate is removed before compression. This will affect the ratio of work obtained from expansion to work required by compression, however it is still expected that the efficiency will follow the same trend with increasing pressure ratio, as for the very simple air standard model. The work of compression or expansion depends on the pressure ratio as well as the inlet temperature of the compressor or turbine: From these equations it is clear that pressure ratio should be the main parameter to investigate, and it is expected that there will be a pressure ratio where maximum work output is obtained. During the system analysis the expansion pressure of the turbine expander was varied between 4 and 15 bar in the simulation model. This corresponds to a variation in pressure ratio between 1.6 and 6. It was decided to include the work obtained from the steam cycle in this analysis.  Also note that preheating of the syngas is not required for this integrated case since the gas leaves the compressor at a temperature of 263 °C, which is suitable for the FT reactor. In the conventional case the syngas is at 50 °C. As mentioned before, there is no real heat input between points 2 and 3 and efficiency therefore needs to be defined as the ratio of work output over the enthalpy difference between all streams entering and leaving the system.    The efficiency values were determined for a variation in pressure ratio and are shown in  Another obvious way to decrease the temperature driving force in the steam generator would be to increase the steam pressure, leading to a higher possible steam temperature on the steam turbine inlet. As an aside, note that even at very high steam pressures and supercritical conditions steam cannot reach the high temperatures of 900–1400 °C of synthesis gas leaving a reformer. The purpose of this discussion is to explore ideas for applying the synthesis gas power production system to the hydrogen production process studied by Li et al. In In order to obtain a suitable pressure reduction over the expander, Li et al.  The much higher inlet temperature to the expander of 975 °C in Case C, as opposed to the 870 °C in Case B, is one of the factors that contribute to the increased power output as work is directly proportional to turbine inlet temperature. Reformer outlet temperature is however inherent to the technology and not a parameter that can easily be adjusted without other major adjustments in operating conditions of the reformer.  The pressure ratio achieved in the SMR cases is significantly lower at 1.23 and 1.47 compared to the ratio of 4.8 for the ATR case. It is clear that further increase in the pressure ratio for the SMR case would lead to increased power output; however, this is not easily achieved as it involves major adjustments to reformer operating conditions and more severe conditions would have a large impact on costs. In the case of the synthesis gas power production system placed after a reformer however, the pressure ratio can be increased up to a point of maximum power output or maximum thermal efficiency. The pressure ratio will be limited by unit operations on the low pressure side, e.g. in case separation is done here it will be influenced by pressure.     In A flow sheet was developed and analysed for integration of a turbine expander into a synthesis gas production process that uses auto-thermal reforming. In this flow sheet the heat available in the high temperature synthesis gas is used more efficiently to produce power, compared to the conventional flow sheet. This efficiency improvement is predominantly due to the reduction in the very high temperature driving force associated with merely cooling the synthesis gas down to generate steam. The methodology used to develop the new flow sheet focuses on integration of an entire cycle as opposed to only a unit operation (e.g. the turbine expander). Synergy with the synthesis gas production process is also exploited. Once again this methodology was proven to be very effective as in the new flow sheet it is possible to produce 37% more power compared to the conventional system, wherein only steam is raised to produce power. The flow sheet development in this case leads to a unique and interesting synthesis gas power production system, wherein the steps of pressure change are reversed, with expansion first, followed by compression. The synthesis gas power production system allows the hot process gas temperature to be reduced significantly to reduce temperature driving forces for downstream steam generation. The pressure ratio over the turbine can be varied to obtain maximum power output or maximum thermal efficiency, the pressure drop is of no concern to downstream processes as the gas is merely recompressed again. Possible flow sheets for application of the synthesis gas power production system to steam methane reforming were also proposed and it is recommended that these flow sheets be modelled and investigated in more detail. Also, for future work it is proposed that the concepts of reheat and intercooling as well as regeneration be included to further improve the synthesis gas power production system. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: