The upgrading of phosphate ores using froth flotation method has been practiced for at least 65years. Extensive research work has been carried out in the last 25years, on various phosphate-containing ores. Despite of extensive research and industrial experience, there are some challenges remaining in particular in beneficiation of siliceous, calcite, and heavy mineral containing phosphate ores.Introduction Phosphate deposits and its origin Flotation beneficiation of different phosphate ore types Carbonatite and dolomitic ores with and without the presence of silicate Direct flotation of phosphate from the ores containing carbonate and dolomite Beneficiation of high iron and mixed iron, titanium ores Plant practice in beneficiation of phosphate ores Florida phosphate treatment plants Vernal phosphate rock mill Serrana operation, Brazil Other operating plants References The upgrading of phosphate ores using froth flotation method has been practiced for at least 65 The upgrading of phosphate ores by some form of froth flotation has been practiced in the last 60 There are two main types of phosphate ore deposits. These are (1) igneous, alkaline complexes and carbonatites and (2) marine sedimentary deposits. There are other more complex deposits containing phosphate and titanium. Other less important sources are by-product apatites from iron ore processing. The principal phosphate mineral is apatite, which has a general formula Ca Uranium is present in most sedimentary phosphate deposits in the concentration of about 100    In general the phosphate minerals vary in composition depending on the type of ore. It should be noted that many different substitutions are found in phosphate minerals. Silica and alumina may occur in place of some of the phosphate, and calcium may be replaced in part by rare earth lanthanide. The separation of apatite from calcite is considered difficult as both minerals contain some cation in its lattice and therefore they have similar flotation properties. It has A number of researchers Studies also performed using sodium oleate as the selective collector for apatite  The highest apatite recovery was achieved between pH 8.0 and pH 9.0. Experimental testwork was also performed at pH 8.0 with different levels of sodium silicate. These results are presented in Most recently, a number of processes are developed for sedimentary carbonate–apatite flotation using inverse flotation of carbonates with fatty acid collector and depression of apatite using various depressant. Some of the processes developed by various research organizations are discussed below.  The results of this study showed that this process is relatively selective and good concentrate grade can be produced.     Flotation test results have indicated that MgO content of the concentrate was too high (1.8–4.2% MgO). The P  Using the above process, two flow sheets were used; these include: Direct carbonate flotation. This flow sheet ( Bulk, carbonate phosphate flotation followed by carbonate/phosphate separation. This flow sheet ( The metallurgical results using some of the above described process are shown in Good metallurgical results were achieved using H In recent studies, research work was carried out on direct apatite flotation from carbonaceous gangue minerals using various depressant and or new collectors. A new process for the separation of a phosphate mineral from carbonaceous gangue using direct apatite flotation has been developed These depressants are tested on the ore assaying 6.9% P The results obtained with different dosages of collector and depressants are shown in Another depressant system consisting of Depressant System A3-2 plus oxalic acid was examined on the ore from Lalitpur, Uttar Pradesh, India Depressant A3-2 is a mixture of sodium silicate aluminum sulfate and sodium bisulfate in a ratio of Na The use of oxalic acid improved silica rejection. The effect of oxalic acid additions on silica assays of the apatite concentrate is illustrated in Collector emulsion A1 is a highly selective collector for the ores containing silica, calcite, and dolomite. The effectiveness of this collector is compared with other collectors in Continuous test results obtained on the ore are shown in The other known method is calcination of the ore at about 700 A number of the phosphate ores of sedimentary or igneous origin have high iron contents, which represent a problem in beneficiation of phosphate. Some ore also contains significant quantities of ilmenite. Various processes have been developed for the removal of iron from apatite concentrate including scrubbing for surface cleaning, gravity separation, magnetic separation, and flotation using specific iron containing gangue depressants. Often, a combination of two or more of these processes is used to reduce iron content of the apatite concentrate to acceptable levels. Attrition scrubbing is used to remove iron coating from the apatite mineral surfaces, which is often the case with crystalline apatite contained in igneous ore. Heavy liquid separation of iron bearing minerals is also practiced. Good separation can be achieved with coarsely liberated particles. One of the methods studied involves the use of silicates with a different modulus Experiments conducted with different mixture of silicate and metal salt showed improvements in apatite grade and iron rejection. In beneficiation of high iron ores a typical reagent scheme includes sodium silicate, caustic tapioca, or corn starch as iron and silicate depressants and tall oil fatty acid/fuel oil mixture for apatite flotation ( Most recently extensive laboratory and pilot plant studies were conducted on complex igneous ore containing iron, ilmenite and apatite The process developed involved grinding magnetic separation followed by direct apatite flotation. The final reagent scheme that has been confirmed in the pilot plant operation is shown in Depressant A4 is composed of lignin sulfonate (30% sodium silicate (50) and CaCl Metallurgical results obtained in the pilot plant are shown in Two major factors played a significant role in achieving satisfactory apatite metallurgical results. These are: Double open circuit cleaning where low recirculating load of gangue was possible to maintain resulted in a stable circuit. In close circuit cleaning the silica The use of causticized tall oil resulted in significant improvement in selectivity. The effect of different collectors on apatite grade recovery relationship is illustrated in There are many operating plants around the world treating different ore types, which are described in this chapter. One of the basics is the use of fatty acid as a main collector for most of the operating plants. Modifiers and depressant system may vary The phosphate mining and beneficiation have been carried out by about 15 different mining companies with about 25 operating plants. The total production of phosphate pebbles and flotation concentrate accounts for about 75% of the total US production. Most of the operating plants have similar flow sheets except three plants where plus 14 mesh pebbles are ground followed by amine flotation of silica. A general Florida phosphate flow sheet is presented in There is, however variation in treatment of coarse fraction from 14 to 20 mesh. In phosphate and silica flotation a variety of collectors are used. Most of the losses of phosphate during treatment of Florida ores occur in minus 150 mesh slime fraction. The final concentrate grade in most of the plants averaged 33–34% P The Vernal Mill is located in Utah, USA. The mill treats sedimentary rock from the phosphoria formation. The ore minerals identified are collophane, dahllite, and francolite, all being carbonate–apatite minerals with chemical formula Ca The reagent scheme used in the Vernal plant in the various phosphate and carbonate circuit are presented in Carbonate flotation is performed in slightly acid pH of 5.6. The final concentrate grade assaying 31% P Serrana operation is located in Jacupiranga province south of Sao Paolo. The low-grade carbonatite ore averaged 5% P The basic reagent scheme includes NaOH for pH control. Modified starch and sarcosine collector type concentrate grade assaying 35.5% P There are about 35 other operating plants that treat phosphate ores. There are three general flow sheets used in these plants; these are: Direct phosphate flotation. These plants utilize fatty acid collector and various gangue depressants such as silica, starches, and dextrius. Phosphate flotation followed by reverse silica flotation. In these plants phosphate is floated using various tall oils fatty acids, in the presence of depressants, followed by apatite depression and silica flotation using amine collector at slightly acid pH. Apatite/dolomite/calcite bulk flotation, followed by apatite depression and dolomite/calcite flotation. These plants are utilized in fatty acid in both bulk and dolomite calcite circuits.