Objective
                  Clinical issues have been raised about problems related to cytotoxic effects caused when applying self-adhesive cement. It was hypothesized that byproducts eluted from self-adhesive cements modulate oxidative stress response, the gene expression of signaling pathways of inflammatory process/transcriptional activators, and the expression and activity of interstitial collagenases, and modify the phenotypic characteristics of cellular proliferation and mineral deposition in odontoblastic-like cells.
               
                  Methods
                  Cements (MaxCem Elite [MAX] and RelyX U200 [U200)]) were mixed, dispensed into moulds, and photoactivated according to the manufacturers’ instructions. Immortalized rat odontoblast-like cells (MDPC-23) were cultured and exposed to polymerized specimens of cements for 4 h. Reactive oxidative specimen production and quantification of gene expression were evaluated. Cell proliferation assay and alizarin red staining were also performed to evaluate the disturbance induced by the cements on cellular proliferation and mineralization.
               
                  Results
                  Despite their cytotoxic effects, both self-adhesive cements influenced the metabolism in the odontoblast cells on different scales. MAX induced significantly higher oxidative stress in odontoblast cells than U200. Gene expression varied as a function of exposure to self-adhesive cements; MAX induced the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNF-α, whereas U200 downregulated, virtually depleted TNF-α expression, also inducing overexpression of the transcriptional factor Runx2. Overexpression of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) and thioredoxin reductase 1 (TRXR1) occurred after exposure to both cements, antioxidant genes that are downstream of Keap1-Nrf2-ARE system. MAX significantly induced the overexpression of collagenase MMP-1, and U200 induced the expression of gelatinase MMP-2. MAX significantly inhibited cell proliferation whereas U200 significantly activated cell proliferation. Alizarin red staining revealed significantly decreased mineral deposition especially when exposed to MAX.
               
                  Significance
                  These results support the hypothesis that byproducts of different self-adhesive cements play important roles in the highly orchestrated process which ultimately affect the cellular proliferation and the mineral deposition in odontoblastic-like cells, possibly delaying the reparative dentin formation after cementation of indirect restorations, especially on recently exposed dentin preparations.Self-adhesive cements contain self-etching functionalized monomers that significantly reduce the pH and demineralize the tooth structure, promoting micromechanical adhesion [ Concerns have been raised about the chemical composition of restorative materials and their application protocols to the dentinal tissue, especially regarding the particularity of self-adhesive cements [ The biological responses of the pulpal tissues after restorative procedures include cytotoxic effects, such as induced oxidative stress–mediated pulp cell death, inflammatory mediator overexpression, and depletion of glutathione peroxidase and superoxide dismutase enzymes [ The cytotoxic effects of exposed odontoblast cells to commercial self-adhesive cements polymerized using different activation modes was previously evaluated [ Considering that the exposure of an odontoblastic cell line to different self-adhesive cements may induce cytotoxicity to varied extents, we hypothesized that these materials may interfere in the oxidative stress response, the gene expression of different signaling pathways of the inflammatory process and transcriptional activators, and the expression of interstitial collagenases. Furthermore, we hypothesized that these alterations would ultimately lead to modifications in the phenotypic characteristics in terms of cellular proliferation and mineral deposition in MDPC-23 odontoblast-like cells. This in vitro study evaluated the oxidative stress responses, the signaling pathways of the inflammatory process/transcriptional activators, and the expression of interstitial collagenases in MDPC-23 odontoblast-like cells after exposure to self-adhesive cements: RelyX U200 (3M ESPE) and MaxCem Elite (Kerr) ( The unpolymerized materials were then placed into a Teflon mold (2 mm thick, 6 mm in diameter) and positioned over a polyester strip. After filling the mold, the cement surface was covered with a Mylar strip and a glass slide to compress and extrude the excess material. The glass slide was then removed, leaving the Mylar strip. Specimens were then photoactivated using an LED light-curing unit (1200 mW/cm MDPC-23 cells are derived from the 18-day-old CD-1 foetal mouse mandibular first molar papilla which synthesizes the dentine-specific protein DSP, which is commonly regarded as being of odontoblast lineage [ The production of ROS in MDPC-23 cells was determined with the fluorogenic probe H Total RNA from MDPC-23 cells was extracted using the TRIzol reagent, and the reverse-transcribed complementary DNA (cDNA) was obtained using the ImProm-II Reverse Transcriptase System kit (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) assays were performed using the SYBR Green PCR Master Mix (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The cycling parameters for the PCRs were 50 °C for 2 min and 95 °C for 10 min, followed by 40 cycles at 95 °C for 15 s and 60 °C for 1 min in an ABI PRISM 7500 Real Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems). Relative quantification was performed using the ΔCt method which results in ratios between target genes and a housekeeping reference gene, the enzyme β-2-microglobulin for MDPC-23 cells (control). The primers for the different rat genes studied were manufactured by Exxtend (São Paulo, SP, Brazil). The specificity of the amplification reaction was determined with a melting curve analysis. MDPC-23 cells were seeded at 3 × 10 The Alizarin Red S assay was used to determine the influence of U200 and MAX on the degree of hydroxyapatite mineralization in MDPC-23 cell culture. Cells were seeded in 24-well plates at a density of 3 × 10 Statistical significance among the groups was assessed using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), followed by Tukey’s test. The unpaired two-tailed Student’s t test ( Cements U200 and MAX induced oxidative stress in the MDPC-23 cells in different ways ( Keap1–Nrf2–ARE signalling controls genes encoding phase 2 detoxifying enzymes and antioxidant proteins [ Differences in the intensity of the oxidative stress induced by these cements seem to explain the variation observed in the expression of the studied genes. By exposing the MDPC-23 cells to both cements for 4 h under experimental conditions, different gene expression responses were observed ( The changes in the gene expression balance induced by the cements were also proven by the phenotypic analyses of the cellular proliferation disturbance ( Odontoblasts through inflammatory stimuli are able to orchestrate the inflammatory response in the dental tissues by producing and secreting a wide variety of cytokines and chemokines [ The major adaptive cell response to induced oxidative stress relies on the cross-talk and interdependence between various Nrf2-regulated antioxidant pathways [ Expression of HO-1 has been claimed to inhibit the maturation in osteoblasts, including mineralized bone nodule formation, Mitochondrial biogenesis can be activated by oxidative and inflammatory cell stress. However, higher levels of oxidative stress trigger inflammatory mitochondrial dysfunction, resulting in energetic failure and cell death [ Indeed, the MDPC-23 cells overexpressed TNFα and PGC-1α in the presence of MAX ( TNF-α is also a major cytokine that plays to a negative role in bone metabolism in many inflammatory diseases or pathological processes [ Conversely, U200 induces a small oxidative stress in MDPC-23 cells when compared to MAX ( U200 can delay the osteogenic differentiation of MDPC-23 cells ( The Runx2/SP7 axis is detected in preosteoblasts, and the expression is upregulated in immature osteoblasts and downregulated in mature osteoblasts; decreasing levels of Runx2 lead to cell cycle exit for proliferating and differentiating osteoblasts [ Biologically active components released by both cements were high enough to modify the odontoblast cell metabolism in different ways. Gene expression disturbance induced by the cements was confirmed by the phenotypic analyses in terms of cellular proliferation and mineralization potential. These results highlight the need for the development of newly bioactive dental restorative materials considering the problems related to the clinical application of functional acidic-containing cements with respect to harmful effects in odontoblastic cells, which might delay the reparative dentin formation after cementation of indirect restorations, especially on recently exposed dentin preparations. This study was partially supported by grants from