Peri-prosthetic fractures are technically demanding to treat, as they require the skills of revision arthroplasty as well as those of trauma surgery. [Lindahl H, Malchau H, Herberts P, Garellick G. Periprosthetic femoral fractures classification and demographics of 1049 periprosthetic femoral fractures from the Swedish National Hip Arthroplasty Register. J Arthroplasty 2005;20:857–65.] reporting on 1049 periprosthetic femoral fractures found that the annual incidence varied between 0.045% and 0.13% for all THAs performed in Sweden and that the accumulated incidence for the primary hip arthroplasties was 0.4% while for the revision arthroplasties was 2.1% [Lindahl H, Malchau H, Herberts P, Garellick G. Periprosthetic femoral fractures classification and demographics of 1049 periprosthetic femoral fractures from the Swedish National Hip Arthroplasty Register. J Arthroplasty 2005;20:857–65.]. The elderly population is particularly vulnerable to low energy periprosthetic fractures attributed to osteopenia or osteoporosis leaving limited reconstruction options to the hip revision surgeon. Bone grafting in the form of autograft has well recognized limitations and allograft represents the gold standard of bone augmentation in the majority of the cases. Allograft can be used as morselised in the form of impaction grafting, reconstructing the bone from within out, or in the form of structural allograft. In the latter case, strut onlay plates or whole proximal femoral allografts can be used to augment the deficient bone or to totally replace it respectively. Immune reaction and disease transmission along with delayed revascularization of the cortical allograft can cause failure of the construct in the long term; however, the results to date from their use are promising. We here present an overview of the literature on the use of available bone grafts in the treatment of periprosthetic femoral fractures.Periprosthetic femoral fractures are becoming an increasing and complex problem for orthopaedic surgeons. The incidence increases with the aging of the population and the popularity of hip arthroplasty. Autogenous bone graft is osteoconductive, osteoinductive and provides osteogenic bone cells. Bone allografts are available as preserved (frozen or freeze-dried) or as fresh specimens. Bone allograft implantation may induce a strong immune response triggered by many different bone components, such as cells, collagen or matrix proteins. Demineralised bone matrix (DBM) is created by the acid extraction of the mineralised phase of bone. Calcium phosphate ceramics such as hydroxyapatite (HA), tricalcium phosphate, and/or calcium phosphate have also been considered to be mainly osteoconductive matrices, Growth factors such as the bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) have also been extensively investigated. Cortical onlay grafts, first described in the literature for the treatment of femoral periprosthetic fractures in 1989 by Penenberg et al. Chandler et al. The histological sequence of strut healing has been demonstrated to correlate accurately with the appearance on plain radiographs in a canine model. There are some disadvantages associated with the use of strut grafts, the most important of which is disease transmission. There are very few biomechanical studies on the efficacy of strut grafts versus metallic plates or long revision stems for the treatment of periprosthetic femoral fractures. Mihalko et al. Combined lateral plating and cerclage with a single anterior or medial allograft strut provide better fixation than an allograft strut alone. The plate protects the strut graft, which can be incorporated onto the host bone and thus augments the mechanical strength of the femur. In a recent cadaveric study by Wilson et al. Periprosthetic femoral fractures around a total hip replacement are often associated with osteolysis. Morselised cancellous allograft has been used together with the impaction grafting technique to compensate for severe osteolysis of the proximal femur, in revision settings, with promising results. Bethea et al. The management of periprosthetic femoral fractures can be complex and the associated bone loss commonly requires the use of structural allografts. When the stem is stable and the bone quality is good (Vancouver type B1 fracture), a double plating technique using two long struts, or strut with plate bypassing the most distal fracture line, may be sufficient to maintain fracture stability and to allow healing. There is increasing evidence, however, in the literature that type B1 fractures may have been underestimated and stem stability needs to be addressed intraoperatively. All authors state that no financial or personal relationships with other people, or organisations has inappropriately influenced this work, within 3 years of beginning the work submitted.