In this work surface modified polyacrylonitrile nanofibers/biogenic silica composites were investigated for their promising and efficient photocatalytic degradation of malachite green (MG) dye. This photocatalyst was based on polyacrylonitrile (PAN) nanofibers fabricated using electrospinning technique, then crosslinked with two kinds of biogenic silica, diatomite and rice husk nanosilica. The photocatalytic activities of MG dye were compared for the two biogenic silica. The prepared membranes was analyzed using SEM, TEM, EDAX, FTIR, and XRD techniques. The photocatalysis performance investigations of malachite green were carried out under visible light illumination in aqueous solutions. Moreover, several factors affecting the degradation were studied including; dye concentration, solution pH, and irradiation time. The results indicated that the investigated composite nanofibers have excellent photodegradation performance for Malachite green. The highest photodegradation efficiency of the MG was obtained at pH 7 and it is relatively a very fast process.Malachite Green (MG) is an important organic dyes which contain triphenylmethane group and it has been widely used as a coloring agent in silk, wool, jute, paper and leather industries Silica itself, besides its composites, is a widely used in liquids purification to remove different kinds of pollutants In this work, we describe the fabrication of the surface modified PAN nanofibers/biogenic silica composite and the effect of the surface doping with biogenic silica on the photodegradation performance of Malachite Green. The main objective of this work is to study the photocatalytic activity of the composite nanofibers and examine the influence of biogenic silica on the photodegradation performance of this dye under visible light irradiation. In addition, studying the effect of various pH values, irradiation time, and dye concentration on the photocatalytic efficiency. Moreover, the photocatalytic degradation mechanism of MG was investigated. Polyacrylonitrile, PAN (MW = 150,000); N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), Sodium hydroxide (NaOH) and Hydrochloric acid (HCL), Glutaraldehyde (GA), and Malachite green dye were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. All reagents and solvents were of analytical reagent grade and used directly without further purification. Processed diatomaceous earth (DE), (Moronita©), was provided by Mr. Juan Muñoz, Sevilla, Spain. Rice straw nanosilica was provided by Nanotech Company, Giza, Egypt. Polyacrylonitrile (PAN) was dissolved in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) (10 wt%) and was stirred at 50 °C for 4 h. Following by the sonication of the solution for 2 h until the PAN completely was dissolved. The above solution was loaded into a syringe pump with a flow rate of 0.5 ml/h, at 25 kV. The fibers were collected on the aluminum foil and then dried to remove the excess solvent The morphology of the fabricated composite nanofibers was examined using Field Emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM), Quanta FEG 250, FEI working at 15 and 25 kV. Transmission electron microscope (TEM) study was done by multipurpose analytical high-resolution transmission electron microscope (HR-TEM), JEM-2100, JEOL. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) was used to indicate the spectra of the functional groups of the nanofibers, biogenic silica and nanofibers composite. FTIR spectroscopy was carried out using a Thermo Scientific Nicolet iN10 spectrometer in the range of 400–4000 cm The photocatalytic activities of the composite nanofibers were evaluated by the photodegradation of malachite green in an aqueous solution. The nanofibers mat (0.05 g) was placed into the column containing 50 ml of 10 mg/l MG solution. The suspension was shaken for 30 min in dark to establish the adsorption-desorption equilibration. Then, the suspension was irradiated with a 125 W halogen lamp as the visible light source. At a certain time interval, about 3 ml of solution was collected from the reaction system, and its absorbance was measured at the maximum wavelength (616 nm) by using a UV–vis spectrophotometer. The effect of different solution pH values (3–9) and the initial MG concentration (10–50 mg/L) was investigated. The relationship between the initial concentration (C The SEM and TEM micrographs illustrate the adhesion of diatomite porous microparticles on the surface of the nanofibers (  The FTIR spectra of biogenic silica and the fabricated composite nanofibers are presented in The photocatalytic degradation performance of two membranes was tested by MG dye under the visible light as a function of irradiation time. The photodegradation efficiency of MG was published by several researchers employing a variety of catalysts ( The dye initial concentration will obviously affects its photodegradation efficiency. The relation between MG initial concentration and the photodegradation efficiency of MG after 15 min of light exposure was studied at 10, 20, 30, and 50 ppm and the results were illustrated in The pH is an important parameter that influences the photodegradation efficiency. The medium pH of the reaction medium has a significant effect on the surface properties of the two biogenic silica membranes. The photodegradation efficiency of MG was studied at different initial pH values, as shown in The MG photocatalytic degradation mechanism of two biogenic silica membrane using MG degradation was shown in The stability and reusability of photocatalysis are crucial parameters for their practical application of environmental pollutant degradation. For each experiment, the photocatalyst was washed, dried and reused. The nanofibers membranes have been fabricated and the two biogenic silica are adhered to form the composite. Complete photodegradation efficiency for MG dye under visible light irradiation in a rather short time and at relatively lower power intensity is remarkably achieved, thereby the overall cost reduction of the MG degradation process is undoubtedly anticipated. The results show that the maximum photodegradation efficiency of MG was achieved after 15 and 25 min for diatomite and rice straw silica membrane. The photocatalyst test on acidic and basic pH and the highest photodegradation was observed at neutral conditions pH 7. At optimum conditions, 98% MG degradation was achieved in less than 10 min. The flexibility of the fabricated composite nanofibers allows their use in continuous operation mode such as a fixed bed column. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. This work is sponsored by the (Egyptian)