This work has assessed factors affecting crystallization of copper sulfide (CuS) under batch conditions and in fed-batch fluidized bed reactor (FBR) using calcium-coated sands as a seed material. Compared with using sodium sulfide nonahydrate as a sulfidation reagent, larger CuS crystals were produced from sodium sulfide pentahydrate, most likely because of the lower surface charge. Due to the partial oxidation of sulfide in the pentahydrate form, the optimum molar ratio of Cu2+ to S2− was found to be 1:2, higher than the theoretical ratio. Crystal growth and aggregation were further increased by using calcium ion as a cross-linker among the CuS fines (<100nm), resulting in an additional 30% decrease in Cu2+ concentrations from the effluent of fed-batch FBR. The efficacy of CuS crystallization was also remarkably dependent on the operating factors, i.e., the resting height of the seed material and recirculation rate. Under optimal conditions, >95% of the initial Cu2+ (100mgCu2+/L) was successfully transformed to CuS crystals within 120min. The size and crystallinity of the star-shaped CuS crystals were confirmed by FEG–SEM and XRD analyses, respectively. Principal component analysis indicated that the resting height and the seed type were the primary parameters affecting CuS crystallization in the fed-batch FBR.Among the common heavy metals, free ionic copper is highly toxic to human and ecosystem health. A direct relation between the concentration of free copper ion and the biological effects has been demonstrated for microalgae and phytoplankton ( Among separation and refinement technologies of metals, crystallization has been technologically advanced from simple ion removal to value adding process, e.g., industrial manufacturing of salt and sugar, semiconductors, and pharmaceuticals ( In this study, the methods for improving CuS crystallization yields by employing calcium (Ca)-coated sand as a seed material and operating the FBR in a fed-batch mode were employed. Several batch experiments were performed to investigate the effects of the extent of hydration on copper sulfidation using Na All the reagents (CuSO Changes in total dissolved sulfide (S The surface charge of CuS at various pH values was evaluated by conducting a batch equilibrium experiment: 4 Batch kinetic experiments were carried out to determine the reaction kinetics of CuS crystallization. Forty milliliters of 30 The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns for the recovered copper sulfide were recorded using a D/max-2500 X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku Corp., Tokyo, Japan) using Cu K Various materials, including fine, coarse, and Ca-coated sands, were introduced as seeds into the fed-batch FBR. Joomoonjin sand, widely used as filtration sand in Korea, was employed as a seed. The sand was separated into two size classes, fine (passing No. 6 sieve) and coarse (retained on No. 6 sieve). The particle size of the fine and coarse sand was less than 1 A fed-batch FBR with an inner diameter and height of 20 and 200 The efficacy of CuS crystallization for both the batch and fed-batch FBR experiments was calculated according to the following equations, modified from Sulfur, used as a crystallizing reagent in this study, is an element with variable oxidation states. Since the pK The surface charge of a particle is mostly dependent on the interaction between the surface groups and the surface pH. As shown in Defining particles Several studies have reported on enhancing the crystal growth using various additives such as triethanolamine (TEA) as a linker for the CuS nano-rods ( Because the only reactive species affecting sulfidation are dissolved sulfides and less than 50% of the total dissolved sulfides from Na Conversion (%) of fines to larger crystals at each molar ratio was calculated based on the difference in copper concentration between the unfiltered and filtered samples as expressed in Eq. Based on crystallization theory, crystal growth can be accelerated at active growth sites ( It is expected that Ca coating would give a dual benefit of increasing surface roughness to provide more active sites for crystal growth and providing cross-linking sites for the CuS fines. Various seed materials, including fine, coarse, and Ca-coated fine and coarse sands, were evaluated in terms of residual copper concentrations in the fed-batch FBR. For the same resting height (10 The resting height of the seeds is another important factor governing the overall efficacy of the fed-batch FBR. In previous studies, the resting height of the seeds was typically 10–90 In conventional FBR processes, immature fines are susceptible to being washed away during the early stage of operation unless appropriate internal recirculation is provided. Particularly for highly charged small particles such as CuS fines, a high rate of internal recirculation is required for adequate growth and development to larger crystals. Changes in the Cu  Crystallization of CuS is a complex process with various influencing factors, making the process efficacy difficult to predict. The most influential factors were investigated using principal component analysis (PCA), a useful statistical technique for identifying underlying variables and clarifying correlations within a set of observed variables ( Despite the advantages of sulfidation, CuS is known to be difficult to recover in a FBR because of its small particle size (< This study was supported by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at