Ammoniacal spent etch liquors is a potential source for copper recovery. In the present investigation copper was extracted from spent ammoniacal PCB etch solutions using hydroxyoxime LIX 84I. Maximum extraction was observed at equilibrium pH of 8.9. Three counter-current stages were required for quantitative extraction of 51.8 g/L copper from the spent liquor using 50%v/v extractant at an O/A ratio of 1.5. It was also possible to achieve quantitative extraction with 20% v/v extractant concentration at an equilibrium pH of 8.9 and O/A ratio 4.5:1. Precipitation −stripping of the loaded organic phase using oxalic acid led to reclamation of copper as copper oxalate. Contacting the oil phase fully loaded with copper in 50% v/v extractant, with 1 M oxalic acid at equal O/A resulted in 77.4% copper getting stripped in first contact, quantitative stripping was achieved in the second contact with fresh acid. There was a close agreement between the experimental and predicted yields based on solubility plots developed for copper-oxalic acid system. Co-extracted ammonia to the organic phase was stripped as soluble ammonium oxalate offering an inherent advantage over the conventional stripping process where build-up of ammonium sulphate is observed during electrowinning process. Calcinations for three hours formed copper oxide, XRD and chemical analysis confirmed the formation of pure copper oxide. The copper present in waste etchant could thus be appropriately converted to value added product.Electronic devices encompass every aspect of human life and are built on the foundation of Printed Circuit Boards (PCBs), which carries the electronic architecture of the device with copper as the main conducting material. The copper concentration in PCB varies depending on the number of layers and the capacity of conductor current Production of PCB involves drilling, scrubbing, chemical cleaning, electroless deposition, photo imaging, pattern plating, resist stripping, and etching as the major steps Almost 1.5–3.5 L of waste etchant is generated per square meter of PCB produced The MECER process uses solvent extraction and electrowinning to recover the etchant and reclaim high purity copper. After copper removal, the etchant is regenerated by adding makeup solvent and ammonia is directly recirculated to the process. Keskitalo et al. Recovery of copper from ammoniacal solutions is important in various hydrometallurgical processes. Current status and the future perspective of recycling by hydrometallurgy are detailed by Xu et al. The last decade has witnessed a number of research publications on recovery of copper and other precious metals from used PCBs using different techniques such as pyrometallurgy, hydrometallurgy, physical methods and their combinations Spent printed circuit board etch solution was collected from a small scale PCB manufacturing industry in Vadodara, India. LIX 84I (BASF) was used as the copper extractant. Commercial kerosene (B.P- 152–271 °C) used as the organic diluent was supplied by Indian Oil Corporation Limited. Other reagents, oxalic acid, sulfuric acid used were of AR grade. The metal composition of the PCB etch solution was determined using inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) (Perkin Elmer Optima 5300 DV) ( Copper extraction was carried out in shake flasks at equal organic and aqueous volumes (100 mL each) on a rotary shaker (Remi-RS 24BL) at 150 rpm and 30 °C. The effect of equilibrium pH was studied using 20% v/v extractant for pH values ranging from 8.5 to 10. To study the effect of extractant concentration, the etch solution was contacted with organic phase containing 10%v/v to 50%v/v LIX 84I in kerosene. To determine the number of stages required for extraction, the etch solution was equilibrated with 20% v/v and 50% v/v of LIX 84I at varying organic to aqueous ratios keeping the total volume of organic and aqueous phase constant. The aqueous phase was analyzed for copper on an Atomic Absorption Spectrometer (AAS) (Chemito AA203) at 321 nm. After extraction the organic phase was separated and scrubbed with water. Stripping was carried out by contacting the loaded organic phase with an equal volume of 1.0 M oxalic acid solution for time intervals ranging from 15 min to 3 h on a rotary shaker (Remi-RS 24BL) at 30 °C and 150 rpm. After the stipulated stripping time the aqueous and organic phase were separated. Copper oxalate precipitate in the aqueous phase was centrifugally separated, washed and dried. The oxalate precipitate was calcined in a tube furnace (Ants Ceramics) at 400 °C for 3 h to obtain copper oxide. Precipitated copper oxalate and copper oxide were characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) on a PAN Analytical Xpert Pro diffractometer using Cu-Kα radiation at λ value of 1.54°A in Bragg-Brentano geometry. Thermogravimetric analysis was performed at a heating rate of 10 °C/min in air atmosphere on a Shimadzu TGA-50 analyser. The elemental composition was determined using EDX analysis (Oxford Instruments). Infrared spectroscopic analysis of copper oxalate and oxide was conducted over a frequency range of 400–4000 cm The spent etchant collected from printed circuit board manufacturing unit had an initial pH value of 8.5. It contained 51.8 g/L copper with other metals present in trace amounts ( The mechanism of copper extraction from ammoniacal solutions using β diketones and hydroxyoximes based on existence of Cu(NH Copper extraction was carried out using hydroxyoxime extractant LIX 84 I at equilibrium pH values ranging from 8.5 to 10 using 20% v/v LIX84I at equal organic to aqueous (O/A) ratios. It was observed that percentage extraction increased from 20.66% at pH 8.5 to 22.01% at pH 8.9 and thereafter decreased to 20.27% at pH 10 ( The extractant concentration in the organic phase was varied from 10% v/v to 50%v/v at equal O/A ratio that led to an increase in percentage extraction in a single stage from 13.38% to 51.54% ( Precipitation – stripping of copper from the loaded organic phase was carried out by contacting organic phase with aqueous oxalic acid solution (1 M). Oxalic acid dissociates into hydrogen ions and oxalate anions in the aqueous phase. An ion exchange reaction at the organic-aqueous interface between Cu After copper extraction the organic phase was washed to remove the adhering ammonia. Stripping behavior was investigated at equal (O/A) ratios by contacting the loaded organic phase with 50% v/v of extractant with 1 M oxalic acid in a single stage contact. Previous studies on precipitation stripping from copper loaded solutions showed that 1 M oxalic acid was optimal for stripping Experimental data shows that out of the 26.7 g copper loaded in the organic phase, the amount of copper precipitated as oxalate was 20.55 g in first contact and 5.77 g in the second contact accounting for a cumulative yield of 98.57%. Copper remaining soluble in oxalic acid after precipitation was experimentally determined. The soluble copper after the first and second contact was 0.12 g and 0.07 g respectively. Thus, net copper stripped from organic phase in first contact is 20.67 g which accounts for 99.42% and 5.7 g in the second contact accounting for 98.8% of copper precipitated. Soluble copper oxalato species were also determined based on theoretical considerations from the solubility diagram. Oxalic acid in solution dissociates into hydrogen ions and oxalate anions depending on the solution pH with equilibrium constants represented as Based on mass law, the oxalate species can be expressed as, The solubility equilibrium for copper- oxalic acid system can be expressed by Eq. Taking logarithm of Eq. Oxalate anions react with Taking logarithm of Eqs. Summation of all the copper soluble complexes It is well known that LIX84I when involved in copper extraction from ammoniacal media co-extracts ammonia in the oil phase. Lee and Chan The co-extraction of ammonia was determined by contacting the spent etchant with an organic phase containing 20% v/v and 50% v/v LIX 84I at equal (O/A) ratios. The difference between the initial ammonia concentration in the aqueous phase and the final ammonia concentration after copper extraction gave a measure of ammonia transferred to the organic phase. The ammonia transferred in the organic phase containing 50% v/v extractant was 420 mg/L while with 20% v/v extractant it was 560 mg/L. At both the extractant concentrations investigated the system operates at maximum copper loading thereby restricting the transport of ammonia in organic phase. Maximum loading of copper minimizes the accumulation of ammonia in the organic phase, which reduces the need for ammonia scrubbing The ammonia transferred in the organic phase also reacts with oxalic acid forming ammonium oxalate. However, due to the high solubility of ammonium oxalate in water it dissolves in the aqueous phase. IR spectra ( TGA for copper oxalate in air is shown in Post stripping, the organic phase containing traces of copper was stripped using 1 M sulfuric acid to recover copper prior to recycle of the organic phase. The organic phase was tested to be used up to five cycles with 0.2% decline in the extraction ability. Since the amount of the metal present was low the same acid can be reused again. Copper was extracted from spent ammoniacal PCB etch solutions using LIX 84I as the extractant. Effect of pH was investigated and a maximum in extraction was obtained at a pH value of 8.9. Increase in extraction concentration from 10% v/v to 50% v/v was a monotonically increasing function. Extraction using 20% and 50% were investigated at varying organic to aqueous ratios. In both the cases three equilibrium stages were required at O/A ratio of 4.5:1 and 1.5:1 as indicated by Mc Cabe Thiele plots. Stripping of the fully loaded organic phase with 50% extractant using 1 M oxalic acid was achieved in two contacts with fresh acid each time. Copper extraction from ammoniacal solutions into hydroxyoximes is accompanied with ammonia transfer. However, maximum loading of copper minimizes the transfer of ammonia in the organic phase. In such a situation of extraction from ammoniacal solutions, precipitation stripping offers an inherent advantage during the reclamiation of copper where in conventional stripping process buildup of ammonium sulfate is observed after recycle of spent electrolyte over a period of time during electrowinning process. In precipitation stripping copper is reclaimed as copper oxalate and there is separation of the solid from the aqueous phase in which ammonium oxalate is soluble. This work makes an attempt to recover copper from an potential waste stream of PCB etch liquors that is projected to grow significantly in the years to come in view of the great demand of PCBs for electronic devices. The reclaimed copper can be utilized effectively for various applications. This work was supported by University Grants Commission, New Delhi, India vide UGC MRP File No. 41-367/2012 (SR).