A method of hydraulic grid slotting and hydraulic fracturing was proposed to enhance the permeability of low permeability coal seam in China. Micro-structural development and strength characteristics of coal were analysed to set up the failure criterion of coal containing water and gas, which could describe the destruction rule of coal containing gas under the hydraulic measures more accurately. Based on the theory of transient flow and fluid grid, the numerical calculation model of turbulence formed by high pressure oscillating water jet was used. With the high speed photography test, dynamic evolution and pulsation characteristics of water jet water analysed which laid a foundation for mechanism analysis of rock damage under water jet. Wave equation of oscillating water jet slotting was established and the mechanism of coal damage by the impact stress wave under oscillation jet was revealed. These provide a new method to study the mechanism of porosity and crack damage under high pressure jet. Fracture criterion by jet slotting was established and mechanism of crack development controlled by crack zone between slots was found. The fractures were induced to extend along pre-set direction, instead of being controlled by original stress field. The model of gas migration through coal seams after the hydraulic measures for grid slotting and fracking was established. The key technology and equipment for grid slotting and fracking with high-pressure oscillating jet were developed and applied to coal mines in Chongqing and Henan in China. The results show that the gas permeability of coal seam is enhanced by three orders of magnitude, efficiency of roadway excavation and mining is improved by more than 57% and the cost of gas control is reduced by 50%.The extraction of coal bed methane (CBM) plays an important role in the development of Chinese energy strategy. Because China is rich in CBM resources with 36 In the past 20 It has been proved that high pressure puled water jet (PWJ) is a kind of powerful tool for hard-rock fragmentation due to its special loading styles of water hammer pressure, ultra-speed lateral jetting and pulse dynamic load, etc., which can produce shear, tensile and fatigue failure of hard-rock. The performance of PWJ on hard-rock fragmentation is determined by the flow-field structure of jets. Meanwhile, the water jet-target impact creates high water hammer pressure in a short time. This phenomenon is called the effect of water hammer pressure. The essential information on flow-field structure should be obtained before conducting the study on corresponding rock breaking mechanism The multi-pulse phenomenon of percussion pulsed water jet and the deflection of the sharp tail structure of interruption puled water jet were captured by using high speed photography technique. 3D dynamic modelling for disc interruption pulsed water jet generation process was carried out. The flow filed study focused on the sharp front tail which directly affects the impact pressure amplitude peak and duration. Through the application of stress wave theory, fluid mechanics, plane geometry, the calculating formula of water hammer pressure forming area Using the high-speed camera ( According to the experiment data, adopting the methods of statistical average and data fitting, the revised mathematical model  The traditional gas disaster is mainly prevented by using the dense drilling technology which needs a large number of dense holes in the coal seam for gas drainage. But the impact area of a single gas drainage hole is small, which leads to the difficulty of gas drainage, large amount of drilling engineering, long time of pumping and extracting. How to improve the permeability of the complex coal seam and increase the pressure relief area of coal and promote desorption of gas is the key to solve the gas disaster management in complex coal seam. As shown in The mechanism of multiphase-oscillating jet fracturing is that coal seams are slotted and damaged. Then, the original crack expands and new crack initiates. As a result, the permeability of coal seam is enhanced. Moreover, the permeability of coal in far field increases due to stress reduction. According to the main mechanism of coal broken with high pressure water jet, theory of cutting rocks by crow, and field condition, the critical parameters that influence the depth of slotting in coal seam mainly includes jet pressure, nozzle diameter, rotate speed and slotting time. An elliptic pressure relief zone is formed around the slotting which is cut by the pulse water jet. Ground stress is reduced and gas can be easily drained in this area. At the same time, the pressure relief of pulsed water jet slotting can widen the relief area on mining surface stress field, reducing the possibility of coal and gas outburst A model was developed to describe relationship between slotting depth and jet pressure, rotate speed and slotting time, when the nozzle diameter was fixed. Fluent simulation results showed that, the reasonable nozzle diameter should be 3 Influence radius of borehole increases with the conduction of drainage, and there is a significant exponential relation between them. Coal seam methane migration was affected by the slotted borehole layout arrangement, while the cross arrangement was more reasonable. Relation expression of drainage time with slot size, borehole spacing, permeability, coal buried depth and methane pressure gradient was developed to guide the reasonable borehole layout. In order to increase the influence of jet slotting and solve the problem of crack expansion disordering in the conventional fracturing, a new method of grid slotting coupled with hydraulic fracturing to increase the permeability of coal seam in the underground is put forward. Firstly, the water jet is used to slot in the split borehole and guide hole to form secondary fractures in coal. The elastic crack, namely the artificial separation layer is formed between the coal body and the top bottom plate. It can effectively reduce the crack initiation pressure, and hinder the expansion of the crack to the top floor, which reduces the damage of hydraulic fracturing on the top floor strata of the coal seam, to achieve directional cracking. At the same time, hydraulic fractures are guided by guide hole in the expansion process so that it can expand along the trend of coal seam and hence avoid the cracking to the top floor. This method can promote the balance of the increased permeability of the coal, and eliminate the “blind zone”. As shown in Since the crack surface is rough, the distribution of asperities on the rough crack based on the model The crack initiation pressure decreases with the increase of horizontal stress difference, angle between inclination and maximum stress direction of coal seam, and dip angle. With the decrease of coal seam inclination, crack initiation direction gradually turns from strike direction to inclination direction and the turning speed increases as well. With the increase of angle between the maximum stress and coal seam inclination, the crack initiation direction turns from inclination direction to strike direction and the turning speed decreases Based on the theory analysis and numerical simulation methods, the natural fracture and coal-rock interface were taken as examples to investigate the non-continuous interface’s effect on hydraulic fractures’ propagation. The research results showed that the three main factors which affect direction of hydraulic fracture propagation are angle of interaction between main crack and natural fracture, the horizontal differential principal stress and the development degree of natural fractures. The propagation direction of crack tends to cross natural fracture in condition of high horizontal principal stress difference and large angle of interaction; besides, with the increase of natural fracture length, the propagating fracture tends to extend along the natural fracture. Considering the effect of coal-rock interface on hydraulic propagation, angle between coal-rock interface and horizontal section, horizontal crustal stress difference, differences in elasticity modulus of coal and rock and shear strength of coal-rock interface affect the direction of crack propagation. With the increase in angle of intersection or horizontal crustal stress, possibility of crack directly crossing coal-rock interface increases. It will be more evident for cracks to propagate along the coal-rock interface with larger difference in elasticity modulus of coal and rock or smaller shear strength of coal-rock interface Pore pressure field can reduce the effective stress in coal and decrease the propagation pressure in coal seam; at the same time, the pore pressure gradient will directly affect the hydraulic crack propagation energy required for propagation. The larger pore pressure will be required for hydraulic crack propagation, thereby induces hydraulic crack propagation along the direction to high pore pressure zone. So hydraulic fractures are guided by holes in the expansion process and expand along the trend of coal seam to avoid the crack propagation into the roof and floor. Permeability enhancement with multiphase-oscillating jet fracturing technology was developed including drilling, cutting groove, hydrodynamic fracturing and strengthening gas desorption. Equipments for the technology have been manufactured with independent intellectual property rights, such as multifunctional drilling and cutting integrated device, sealing drill pipe and rotating water delivery device under high pressure. The gas drainage device and water slag gas separator have been made. With the equipment, it ensures the fracturing and gas drainage in the coal seam. In the condition of extremely complicated coal seam where permeability coefficient is less than 10 The achievements have been used in four mining areas of very complicated gas conditions in Nantong, Songzao in Chongqing, Sichuan Basin, Pingdingshan in Henan province. These coal mines are a typical representative of the coal and gas outburst mines with low permeability and complicated geological structure. After applying the technology, which can achieve a rapid elimination of gas disaster, it makes the preparation period of coal mining be shortened from 2–4 to 1 The orientated hydraulic fracture technique was developed to solve the problem of disordered extension. The technique include technology of borehole arrangement, technology of slotting with high pressure water jet, technology of borehole sealing and technology of hydraulic fracture. Then, computation model of plastic zone of coal seam slotted by high pressure water jet was developed after figuring out the relationship between water pressure and diameter of slitting. According to the characteristics of drainage in the tunnelling strip, the coal seam, rock cross-cut coal uncovering, permeability enhancement with grid slotting and fracking technology have been developed for the tunnelling strip, rock cross-cut coal and the coal seam. Matching devices, such as flow and pressure automatic regulating device, gas water slag separating device and sealing device, have been successfully developed, which effectively improves the construction efficiency and safety. The experiment of cracking control showed that the law of fracture propagation was composed of three phases: stress accumulation phase, fracture stable propagation phase and fracture unstable propagation phase. The scope of the examination and the effect evaluation system have been established based on the gas content, water content, ground stress and and other geophysical means The field applications at Songzao, Nantong, Tianfu Mining Area in Chongqing and Henan mining area show that the number of pre-drilled boreholes in the driving belt is reduced by more than 40%; the amount of extraction of coalbed methane increases by 3–5 High-pressure hydraulic fracturing technology in coal and coal bed methane mines can lead to roof and floor damage, and fracture initiation disorder can lead to a “blank area” and other issues. A new method of hydraulic fracturing is proposed to increase the homogeneous permeability of coal in underground coal mines. The tree-type array method is applied with branching boreholes drilling at the bottom of a crossing borehole advanced into a coal seam. The branched boreholes are radially distributed and parallel to the coal seam—the radial centre is the cross-measure fracturing borehole. Ideally, cracks initiate multiply from most of the ends of the branched boreholes, and extend outward. The cracks also ideally connect all branch-ends. Thus, if the cross-measure fracturing borehole is regarded as the tree trunk, the branched boreholes can be regarded as tree branches and the cracks as twigs-hence, the final result of this method should resemble a tree in three dimensions. With this in mind, an ideal branched, a tree-type hydraulic fracturing array has uniformly distributed branches (in the coal seam) at the bottom of the cross-measure fracturing borehole as shown in Branched borehole model with different forms of the tree-types are studied using numerical simulation tests. The results show that the branched array causes cracks to initiate from the bottom of the array, and these extend along the direction of the adjacent boreholes. Generally, as the number of branched boreholes increases, the coal seam fracture network also increases, improving the distribution of the fracture network, making the fracturing effect better. The branched boreholes appear to reduce initiation pressure and, with increasing branches, the initiation pressure decreases. A model with four tree-types, branched boreholes lead to a reduction in initiation pressure of 69% With years efforts, the technology and theory for permeability enhancement with hydraulic measures have been developed and successfully applied to the mining practice in China. The main work includes: Transient dynamic characteristics and rock breaking mechanism of high pressure pulse water jet. Mechanism of permeability enhancement by multiphase-oscillating jet fracturing. Theory on the enhancement of hydraulic grid slotting coupled with hydraulic fracturing. Based on the researches, multiphase-oscillating jet fracturing permeability enhancement technology, grid slotting and fracking technology on enhancing permeability in coal seam and tree-type boreholes drilling and volume fracturing technology were developed to increase permeability uniformly. The application of grid slotting and fracking technology showed that the permeability of coal seam could be increased by three orders of magnitude, efficiency of roadway excavation and mining was improved by more than 57% and the cost of gas control was reduced by 50%. This work was supported by the