Objective
                  To more clearly define the efficiency and potential benefits of variable pulse-width laser technology for ureteroscopic lithotripsy, we performed comparative in vitro evaluations assessing stone comminution, laser fiber tip degradation, and stone retropulsion.
               
                  Methods
                  All experiments were conducted using a Swiss LaserClast Holmium:YAG laser (Electro Medical Systems, Nyon, Switzerland) with adjustable pulse duration (300 µs-1500 µs). To assess comminution efficiency and fiber tip degradation, a “dusting” model was employed; the laser fiber tip was moved by a 3-dimensional positioning system in a spiral motion across a flat BegoStone surface submerged in water. Comminution efficiency was measured as the loss of stone mass while fiber tip degradation was measured simultaneously. The same laser and fiber were used in a pendulum model to measure stone retropulsion with a high-speed resolution camera.
               
                  Results
                  In our dusting model, comminution was significantly greater at high energy (2 J/5 Hz). At the high energy setting, comminution was significantly greater with long pulse duration than short pulse, although this difference was not seen at the high frequency setting (1 J/10 Hz). Tip degradation was increased at high energy settings and was even more pronounced with short pulse duration than long pulse. Short pulse duration caused far more retropulsion than the long pulse setting.
               
                  Conclusion
                  In an in vitro dusting model, a longer laser pulse duration provides effective stone comminution with the advantage of reducing laser fiber tip degradation and stone retropulsion.The rising prevalence of stone disease in the United States has led to similarly increasing efforts to optimize ureteroscopic treatment. Existing holmium laser lithotripters allow the operator to control the total power output by adjusting pulse energy and pulse frequency. In newer models, the urologist can choose different pulse durations, that is, long pulse vs short pulse. Previous studies have evaluated the efficiency of variable pulse-width Ho:YAG laser lithotripsy, focusing specifically on the optimal energy and pulse settings. This set of experiments was performed using the 2.1 µm-emitting Ho:YAG laser Swiss LaserClast (EMS Electro Medical Systems S.A., Nyon, Switzerland), allowing for pulse energy settings between 0.5 and 3.5 J/pulse and pulse frequency between 3 and 20 Hz. Single-use uncleaved laser fibers with core diameters of 200 µm (per manufacturer's specifications) were tested, with a new fiber used for each experiment. The optical pulse width can be varied between 400 and 1000 µs and, according to the system specifications, the ratio of long pulse to short pulse duration is at a factor of 1.5-2.5, depending on the laser setting used. A stage controller and 3-dimentional positioning system (VXM-2 step motors with BiSlide-M02 lead screws, Velmex, Bloomfield, NY) was used to position the laser fiber over a flat stone phantom made of BegoStone powder (BEGO USA, Lincoln, RI), with a powder-to-water mixing ratio of 15:3, producing a stone with properties similar to calcium oxalate monohydrate. Two energy settings were tested for comminution efficiency: 1.0 J/10 Hz (high frequency) and 2.0 J/5 Hz (high energy). A total of 4 kJ of energy was delivered to each stone. Fiber-stone contact was adjusted every kilojoule to account for any loss in length of fiber. The dry weight of the stone phantom was measured prior to testing. Following application of energy, the stone phantom was dried in a 40°C oven for 24 hours before the post-test mass was measured, which is common practice in research using this stone model. Tip degradation or “burnback” measurements were performed concurrently with the comminution testing. Tip length from the sheath was measured with electronic calipers prior to testing, and again after each kilojoule of delivered energy. Degradation was defined as the loss of fiber length after each treatment at different energy settings. Experiments were performed underwater using a pendulum model with a cylindrical BegoStone suspended from a fixed mount by a silk suture. The fiber was positioned in contact and perpendicular to the flat end surface of the stone. Retropulsion experiments were conducted using settings of 1.0 J/10 Hz and 2.0 J/5 Hz. The pendulum deviation after the first pulse of each experiment was measured. The induced pendulum movement was recorded using a high-speed imaging camera. The camera was positioned perpendicularly to the expected oscillation plane and was also focused in this plane. For calibration and measurement, a caliper set to 10 mm was attached to the glass of the tank and the zoom was kept constant. Each experiment was performed 7 times. Statistical evaluation included calculations of the means and standard deviations for each experiment and their graphical representation. A one-way analysis of variance was used to compare multiple groups, and a post hoc Tukey test was applied to make comparisons between pairs. Alpha was set at 0.05 to determine statistical significance. Statistical analysis was performed with JMP software (SAS Institute, Cary, NC). As shown in At high energy, after 4 kJ of energy was delivered, a long pulse duration had significantly greater comminution than short pulse (0.42 g vs 0.31 g, When evaluating mean fiber tip degradation, the high energy setting with short pulse duration had a significantly greater fiber loss than all other settings (1.31 mm vs 0.34 mm, 0.23 mm, 0.04 mm; all A similar pattern was seen when comparing the retropulsion effects at different laser settings ( In this study, the long pulse setting on a variable pulse-width laser was shown to offer improved comminution efficiency with less fiber tip degradation and retropulsion than the short pulse setting. Past studies have confirmed that stone fragmentation increases as laser pulse energy increases. Dusting is a fragmentation technique in which the laser tip is brushed back and forth across the stone surface so the stone is ablated layer by layer. Previously, stone comminution using the Swiss LaserClast variable pulse-width laser was evaluated using a standard experimental setup of lattice with a mesh in addition to a hands-free model to exclude experimenter bias. This study demonstrates that stone comminution increases at higher energy settings. With the increased energy, fiber tip degradation increased, which has been previously discerned as well. Previous studies have shown that efficient stone comminution can be achieved using a more typical dusting setting of 0.2 J and 50 Hz, which also uses 10 W of power. Limitations of this study include the in vitro nature of these tests, which can only attempt to replicate in situ laser effects. Additionally, because the fiber position was adjusted after each kilojoule of energy delivery, it is possible that the fiber may have lost contact with the phantom prior to each repositioning. Because no consistent visual change in stone comminution or loss of dusting capability occurred toward the end of each kilojoule, it is unlikely that this would present a significant effect on the data. Despite these concerns, the information gleaned from such in vitro studies helps to delineate the mechanisms by which various lithotripters operate and compare different tools and settings for eventual clinical use. Additionally, the in vitro operator-independent setup of these tests allows for reproducibility of the results and analysis of the data of interest without biological variability. In this way, the limitations of using a mechanized positioning system for laser comminution efficiency and pendulum model for retropulsion evaluation can be seen as strengths as they isolate the variable of interest in each experiment. This in vitro study demonstrates that longer laser pulse duration reduces stone retropulsion and laser tip degradation while sustaining comminution efficiency in a model that closely mimics the commonly used dusting technique of stone fragmentation. The urologists' control over laser settings is clearly a benefit of variable pulse-width laser technology, which may lead to decreased operative times, improved efficacy, and potentially lower cost.