 Although the precision and accuracy of the bite force delivery are relevant aspect of jaw motor control and possible outcomes supporting temporomandibular joint rehabilitation, their assessment has received still too little attention.   The unilateral task consisted in a series of isometric unilateral biting lasting 5 seconds each to match 9 force targets. The bilateral task consisted in coordinating right and left bite force in order to match 23 reference targets, representing symmetrical and asymmetrical jaw clenching. Force targets and the level of the force delivered by the subjects were displayed on a pc screen as real time feed-back of the performance. Each exercise was repeated three times in a first session and the two conditions were repeated in a second session the next day to evaluate reliability and learning effects. The force performance was assessed with indices of accuracy (mean distance, MD and offset error, OE) and precision (standard deviation, SD). The Intraclass Correlation Coefficient (ICC) was used to analyze the relative reliability of the indices while the Pearson’s r was used to assess their concurrent validity. An ANOVA for repeated measures was used to investigate any learning effect the day after.  In the unilateral task, MD, OE and SD had ICC values of 0.74, 0.76 and 0.88, respectively. There were high correlations (all r > 0.7) between left and right sides, between indices and intensity of contraction and among indices. In the bilateral task, the ICCs of MD, OE and SD were, respectively, 0.78, 0.66 and 0.78. MD and OE were highly correlated (r = 0.97) while SD neither showed correlation with MD (r = 0.7) nor OE (r = 0.15). The repeated measures ANOVA revealed a dependence of indices on session (P < .05) for both the unilateral and bilateral conditions with all indices reduced in the second session.  The motor performance is characterized using indices of accuracy (MD and OE) and precision (SD) which resulted to be sufficiently reliable. The significant learning effect occurring in the second session could be attributed to the visual feedback that normally does not constitute a physiologic system of control of clenching force.     