Modeling and optimization of industrial hot-working operations by means of commercial finite element computer codes require robust constitutive descriptions, which could be easily implemented. Also, it is expected that such formulations are able to describe as accurate as possible the flow stress, work-hardening and work-softening rate of the material, as a function of microstructure and deformation conditions. The present communication describes the development of a novel constitutive description of metals which exhibit dynamic recrystallization during deformation under hot-working conditions. The formulation is founded on the extension of the model earlier developed by Anand and co-workers for the constitutive description of metals which exhibit dynamic recovery as the only dynamic restoration mechanism during hot deformation. The advanced constitutive formulation has been validated by conducting axisymmetric compression tests with samples of a R260 steel employed for the manufacture of rail tracks. The specimens were deformed in a wide range of temperatures and strain rates, both under constant and variable strain rate conditions. The latter involve either an increase or a decrease in the Zener-Hollomon parameter as plastic deformation is applied. The results obtained indicate that the proposed constitutive description is able to reproduce quite accurately the experimental flow stress data. It has also been shown that the correct computation of the recrystallization time and volume fraction recrystallized dynamically, by means of an appropriate differential or incremental formulation of the Avrami equation, constitutes an essential aspect of the model. Such an approach is particularly important for predicting correctly the changes in flow stress under variable strain rate conditions.effective strain critical strain for the onset of dynamic recrystallization strain to the onset of steady-state effective strain rate, s ratio of the current flow stress to the internal variable material parameters, MPa strain increment time increment, s effective stress, MPa flow stress corresponding to the work-hardening and dynamic recovery curve, MPa flow stress corresponding to flow stress curve, once dynamic recrystallization is operative, MPa temperature and strain rate-dependent saturation stress, MPa temperature and strain rate-dependent steady-state stress, MPa temperature and strain rate-dependent yield stress, MPa athermal work-hardening rate, MPa material parameter, MPa pre-exponential factor, s material parameter, s material parameter material parameters, s initial austenitic grain size, μm parameter for describing the changes in Z with strain material parameter, MPa strain rate sensitivity exponents material parameter material parameter material parameter Avrami exponent strain increment at which conditions for the onset of DRX are fulfilled material parameter material parameter apparent activation energy for hot deformation, kJ mol apparent activation energy for dynamic recrystallization, kJ mol universal gas constant internal variable in Anand's model, MPa material parameter, MPa saturation value of the internal variable, MPa recrystallization time, s time required to achieve 50% dynamic recrystallization, s absolute temperature, K material parameter volume fraction recrystallized dynamically Zener-Hollomon parameter, s The development of rational and sound descriptions of material behavior, which includes an accurate prediction of flow stress, work-hardening and work-softening rates as a function of microstructure and deformation conditions, among other features, constitutes an essential aspect of the numerical methods employed for designing and modeling industrial hot-working operations. Particularly, in the case of structural steels, modeling of industrial hot-working processes by means of commercial finite element (FE) computer codes is based on the use of simple parametric relationships ( The need of formulating rational constitutive descriptions that could be easily implemented and employed for the numerical simulation of hot-working processes and which are able to incorporate the different physical mechanisms involved during such complex deformation schedules, has long been acknowledged. As an example, Anand et al ( In order to overcome this limitation, More recently, a wide range of physically-based constitutive descriptions for different metals and alloys which exhibit both DRV and DRX during high temperature deformation, have been proposed (   The increase in formability associated to the occurrence of DRX led Popova et al ( Concerning the computational modeling of DRX, Zhao et al ( Clearly, the above review indicates that the diversity and degree of complexity of the different approaches proposed for describing simultaneously the microstructural evolution and mechanical response of materials deformed under hot-working conditions, is quite large. Thus, the present communication is devoted to the development of a novel simple and straightforward formulation that could be easily implemented in commercial FE computer codes for modeling the hot deformation behavior of materials which exhibit DRX. The proposed constitutive description is based on the original formulation advanced by Anand et al ( Opposite to the model developed by The model is validated by means of a number of flow stress curves determined for a R260 steel grade obtained during hot deformation in a wide range of temperatures and strain rates, both under constant and variable strain rate conditions. Given the fact that x The constitutive description employed in the present work for the prediction of the flow stress behavior of austenite is based on the internal variable constitutive model previously advanced by Anand et al ( According to the original formulation, if the material only displays DRV during hot-working, the flow stress could be accurately described by means of two equations. Firstly, a flow equation, which relates the effective strain rate, Secondly, an evolution equation for the internal variable, of the form: Thus, equation The functional form of the flow equation selected by Brown et al ( In the above equation, A represents a pre-exponential factor, Q an apparent activation energy, R the universal gas constant, ξ a material parameter and m a strain rate sensitivity exponent. Accordingly, the ratio σ/S can be expressed as: In the above expression, θ Thus, essentially equation The extension of the above model for the description of the flow stress of those alloys which exhibit DRX during hot-working can be accomplished by the introduction of some additional relationships and the modification of some of the previous equations. Thus, the Sellars-Tegart-Garofalo (STG) model can be employed for the description of the yield stress of the material ( Also, following eqs. In equation As indicated above, B In the above equation, k The conditions for the onset of DRX will be fulfilled whenever: If the above condition is not fulfilled, the current flow stress, σ, would be given by σ  In the above equation, n Therefore, the flow stress once the conditions for DRX are fulfilled, σ The current flow stress of the material will be given either by σ The present investigation has been conducted with samples of a R260 steel grade with the following composition (wt.%): 0.67 C, 1.51 Mn, 0.21 Si, 0.03 S, 0.015 P and rem. Fe. This material is widely used for the manufacture of rail tracks by hot rolling processes and it was provided as a straight section of such a component, from which axisymmetric compression samples were machined. The nominal dimensions of the specimens were of 15 mm in height and 10 mm in diameter. Compression tests were carried out in vacuum employing a Gleeble 3500 thermal mechanical system. Testing under nominally constant conditions was conducted in the temperature range of 1073–1473 K at constant strain rates (variable ram speed control) in the span of 0.01–1 s Furthermore, in order to evaluate the capability of the advanced constitutive description for predicting the changes in flow stress during variable strain rate deformation conditions, additional tests were carried out at temperatures of 1173 K and 1373 K, which involved ramped changes in strain rate from 0.01 to 1 s Friction conditions during testing were reduced as much as possible by grinding the specimen flat surfaces with SiC abrasive papers of 240 mesh and subsequent lubrication. For this purpose, a high-temperature anti-seize Ni-based compound stable up to temperatures in the range of 1427 °C was employed. Furthermore, before each test, thin Ta sheets were placed at the interface between the WC deforming tools and the steel sample. The temperature of the samples was monitored and controlled by welding a type K thermocouple to the surface of the sample at mid height. The testing sequence involved the austenitization of the specimens at a temperature of 1473 K for 300 s prior to any subsequent step. The austenitization temperature was achieved by heating up the specimen in vacuum at a heating rate of 3 °C s In the case of the tests conducted under variable strain rate deformation conditions, the initial strain rate was maintained up to an effective strain of 0.15 and ramped to the final strain rate following a logarithmic profile up to a strain of 0.6, after which it was maintained constant. Prior to their analysis, the flow stress curves were analytically corrected for any changes that might have occurred either in deformation temperature and strain rate. Changes in these parameters are bound to take place when the material is deformed at relatively low deformation temperatures and strain rates higher than 1 s  Such a behavior is characterized by a continuous increase in the flow stress and a decrease in the work-hardening rate of the material, in the course of plastic deformation, until a saturation stress level is attained at large deformations. On the contrary, if the material undergoes DRX during deformation, after the initial work-hardening transient, the flow stress curve exhibits a clear peak stress and subsequent work-softening. The rate of work-softening decreases as plastic deformation proceeds, until the attainment of a constant flow stress level, known as the steady-state stress. Such stress magnitude also represents the critical stress value for the onset of DRX, located on the initial work-hardening transient. As shown in the forthcoming, the occurrence of DRX can be established by defining a critical value of the Zener-Hollomon parameter, Z The first step in the determination of the material constants involved in the model requires the computation of the apparent activation energy for hot deformation. For this purpose, each flow stress curve, determined at a constant deformation temperature and strain rate, is fitted by means of the proposed model, in order to determine the yield, peak, saturation and steady-state stresses. The correlation of the yield stress with temperature and strain rate through the Zener-Hollomon parameter can be established by means of equation As can be observed from the plot, the use of a single value for Q allows not only a satisfactory description of each stress parameter, but also the definition of the critical value for the Zener-Hollomon parameter above which the material will not exhibit DRX. In the present case, such a value has been identified as Z The second step in the calibration of the material parameters involves the fit of equation The third step in the determination of the model parameters requires a preliminary evaluation of the Z dependence of the initial work-hardening rate values obtained experimentally, Θ The fourth step in the identification of the parameters involved in the constitutive model requires a final optimization procedure in order to compute the value of the constants δ Thus, the simple model that has been assumed for describing the temperature and strain rate dependence of t  An additional source of discrepancy between experiment and model is also associated with the assumption of a single value for the Avrami exponent. As can be observed in some of the experimental Avrami curves shown in The overall accuracy of the proposed constitutive formulation can be estimated from In addition and only for comparative purposes, The different constants involved in the above relationship were determined by means of non-linear regression analysis employing all the experimental flow stress data. Thus, it can be clearly observed that, although the predicted flow stress values compare satisfactorily with the experimental ones, the above equation is not able to reproduce a number of important features of the experimental flow stress curves. Firstly, the above equation does not encompass a term corresponding to the yield stress of the material. Therefore, it cannot describe the temperature and strain rate dependence of such a stress parameter. Secondly, it is not able to predict the attainment of the steady-state stress after the flow softening transient. Thirdly, as can be observed from Such results are a consequence of the fact that this law is a simple parametric relationship, which has not any physical basis. However, it has the advantage that it can be easily implemented in FE codes and the parameters involved in the relationship can be readily identified from the available experimental data. Therefore, it has been widely employed as a first approximation for the computation of the flow stress of the material.  Under the deformation conditions employed in the present work for the variable strain rate tests, according to the results obtained from the tests conducted under constant temperature and strain rate conditions, it is expected that the material will undergo DRX and attain a fully recrystallized condition at the end of the deformation interval.   When the strain rate is decreased from 1 to 0.01 s As will be discussed in the next section, due to the changes in strain rate that occur during the different variable strain rate deformation schedules described above, the correct application of the mechanical equation of state also requires the computation of the volume fraction recrystallized dynamically by means either of equation Anand et al (  The validation of the extended model during deformation at constant temperature and under variable strain rate conditions requires testing the material by taking into account three important experimental limitations: machine inertia, specimens thermal inertia and friction. Machine inertia limits the severity of the changes in strain rate, which can be evaluated by means of the parameter H firstly introduced by As indicated in The third limitation involves the presence of significant friction effects, which start at effective strains of approximately 0.6. An interesting result indicated in The above equation is strictly applicable to deformation under constant conditions and should not be employed for analyzing deformation schedules which occur under variable strain rate conditions. Particularly, in deformation schedules in which the strain rate increases in the course of plastic deformation, such as those shown in A plausible solution for overcoming such a numerical artifact would be the computation of t from each strain increment, as follows:  In the above expression, N   Similar conclusions concerning the validity of a MES have been reported by As far as the behavior of the R260 steel grade is concerned, the determination of whether austenite will also exhibit a similar trend to 316L stainless steel at higher ramping rates will require the analysis of tests involving more severe changes in strain rate and therefore, overcoming the limitations imposed by machine inertia. Finally, it is important to point out that during DRX the driving force for grain boundary motion increases as deformation proceeds and consequently the growth rate of the recrystallized grains is not constant. As pointed out by A new constitutive description for the hot deformation of austenite, based on the original formulation advanced by Anand and co-workers for metals which undergo DRV as the only dynamic restoration mechanism present during hot-working, has been proposed. As the original model, the proposed formulation, which has been here extended for metals exhibiting DRX, involves a single scalar internal variable. It encompasses three differential equations for the determination of the flow stress of the material, prior and after the critical condition for the onset of DRX has been achieved, as well as the volume fraction recrystallized dynamically. Also, it involves a temperature and strain rate description of the yield, saturation and steady-state stresses, as well as the initial work-hardening rate and the time required to achieve a volume fraction recrystallized of 0.5. The new formulation has been validated by means of tests conducted either under constant and variable strain rate conditions, employing samples of a R260 steel grade deformed in a wide range of deformation conditions. It has been shown that this new constitutive description is able to predict quite satisfactorily both the flow stress and work-hardening or work-softening rate of the material, regardless of the applied loading conditions. Also, it has been established that, if the recrystallization time and volume fraction recrystallized are correctly computed by means of a differential or incremental formulation, a mechanical equation of state would be able to provide similar results to those obtained with the differential formulation for the analysis of different deformation schedules conducted under variable strain rate conditions. Accordingly, it has been concluded that, when moderate ramping rates are applied to the material in the course of plastic deformation, austenite could follow a mechanical equation of state. Therefore, at any applied strain, the flow stress of this material would be expected to depend only on the current values of deformation temperature and strain rate. Determining whether austenite will exhibit the same trend at higher ramping rates will require the analysis of deformation schedules conducted by applying more severe changes in strain rate conditions. Although the Avrami equation is not entirely adequate for describing the evolution of the volume recrystallized dynamically as a function of recrystallization time, the experimental evidence shows that it constitutes a satisfactory approximation that can be confidently applied for such a purpose. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of The evolution law proposed by Therefore, S can be readily obtained by the integration of the above equation. Under conditions of DRX, the internal variable can be computed from a linear law of mixtures of the form: The above equation is equivalent to equation