The influence of pulp chemistry on particle interactions and dewatering behaviour of colloidal kaolinite dispersions has been investigated under coagulation conditions. The dispersion shear yield stress, settling rate and consolidation showed strong dependence upon pH and ionic strength, indicating a maximum at ∼pH 3.2 which was established as the isoelectric point (iep) by particle zeta potential analysis. A “gel point” solid concentration at which the dispersion began to be significantly networked and gravity-driven consolidation of the pulp was completely suppressed, occurred at 13 vol.% (∼28 wt.%). The dewatering rates due to coagulation were significantly lower than those commonly achieved by polymeric flocculation, however the sediment consolidation was ∼25% higher when compared with flocculated pulps. Electroosmosis was found to be effective in consolidating pre-sedimented pulps to spadeable pastes (∼30 vol.%) at pH values away from the iep where zeta potential was higher and ionic strength low (10−3 M). This pulp consistency or markedly improved consolidation behavior is not achievable under coagulation and/or flocculation conditions.Effective dewatering of clay mineral waste tailings is an important global issue which poses a major technological and environmental challenge to the mineral processing industries. Chemical additive (coagulants and polymeric flocculants) mediated, gravity-driven thickening processes are generally used for clay tails dewatering but these are far from being efficient. Kaolinite (Al In the present work, fundamental studies focussing on new knowledge and greater understanding of the pivotal role interfacial chemistry plays in regulating particle interactions/colloid stability and improving the dewaterability of kaolinite dispersions as a function of pH, KNO Synthetic, colloidal kaolinite crystals (K15GM, 99% pure, quartz and mica 1%, Unimin Australia) with particle sauter mean diameter, BET surface area and density of 2.7 μm, 26.1 m Particle zeta potential ( Batch sedimentation tests were performed in graduated, 0.5 dm The particle zeta potentials measured for 4.1 vol.% solid dispersions containing 10 To determine the nature of the particle interaction forces operative in the dispersion and their possible compliance with DLVO theory, where attractive van der Waals and repulsive electrical double layer forces are the only surface forces present, Scales et al. The settling behaviour of dispersions of different solid content coagulated at 10 Batch, electroosmotic dewatering studies of pre-sedimented kaolinite dispersions of 13 vol.% solid (28 wt.%) at pH 2.2, 3.5 and 5.7 for 8 h showed that a dramatic increase in pulp consolidation may be achieved, particularly at a pH value away from the iep where particle zeta potential was moderately high and also the ionic strength was low (10 EO induced consolidation was more effective at pH 5.7 where the particle zeta potential was higher (∼ The influential role of interfacial chemistry on rheological and dewatering behaviour of kaolinite dispersions has been exemplified by the findings of this study. Particle zeta potential, dispersion shear yield stress and dewaterability displayed strong dependence on pH and ionic strength. The concomitant particle interactions forces may be treated in the manner of DLVO theory. The yield stress, sedimentation rate and consolidation all showed a maximum at the iep, where the electrical double layer repulsion was minimum. The dispersions displayed a “gel point” at 13 vol.% solid, where they were significantly networked and a further gravity-assisted consolidation was not possible. The dewatering rates produced by coagulation were significantly lower than those commonly achieved by polymeric flocculation, however, the pulp consolidation (13 vol.%) is ∼25% higher than observed for the latter. Electroomosis of pre-sedimented pulps was found to be effective, resulting in dramatically improved consolidation to spadeable pastes (∼30 vol.%) at low ionic strength (10 The financial support to the project by the Australian Research Council and minerals industry (Anglo Platinum, Newmont and Rio Tinto) through Australian Mineral Industry Association (AMIRA P523A) is gratefully acknowledged.