Di-calcium silicate or belite (β-Ca2SiO4) is one of the major compounds in Portland cement clinker. Conventionally, belite is produced by long lasting sintering of limestone and quartz at temperatures exceeding 1400°C. The subject of this paper is the sol–gel synthesis of belite. Both aqueous and non-aqueous sol–gel routes were applied. The preparation of the precursor mixture and the formation of the ceramic product were monitored using TG/DTG, XRD, FT-IR and SEM. The combination of these techniques led to the recording of all the transformations occurring during the processing of the precursors and the formation of the final products. As it was concluded, both routes can be successfully applied for the preparation of di-calcium silicate. The final products consist of very fine spherical crystallites in the range 1–3μm. Their formation requires a 3-h sintering at 1000°C. In both cases, β-2CaO·SiO2 is obtained without the use of any chemical stabilizers.Calcium silicates and aluminates are the main constituents of ordinary Portland cement (OPC) which is the main building material of our age. Recently, calcium silicate powders were found to have excellent bioactivity and they are potential candidates of new biomaterials for hard tissue repair. The formation of calcium silicate powders through solid state sintering requires the mixing of very fine powders (usually CaCO Sol–gel process has been well established for the synthesis of very homogeneous types of glass and ceramics at lower temperatures, than normally used, and there have also been made some efforts to produce pure clinker phases. Roy and Oyefesobi In this paper, 2CaO·SiO Pure Ca(NO The first way involves the following steps: (i) mixing of TEOS and ethanol (molar ratio C Thermogravimetric analysis (TG/DTG) was used in order to record the sintering reactions of the prepared gels. TG and DTG curves were obtained using a Mettler Toledo 851 instrument. The sample was heated from 20 to 1000 XRD and FT-IR were used in order to identify the products and check their crystallinity. X-ray powder diffraction patterns were obtained using a Siemens D5000 diffractometer, with Cu Kα The sintered sample was examined using a JEOL JSM-5600 Scanning Electron Microscope equipped with an OXFORD LINK ISIS 300 Energy Dispersive X-Ray Spectrometer (EDX).      This work led to the following conclusions: Both aqueous and non-aqueous sol–gel routes can be successfully applied for the preparation of di-calcium silicate. The final products consist of very fine spherical crystallites in the range 1–3 β-2CaO·SiO The combination of TG/DTG, XRD, FT-IR and SEM leads to the recording of all the transformations occurring during the processing of the precursors and the formation of the final products. The authors acknowledge the financial support of this research under program Grant No: Heraklitos 68/647. The project is co-funded by the European Social Fund (75%) and National Resources (25%).