The development of a hydrometallurgical process to recover manganese and silver from manganese–silver ores is reported. Insoluble manganese(IV) was reduced to soluble manganese(II) in an aqueous medium with calcium sulfide (CaS) as the reductant, and the resultant residue was then leached by a sulfuric acid solution. Thiosulfate (S2O3
                     2−) was produced in situ in the reduction stage. The S2O3
                     2− by-product was reserved and used as the lixiviant for the subsequent silver leaching step with copper(II) and ammonia additives. The production of S2O3
                     2− was 0.168mol/L in the reduction stage and the recovery of manganese reached 98.0% in the acid leaching stage under the optimum conditions. Notably, 57.5% of silver was recovered when only the S2O3
                     2−-containing liquor from the reduction stage was used, and 92.0% of silver was recovered when a small amount of supplementary S2O3
                     2− was used.Large reserves of manganese–silver ores with typical grades of 5–35% manganese and 0.005–0.5% silver have been found in many parts of the world, including the United States, Mexico, Indonesia, Japan, New Zealand ( Mineralogical investigations have revealed that manganese occurs mainly as higher oxides including, but not limited to, pyrolusite (MnO For the treatment of manganese, pyrometallurgical processes for the reduction of manganese oxide ores using coal, pyrite, cornstalk ( For the treatment of silver, the lixiviants or leaching systems and the consumption of reagents have been investigated, and conventional cyanidation ( Except for the simultaneous leaching of manganese and silver from manganese–silver ores reported by The manganese–silver ore sample was obtained from Fujian province, China, and was first crushed into 2-mm diameter particles and then ground to the required size using a laboratory-scale ceramic ball mill. Calcium sulfide was synthesised according to the method reported in our previous work ( The X-ray diffraction (XRD, TTR III, Rigaku, Japan) was used to study the mineralogy of the manganese–silver ore. Only gangue minerals, mainly quartz and a small amount of dolomite, were confirmed by XRD. The manganese component is difficult to analyse by XRD because of its complicated and diverse structure, even though its content is relatively high. Moreover, silver minerals could not be identified in XRD patterns because of their very low content. Therefore, chemical phase analysis, based principally on a selective solvent, chelates, resins or other isolating agents, was used to determine the mineralogy of the manganese–silver ore ( The manganese, iron, and silver contents in the leach liquor were analysed by atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS, TAS-990 Super, Persee, China). The content of S The leaching tests were divided into three stages: (1) the reduction of manganese oxides, (2) acid leaching of manganese and (3) ammoniacal leaching of silver. The tests were performed in 250-mL round bottom flasks with a mechanical stirring paddle, and the stirring rate was fixed at 400 The chemical and mineralogical analyses of the manganese–silver ore sample are given in The effect of ore particle size on the leaching efficiencies of manganese, iron, and silver was studied under the following conditions: CaS/ore ratio (w/w) of 0.2:1, 95 As summarised in For the further characterisation of the elemental distributions in particles of different sizes, EDS analysis was performed for the 505, 156, and 44-μm diameter particles. Representative points were selected, and the results are presented in Given both the leaching efficiency and energy consumption in terms of high benefit and low cost, an average particle size of 44   The production of S The CaS/ore ratio was varied between 0 and 0.6 (Test 1) to examine its effect. The results shown in The effect of the reduction temperature was examined between 75 and 95 The effect of the reduction time on the leaching efficiency of manganese and the production of S To optimise the leaching of manganese and the production of S After reduction, the S The dissolution of manganese can be catalyzed by solubilised iron(II), as shown by Eqs. (14) and (15), because the potential of the Fe The effect of the H The effect of the acid leaching temperature was examined in the range of 60–95 As shown in The effect of the acid leaching time on the leaching efficiencies of manganese and iron was investigated in the range of 5–50 After manganese leaching, thiosulfate–copper–ammonia leaching for the silver-enriched residue was conducted. In the presence of Cu From the above equations, it is clear that metallic silver can be oxidised by O The silver-enriched residue was mixed with the S The effect of the Cu The effect of NH As shown in To improve the silver leaching efficiency, it was necessary to examine the influence of the leaching time (Test 13). The corresponding results are shown in The thiosulfate leaching L/S ratio is not only an important factor for the recovery of silver and the consumption of S The SEM images of the primary ore, the acid leaching residue, and the thiosulfate leaching residue (as the final residue) are presented in As shown in A fully hydrometallurgical process to leach manganese and silver from typical manganese–silver ores, which included the reductive treatment of primary ores with CaS in aqueous medium, in situ production of S Reduction of manganese oxides. S Acid leaching of manganese and iron. Within 10 Ammoniacal leaching of silver: An additional 0.2 The satisfactory recoveries of manganese and silver demonstrate that this new process is highly efficient. As a by-product of the reduction of MnO This work was supported by the