Background
                  Intra-articular fractures and fracture-dislocations of the ulnar-sided carpometacarpal joints (US-CMC) are common and under-reported. Their diagnosis is often delayed or incomplete, and there is no consensus as to the best treatment. The aim of this systematic literature review was to focus on the quality of existing data and to describe in detail the available evidence on the diagnosis and treatment of these lesions. Based on our findings, we will propose guidelines for improving the design of future studies on these lesions.
               
                  Methods
                  This systematic literature review looked at all articles published between 1918 and 2019 on US-CMC fractures and fracture-dislocations. The quality of the articles was evaluated using the Quality Appraisal Tool devised by Moga et al. Information on the diagnostic and therapeutic methods were extracted along with epidemiological data, classifications, and clinical and radiological outcomes.
               
                  Results
                  Of the 500 articles identified, 13 were included. According to the Quality Appraisal Tool, three of these articles had acceptable quality. While either radiographs or CT scans were used for the diagnosis, the radiographs were insufficient to precisely describe the lesions and guide the treatment. Conservative treatment or percutaneous surgical treatment was preferred for acute stable lesions without extensive fractures or comminution, while open surgical treatment was used most often in cases of unstable or sub-acute fractures and fracture-dislocations.
               
                  Discussion
                  The current literature on this topic is made up of case series with a low level of evidence. CT is needed to assess and classify these lesions and select between conservative and surgical treatment. Unstable cases or those with delayed presentation should be treated with an open surgical approach. Based on our findings, we propose reporting guidelines for future studies on the treatment of US-CMC fractures and fracture-dislocations.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  III.Intra-articular fractures and fracture-dislocations of the ulnar-sided carpometacarpal joints (US-CMC) are common and under-diagnosed Since the first description of US-CMC dislocation in 1918, various articles describing single cases or small case series have featured isolated fractures or fracture-dislocations of the base on the joints at the 5th and/or 4th ray, although there is no consensus as to the best way to diagnose or treat these lesions The aim of this review was to answer three questions: is the quality of current evidence good enough to propose guidelines on the treatment of US-CMC fractures and fracture-dislocations?; are radiographs sufficient for diagnosing these lesions?; should open surgery be used to treat all lesions? After having answered these questions, we hope to produce guidelines for future studies on the treatment of US-CMC fractures and fracture-dislocations. This systematic literature review was carried out according to the PRISMA recommendations proposed by the EQUATOR network Articles written in English, French, German and Portuguese were included. Animal and cadaver studies were excluded as were conference reports, radiology reports and articles with fewer than 3 cases. Literature reviews were excluded although their reference list was consulted. Five hundred articles were identified. The first selection round was based on the title and abstract to reduce the pool to articles that solely focused on CMC lesions of the 4th and 5th rays. A full text analysis was done to exclude reports of neck or shaft fractures of the 5th metacarpal or these including fracture of the forearm bones, fractures of carpal bones other than the hamate, and fractures or fracture-dislocations of metacarpals other than the 4th and 5th. In the end, 13 articles were selected and numbered arbitrarily from 1 to 13 for the purpose of this analysis ( The quality of these articles was determined using the Quality Appraisal Tool for case series developed by Moga et al. A threshold score of 70% positive responses (13 positive answers) was used to define an article of acceptable quality Information about the year of publication, study design and inclusion criteria were analyzed. Data on the number of patients, sex, age, the type and mechanism of injury, side affected, radiology modality used for the diagnosis, treatment delay, treatment method, mean follow-up and classification used were also compiled. The radiological and clinical outcomes were assessed based on the WHO's International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health and consisted of evaluating body function (pain, sensitivity, mobility, grip strength), physical structures (bone union, displacement, articular surface evaluation, metacarpal shortening, signs of osteoarthritis), activities (DASH, Michigan Hand Outcomes questionnaire and Kumar score) and participation (return to work and prior activities) The statistical analysis was performed with Prism software (GraphPad, USA). The results are presented with the mean values and range or as percentages. The 13 articles included were published between 1974 and 2015. Ten articles were case series and three were cohort studies. Based on the Quality Appraisal Tool, three articles (Gehrmann et al. Questions 1, 2, 13 and 17 on the clarity of the study objective (1), description of study population (2), report of follow-up (13) and consistency between conclusions and results (17) had the largest number of positive responses (67%). The question on the potential multicenter nature of the study had the largest number of negative responses (100%). At this stage, given these findings and the small number of good quality articles, it was difficult to propose guidelines for treating these lesions. The mean number of patients per study was 22 (range, 4–39). Right and dominant hands were injured in 86% and 88% of cases, respectively, with 95% of patients being male. The mean age was 31.5 years (range, 12–93) (( The most common lesion was an isolated fracture of the 5th metacarpal base without dislocation (84%). Isolated CMC dislocation in the 5th ray, combined CMC dislocation in the 4th and 5th rays, fracture of the base of the 4th metacarpal and fracture of the hamate were reported in 61%, 53%, 53% and 46% of studies respectively. When a dislocation was present, it was dorsal in 100% of cases and occurred after a punch ( All the studies used radiographs to diagnose the lesions ( Five studies (38%) made up their own classification systems; their criteria involved the presence of an intra-articular fracture of the hamate and metacarpals, the fragment size, comminution and shape of the fragments, displacement, chronicity of the lesions, and a coronal fracture line or hamate avulsion ( Treatments and indications are detailed in the supplementary materials ( conservative treatment or percutaneous treatment was used most often for treating acute stable lesions without fracture or extensive comminution after reduction surgical treatment was most often used for chronic or unstable fractures and fracture-dislocations: an open procedure was used for older and/or unstable lesions with large articular fragments and especially coronal fractures of the hamate a closed procedure was used for unstable lesions without coronal fracture of the hamate The following surgical techniques were used: closed with K-wires, open with K-wires, open with K-wires reinforced by screws and/or plate fixation, mini-screws or plate only. When open surgery was performed, the approach was either dorsal or dorso-ulnar. When using K-wire fixation, the constructs were parallel intermetacarpal fixation of the 5th and 4th metacarpals, crossed fixation and carpometacarpal temporary fixation. Postoperative immobilization was used for 2 to 6 weeks and the K-wires were removed 4 to 6 weeks after surgery. Plates and screws were left in place or removed after 6 to 8 months. Pain was not measured in five articles (38%) and only one article (8%) used a visual analog scale to measure it Range of motion was reported in three articles (23%) and was compared to the healthy side. One article declared using a goniometer to measure the range of motion. Grip strength was reported in 11 articles (85%) and was measured with a standardized dynamometer in 4 articles. Grip strength was reduced by 0% to 19% relative to the healthy side. All studies except one used a clinical analysis to evaluate the results. Ten articles (76%) described radiological outcomes. In terms of complications, seven articles (54%) described an infection or hardware failure after open surgical treatment. No articles reported malunion, delayed union, nonunion or complications related to immobilization. The functional outcomes were determined in five articles (38%) and were good based on the DASH score, Kumar criteria and Michigan Hand Outcomes Questionnaire or other non-standardized qualitative tools. Participation was measured in eight articles (61%) and was analyzed based on the time away from work or the return to prior activities ( The scientific literature on US-CMC fractures and fracture-dislocations is mainly made up of low-quality studies describing a variety of diagnostic methods, classification systems, treatment methods and outcome measures. Given the lack of clear recommendations for the treatment of these lesions, diagnosis and treatment are a challenge for surgeons and traumatology specialists Using the Quality Appraisal Tool described by Moga et al., only three articles had an acceptable quality of evidence. We believe that this low number of high-quality articles is due to a selection bias induced by articles published before 2000, since, based on our search, the good quality articles were published after 2010. In fact, the questionnaires and standardized methods for functional evaluation of the upper extremity were first developed in the 1990s and imaging methods have greatly improved since the introduction of digital radiography in 1980 The diagnosis of US-CMC fractures and fracture-dislocations is difficult when using standard radiographs because of the superimposition of carpal bones and metacarpal bones ( While this intercarpal angle screening test is a reliable tool, most surgeons prefer using a CT scan right away when CMC fracture or dislocation is suspected Eight classification systems have been described for US-CMC fractures and/or fracture-dislocations ( Currently, the Cain classification is the most popular and largely accepted. It is based on metacarpal dislocation and the type of hamate fracture. However, this classification does not include metacarpal base fractures even though they affect joint stability and are important factors to consider when selecting the treatment Among the newer classification systems, only the radiological classification proposed by Lee et al. in 2011 included CMC dislocations, metacarpal fractures and fracture-dislocations and hamate fractures. The authors classified the lesions according to the presence of dislocation, extent of the hamate area fractured and condition of the metacarpal bases. Three different types of fracture-dislocations with 12 subtypes were described along with the corresponding treatment. This classification system is the clearest, most comprehensive and highlights the impact of dorsal impaction and coronal hamate fracture on CMC stability. However, volar impaction of the metacarpal bases was not analyzed, even though we believe this is an important factor in stability. Nevertheless, this hypothesis must be verified in anatomical studies. The time to treatment is especially important for the prognosis of these lesions. When poor results were reported, these were instances of delayed treatment with incorrect or missed diagnosis It is widely accepted that surgical treatment is needed after closed reduction and immobilization failure, although there is no consensus on whether these unstable lesions should be reduced and fixed with an open or closed procedure. Cain et al. state that the reduction's instability, the extent of the hamate's fracture and the impingement of the dorsal CMC ligament are factors in support of open treatment Fixation of metacarpal articular fragments is more controversial. While it is widely accepted that anatomical reduction and stabilization are needed to achieve satisfactory outcomes, there is no evidence to support this opinion. Schortinghuis and Klasen believe that reducing the intra-articular fragments is a key to avoid long term osteoarthritis However, these reports were in isolated cases with a short follow-up and have a low quality of evidence. Higher quality articles show that the outcomes are poor when non-surgical treatment is applied to unstable fractures or delayed treatment of US-CMC lesions Given that the population of patients with US-CMC fracture or fracture-dislocations is relatively homogeneous and that the injury mechanism is mainly the result of a fist strike in the context of an assault, fight and/or self-mutilation, we could superimpose this population to that of patients who have fractured the neck of the 5th metacarpal, called “boxer's fracture”. A recent study described the psychopathological traits and personality types of the patients who suffer from this type of fracture. The authors found high anger and cynicism scores, personality disorders and anxiety symptoms that may explain some of our findings The current study has several limitations. The inclusion criteria were very broad. A selection bias is likely because we analyzed all case series independent of patient age, injury mechanism, patient's occupation (e.g. heavy manual laborers), follow-up, diagnostic methods, treatment and outcome measures. On the other hand, this provided detailed and representative information about the quality of the available scientific evidence and current practices. Our study selected 13 articles out of 500, which corresponds to a 97% exclusion rate. In fact, many of the articles that we identified were single case reports that we decided to exclude to avoid analysis bias induced by heterogeneous and non-comparable data. However, we are aware that by excluding these single cases, some lesions or rare combinations may not have been included. The third limitation is the small number of case series included. Given the high rate of incorrect diagnosis for US-CMC lesions (about 70%) and the difficulty in following patients, there are few published case series Given our findings and analysis, we suggest that authors document the following data when performing studies in the future for publication: details about the injury (injured site, dominant hand, injury mechanism); type of fracture and dislocation in the Lee classification time elapsed before treatment; initial treatment (especially for instances when surgical treatment is delayed); description of orthopedic or surgical indications; description of the type and duration of conservative treatment; description of surgical treatment (open, closed), fixation methods, postoperative immobilization method and duration; imaging modalities used to evaluate the results; union, delayed union, nonunion, malunion and secondary displacement rate; values of functional outcome scores (DASH or PRWE or Michigan or Kumar); time to return to work or activities; pain, grip strength and joint range of motion relative to healthy contralateral side and measured with a standardized tool; radiological signs of osteoarthritis based on the scale described by Knirk and Jupiter; number of surgical revisions; long-term follow-up (at least 6 months, preferably 2 years); number and types of complications. Our study was a review of the current literature on US-CMC fractures and fracture-dislocations. Despite limitations related to quality of evidence, we can draw some conclusions. US-CMC fractures and fracture-dislocations are common, often neglected and relatively poorly studied. They are complex and involve metacarpal and hamate articular lesions; a CT scan requested urgently is useful for analyzing the extent of the lesions and for selecting the most appropriate treatment relative to the injury's stability; the classification system described by Lee et al. is the most comprehensive for describing lesions and guiding the surgical treatment; percutaneous surgical treatment is the most common treatment. The indication for open surgery is controversial although usually limited to perform open reduction for unstable or chronic fracture-dislocations; while the outcomes are not well documented, the patients are generally not very demanding because of the context of self-mutilation and lack of financial compensation; studies that follow the guidelines that we have proposed are needed to improve the quality of future publications and the treatment of these injuries. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. This study did not receive any funding. Dr Chaves carried out the research, data collection and manuscript preparation. Dr Dubert designed and supervised the study. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 