Silicate matrix composites are potential candidates for high-temperature applications. In the present investigation, the effect of metallic (Cu) and non-metallic (SiC particulates, platelets, short fibres and whiskers) additions on the rheological behaviour of borosilicate matrix composites has been evaluated. The hot-pressed composites were tested both in compression and tension in the temperature range of 625–725°C. SiC reinforced composites tested in compression exhibited varying degree of strengthening and strain rate sensitivity depending on the volume fraction and morphology of reinforcements. The degree of strengthening and strain rate sensitivity depends on the volume fraction and morphology of reinforcements. Strengthening effect increased with the volume fraction and aspect ratio of reinforcements. The flow behaviour of composites changed from Newtonian to non-Newtonian with strain rate sensitivity index value changing from unity to 0.48. A similar trend was seen in the rate sensitivity of copper composites. However, copper additions decreased the strength of the composites at lower temperatures because of the softer copper phase. Pre-oxidation of copper particles had certain strengthening effect on the composite. The apparent viscosity of SiC reinforced composites increased with volume fraction and aspect ratio of reinforcements. However, in particulate composites, the viscosity found to increase with particle size. The mechanical/hydrodynamic interactions among the particulates appeared to be responsible for such a behaviour. With increasing strain rate, the viscosity decreased progressively confirming the shear thinning of the composites. The tensile ductility of the composites with 40 vol% reinforcements was evaluated at 700°C. While 400% elongation was observed in SiC particulate, platelet and copper composites, in short fibre/whisker composites, the tensile elongation values were only 150%. Further, the elongation of SiC platelet and copper composites improved by decreasing temperature and volume fraction of reinforcements, and also elongation values >500% were recorded. The tensile ductility of borosilicate composites was limited by onset and growth of cavities nucleated at the reinforcement/matrix interfaces.In the recent past, a large number of glass and glass-ceramic matrix composites have been developed by incorporating either continuous or discontinuous reinforcements. Earlier investigations had studied the flow behaviour of glass and glass-ceramics without any extraneous dispersions. At very high temperatures (i.e. in the vicinity of glass transition temperature, When compared to glass systems, the work that was carried out on glass-ceramic systems is very meagre. Wang and Raj No systematic study is available for understanding the effect of reinforcements (both metallic and non-metallic) on the flow behaviour of silicate matrix composites. In the present investigation, the effect of reinforcement morphology, volume fraction and particle size on the flow behaviour of a silicate has been studied considering borosilicate as a model system. The composites of this study consist of borosilicate matrix and discontinuous reinforcements of SiC along with copper. Copper particles were added in as received and oxidised (200°C for 10 min) condition. The size of copper particles varied from 0.6–10 μm with 23% between 6.4–8 μm. The details of various SiC reinforcements are shown in The microstructures of various borosilicate composites are shown in For each composite, a load-displacement plot was obtained from cross head velocity change test in compression. Flow stress ( The activation energy ( To start with, it is of interest to know whether the cristobalite formed during hot-pressing of glass powder modifies its flow behaviour. The data presented in The strain rate data for different copper reinforced composites (processed with and without surface oxidation of copper particles) are presented in In addition to the effects of temperature and copper content, the differences in the flow behaviour of the composites processed with and without oxidised copper is of interest to assess the role of copper oxide. Composites processed with oxidised copper powder exhibit higher flow stress than their counterparts. The difference in their flow stress increases with volume fraction of copper and drop in test temperature. Considering the strain rate regime below 10 The stress( The Making use of the flow stress data at various temperatures for a strain rate of 1.0×10 In SiC particulate composites, in addition to strengthening, addition of reinforcements led to non-Newtonian behaviour especially at higher volume fractions. The flow became increasingly non-Newtonian with decreasing temperature, increase in volume fraction and increase in strain rate. Flow behaviour of the composites for reinforcements of four different size ranges and volume fraction is found to be strongly dependent on temperature. For a given temperature and volume fraction the extent of strengthening depends on reinforcement size ( The activation energy values were found to vary in the range of 335–540 kJ/mol depending on the particle size and volume fraction. The activation energy generally decreased with increasing particle size and volume fraction of particulate. It may appear that good ductility can be expected both in tension and compression in rate sensitive materials. While plastic instability known as necking affects tensile ductility, such instability does not occur in compression. In materials exhibiting viscous flow, strain rate hardening stabilises uniform flow along the gauge length of a tensile specimen and flow localisation and neck growth are suppressed. Hence a material exhibiting viscous flow would neck down to a point and high tensile ductility can be expected. However, rate sensitivity of flow stress is only a necessary but not sufficient condition for large ductility. The onset of fracture events involving initiation and propagation of cracks/voids become significant in tensile mode of testing and the tensile ductility may be limited by fracture. Compressive stresses would not favour initiation and propagation of cracks/voids and thus compressive ductility may be better than that in tension. Glass matrix composites generally exhibit lower ductility in tension than in compression at temperatures around glass transition temperature where the flow becomes rate sensitive. The tensile ductility of these composites is of interest from the view point of their deformation processing. Accordingly, the tensile ductility of various composites is explored in this study at different temperatures. The results and the origin of the differences in the tensile ductility of different composites are considered below. The tensile ductility of 40 vol% copper and SiC composites at different temperatures is illustrated in The reinforcements in glass matrix composites not only reduce the rate sensitivity of flow stress but also promote early fracture in tension. Both of these factors influence the tensile ductility of composites. The observed variation in tensile ductility of composites with different reinforcements may have its origin in the aspect ratio of reinforcements. The aspect ratio of short fibres/whiskers is considerably higher than that of particulate/platelets. Although the short fibre/whisker reinforcements are randomly distributed in the matrix, some of the interfaces will be transversely aligned with respect to the tensile direction and such interfaces are potential sites for initiating voids/cracks. Similar events can occur to a lesser degree in particulate/platelet composites. The local stress concentration at the matrix/reinforcement interfaces is also expected to be more severe in the case of reinforcements of higher aspect ratio. Moreover, the strength of composites with short fibres/whiskers is higher than the others and thereby the magnitude of tensile stress is higher than in case of reinforcements with smaller aspect ratios. Because of these reasons, fracture would set in earlier in reinforcements of high aspect ratio. Thus the overall effect of the reinforcement geometry is a lower tensile ductility in composites with reinforcements of high aspect ratio relative to those with reinforcements of low aspect ratio. The other trend is the enhanced tensile ductility in copper and platelet reinforced composites at lower test temperature. From the data shown in Another noteworthy observation in the tensile flow behaviour of composites is the extensive swelling of deformed specimens as a result of formation of voids/pores. Bulk density measurements were carried out at different locations along the gauge length of tensile specimens to estimate their pore content and the data are presented in  At higher temperature (700°C), the presence of cristobalite (up to 10 vol%) did not influence the flow behaviour of borosilicate glass. However, at lower temperatures the effect appeared to be significant. Although there was not much influence on flow stress values the strain rate sensitivity value decreased from unity to 0.7 at 650°C. Addition of increasing amounts of copper resulted in a lower strength of the composites due to the softer copper particles relative to the matrix. However, at 700°C, strengthening was observed due to softening of glass matrix relative to metallic particles. Composites processed with oxidised copper exhibited a higher flow stress. The strain rate sensitivity decreased as the copper content increased. All SiC–borosilicate composites exhibit strengthening in response to increasing strain rate and drop in temperature. While the flow stress increases with the volume fraction and aspect ratio of reinforcements, the rate sensitivity gradually decreases. In case of SiC reinforcements, the strain rate sensitivity index decreased from unity to 0.50, whereas in copper dispersed composites it decreased to 0.63. With a loss in rate sensitivity in the higher strain rate regime, the flow behaviour tends to become more non-Newtonian and non-linearity of double logarithmic stress-strain rate plots predominates. The apparent viscosity of copper dispersed composites varied with temperature and is almost independent of copper. Composites with oxidised copper exhibited a slightly higher viscosity compared with as-received copper containing composites. In SiC dispersed composites, the apparent viscosity increases with volume fraction and aspect ratio of reinforcements. The greatest resistance to matrix flow is offered by the reinforcements having highest aspect ratio, which results in a significant increase in viscosity of short fibre/whisker composites. However, in particulate composites viscosity increased with higher volume fraction and larger size of the particles. The mechanical/hydrodynamic interactions among the particles are probably responsible for the rise in the viscosity in the composites with larger particles. In SiC composites empirical relationships between apparent viscosity and various processing parameters have been developed by regression analysis. With increase in strain rate, the viscosity decreases progressively confirming to the shear thinning behaviour of the composites. At 700°C, copper and SiC platelet/particulate composites exhibited higher tensile elongations (400%) than in whisker/short fibre composites. 20 vol% composites offered higher tensile ductility compared to its 40 vol% counterpart. In 40 vol% platelet composites tensile ductility increased with decrease in temperature. The tensile ductility of composites is limited by the onset and growth of cavities/cracks at the reinforcement/matrix interface as a result of stress concentrations of varying degree depending on the reinforcement morphology. Across the gauge length of all the tensile samples, a variation in the cavitation is observed. The cavitation generally increased from shoulder to the centre of the samples. This work was supported by the Department of Science and Technology, Government of India under grant No. III 5(22)93-ET.