The effect of filler material concentration on Electromagnetic Interference (EMI) Shielding Effectiveness (SE) of polymeric nanocomposites has been studied. Computational model was developed for shielding performance of graphene polymeric nanocomposites. Nanocomposites were fabricated using High Pressure Resin Transfer Molding (HPRTM) method, latter EM shielding properties were measured experimentally using waveguide technique. It is observed that SE increases with increase in wt% of graphene. From the results, it is perceived that nanocomposite with 2.5 wt% of graphene shows good shielding with the range of −27 dB to −30 dB, doubled in comparison to pure polymeric composite. Numerical simulations of various graphene nanocomposites have been carried out for the prediction of SE while incorporating EM properties of corresponding nanocomposite as input. Excellent agreement between numerical simulations and experimental results has been observed. The developed numerical model predicts SE values of graphene nanocomposites in −30 dB range which certainly falls in the X-band.Materials for Electromagnetic Interference (EMI) shielding have been paid attention due to their major activity in blocking uninvited electromagnetic radiation from electronic devices, which has been a concern with the rapid advancement of electronic gadgets, telecommunication and related innovations [ In the current study the second method has been chosen knowingly absorption dominated microwave shielding. The pertinent dielectric filler material properties such as intrinsic dielectric constant, magnetic permeability, electrical conductivity, wt% of filler and its aspect ratio are all important for Electromagnetic Interference Shielding Effectiveness (EMISE). A very light weight material is sought to shield the radiation generated in the work space resulting from computer/electronic equipment etc. and also to cover the sensitive circuits [ Metal based microwave shielding materials have also been widely used and explored. However, various properties of metal based shielding materials such as high relative density, corrosion disposition and cumbersome fabrication process made them unsuitable for shielding applications. Moreover, these materials are not suitable wherever absorption is necessary because of replication of radiation [ The broad objective of the present work is reduction of EM radiations interms of EMI shielding using lightweight polymer nanocomposite materials. A systematic study is conducted which includes development of computational model to see the effect of filler material weight concentrations on EMISE pertained to X-band. Further experimental investigation of EMISE will be done for various graphene polymeric nanocomposites. Graphene was used as a filler material and epoxy/glass fiber composite as matrix material. Raw graphene with surface area 120 m Proper dispersion of graphene in epoxy is a major challenge in preparation of graphene/epoxy nano composites. Good distribution state of filler in composite affects its electrical and physical properties and this depends on the processing technique. The distribution of filler material in the matrix has been achieved by means of solution mixing process. Graphene with different weight percentages (0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5 wt%) has been dispersed separately in the epoxy resin. The required quantities of filler material, fiber weight and matrix material have been calculated using rule of mixtures concept for a given size and thickness of laminate. Graphene/epoxy solution was sonicated using ultra tip sonicator for 90 min to get proper distribution of graphene in the epoxy resin. Based on the chemical properties of epoxy and hardener, the ratio of epoxy/graphene to hardener solution was maintained as 100:11 for all weight percentages. E–glass fiber was cut to specific dimensions (50 × 50 mm Crystalline nature of graphene was observed using XRD (Rigaku) within the incident angle range (2θ) from 10.0154° to 90.9524° under standard atmospheric conditions. From the output, it is observed that maximum diffraction peaks attained at nearby 26° of incident angle and the same has been depicted in Recorded TEM micrographs examined to investigate the structure of graphene at 200 nm scale which is presented in The graphene molecular components bonding was verified using FTIR in 4000–400 cm It is observed from Raman Spectrum analysis of graphene is presented in The graphene structure and its surface morphology imaging were carried out using FESEM (JSM7100F). The elemental composition has been verified using Energy Dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) which is an integral part of FESEM and the results are presented in Elemental composition is presented in Electromagnetic interference numerical modeling of graphene nanocomposites has been carried out using FEM based COMSOL multiphysics software. The inbuilt RF module was used to solve electromagnetic wave theory equations for the current computational domain. Graphene/epoxy composite with dimensions of 22.86 × 10.16 × 2 mm In the RF module of COMSOL, plane wave equations in free space are given in Equation Here The nanocomposite sample was cut into specific dimensions 22.86 × 10.16 × 2 mm EMI Shielding Effectiveness is the ability of a material to assuage EM waves which is useful for EMI studies of electronic system. Shielding capacity of composite material is measured interms of Shielding Effectiveness (SE). Total SE (SE) can be defined as the ratio of incident power (P In the present work the total SE calculation was performed using equation Reflection is one of the shielding mechanisms. When an EM field is incident on the material, reflection loss increases due to the presence of induced charged carriers in the composite. Dielectric/magnetic polarization or energy dissipation within the filler material of composite affects the absorption based shielding. Multiple reflections in the composite material are reflections due to the opposite faces of the filler material [ When an EM wave is incident on the surface of the composite material, the total energy is divided into three parts which are the reflectivity (R), absorptivity (A) and transmissivity (T) as indicated in equation EM properties permittivity and permeability of fabricated samples were measured using waveguide measurement setup ( Real (μ′) and imaginary (μ″) parts of relative permeability values of fabricated samples are presented in EM wave theory equations of graphene composites were solved numerically using finite element analysis. RF module methodology was adopted to simulate the composite structure in X-band. The geometry consists of two ports (Input/Output), input port specified at the left side of composite followed by a line of length 150.4 mm (as per WR90 Designation standards) as shown in The composite structure is meshed with free tetrahedron method and near the composite boundary mesh was refined for various element sizes. Grid independence test has been done with three different element sizes corresponding elements are 7348, 8109 and 10,318 and obtained shielding effectiveness are −21dB, −24.5 dB and −23.98 dB in X–band frequency range. Numerical simulations of all graphene wt% are conducted at converged computational mesh which contains 8109 elements for predicting the EMISE interms of EM field strength contours and also free tetrahedron meshing of 2.5 wt% is presented in The effect of filler material wt% on SE is presented in Fabricated epoxy/graphene based composites were cut into specific dimensions to measure the S-parameter using waveguide measurement technique in X-band. Reflection loss (RL) of incident EM radiation was represented with S11 (in dB) and on the other hand S21 (in dB) denotes transmission loss. The variation of both S11 and S21 in X-band is presented in The variation of S-parameters can be studied based on ABCD and Z parameters. ABCD parameters depend on the input and output signal of EM radiation. Z parameter depends on the material properties. ABCD parameters do not vary with the weight percentage of the filler material since the input and output signals of EM radiation remain constant. Whereas, the characteristic impedance of the filler material changes with its weight percentage in the composite, hence affects the Z-parameters. Moreover, the characteristic impedance of the composite material decreases with increasing wt% of filler. Reflection and transmission losses are the function of characteristic impedance of the filler material. Hence, both are increasing with an increase in wt% of graphene and the same was confirmed in EMISE results of various graphene nanocomposites are shown in It is observed from Further, the results of both experimental and simulation of total shielding effectiveness (SE) for various graphene nanocomposites were compared in the X-band. It can be seen that the simulation results are in good agreement with experimental results and Numerical model is developed for EMI shielding effectiveness of polymer nanocomposite reinforced with different wt% of graphene using finite element analysis in X – band frequency range. Experimental validation of this design is also done by using waveguide measurement technique. It is revealed from the results that the shielding effectiveness increases with increase in graphene wt% of nanocomposite in X-band which was confirmed with both simulation and experimentation. Graphene 2.5 wt% nanocomposite has better shielding effectiveness in X-band and exhibits more than 95% of absorption in X – band. Further, numerically obtained total SE were validated with experimental results and minimum error of 2.79% was observed for graphene 2.5 wt%. From the results of various nanocomposites, it was perceived that the weight percentage of the filler material plays an important role in protecting the electronic devices, microwave components from EM radiation.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Authors would like to express their gratitude to Naval Research Board (NRB), Ministry of Defence Government of India and TEQIP Phase II CoE for their facilities to do research.