Manufactured fine aggregates have become a viable alternative to natural sands in construction and building all over the world, in particular where a sustainable source of the later is not available. Technologies that are now associated to processing these materials include vertical shaft impact crushing and dry classification, which have the direct ability to improve particle shape and control the amount of filler material, respectively. Granites and gneisses are among the rocks that are most commonly used for aggregate production worldwide. While composition generally creates no major issues in their application as coarse aggregates, the use of these rocks in production of manufactured sand can represent a challenge, mostly associated to the presence of appreciable amounts of contaminating minerals, in particular micas, which can have a negative impact on both rheology and strength of mortars and concrete. The present work demonstrates the improvement in the characteristics of three manufactured fine aggregates through dry rare-earth magnetic separation. It demonstrates that the mica/biotite content has been reduced significantly, leading also to a significant improvement in shape in the product. Magnetic separation has been found to have the added advantage of removing other deleterious minerals also present in these rocks, thus improving the brightness (given the dark coloration of mafic minerals removed) and potentially the performance of such fine aggregate in mortars, concrete and asphalt.Manufactured fine aggregates are being increasingly used as a more sustainable alternative to natural sands in different parts of the globe, as a response to the growing restrictions to the use of the natural material ( Some studies have demonstrated the effect of crushing process in the manufactured sand characteristics and performance, mainly showing the benefit of impact crushing over compressive (cone) crushing to improve particle shape ( Mineral composition of manufactured sand can also have an impact on its application on mortars, concrete and asphalt. The presence of sulfides, carbonates, reactive silica minerals (opal and calcedony), minerals resulting from weathering of feldspar minerals (kaolinite, “sericite”, “saussurite”, illite and chlorite), as well as foliated minerals has been associated to deleterious effects in mortars, concrete and asphalt ( Several rocks used for producing manufactured sands, in particular granite and gneiss, can have appreciable amounts of biotite. Biotite is a name used for a number of black mica minerals that have different chemical compositions but very similar physical properties. These minerals generally cannot be distinguished from one another without detailed laboratory analyzes and have the general composition K(Mg,Fe) The presence of biotite in manufactured fine aggregates is known to be detrimental to the performance of mortars and concrete ( Gneisses are the most abundant rocks in the State of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil ( Magnetic separation technology has evolved significantly in recent years, now making it possible to separate dry with increasingly higher magnetic field intensities with the aid of rare earth magnets ( The present work demonstrates the use of high-intensity dry magnetic separation to remove contaminants from manufactured fine aggregates from gneiss rocks from Brazil, with the aim of improving their response in mortars and concrete. Samples of fine manufactured aggregates, designated hereafter as A, B and C, were collected from three distinct quarries located in the metropolitan area of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Petrological analyzes identified them as gneiss: whereas types A and B are from the Rio Negro formation, C is from the Faccoidal formation ( Samples were initially analyzed to determine their size distribution by sieving. Samples, with top size of 5.6 Preliminary liberation analyzes of particles contained in narrow size ranges were conducted by inspection using a stereoscopic microscope to estimate the proportion of particles that are either composed exclusively of the mafic minerals, felsic minerals and those that are locked. In this study a particle was considered liberated if more than 90% of its apparent area was composed of either mafic or felsic minerals. Magnetic separation tests were conducted using a Rare-Earth Magnetic Separator, model RE-ROLL manufactured by INBRAS-ERIEZ, fitted with an 8 The tests were conducted in two different stages ( Samples of the feed and products were then subjected to a number of analyses, in order to characterize their composition (chemical and mineralogical) and particle shape. This later was used in order to assess the effect of removal of the lamellar biotite particles on the product. Chemical analyzes were conducted by X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy in vacuum, using the Shimadzu Ray ny EDX-7001 Dispersive Energy X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometer with 3 The mineral composition was calculated by X-ray diffraction and with fundamental parameters of the Rietveld refinement method ( Particle shape analyzes were performed by dynamic image analysis using Camsizer XT (Retsch GmbH, Germany). The particle projections were captured by two digital cameras (basic and zoom cameras) simultaneously, differentiating between coarse and fine particles. The images were then processed using a proprietary image analysis software. X-ray diffraction allowed estimating the mineralogical composition of the as-received samples ( The chemical composition of the samples was analyzed by X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy ( The mass distribution of the samples in the different size ranges is shown in In contrast to the mass distribution, the iron content shows the opposite behavior, increasing with the reduction in particle size ( The size-by-size composition of the different samples, considering the felsic minerals as a group and discriminating between the mafic minerals (biotite and hornblende), is presented in Combined information from Prior to separation it is worthwhile analyzing whether or not the mafic minerals are liberated at the different size ranges and samples. Preliminary analyzes of liberation by comparing the proportion of liberated (either particles containing exclusively felsic or mafic minerals) and the total number of particles in each size were estimated and a summary is presented in Particle shapes were measured for the three samples and a summary of values for aspect ratio is shown in A summary of data from the magnetic separation tests is presented in For the three finer size ranges it is evident that the scavenger stage was instrumental to increase the yield of the non-magnetic product, with no negative impact on grade. As such, from this point on in the manuscript, the non-magnetic products of both stages of separation were combined, so that the magnetic waste is solely composed of the final scavenger tailings (  Considering now the classification of each sample into deleterious and non-deleterious components, with the first being composed of biotite, hornblende, muscovite, chlorite, kaolinite and montmorillonite and the latter being composed of the remaining minerals, the efficiency of the separation process could be assessed using the expression presented by Micaceous minerals have the tendency to break into flaky shapes, which are detrimental to the performance of mortars and concrete both in fresh and hardened states ( A summary of results from the separation tests is presented in Finally, size analyzes of the products are presented in Magnetic separation has been capable of only achieving modest upgrading of the coarser product (+1.18 Very efficient separation has been found for the sizes 0.425–0.212 Magnetic separation also demonstrated to be able to remove hornblende, another paramagnetic mineral, which has a dark coloration that may not be desirable in mortars, as well as several other deleterious minerals, namely muscovite, chlorite, kaolinite and montmorillonite. Their recovery in the magnetic product was not expected, due to their either weakly paramagnetic or diamagnetic character, but was regarded as an additional advantage of magnetic separation in upgrading the manufactured fine aggregates. Overall yields of magnetic separation and removal of the −0.053 Magnetic separation resulted in a measurable improvement in shape of the product, in particular in the intermediate to fine sizes. Results demonstrate that high-intensity dry magnetic separation is a very good alternative for removal of deleterious components from manufactured fine aggregates. However, prior to deployment of this technology in an industrial scale, it will be necessary to determine the optimal specific throughput, separator design and magnetic field strength, besides gaining insights into the sensitivity of separation to moisture. The strategy to be adopted in regard to particle size, if conducting separation in narrow size ranges or wider, should also be further investigated. These are topics under study in the authors’ laboratory, with plans for pilot-plant work in an industrial site in the near future. The authors would like to thank the Brazilian agencies CNPq, CAPES and FAPERJ for supporting the work, as well as the companies that are part of Sindibrita-RJ for providing the samples for testing and partially sponsoring the work. The authors also thank CETEM for the use of its magnetic separator and Laboratório de Caracterização Tecnológica of USP for the use of the Camsizer™. This work was result of a co-supervision by Mr. Mateus G. Rossi, who died December 22nd, 2016. This paper is dedicated to his memory.