Using an in situ mineralization process that is biomimetic we have synthesized new nanocomposites of chitosan/hydroxyapatite in 50–50 ratio(ChiHAP50), polygalacturonic acid/hydroxyapatite in 50–50 ratio (PgAHAP50) and Chitosan/hydroxyapatite/Polygalacturonic acid (ChiPgAHAP50). Polygalacturonic acid (PgA) is electrostatically complementary to chitosan, and thus is expected to provide stronger interfacial interactions and improve mechanical response. Atomic force imaging of fractured and polished surfaces suggests a multilevel organization in the hydroxyapatite/biopolymer nanocomposite. The AFM images of ChiPgAHAP50 nanocomposite display presence of chitosan rich and polygalacturonic rich domains. These chitosan rich and PgA rich domains are made of smaller globular shaped particles in which, hydroxyapatite nano-particles are embedded in the biopolymer matrix. The average size of the hydroxyapatite particles in PgAHAP50, ChiHAP50 and ChiPgAHAP50 were found to be 25, 42 and 34 nm respectively. The elastic moduli determined from nanoindentation of PgAHAP50, ChiHAP50 and ChiPgAHAP50 composites are 29.81, 17.56 and 23.62 GPa respectively. Hardness values of the three composites in the same order were found to be 1.56, 0.65 and 1.14 GPa respectively. Macro-mechanical tests showed significant enhancement in elastic moduli, strain to failure and compressive strength of ChiPgAHAP50 composites over ChiHAP50 and PgAHAP50.Chitosan, a biodegradable, biocompatible, non-antigenic, and biofunctional polymer, is an excellent material for tissue regeneration. In addition, its hydrophilic surface promotes cell adhesion, proliferation, and differentiation, and evokes minimal foreign body reaction on implantation Pectin is a plant polysaccharide primarily obtained from edible plants. Pectin contains poly(d-galacturonic acid) bonded via glycosidic linkage In situ mineralization is a biomimetic process, in which mineralization occurs in close association with the polymer much like the mineralization of HAP in natural bone with the association of collagen and other proteins. Recently, this process has attracted much attention primarily due to two reasons: first, to understand the fundamental science of biomineralization and second, for development of new materials with tailored structure and properties In the current study, effect of polygalacturonic acid on macro-mechanical and nano-mechanical properties of chitosan/hydroxyapatite based composites has been investigated by compression tests and nanoindentation. Nanostructural analysis has been performed using atomic force microscopy in Tapping Mode™. Na Hydroxyapatite (HAP) composites were prepared using a “biomimetic process” by wet precipitation method X-ray powder diffraction studies of all samples were carried out using a Philips diffractometer using CuK  Macro-mechanical response of composites has been investigated under constant loading rate of 25 N/min ( Nanoindentation tests were conducted using a diamond berkovich tip. Load controlled indentation tests were performed at a 5-second loading followed by holding for 5 s and then unloading for 5 s. All indentation experiments were performed at load of 1000 μN. The average value of elastic moduli and hardness are shown in The morphology of fractured surfaces of these composites has been further studied by atomic force microscopy (AFM) in Tapping Mode™. In Tapping Mode™, the AFM tip oscillates at a frequency close to its resonance and the tip is allowed to make contact with the sample only for a short duration in each oscillation cycle. During oscillation of the tip over the sample surface, the tip-sample interaction may alter the amplitude, resonance frequency, and phase angle of the oscillating cantilever. Detection of phase angle changes of the cantilever probe during scanning provides an image, called as phase image. Phase angle change is associated with energy dissipation during sample-tip interaction. Several parameters such as: topography of the sample, sample-tip interactions, deformation of sample-tip contact area, and experimental conditions can cause energy dissipation  The AFM images of polished surfaces of ChiHAP50, PgAHAP50 and ChiPgAHAP50 composites revealed further detail of their structure ( The AFM analysis of fractured and polished samples suggests multilevel organization in hydroxyapatite/biopolymer composites ( As noted earlier, the elastic moduli of these nanocomposites found from nanoindentation experiments are around 25 GPa and the moduli found from macro-compression test are around 1–2 GPa. The differences between macro and nano mechanical properties are often observed in nanocomposite systems, especially composites where the nanophase is significantly stiffer. Also, AFM images of fractured surfaces indicate that fracture occurs through domain interfaces. The nanomechanical elastic modulus of ChiPgAHAP50 is intermediate between moduli of ChiHAP50 and PgAHAP50. This suggests weak interfacial interactions between domains in chiHAP50 and PgAHAP50 composites as compared to ChiPgAHAP50 composites. The enhancement in mechanical response of ChiPgAHAP50 over ChiHAP50 and PgAHAP50 can be attributed to the strong interfacial interactions between chitosan rich domains and polygalacturonic acid rich domains. Chitosan is a cationic polymer and polygalacturonic acid is an anionic polymer. Due to their opposite electrostatic charge, strong interfacial interactions can be expected between chitosan rich domains and polygalacturonic acid rich domain. This interfacial interaction could lead to enhancement in macroscopic mechanical response of ChiPgAHAP50 composite. The nanomechanical response of ChiPgAHAP50 composites is intermediate between that of ChiHAP50 and PgA50 composites since the interfacial behavior between domains is inconsequential at low depth of penetration indentations. New nanocomposites of chitosan–polygalacturonic acid–hydroxyapatite have been synthesized used biomimetic routes. Significant improvement in elastic modulus, strain to failure and compressive strength has been achieved by incorporating polycationic and polyanionic biopolymer together with hydroxyapatite. Mechanical tests in the compressive mode indicate 103%, 120% and 190% enhancement in elastic modulus, compressive strength and strain to failure respectively. Further, nano-structural analysis of these nano-composites reveals a multilevel organization in nanocomposites. AFM images of fracture and polished surfaces reveal that ChiPgAHAP50 nanocomposite consists of chitosan rich and polygalacturonic rich domains. These chitosan and PgA rich domains are further made of smaller globular shaped particles with hydroxyapatite nano-particles embedded in biopolymer matrix. The enhancement in mechanical response of ChiPgAHAP50 nanocomposite has been attributed to strong interfacial interactions between chitosan and PgA rich domains. This study will further enhance the understanding of biomineralization and aid in the development of new biomaterials. This research is partially funded by grant from National Science Foundation (CAREER # 0132768).