In the solvent extraction of Pt(IV), Pd(II), and Rh(III) from chloride solution, most of Pt and Pd was extracted into Alamine 336 phase, while extraction percentage of Rh was low. In this study, separation of Pt and Pd from the loaded Alamine 336 solution was investigated as a function of the concentration of stripping agents. HClO4, Na2CO3 and a mixture of HCl and thiourea were tested as stripping agents. In our experimental range, a mixture of HCl and thiourea led to the highest stripping percentage of Pd (>99%) while the stripping percentage of Pt was less than 8%. The low stripping percentage of Pt by the mixture was related to selective stripping of Pd from the loaded Alamine 336. Our results can be utilized in developing a process to separate Pt, Pd, and Rh from chloride solution by solvent extraction.Platinum group metals (PGMs) are extensively in use as catalysts in the automobile, chemical and petroleum industries. In automobiles, Pt and Pd are used as catalytic converter to reduce harmful emissions. In the petroleum cracking process, the catalyst containing Pt and Pd helps to break crude oil molecules into smaller organic molecules ( The mechanisms in the solvent extraction of PGMs by various extractants ( The separation of Rh, Pd and Pt from chloride media ( However, few data have been reported on the stripping of PGMs from the loaded amines ( In our previous study on the separation of Rh(III) from Pt(IV) and Pd(II) chloride solution by using Alamine 336, both Pt and Pd was completely extracted into Alamine 336 in the HCl concentration range from 1 to 5 Stock solutions of platinum and palladium were prepared by dissolving the necessary amount of the metal chlorides in doubly distilled water. Reagent grade of PtCl Alamine 336 (Henkel Corp.), which is a mixture of tertiary amines with alkyl chains varying from eight to ten carbon atoms, was used as an extractant without further purification and toluene was used as a diluent. Alamine 336 (R In our solvent extraction experiments, freshly prepared aqueous solutions were used. Equal volume (20 In the published literatures, some agents such as H According to In the above equation, subscript aq and org represents the aqueous and organic phase, respectively. Our results on the stripping by 0.1 When Na Effect of Na Stripping of Pt and Pd from the loaded Alamine 336 was performed by using HClO Mixture of HCl and thiourea has been used in the stripping of Pt and Pd from different loaded organic phase. In our study, stripping experiments were done by varying thiourea concentration at 0.5 and 5  In the stripping of Pt and Pd from the loaded Alamine 336 phases by the mixture of HCl and thiourea, our results indicate that the stripping percentage of Pd was more affected than that of Pt. Moreover, the presence of thiourea has a more pronounced effect on the stripping of Pd than the concentration of HCl in the mixture. According to the hard and soft acid and base theory (HSAB theory), thiourea is a soft ligand and effective in stripping Pd from the organic phase through the formation of a water soluble complex, Pd (thiourea The effect of thiourea addition to HCl solution on the stripping percentage of Pt was further investigated. The solution containing only 0.001 HCl solution alone cannot strip Pt and Pd from the loaded Alamine 336 phases, which agrees well with the reported results on the stripping of Pd from DEHTPA ( The stripping of Pt and Pd from the loaded Alamine 336 phases was investigated. Stripping by HClO This work was supported by a grant from the