In this study, sedimentation tests for individual minerals and artificially mixed minerals and bauxite ores were carried out to understand the effects of sodium tripolyphosphate (STPP) on the selective flocculation of diasporic-bauxite in the presence of Ca2+ and Mg2+ ions. It was found that STPP can mitigate the detrimental effects of Ca2+ and Mg2+ ions on the dispersion of diaspore and kaolinite. When separating bauxite from the mixtures of minerals and in the presence of Ca2+ ions, STPP can serve as better dispersant than sodium carbonate. By jointly using STPP as a dispersant and PAAS as a flocculant, a flocculation concentrate with the mass ratio of Al2O3/SiO2 (Al/Si) of 7.14 and Al2O3 recovery of 89.97% was produced from the feed (Al2O3/SiO2
                     =5.64) in the presence of Ca2+ ions. In contrast, with using sodium carbonate as the dispersant and PAAS as the flocculant, selectivity of the flocculation separation of diasporic-bauxite was deteriorated. These experimental data were satisfactorily interpreted by some chemical reactions occurring in the pulp, which were deduced from measured zeta potentials of the reaction resultant products and residual Ca2+ concentrations of the pulp.In a typical diasporic bauxite ore, the gangue includes a certain amount of argillaceous minerals such as limonite, kaolinite, illite and chlorite ( The principles of selective flocculation have been reviewed by many researchers. Some of the earlier reported in the literature were ascribed to the selective adsorption of flocculants due to differences in surface charge, either natural or induced, by a judicious control of pH and solution conditions ( However, selective flocculation can be influenced by many factors, especially the quality of water. The Ca Based on the analysis of water quality, the content of Ca The individual minerals of diaspore and kaolinite were collected from Xiaoyi bauxite deposit in Shanxi province, China. All individual minerals were separately hand picked, crushed by jaw crasher with porcelain liners, ground in a porcelain vertical mill, and then dried in vacuum oven at room temperature and stored in glass bottles for the use of tests. A laser granulometry was used to determine the particle size of the four individual minerals, and the average is less than 10 The diasporic-bauxite ore samples were collected from different bauxite mines in Henan province. The main alumina mineral is diaspore, with the main gangue minerals being illite and kaolinite. There are also small amounts of chlorite and pyrophyllite. The chemical composition of the bauxite ore samples is shown in Analytical grade chemical reagents such as hydrochloric acid, sodium hydroxide, sodium carbonate (SC), sodium tripolyphosphate (STPP), calcium chloride, magnesium chloride and sodium polyacrylate (PAAS) were used in this study. For individual minerals, 5 The mixture of the four individual minerals contains 78% diaspore, 9% illite, 9% pyrophyllite and 4% kaolinite by weight, and its assay shows 69.08% Al The selective flocculation tests on diasporic-bauxite ore were carried out in a column with 20 The Delsa440sx zeta potential apparatus was used for zeta potential measurements. Samples were ground to −5 Atomic absorption spectroscopy was used for the measurement of calcium ions concentration in solution. Five grams samples of mineral particles were used for each measurement. Sixty milliliters distilled water was added into a beaker, followed by addition of calcium chloride, and the pulp was stirred for 3 It has been reported that Ca   It is well known that the slurry pH has significant effects on the dispersion of mineral particles. So the slurry pH values were also measured with the increase of the dosage of sodium carbonate and sodium tripolyphosphate under different conditions, and the results are shown in It can be found from In order to confirm the foregoing sedimentation test results, the selective flocculation tests on artificial mixture of minerals and bauxite ore were carried out. Sodium carbonate and sodium tripolyphosphate were used as dispersants, and sodium polyacrylate (PAAS) was used as flocculant. The test results are presented in In distilled water and in the presence of 80 In the presence of 120 However, use of STPP to replace sodium carbonate can significantly increase the A/S of flocculate separation performance, with the Al   At dispersant dosages over 600 The action mechanisms of SC and STPP can be related to the possible chemical reactions occurring between Ca As shown, the surface properties of the resultant products generated by calcium ions and two dispersants are different. With increasing SC dosage, the product surface underwent a charge reversal from positive to negative, and charge neutralization was obtained at 350  As shown, the residual Ca When increasing STPP dosage in the range of 100–400  Both sodium carbonate and sodium tripolyphosphate can eliminate the negative effects of calcium and magnesium ions on the dispersion of individual minerals such as diaspore and kaolinite. However, for the selective flocculation of the artificially mixed minerals in the presence of Ca Calcium carbonate deposition could be generated by the reaction between sodium carbonate and Ca The reaction between calcium ions and sodium tripolyphosphate is complicated and may include several stages. The concentration of Ca The authors are grateful for the financial support provided by the ‘‘