To rapidly produce oil, downhole heating technology requires an electric heater, which is limited by the diameter of the heat injection well, with long-term working stability and high-efficiency heat transfer. Simulations indicated that heater with continuous helical baffles is more suitable for downhole heating technology than heater with segmental baffles in terms of long-term working stability. Then, experiments were conducted on four continuous helical schemes with pitches of 50, 110, 160, and 210 mm. The test results showed that, in the test scope, the heater with the helical pitch of 110 mm (H110) had the best comprehensive performance, which was 2.95–3.75 times better than that of the heater with the helical pitch of 210 mm (H210). Under the same working conditions, heaters with smaller helical pitch values produce less irreversibility in the heat transfer process. In addition, the heaters with helical pitch values of 110, 160, and 210 mm were more effective at a lower Reynolds number, whereas the heater with the helical pitch of 50 mm could be used under a wide effective range of Reynolds numbers. The conclusions are benefit to setting the heating parameters of electric heater during the process of oil shale in-situ pyrolysis.area, m hydraulic diameter, m energy, J Entransy dissipation rate, W/K enthalpy, J specific enthalpy, J gravitational acceleration, convective heat transfer coefficient, W·m shell-side convective heat transfer coefficient, W·m Tube-side convective heat transfer coefficient, W·m Overall heat transfer coefficient, W·m mass, kg mass flow rate, kg/s modified entropy generation number Nusselt number actual power, W effective power, W the energy absorbed per kilogram, J/kg Reynolds number equivalent thermal resistance, K/W dimensionless entransy dissipation-based thermal resistance fouling resistance entropy generation rate, W/K heating rod surface temperature, K average heating rod surface temperature, K air temperature, K thermodynamic energy, J velocity, ms relative height to reference system, m thermal conductivity, W/(m k) Pressure drop, Pa density, kg/m dynamic viscosity, kg m logarithmic heat transfer temperature difference, K maximum temperature difference, K minimum temperature difference, K heat loss power, W heat loss power per kilogram, W/kg inlet or inner outlet or outer shell-side Oil shale resources are large in stock yet hard to exploit The flow pattern on the shell side of the electric heater resembles that of a shell-and-tube heat exchanger (STHX). Thus, the technologies applied in STHXs can be used in a DEHCHB. Studies Lutcha and Nemcansky developed helical baffle heat exchangers Peng Guo To produce more shale oil, DHT heats the oil shale layer without interruption. Therefore, the long-term working stability of the electric heater is crucial for the in-situ pyrolysis of oil shale. Tube vibration and hot spots on the heating rod surface, which result from zigzag flow on the shell side, are two factors that reduce the long-term working stability of a DEHCHB. Based on previous studies Therefore, in this study, the shell-side flow and distribution of the heating rod surface temperature were investigated using simulations in FLUENT, and the results were used to verify a suitable selection of a heat transfer structure for a DEHCHB. Experiments were conducted to examine the surface temperature of heating rod, heat transfer and pressure drop characteristics of four cases. In addition, a comprehensive index was applied to evaluate the comprehensive performances of these four cases. Finally, a second-law thermodynamic analysis was employed to study the irreversible loss of the DEHCHB.  Here, S represents ‘segmental’, H represents ‘helical’, and the numbers 50, 110, 160, and 210 represent the baffle pitch or helical pitch. In the computational domain, the walls of the central pipe and shell of the DEHCHB were considered to have no penetration, no slip, and adiabatic boundary conditions, whereas the heating rod walls and helical baffle walls were regarded as having no penetration, no slip, and coupling heat transfer boundary conditions. For a complicated configuration, the computational domain was meshed with unstructured tetrahedral grids using HYPERMESH, and mesh refinement was adopted near the wall. The model with 4.5 × 10 The following assumptions were made in the numerical simulation: (1) the shell-side fluid was a fully developed turbulent flow and in a steady state: (2) the fluid in the spiral channel was incompressible: (3) the heat dissipation on the external wall of the shell cylinder was ignored: and (4) the heating rods were regarded as walls with a constant heat flux density. The renormalisation group (RNG) The commercial computational fluid dynamics (CFD) software FLUENT was used to calculate the shell-side flow and heat transfer. A steady-state solution was selected as the time option, and the implicit formulation was used in the pressure-based solver. The numerical simulation model was based on the pressure implicit stationary solver. The heat transfer between the heating rods and air was determined by the coupled method. The SIMPLE algorithm was adopted to address the coupling between the velocity and pressure, while the momentum, energy, and turbulence parameters were solved using the second-order upwind scheme. The default values of the under-relaxation factors were used for the pressure, momentum, and turbulent kinetics. For the continuity equation, the residual values of The helical baffle surface becomes relatively steep near the central axis when the pitch is large. To address this problem, a central pipe (shown in  The temperature sensors used in the experiment included a platinum resistance thermometer (PT100) in the inlet section and K-type thermocouples on the heating rod surface and in the outlet section, which had different temperature ranges. The heating rod surface temperature sensors were all attached to the leeward side to obtain the real heating rod surface temperature. The pressure drop was also measured using capacitive differential pressure sensors. The layout parameters of the heating rod surface temperature sensors are listed in The DEHCHB outlet was set to have a free-flow condition, and two experimental schemes were applied. The first was a constant power scheme, which was adopted to measure the inlet and outlet gas temperatures and air pressures, along with the surface temperature of the heating rod, to comprehensively evaluate the performance of the DEHCHB by analysing the shell-side Reynolds number, overall heat transfer coefficient, and shell-side pressure drop under different actual power values and mass flow rates. Each DEHCHB was used in a comprehensive series of experiments with four power levels and five mass flow rates. A series data of H210 is missing for the case where the heating rod surface temperature exceeded the safe temperature when P The second scheme was a constant outlet air temperature scheme, which was applied to measure and study the heating rod surface temperature when The physical properties of the air were calculated with a polynomial formula using the average air temperatures at the inlet and outlet of the DEHCHB as the characteristic variables. The energy system of the DEHCHB was a stable open system. It was assumed that over a certain period of time the system had an inflow and outflow of air of m kg, the heat absorbed from outside was The energy of the air flowing into the system is defined as follows The energy of the air flowing out of the system is defined as follows The enthalpy of the air The energy system has no energy increment. Thus, the energy absorbed per kilogram of air q is defined as follows: If we suppose that the air density is constant, because the inlet and outlet have the same area, V The heat loss power The effective power Few specialists and researchers have conducted experimental research on shell-and-tube electric heaters (STEHs). Thus, there is no basis for evaluating the heat transfer coefficient. To compare the heat transfer performances of the DEHCHBs with different helical pitch values, this study drew lessons from the calculation formula for the overall heat transfer coefficient of a STHX. The overall heat transfer coefficient of the DEHCHB was obtained by changing the definition of the heat transfer temperature difference. The overall heat transfer coefficient K is defined as follows The logarithmic heat transfer temperature difference The Reynolds number (Re) of the DEHCHB is defined as follows: The convective heat transfer coefficient h of the heating rod surface is defined as follows The shell-side Nusselt number The thermal resistance of an STHX is defined as follows  An STHX uses a tube-side fluid to heat a shell-side fluid or gas, whereas the DEHCHB heats a shell-side air using heating rods. Thus, The thermal resistance of the DEHCHB is defined as follows: Because the DEHCHBs are new, the fouling resistance Entropy generation always occurs in all irreversible thermodynamic processes. Entropy generation is used as a sign of irreversibility, and its value can be used to estimate the irreversibility. There are two types of irreversibility for the DEHCHB heat transfer with finite temperature differences and flow friction with finite pressure drops. The overall entropy generation rate To avoid the so-called ‘entropy generation paradox’, Hesselgreaves The dimensionless entropy generation number is called the modified entropy generation number Entransy dissipation is the loss of heat transfer potential during the heat transfer process and can be used to evaluate the irreversibility of the heat transfer. The overall entransy dissipation rate Guo The dimensionless entransy dissipation-based thermal resistance The value of The experimental uncertainty in the present study was determined by applying the method presented by Kline et al. and Moffat Regarding the three differences in the DEHCHBs, the conclusions for STHXs could not be directly applied to the DEHCHBs. Thus, simulations were used to verify the most suitable selection of continuous helical baffles for the heat transfer structure of the DEHCHB by studying the shell-side flow fields and surface temperature distributions for the heating rods of S110 (the heater with segmental baffles and a baffle pitch of 110 mm) and H110 (the heater with helical baffles and a helical pitch of 110 mm). All of the experiments were conducted with the same shell and identical sizes, heating rod numbers, and layouts. Thus, the actual power P The curves for the heat transfer correlation linear regression, surface temperature of heating rod T, overall heat transfer coefficient (h.t.c.) K, shell-side pressure drop △P, comprehensive index K/△P, modified entropy generation number Because each DEHCHB was used in multiple groups of experiments, for simplicity, other than the modified entropy generation number  Simulations of the shell-side flow field and surface temperature of the heating rods indicate that heater with continuous helical baffles is more suitable for downhole heating technology than heater with segmental baffles in terms of long-term working stability. According to the heating rod surface temperature distribution feature of H110, the temperature sensors used in experiment should be uniformly fixed on the surface of the heating rod. According to Eqs. The following equation can be obtained by the linear regression of Eq. The distribution features of the heating rod surface temperature play a significant role in setting the gas injection parameters during the oil shale in-situ pyrolysis process.   The continuous helical baffles force the shell-side air to reach the plug flow pattern and enhance the heat transfer process. Under certain conditions, a smaller helical pitch or larger Therefore, during the in-situ gas injection process, when the heating rod surface temperature exceeds the safe range, mass flow rate  Because of the enhanced heat transfer mechanism of the electric heater, when air flows past the heating rod surface at a certain velocity gradient, the boundary layer on the heating rod surface becomes thin and detaches from the surface, taking heat away from it. Under given conditions, a smaller helical pitch or larger  The pressure drop of a heater can be divided into two parts: the local pressure differential resistance and friction resistance on the shell-side, with the former accounting for the largest proportion of the pressure drop. Under the same mass flow rate, the air viscosity increases with an increase in actual power P From To rapidly convert oil shale into oil, the first stage of oil shale in-situ pyrolysis technology heats the oil shale layer at a high heating rate. Because the higher the heating rate, the greater the activation energy of oil shale, which means less energy is needed to convert the oil shale into oil. Therefore, in the first stage of in-situ pyrolysis of oil shale technology, H110 is a good choice to heats the oil shale layer at a high heating rate. Entropy generation is a measurement of irreversibility in the heat transfer process of the DEHCHB. Under a given condition, a smaller helical pitch is associated with a larger enhancement of the heat transfer and a smaller value for In the present work, the dissipation theory was used to study the effect of the helical pitch on the heat transfer ability of the DEHCHB during the heat transfer process. The trend of the fitting curve of dimensionless entransy dissipation-based thermal resistance The Reynolds number is affected by three variables. To make the explanation more concise, a change in the Reynolds number is regarded as equivalent to a change in the velocity gradient at which the air flows past the heating rod surface. The heat-transfer capability of the heater is enhanced by an increase in the equivalent velocity gradient. In addition, a high equivalent velocity gradient results in an increase in the entransy dissipation, which will decrease the thermal resistance for the same heat transfer temperature difference. The increase in the entransy dissipation is related to a decrease in the boundary layer by increasing the equivalent velocity gradient, which is beneficial for the heat transfer. In contrast, thermal resistance From the results presented in To rapidly convert oil shale into oil, the second stage of oil shale in-situ pyrolysis technology heats oil shale at a constant heating temperature. To reach the highest energy efficiency, therefore, the heating parameters of H110 should set in lower Reynolds numbers range. The DEHCHB was the first attempt to apply a heat transfer structure with continuous helical baffles to the in-situ pyrolysis of oil shale. Because it was different from traditional STHXs, simulations were used to verify the most suitable selection of continuous helical baffles for the heat transfer structure of the DEHCHB, and the heat transfer and flow resistance characteristics of four cases were studied experimentally. The following conclusions could be obtained. Compared with S110, the heating rod surface of H110 had no local hot spots, and its heat transfer structure was not susceptible to induced tube vibration. Thus, it is suitable for the long-term stable operation of the DEHCHB under complex downhole conditions. In the fully developed section of the heater, the heating rod surface temperature increased linearly along the X axis. The average surface temperature of H50 was the lowest under the same conditions, which was 36.8–44.4% lower than that of H210. Based on the comprehensive performance index of the DEHCHB, H110 had the best comprehensive performance, with a value that was 2.95–3.75 times that of H210. From the perspective of the second-law of thermodynamics, a smaller pitch produced a smaller irreversible loss, and H110, H160, and H210 were more effective at lower Reynolds numbers, while H50 could be used at a wide effective range of Reynolds numbers. This work was supported by the Project of Jilin Province Development and Reform Commission of China, the Cooperative Project between Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: