In the Sasol Synfuels plant in Secunda, Sasol-Lurgi fixed-bed dry-bottom gasifiers are used for the conversion of low-grade bituminous coals to synthesis gas (syngas). The gasifiers are fed with lump coal having a particle size in the range from 5 to 100mm. Operating experience shows that the average particle size and particle-size distribution (PSD) of feed coal, char and ash influence the pressure drop across the bed and the gas-flow distribution within the bed. These hydrodynamic phenomena are responsible for stable gasifier operation and for the quality and production rate of the syngas. The counter-current operation produces four characteristic zones in the gasifier, namely, drying, de-volatilization, reduction and combustion. The physical properties of the solids (i.e. average particle size, PSD, sphericity and density) are different in each of these zones. Similarly, the chemical composition of the syngas, its properties (temperature, density and viscosity) and superficial velocity vary along the height of the bed. The most popular equation used to estimate the pressure drop in packed beds is that proposed by Ergun. The Ergun equation gives good predictions for non-reacting, isothermal packed beds made of uniformly sized, spherical or nearly spherical particles. In the case of fixed-bed gasifiers, predictions by the Ergun equation based on the average or inlet values of bed and gas flow parameters are unsatisfactory because the bed structure and gas flow vary significantly in the different reaction zones. In this study, the Ergun equation is applied to each reaction zone separately. The total pressure drop across the bed is then calculated as the sum of pressure drops in all zones. It is shown that the total pressure drop obtained this way agrees better with the measured result.empirical parameters constants in Eq. (2) surface area of a single non-spherical particle (m form drag coefficient particle diameter, m average particle diameter (Sauter mean), m acceleration due to gravity, m/s modified Galileo number bed height, m molecular mass, kg/kmol molar gas flow rate, kmol/s absolute pressure, Pa pressure loss, Pa gas constant, J/kmol particle Reynolds number, modified Reynolds number gas temperature, °C critical temperature, K superficial gas velocity, m/s volumetric gas flow rate, m volume of a single non-spherical particle, m mass fraction molar fraction voidage dynamic gas viscosity, kg/m gas density, kg/m bulk solids density, kg/m particle density, kg/m particle sphericity In the Synfuels plant in Secunda, Sasol-Lurgi fixed-bed, dry-bottom gasifiers produce the synthesis gas which is converted via the Fischer–Tropsch process to fuels and chemicals. A total of eighty reactors gasify more than 30 million tpa of high-ash bituminous coal and have a combined production capacity of more than 5.1 million m Large coal particles exposed to high temperatures in the gasifier undergo fragmentation that reduces the mean particle size and changes the PSD of the coal. This may lead to a change in the permeability of the bed which can affect the pressure drop and gas-flow distribution in the bed. The operation of the gasifier may become unstable. Particle-size distributions of the feed-coal blends are determined in order to predict which PSD’s are more likely to cause unstable operation owing to pressure-drop effects. In engineering practice, the most popular correlation to estimate the pressure drop through a porous medium is the semi-empirical Ergun equation The pressure drop during one-dimensional flow of gas through a fixed bed of granular material is given by the sum of two terms: a viscous energy loss term proportional to the fluid velocity, and inertial loss (kinetic energy) term proportional to velocity squared The equivalent volume diameter of large particles (>1 Particle sphericity, Mean voidage, A great deal of experimental and modelling work has been done to relate mean voidage to the properties of the individual particles This correlation is valid for packed beds of granular materials with voidages in the range from 0.4 to 1.0. To date, no reliable correlation has been found between PSD, sphericity and voidage, in the sense of being universally applicable to a wide range of particle-size distributions. The Ergun equation is very sensitive to mean bed voidage variation. The precise estimation of bed voidage is, therefore, a necessary condition for the accurate calculation of pressure drop. The values of constants Many attempts have been made to improve the predictive power of the Ergun equation. An expression proposed by Tallmadge Crawford and Plumb Foscolo et al. Recently, du Plessis and Woudberg It has to be stressed that experimental determinations of constants The fixed-bed gasifier operates with counter-current flow of coal and gasification agents (oxygen and steam). Inside the gasifier, coal moves through four definable, but not distinctly separate, zones, namely: zones of drying, de-volatilization, gasification and combustion The solid particle-temperature profile inside the Sasol-Lurgi Mk IV gasifier was estimated by means of the vitrinite-reflectance technique The distribution of the average particle size, The profile of bulk density The average coal flow into a Sasol-Lurgi Mk IV gasifier is typically 51,000 Crude gas leaving the gasifier contains CO, H The local volumetric flow rate and the density of the gas can be estimated from the equation of state, provided that the gas composition, pressure and temperature are known. Because no experimental data on gas flow and composition in the individual zones are available, local gas flow rates and compositions used in this paper are identical to those calculated in an ASPEN model The dynamic viscosity of a gas mixture at moderate pressures can be estimated from Because steam is the main component of the crude gas, the viscosity of the gas can be approximated by that of steam. The viscosity of superheated steam in the temperature range of 100–700 From the earlier work of Bunt and others Greef et al. Keyser et al. In this study, we have now calculated the values of pressure drop, Reynolds and Galileo numbers in each bed zone at ∼65,000 Data on pressure drop in a commercial Sasol-Lurgi gasifier are characterised by a large scatter The following conclusions can be drawn from the analysis of the Ergun equation and experimental data on the bed structure in a commercial Sasol-Lurgi gasifier: The Ergun equation (Eq. (2)) gives reasonable predictions for homogeneous beds of fine particles with narrow PSDs and pure gases at low temperatures and pressures. Sphericity, bed voidage, and average particle diameter are not independent variables. More experimental studies are required to better understand the relationship between these variables in coal/char/ash beds similar to those in Sasol-Lurgi gasifiers. The Ergun equation in its original form fails to predict the pressure drop in a commercial Sasol-Lurgi gasifier because of significant differences in the bed structure and gas flow in individual reaction zones. The Ergun equation does not contain a variable that describes the width of the particle-size distribution of solids present in the bed. Inclusion of such a variable will lead to improved predictions for beds with wide PSDs. Adjustments to the empirical constants