Abstract
                  Bone grafting is not routinely required in primary arthrodesis in the absence of infection, avascular necrosis, bone defect or previous non-union; when any of the above factors is present, autograft is the gold-standard method. However, donor site morbidity and the quantitative and qualitative limitations of autograft have led to the development of alternatives. This study documents the use of the bone morphogenetic protein BMP-7 in a total of 19 joint fusions (ankle, subtalar, talonavicular, pubic and sacroiliac). Healing rates of 90% and satisfactory subjective functional outcome in 70% of cases were recorded over a minimum follow-up of 15 months. These data should provide a sound foundation for future clinical trials evaluating the application of BMP-7 in the fusion of joints.Arthrodesis was widely practised before the era of arthroplasties and the contemporary advances in the management of intraarticular fractures and osseo-cartilaginous pathology. Currently arthrodesis still represents the ultimate in spine and pelvic girdle surgery, is a reliable method of surgical management of the small joints of the extremities and, for the large joints of the upper and lower extremities, is a salvage or last-resort option. The existing methods of achieving a successful arthrodesis vary according to the anatomical site, the underlying pathology, the presence or absence of previous implants, and the condition of the surrounding soft-tissue envelope. The basic principles are, however, the same and consist of debridement of the articular cartilage, preservation of adequate bone stock and stable compressive fixation in a position that permits optimal function of the fused extremity. Bone grafting is used as an osteoinductive and osteogenic stimulus in cases of suboptimal local or systemic biology, in failed attempted fusions and revisions and in the presence of large defects after debridement requiring an active void filler. The different grafting options described in the literature include autologous bone graft from the pelvis or adjacent anatomical sites, allografts, bone substitutes or their combinations. Bone morphogenic proteins (BMPs) emerged during the past 15 years and, since recombinant technology achieved their biosynthesis, have been applied and have proved their potency as osteoinductive agents in cases of acute fracture, In this study we present our experience over a period of 4 years with the administration of BMPs to a series of people undergoing arthrodesis of the appendicular skeleton or fusion of the pelvic girdle joints. A prospectively created database of the BMP-7 applications at our institution was used to identify cases of arthrodesis. The existing database includes demographics, previous medical history, comorbidities, intraoperative and in-hospital details of each person and also data expanding to the whole follow-up period until successful bone healing and discharge of the person from the outpatient clinic. The indications for arthrodesis were posttraumatic arthritis and chronic pain, chronic postpartum pelvic girdle pain and septic destructive arthritis. The indications for the off-licence BMP-7 application at the surgeon's discretion included previous failed attempts (nine cases) and the presence of risk factors for impaired bone healing such as tobacco use, diabetes mellitus, chronic corticosteroid therapy and poor local biology. All the cases included in the study were treated with local application of BMP-7 (OP-1®, Osigraft®; Stryker-Biotech, Hopkinton, MA), a combination of 3.5 mg rhBMP-7 with 1 g purified type I bovine collagen as a carrier. The product is reconstituted with saline to form a paste, which is then implanted at the fusion site. BMP-7 was used as a substitute for autologous bone graft in eight cases. In the other 11 cases, where the defect was greater than 2 cm, BMP-7 was used in conjunction with autologous bone grafting or allograft. Accomplishment of both clinical and radiological union was considered a successful outcome. Clinical union was defined as pain-free full weight bearing needing no further surgical intervention, and radiological union was defined as evidence of new bone bridging the fused joint on more than one radiological view. At the final follow-up, participants were asked to express their subjective opinion of their outcome according to a simple scale consisting of four levels: excellent, good, fair and poor. The minimum duration of follow-up was 15 months. Between May 2005 and May 2008, 19 anatomical sites in 16 cases where BMP-7 was applied on the indication of joint fusion of the pelvis or the appendicular skeleton, were identified ( Standard surgical approaches and methods of open reduction, debridement and plate fixation were used in all cases ( The median follow-up period was 30.4 months (range 15–51 months). All attempted fusions healed in a median period of 6 months (range 4–9 months), with some variations related to the anatomical site and, in one case, to incomplete fusion of the pubic symphysis and left sacroiliac joint. In the latter, a case of posttraumatic pelvic fracture, symptoms persisted and neither fusion healed. Further autologous grafting with BMP-7 application was required, as well as a revision of the osteosynthesis 1 year after the initial BMP-7 procedure ( At the last follow-up appointment, the majority of the participants were satisfied with the outcome and the function of their affected limb or pelvis. Two people (three anatomical sites) reported poor outcome and related their dissatisfaction to the persistency of pelvic girdle symptoms. One of these was the man whose arthrodesis did not heal, and the other was a woman who remains wheelchair bound, although with no sign of local or systemic infection or implant loosening and with radiological evidence of a healed pubic symphysis fusion. She received a diagnosis of fibromyalgia and is currently being attended by clinical psychiatrists and the pain management team, almost 3 years after her operation. Arthrodesis as an operative treatment for large or smaller joints of the extremities remains a viable option, despite the development of arthroplasty for most joints in the appendicular skeleton. Either as a salvage procedure or as first-line treatment, arthrodesis offers in most cases pain-free weight bearing and correction of deformities. Bone grafting as part of an arthrodesis procedure has been described and used regularly during the past century, and is generally considered an important component of foot and ankle arthrodesis if the potential for union is compromised by factors such as infection, avascular necrosis, bone defects and previous non-union. Osteoconductive materials and allografts have proved quite effective in the treatment of lower extremity cystic lesions, fractures and arthrodesis. They are considered comparable to conventional autogenous iliac crest grafts in terms of direct medical costs (diminished anaesthesia time, theatre costs and hospital stay). To date there are no peer-reviewed publications comparing the safety, efficacy and costs of these alternative options to grafting in the clinical setting of joint fusions other than the spine. To the best of our knowledge the present study represents the first case series focusing on the use of BMPs, in particular BMP-7, in the clinical setting of arthrodesis of the foot, ankle or pelvic girdle. We acknowledge the low level of evidence of this uncontrolled case series. Nevertheless, the 90% healing rates of the fused joints as well as the functional results, which compare well with the standard methods of arthrodesis with/without autograft, provide a sound foundation for future clinical trials.