Silver cementation from nitrate containing solution using Taguchi methods was studied to understand and optimize silver cementation yield by considering design and rotation rate of the impeller, temperature and pH of the solution. In the experiments, 2, 4 and 6 blade impellers and 100, 200 and 300 RPM rotation rates were used. The solution pH values were selected as 0.5, 1.5, and 2.5, and the experiments were conducted at 30, 45 and 60 °C.
                  The maximum silver recovery conditions were obtained when six-bladed impeller was rotated at a rate of 200 RPM in a solution pH of 0.5 at 30 °C. The silver cementation yields obtained by theoretically and experimentally were in good agreement, which were 99.1% and 99.2% respectively.Cementation has been used for years to recover noble metals or heavy metal ions from solutions based on a redox reaction between electronegative metal and electropositive ions. Cementation is a preferable process due to its efficiency, cost, and ease of applicability. Copper metal is widely used for silver cementation. The reaction for silver cementation on copper is as follows: There are various parameters known to affect this reaction, such as solution temperature, pH, concentration, flow rate, presence of dissolved oxygen in the solutions, cementator surface area, presence of other ions (such as cyanide, chloride), and time ( In literature, studies have mostly focused on cementation of silver from solutions of sulphuric ( In all of the studies mentioned above one factor at a time approach has been used in order to understand the effectiveness of parameters on cementation yield of silver. However, in recent years many successful uses of statistical designs have reported on the cementation of various metals such as gold ( The core purpose in using statistical experimental design is to provide maximum and reliable information by making fewer possible runs. For this purpose, Taguchi is preferable technique in statistical experimental design methods. This method differs from the other design of experiments techniques: first, Taguchi methods strongly rely on researchers' experience and knowledge in choosing right parameters and their levels. Second, these methods use orthogonal arrays to investigate the main and interaction effects of parameters in an optimum number of experiments. Third in Taguchi's designs, researchers have to determine a target for their response variables such as “smaller is better”, “larger is better” or “nominal is best”. Lastly, Taguchi methods suggest the use of a loss function to understand the variation from the desired values. Therefore, depending on the target being smaller, larger or nominal every response data is converted to ratio of signal to noise ( The aim of this study is to apply a statistical design method on silver cementation to improve the yield of process with fewer experiments. Considering the previous literature findings ( 10 g/l AgNO The rotation rate, impeller design (blade numbers), solution temperature and pH are the predetermined process parameters and three levels were applied for each parameter. The rotation rates of impellers and cementation temperatures were selected as 100, 200 and 300 RPM and 30 °C, 45°C and 60°C respectively. Three types of impellers having 2, 4 and 6 blades were used. The experiments were performed in three different pH values; 0.5, 1.5 and 2.5. In order to measure the residual silver concentration ( L ANOVA (Analysis of Variance) and Signal/Noise ratio analyses are conducted on the measured residual silver concentration data. For these analyses Minitab15 software was utilized ( The effects of parameters are calculated by averaging the  In addition to As in The rotation rate and impeller design (see Another outcome obtained from this study is a reduction in pH improves the yield of cementation (see As seen in According to the analyses, the highest recovery is achieved when 6 bladed (B3) impeller is rotated at 200 RPM (A2), in 0.5 pH solution, at 30 °C (D1). In contrast, 4 bladed (B2) impeller which is rotated at 100 RPM (A1), in a solution pH of 1.5 (C2) at 60 °C (D3) has shown the lowest performance in silver cementation. In order to obtain the highest recovery in the cementation process, the optimized silver concentration is calculated using the following equation: In this study, a Taguchi's L Temperature and pH are effective parameters and the decrease in their values cause an increase in cementation efficiency. Rotation rate and impeller design seem to be less effective than those of other parameters. Rotation rate of the impeller and its design define the mechanism of the cementation process. As solution flow rate is enough to get fresh surface on the copper granules, the cementation process becomes more efficient. The highest efficiency is achieved when rotation rate is 200 RPM, impeller has 6 blades, pH is 0.5 and cementation temperature is 30 °C. The highest recovery is the result of adequate flow dynamics and solution chemistry. Both flow dynamics and solution chemistry provide active surfaces on cementators, which lead to an increase in cementation yield and cementation rate. A verification experiment is conducted in optimum conditions and the result (80.1 ppm) is in good agreement with the value calculated (89.1 ppm). Indicating good theoretical (99.1%) and experimental (99.2%) silver cementation yields. I gratefully thank Prof. Dr. Servet Timur and MSc. Özgür Çetinkaya for their help and support.