Biodiesel has a lower oxidation stability index (OSI) than mineral diesel fuel. Its consequential oxidation products and deteriorated physical and chemical properties of fuel are associated with engine operation challenges such as the formation of insoluble gums that can plug fuel filters. Given the fact that oxidation leads to barriers for commercial use of biodiesel, addition of appropriate antioxidants into biodiesel is a promising and cost-effective approach to overcome this challenge. Although synthetic antioxidants such as propyl gallate (PG) are frequently used to counter the oxidation process of biodiesel, PG is a designated carcinogen. In light of that, this study was conducted aiming at introducing walnut husk methanolic extract (WHME) as a more sustainable antioxidant to replace PG in waste cooking oil (WCO) methyl esters. Moreover, to facilitate the commercialization of the new product, a comprehensive environmental investigation and comparison with the conventional counterpart, i.e., PG, was performed using life cycle assessment (LCA) approach. To enhance the eco-friendly features of the natural antioxidant, a solar photovoltaic-driven extraction process based on methanol (as reagent) was used in extracting polyphenols from walnut husk. The results showed that the induction period of WCO methyl esters was prolonged from 1.2 h to more than 3 h (meeting the ASTM D6751 standards) using 5000 ppm and 250 ppm of WHME and PG, respectively. More specifically, 20-fold more natural antioxidants would be required to meet the international standards. However, since walnut-producing countries are responsible for 42.4% of global biodiesel production on one hand and the cost-effectiveness of walnut husks on the other hand, their valorization could attract the attention of the global biodiesel industry. Moreover, this study highlights the considerable environmental and health benefits of turning this bio-waste product into a value-added antioxidant fuel additive. The LCA results showed that the developed bio-antioxidant was more effective in different damage categories compared with PG, i.e., 0.32% in ecosystem quality, 12.13% in human health, 8.37% in climate change, and 614% in resource. Overall, the WHME obtained through solar photovoltaic-driven extraction process could outcompete PG from the environmental perspective.Analysis of variance American society for testing and materials α-tocopherol Barrels per day Butylatedhydroxyanisol Butylatedhydroxytoluene Ethanol Acetone Ethyl acetate Catalase Methanol Carbon dioxide Carbon monoxide Deoxyribonucleic acid N,n0-diphenyl-p-phenylenediamine 2, 2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl Exempli gratia European standard specifications Stabilization factor Functional unit Gallic acid equivalents Sulfuric acid Introduce examples Induction period Intergovernmental panel on climate change International organization for standardization Potassium hydroxide Life cycle assessment Sodium carbonate Sodium hydroxide Octylated butylated diphenyl amine Hydroxyl Oxidation stability index Particulate matter Propyl gallate Probability value Propyl 3,4,5 trihydroxybenzoate Coefficient of determination First scenario Second scenario Inhibiting superoxide dismutase Total antioxidant activity Tert-butyl hydroxyquinone Tert-butylated phenol derivative Total phenolic content Unburnt hydrocarbons United states Volume/volume percent Versus Weight/volume percent Waste cooking oil Walnut husk methanolic extract Percentage by weight Celsius Micropoints Disability-adjusted life-years Gram Hour Kilograms Kilograms carbon dioxide equivalent Liter Cubic meter Milligram Minutes Megajoule Milliliter Micromolar Nanometer Potentially disappeared fraction of species over a certain amount of square meters during a certain amount of year Parts-per-million One of the most significant current discussions in the world is the growing fossil fuel demands [ Among these energy carriers, a blend of several fatty acid methyl or ethyl esters also known as biodiesel [ Currently, industrial production of biodiesel relies primarily on virgin oil feedstock [ In spite of its advantages, biodiesel’s relatively poor thermo-oxidative stability and short shelf life compared with mineral diesel due to its ester-based chemistry must be addressed to increase its viability as an alternative fuel [ Among the mentioned approaches, special emphasis has been placed on the application of antioxidants to combat the free radicals generated in the initiation and propagation phase of fatty acid esters oxidation [ Various studies have been performed to investigate the OSI of natural antioxidants The environmental effects of newly identified natural antioxidants have also been scrutinized to further their sustainable production. Rodríguez-Meizoso et al. [ Overall, there are many methods to deal with agro-wastes in modern agriculture, however, their valorization into valuable biomaterials including natural antioxidants is regarded as a very promising strategy. This has led to a widespread search to identify agro-wastes containing significant amounts of phenolic compounds, which could be used for sustainable production of natural antioxidants. In line with that, antioxidant characteristics of different parts of the walnut plant (fruit, stem, leaf, and husk) have been investigated [  Husks of Persian walnut ( To maximize methyl ester yield and avoid saponification reactions, a two-step process was employed using acid-catalyzed esterification followed by alkaline-catalyzed transesterification [ Polyphenolic extract of walnut husks was obtained as described by Jakopič et al. [ TPC of the extract was measured using a Folin–Ciocalteu reagent after slight modifications of the procedure introduced by Nickel et al. [ The methodology described by Nickel et al. [ Briefly, a Rancimat apparatus (743 Rancimat, Metrohm AG, Herisau, Switzerland) was used to measure the OSI of the WCO biodiesel samples containing different concentrations of WHME (in the range of 1000 ppm to 10,000 ppm) based on the ENE 14214 biodiesel standard. A comparative study was conducted by incorporating PG into biodiesel at concentrations of 250–1000 ppm [ All the data were averaged and presented as the average ± standard deviation. Statistix 8 software was used to carry out analysis of variance (ANOVA). A least significant difference test at p-value < 0.05 was used to compare mean values. All experiments were repeated three times. LCA was used to weigh and compare environmental sustainability with respect to the production of WHME and PG as well as their respective environmental burdens. Two scenarios were considered: First scenario (Sc-1): WCO biodiesel augmented by WHME Second scenario (Sc-2): WCO biodiesel augmented by PG. Awareness of the environmental impacts of goods and services through their life cycle, e.g., their overall contributions to deforestation, species extinction, and/or increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations, is growing [ The LCA consisted of four interrelated steps: goal and scope definition, inventory analysis, impact assessment, and interpretation [ In the second step of an LCA (inventory analysis), the inputs and outputs of a production system should be determined and compiled [ The results of LCA studies generally face uncertainties because of erroneous measurements, unrepresentative or missing data, wrong estimations, modeling assumptions, and data variability [ In this section, the preparation of the polyphenolic extract of walnut husks is first explained followed by presenting the TPC and TAA of WHME. Subsequently, the results obtained on the effect of WHME on the OSI of WCO methyl esters are reported and compared with those of the synthetic antioxidants (i.e., PG). Finally, the environmental impacts of the investigated antioxidants through LCA are presented and compared. The practical implications of this study are also presented. To obtain phytochemicals such as phenolic compounds from plant materials, milling, grinding, homogenization, and extraction must be carried out. Here, the final step is considered the most critical [ The TPC and TAA of WHME are summarized in A constant concentration of 200 ppm, the antioxidant capacity of the obtained WHME, was comparable to that of the synthetic antioxidant PG (87.6% As mentioned earlier, biodiesel OSI has been a subject of considerable research over the last two decades [  The lowest concentration of PG, 250 ppm, enhanced the OSI to 3.48 h, which was well above the minimum standard requirement. The F value for 250 ppm of PG was equal to that of 5000 ppm of WHME. Comparing the effects of 10 different synthetic antioxidants (PG, PY, TBHQ, etc.) at doses ranging between 100 and 1000 ppm on the OSI of biodiesel, Chen and Luo  [ Similar findings have also been reported in previous reports by Dunn [ Based on the study findings, higher concentrations of the natural antioxidant would be required to meet the international standards as compared with the synthetic antioxidant. Nevertheless, walnut husk valorization through natural biodiesel antioxidant production could still be of wide industrial interest due to the growing demand for organically oriented substitutes for synthetic antioxidants, PG in particular. Moreover, walnut husks are inexpensive and readily available agricultural waste products that could enhance the economic features of biodiesel supplemented with the resultant natural antioxidant. Two scenarios were considered in the present study, i.e., 5000 ppm of WHME and 250 ppm of PG incorporated into 1 kg of WCO biodiesel (first and second scenarios, respectively). To compare the scenarios from an environmental perspective, four end-point damage categories were taken into consideration. According to IMPACT 2002+, “carcinogenic,” “non-carcinogenic,” “respiratory organic,” “respiratory inorganic,” “ionizing radiation,” and “ozone layer depletion” are the mid-points categorized in the human health damage category [ Overall, the burdens imposed on the human health damage category were estimated to be 12.13% higher for Sc-2  IMPACT 2002+, an ecosystem quality damage category consisting of four mid-points — “aquatic ecotoxicity,” “terrestrial ecotoxicity,” “terrestrial acidification/nutrification,“,” and “land occupation” — was used to investigate the level of disruption in ecosystems [  Resource damage category mid-points — “non-renewable energy consumption” and “mineral extraction” — represent primary energy utilization in a given activity or production process [ Based on the data presented in Based on the IMPACT 2002+, the only mid-point category contributing to the climate change damage category is global warming impact category with a characterization factor of 1 [ Based on the Monte Carlo simulation, the probability that Sc-2 reaches −2.37 kg CO The Sc-1. was found more environmentally advantageous than the Sc-2 based on the obtained LCA results in all the investigated damage categories, i.e., 0.32% in an ecosystem quality, 12.13% in human health, 8.37% in climate change, and 614% in the resource. In addition, the uncertainty propagation using the Monte Carlo analysis emphasized on the superiority of Sc-1 Sc-1 was found superior to Sc-2 in all damage categories, however, given the different unit used in different damage categories, it would be difficult to compare these scenarios in term of their total environmental damages. Therefore, the values associated with different damage categories ( Moreover, given consumption and exposure to PG, and the consequent potential health hazards, careful consideration of the biosecurity and teratogenicity aspects of this synthetic compound is warranted [ The favorable environmental aspects of antioxidant production from walnut husk investigated herein could be further enhanced by considering a series of recommendations, including 1) changing the antioxidant extraction method from walnut husk, e.g., the use of microwaves instead of solvents could result in higher extraction rates and decreased electricity consumption by eliminating the solvent recovery stage, and 2) changing solvent type (e.g., using solvents that increase extraction speed and consequently, reduce electricity consumption per mg of WHME produced). Future studies could scrutinize the environmental impacts associated with these recommendations. Overall, WHME is favorable as a cleaner antioxidant in both production and consumption phases, while it could serve as a suitable replacement for the potentially hazardous PG. Moreover, production and use of WHME as a natural fuel antioxidant could lead to more sustainable waste management of walnut plantations. PG is a phenolic antioxidant used extensively to improve the stability of biodiesel fuels by avoiding its oxidative degradation. However, the biosecurity and teratogenicity aspects of this compound and the consequent potential health hazards upon exposure necessitate its substitution with safer alternatives. Throughout this study, the use of a naturally sourced, solar photovoltaic-driven substitute for PG, i.e., WHME in WCO biodiesel, was studied. Finally, the present findings seem to be consistent with those of the other research works claiming that synthetic antioxidants could be replaced with their natural counterparts to improve the oxidative stability of biodiesel (see The results revealed that, at a constant concentration of 200 ppm, the antioxidant capacity of WHME was comparable to that of the synthetic antioxidant PG (87.6%  Authors declare no conflict of interest. The authors would like to extend their sincere appreciation to the