Background Context
                  As war injury patterns have changed throughout Operations Iraqi and Enduring Freedom (OIF and OEF), a relative increase in the incidence of complex lumbosacral dissociation (LSD) injuries has been noted. Lumbosacral dissociation injuries are an anatomical separation of the spinal column from the pelvis, and represent a manifestation of severe, high-energy trauma.
               
                  Purpose
                  This study aimed to assess the clinical outcomes of combat-related LSD injuries at a mean of 7 years following operative treatment.
               
                  Study Design
                  This is a retrospective review.
               
                  Patient Sample
                  We identified 20 patients with operatively managed LSDs.
               
                  Outcome Measures
                  Time from injury to arrival in the United States, operative details, fixation methods, postoperative complications, time to retirement from military service, disability, and ambulatory status at latest follow-up.
               
                  Methods
                  We performed a retrospective review of outcomes of all patients with operatively managed combat-related LSD from January 1, 2003 to December 31, 2011.
               
                  Results
                  Twenty patients met inclusion criteria and were treated as follows: posterior spinal fusion (12, 60%), sacroiliac screw fixation (7, 35%), and combined anterior-posterior fusion for associated L3 burst fracture (1, 5%). The mean age was 28.2±6.4 years old. The most common mechanism of injury was mounted improvised explosive device (IED, 55%). On average, 2.2 spinal regions were injured per patient. Neurologic dysfunction was present in 15 patients. Three patients underwent operative stabilization of their injuries before evacuation to the United States. Four patients had a postoperative wound infection and two patients underwent reoperation. Mean follow-up was 85.9 months (range: 39.7–140.8 months). At most recent follow-up, seventeen patients were no longer on active duty military service. Eight patients had persistent bowel dysfunction and nine patients had persistent bladder dysfunction. Fifteen patients reported chronic low back pain. Seventeen were ambulating and five had documentation of running following surgery.
               
                  Conclusions
                  This is the largest series of operatively managed LSD in patients currently reported. Our series suggests that combat-related LSD injuries frequently result in persistent, long-term neurologic dysfunction, disability, and chronic pain. Operative management carries a high postoperative risk of infection. However, a select group of patients are highly functional at latest follow-up.Lumbosacral dissociation (LSD) injuries are a morbid subgroup of spinal injuries that occur infrequently and typically result from high-energy trauma After institutional review board approval, we retrospectively reviewed all patients surgically managed at our institutions with LSD injuries sustained while deployed in Operation Enduring Freedom, Operation Iraqi Freedom, and Operation New Dawn from January 1, 2003 to December 31, 2011. We included all patients with LSD injuries, defined as a transversely oriented sacral fracture with bilateral vertical fracture components, as well as severely comminuted fractures of the sacrum, resulting in instability between the superior endplate of S1 and the ilium, representing a separation of the spinal column from the pelvis. In addition, we classified each patient according to the LSICS, including the fracture morphology, integrity of the PLC, and neurologic status. We reviewed all pertinent Department of Defense electronic medical records. We recorded demographic data as well as the time of initial injury, mechanism of injury, injury morphology, neurologic injury, associated injuries, date of arrival after medical evacuation to the United States, treatment methods, clinical results, and complications. We performed chi-square analysis to evaluate categorical data, Student  Complex lumbosacral dissociation has emerged as one of the characteristic injuries of the armed conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan. The authors present their single center experience, describing surgical intervention for this unique clinical entity. The study included 20 patients treated between 2003 and 2011. Perioperative morbidity for these injuries is quite high and chronic low back pain appears to be nearly ubiquitous. Despite the devastating nature of these injuries, 17 of 20 patients had preserved ambulatory function. The authors maintain that their study encompasses the largest number of patients operatively managed for lumbosacral dissociation. While the study is clearly informative, there is likely little capacity for translation to the civilian sector given the injury mechanism and expertise of the center where these surgeries were performed. Moreover, not all patients with lumbosacral dissociation are able to undergo surgical intervention and this study does not touch on the outcomes of those individuals. As a result, this paper presents Level IV evidence. — The mean time to definitive spine fixation was 19.9 days (range 1–111 days). Three patients underwent operative stabilization of their injuries before evacuation to the United States. Surgical treatment included posterior spinal fusion (60%), sacroiliac (SI) screw fixation (35%), and combined anterior-posterior fusion for an associated L3 burst fracture (5%). Average LSICS neurologic sub-score between the SI screw group and the posterior fusion group was 1.6 versus 2.7 (p>.05). Three patients had traumatic durotomies requiring repair at the time of index surgery. Four patients had a postoperative wound infection and two underwent reoperation (one patient underwent hardware removal, and one patient required three irrigation and debridement procedures for infection) ( The mean clinical follow-up was 85.9 months (range: 39.7–140.8 months). At latest follow-up, 85% of patients were no longer on active duty military service. However, the three patients that remained on active duty had all redeployed, and one continued serving in the Army Rangers. Eight patients (40%) had persistent bowel dysfunction and nine (45%) patients had persistent bladder dysfunction. Fifteen patients reported chronic low back pain (LBP). Seventeen were ambulating with or without assist devices and five had documentation of running following surgery ( Lumbosacral dissociations are uncommon but have been reported with increased frequency in combat-injured service members returning from the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan The degree of injury severity in this population is evident by the concomitant injuries, and in particular, we found a traumatic brain injury rate of 35%. Forty-five percent (45%) of these patients required a lower extremity amputation at some point during recovery, and three patients eventually underwent bilateral lower extremity amputations. In addition, at more than 7-year mean follow-up, 45% of the patients in our series had persistent neurologic deficits, with a high rate of bowel or bladder dysfunction and chronic pain. However, in contradistinction to some of the other literature examining LSD injuries Three patients underwent index surgery before evacuation to the United States, and two of these patients were injured by gunfire: one had a progressive neurologic injury and the other developed cauda equina syndrome during transport (both LSICS=10). The former was treated with decompression and posterior fusion on the day of injury but did not have any appreciable recovery in neurologic function postoperatively. The latter was treated at Landstuhl Regional Medical Center (Role IV) in Germany with decompression and posterior fusion, and had residual bilateral foot drop at most recent follow-up (LSICS=6). The remaining patient was injured in a helicopter crash, and did not have an acute neurologic injury at the time of presentation. However, he had a concomitant pelvic ring injury, and his index surgery (bilateral SI screw fixation) was also performed at Landstuhl Regional Medical Center. Previously, there has been a lack of general consensus regarding the optimal classification and treatment of LSD injuries. Terminology such as lumbosacral fracture dislocation There is little in the literature regarding patient outcomes following surgical treatment of LSD injuries. Lindahl et al. Most other LSD reports are limited to very small case series, which describe a heterogeneous fracture morphology group. Kim et al. In a previous investigation of LSD injuries, Helgeson et al. The primary weakness of this study lies in its retrospective design and small sample size. Because of the high rate of concomitant injuries, initial American Spinal Injury Association Impairment Scale neurologic classification is often not reliably reported in many patients on presentation. Also, despite the increased incidence of these fractures encountered from combat-wounded service members, LSD injuries are still rare and our small sample size precludes any conclusive recommendations regarding optimal surgical timing or mode of fixation. However, with a mean 7-year follow-up, this study has one of the longest follow-up periods for patients with this morbid injury. Our findings show that majority of these patients with operatively treated fractures are able to return to moderate activity, with a select group returning to high-level activity. To our knowledge, this study is one of the largest series of operatively managed LSD injuries reported, with the longest follow-up of any series in the literature. We found that combat-related LSDs frequently result in persistent, long-term neurologic dysfunction, disability, and chronic pain. Operative management carries a high risk of infection that must be considered in the treatment decision. Despite the morbid nature of these injuries, the majority of patients are able to ambulate, with a select few experiencing good clinical outcomes after operative intervention.