For operative treatment of unstable trochanteric fractures two options exist: extramedullary or intramedullary stabilisation. A review of 18 international papers that compared two different treatment methods for trochanteric fractures, in prospective randomised clinical trials, is presented. In view of the overall results, routine use of intramedullary fixation devices is not to be recommended for stable trochanteric fractures. For these fractures one of the sliding hip screw systems provides a safe and simple alternative. For unstable fractures intramedullary implants are (biomechanically) superior. The review shows that clinical advantages of both treatment methods are suggested and advocated, but still remain to be demonstrated on evidence base.Trochanteric fractures pose a challenge to the trauma surgeon in many ways: the nomenclature is often confusing, uniform classification is difficult because of the use of different classification systems, and the various treatment options are diverse, not evidence based and without consensus. An unstable trochanteric fracture adds to this, the challenge of a biomechanically very unfavourable fracture. A good treatment plan therefore starts with proper fracture classification. Several trochanteric fracture classifications exist: In general, for treatment of unstable trochanteric fractures two options exist: extramedullary or intramedullary stabilisation. The extramedullary option ( A Medline literature search was performed for prospective randomised clinical trials—comparing two basic methods of treatment for trochanteric femoral fractures—published since 1990. Studies comparing more than two treatment options in one randomised trial Additionally, we performed a search for recent clinical cohort and comparative studies concerning intramedullary treatment of unstable trochanteric fractures. The literature search revealed 20 prospective randomised clinical trials comparing two methods of treatment for unstable trochanteric femoral fractures, published since 1990. Two publications Ten of the 18 remaining randomised trials did not analyse the results for unstable fractures separately from stable fractures. Results of these 10 studies are summarised in Two randomised trials Adams et al. Pelet et al. Recently, Sadowski et al. Focussing on extramedullary treatment options, Desjardins et al. Another study Fritz et al. In a multicentre clinical trial Lunsjo et al. Many studies reported on the treatment results of the Gamma Nail Recently the results of three prospective clinical studies on the use of the Proximal Femoral Nail Weight bearing capacity and implant stability of the DHS, Gamma Nail This review was performed in an attempt to find evidence-based support for consensus of best treatment of unstable trochanteric femoral fractures and to discuss the current state of the art of treatment. There are some limitations to this review: literature since 1990 revealed a limited number of publications assessing too many different treatment methods to perform a systematic review. Moreover, methodology was found to be too defective for meta-analysis, as for instance, method of randomisation was not known in nearly half of the studies, and most did not include enough patients (power analysis was rarely presented). Many trials included both stable and unstable fractures, but failed to analyse results according to fracture type. Because of this, only 8 Randomised trials were selected starting from publication year 1990, as earlier study results may have been biased in favour of the sliding hip screw, because of limited experience with intramedullary devices. When we consider the results of the eight retrieved trials As the experience of surgeons with the various intramedullary fixation systems increases, treatment results tend to improve, with less intraoperative and postoperative complications. Modifications like adapted distal interlocking options have reduced the risk of postoperative adverse events, and emphasis on the correct positioning of the fixation device in the femoral head after optimal reduction of the fracture will help further decrease the risk of cut-out. The diversity of fixation devices available for treatment of unstable trochanteric femoral fractures illustrates the difficulties encountered in the actual treatment. Reduction in cut-out numbers will, however, hardly be accomplished by other and newer intramedullary implants, since optimal implants cannot make up for suboptimal fracture reduction or poor implant position. In view of the overall results of this literature review, routine use of intramedullary fixation devices is not to be recommended for stable trochanteric fractures.