Anteromedial dome impaction (AMDI) is frequently encountered in acetabular fractures especially those occurring in elderly population with poor bone quality The radiologic characteristics of acetabular dome impaction were first presented by Anglen et al. The AMDI is mainly observed in fractures of the elderly patients with poor bone quality As in most of other articular impaction injuries the aggregate of the actual damage to the cartilage is only indirectly estimated from the extent, configuration and comminution of the osseous fracture. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is not part of the diagnostic studies and to the best of our knowledge it has not been reported to be useful in quantifying the damage of cartilage in acute acetabular fractures. In the same context the concomitant femoral head injury that accompanies the impaction of the acetabular dome is appreciated from the CT scan and occasionally intra-operatively when the anterior intrapelvic approach (modified Stoppa) is used. Anatomic reduction, stable fixation and early mobilization are the aims of an open reduction and internal fixation of an acetabular fracture. All three objectives have traditionally been considered of paramount importance for an optimal outcome. The above principle is frequently modified in cases of open reduction and internal fixation of acetabular fractures in elderly When reduction and fixation of the AMDI is attempted, careful preoperative planning is needed. An anterior based approach is used in all cases and the location/configuration of the fracture dictate the exact reduction maneuvers and fixation techniques. With the ilioinguinal approach the AMDI can be visualized either through an independent iliac cortical window or via the preexisting fracture of the internal iliac fossa. The depressed fragment is carefully manipulated and pushed using a bone pusher in its anatomical position, to subchondral void is filled with graft and the osteochondral fragment is supported with screws. Scolaro and Rout The anterior intrapelvic approach (modified Stopppa) has recently gained increased popularity especially in the management of geriatric acetabular fractures. Reduction of the AMDI and buttressing of the quadrilateral plate can be performed via this approach. Collinge and Lebus Keel et al. In the light of the above newly described reduction techniques and stabilization methods the prognostic value AMDI could be possibly questioned. Multiple authors have concluded that this is a poor prognostic sign for hip survivorship The AMDI is still one of the great challenges in acetabular fracture surgery. In the recent years promising steps related to the surgical reduction and fixation techniques have been undertaken. Future research should focus on the delineation of the exact anatomic features of the AMDI, the extend of the articular damage of the acetabulum and femoral head related to it, the best grafting material to support the subchondral void after reduction, the best implant type and configuration for stabilization and the prognostic value taking into account the reduction and stabilization of this specific anatomic area. The authors declare no conflict of interest.