Infrared thermography is a technique with an increasing degree of development and applications. Quality assessment in the measurements performed with the thermal cameras should be achieved through metrology calibration and verification. Infrared cameras acquire temperature and geometric information, although calibration and verification procedures are only usual for thermal data. Black bodies are used for these purposes. Moreover, the geometric information is important for many fields as architecture, civil engineering and industry.
                  This work presents a calibration procedure that allows the photogrammetric restitution and a portable artefact to verify the geometric accuracy, repeatability and drift of thermographic cameras. These results allow the incorporation of this information into the quality control processes of the companies. A grid based on burning lamps is used for the geometric calibration of thermographic cameras. The artefact designed for the geometric verification consists of five delrin spheres and seven cubes of different sizes. Metrology traceability for the artefact is obtained from a coordinate measuring machine. Two sets of targets with different reflectivity are fixed to the spheres and cubes to make data processing and photogrammetric restitution possible. Reflectivity was the chosen material propriety due to the thermographic and visual cameras ability to detect it.
                  Two thermographic cameras from Flir and Nec manufacturers, and one visible camera from Jai are calibrated, verified and compared using calibration grids and the standard artefact. The calibration system based on burning lamps shows its capability to perform the internal orientation of the thermal cameras. Verification results show repeatability better than 1mm for all cases, being better than 0.5mm for the visible one. As it must be expected, also accuracy appears higher in the visible camera, and the geometric comparison between thermographic cameras shows slightly better results for the Nec camera.Thermography is the technique of producing an image from the infrared radiation that all the bodies emit due to their thermal conditions Thermographic cameras are typically thermally calibrated and verified in order to guarantee an accurate temperature measurement. These calibrations and verifications are based on black bodies, which avoid spurious radiation reflectivity, and generate controlled temperature conditions with traceability to the national reference, Kelvin. Calibrations and verifications based on black bodies are a mature metrological service that is offered by many laboratories around the world. Geometric information of thermographic cameras obtained from photogrammetric restitutions could be very important in many fields (energy efficiency studies in architecture, geometrical positioning of concrete pathologies in civil engineering, process monitoring in injection mould and machining, mechanical wear prediction, electrical failure detection, etc.). Moreover, geometric calibration and verification of thermographic cameras is scarcely found in the bibliography The importance of combining thermal and geometric data from the cameras and the necessity to integrate the instrumentation in the quality management systems of the companies make it necessary to develop calibration procedures and standard artefacts for the geometrical verification of these systems. This work shows a calibration procedure and a low-cost, portable system to verify the geometric parameters, such as accuracy, repeatability and drift, of thermographic cameras. Such procedure and artefact are used to establish the geometrical calibration and verification of two thermographic cameras, Flir P640 and NEC TH9260, both with sensors of 640 Two thermographic cameras from different manufacturers but similar characteristics are analyzed in this paper. Their technical characteristics are shown in The semi-metric visible camera used was a Jai BB500GE, with 8 Camera calibration is a key aspect to obtain geometrical information through photogrammetry restitution. Calibration gives the internal parameters of the camera as the focal length, principal point or lens distortion. For both semi-metric and thermographic cameras, calibration is performed by a self-calibration bundle adjustment method The Jai BB500GE camera was calibrated using Photomodeler software and calibration grid. This method is extensively used in visible camera calibration Selection of type and size of the calibration grid used ( Capture of eight photographs of the calibration grid, from different points of view, which must ensure good ray intersections. Therefore, images should be taken perpendicularly and obliquely from the calibration grid, with a relative rotation of 90° around the optical axis Photomodeler processing: automatic fiducial targets marking, calibration algorithm. Generation of a file including the calibration parameters, that are focal length, format size, principal point and radial and decentering distortion of the lens. Values of these parameters for Jai camera are shown in Thermographic cameras are thermally calibrated in order to provide accurate temperature information The calibration methodology carried out was identical to the one explained for the Jai camera, also using the Photomodeler software. Verification of metrological systems in dimensional metrology is usually performed through physical artefacts which materialize a certain length. For example gauge blocks or spheres are used for the verification of coordinate measuring machines, callipers or micrometers The standard artefact consists of an aluminium block, with seven aluminium cubes of descending dimensions, and five delrin spheres assembled with epoxy glue to the top of the block. Every component but the sphere was machined by a precise CNC system. The nominal diameter of the spheres is 100 The calibration of the artefact and traceability to the national reference of length was given by a coordinate measuring machine Mitutoyo Euroc Apex 12010 under controlled environmental conditions: 20 The surface of the artefact was covered by black targets with 6 The procedure for the verification of the geometrical parameters obtained for the cameras was the following: Warming of the standard artefact, with an electric heater, in order to maximize the effect of the difference in emissivity between each part of the artefact and the targets. Capture of 12 photographs with the Jai camera, and 24 thermographies with both thermographic cameras, Flir P640 and NEC TH9260. The reason for this difference in the numbers of images needed in each case is that the field of view of the thermographic cameras is smaller than the field of view of the visible camera (see Photogrammetric restitution and 3D geometry obtaining of the artefact in the Photomodeler software, from the photographs (Jai case) or the thermographies (Flir and NEC cases) and the calibration file of the corresponding camera. An example of the tridimensional model obtained is shown in Accuracy evaluation. A least square fitting algorithm was used to calculate the centre of the spheres from the coordinates of the targets located on them; distances between centres were also calculated. Dimensions of the cubes, named Repeatability evaluation. Corresponding targets in the different restitution processes are given the same names to facilitate the comparison between the coordinates obtained from each camera ( The calibration parameters for each thermographic camera are shown in Calibration file is then included in the photogrammetric restitution using the same Photomodeler software. Calibration procedure developed for thermographic cameras supported by the panel with burning lamps shows similar results in both cameras. Standard deviation of the calibration parameters obtained for the thermographic cameras is good enough to achieve good results in the photogrammetric restitution ( Photographic and thermographic acquisition for geometric verification was developed under indoor conditions, that is, 22 Repeatability obtained for the geometric determination of 53 targets fixed to the standard artefact is shown in Accuracy in the determination of the dimensions of the cubes in the three axes is shown in Accuracy for the distances between centres of the spheres is exhibited in Regarding thermographic cameras, their results are partly limited by the reflexes that appeared on thermographies caused by the artefact itself ( The standard artefact developed and the methodology applied for the verification also reveal that the Nec camera appears slightly better under a geometric point of view than the Flir camera, being their technical characteristics similar. Geometric information gives an added value to the typical temperature measurements performed with thermal cameras for a number of applications. The complete integration of these systems into the quality control systems of companies requires the development of calibration procedures and standard artefacts for verification. This article presents a procedure for the calibration of thermographic cameras and a low-cost, portable system that provides the verification of their metrological parameters, such as repeatability, accuracy and drift. The standard artefact allows working with the visible and the thermal infrared bands of the electromagnetic spectrum. Calibration procedures and verification systems can be used to check the technical specifications given by manufacturers, to establish comparisons between systems, to guarantee the nonexistence of any geometric drift in thermographic cameras and to test its appropriateness for a particular industrial tolerance. The standard artefact verifies the measurement process entirely and all the parameters of influence as the camera calibration, technical characteristics of the cameras, expertise of the operator skills and environmental conditions during the experiments, as presence of reflexes and illumination. One of the essential technical characteristics of thermographic cameras in this system is thermal sensitivity, because the higher it is, the better the detection of the targets is. As it must be expected, comparison between the two thermographic and the visible cameras reveals better metrological characteristics of the visible one. Furthermore, there are also some differences between thermographic cameras, which show that the Nec camera is better for geometrical measurements than the Flir one. Authors would like to give thanks to Consellería de Economía e Industria (Xunta de Galicia) and Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación (Gobierno de España) for the financial support given; human resources programs (IPP055 – EXP44, FPU AP2009-1144) and projects (INCITE09 304 262 PR and BIA2009-08012). All the programs are co-financed by the Fondo Europeo para el Desarrollo Regional (FEDER).