Fractures of the patella present unique challenges to surgeons and patients alike. As surgical knowledge and technique has advanced, management of these injuries has evolved from nonoperative care or patellectomy to anatomical reduction and internal fixation. Currently, tension band constructs are the most common method of fixation, but anterior knee pain and implant-related problems have become accepted as an expected consequence of treatment. Further, this technique often fails to address inferior pole comminution commonly seen in these injuries. In an effort to improve clinical outcomes and patient satisfaction, patella fracture plating has increased in popularity, but operative plating techniques vary significantly. In this article, we describe a novel treatment strategy that permits direct visualization of the articular reduction, uses multiplanar fixation through a low-profile small-fragment mesh plate, and addresses inferior pole comminution with minimal disruption to the patella vascularity.Patellar fractures represent an interesting challenge for orthopaedic surgeons. Although these injuries are uncommon, representing less than 1% of all fractures, the patella plays a key role in the normal kinematics of the knee, making effective treatment of these injuries essential. Surgical techniques for the treatment of patella fractures have evolved dramatically over the past century. Historically, the use of partial or total patellectomy was thought to allow for adequate pain relief and partial restoration of extensor mechanism function. In an effort to minimize complications and poor clinical outcomes associated with tension band techniques, specifically prominent implants and construct failures, various patella plate fixation techniques have recently been studied in cadaveric models. A radiolucent table is required and the patient is positioned supine with a bump or beanbag beneath the ipsilateral buttock to ensure that the patella is facing anteriorly. A nonsterile tourniquet is applied to the proximal thigh before sterile preparing and draping, although we routinely do not inflate the tourniquet unless visualization is impaired by excessive bleeding. Alternatively, a sterile tourniquet can be used at the surgeon׳s discretion or if additional procedures are planned. A bump is placed under the knee to keep 20°-30° of flexion throughout exposure. A longitudinal skin incision extending from 5 Anatomical reduction of the articular surface is then performed under direct visualization. We have found that for large fragments, 2.0 threaded Kirschner wires are useful both as joysticks and to maintain reduction when placed in interfragmentary fashion. Pointed reduction clamps are also used to achieve and maintain reduction ( For definitive fixation, a Synthes 2.4/2.7 mesh plate (Synthes; West Chester, PA) is cut and contoured for application circumferentially to the lateral half of the patella. The plate design permits extension beneath the patellar tendon distally and quadriceps tendon proximally while extending over the anterior surface of the patella with the 2 remaining limbs. We typically use 1 of 2 specific plate patterns based on patient size and the shape of the patella ( After the plate is seated and all limbs are appropriately positioned, a combination of 2.7 and 2.4 screws can be placed to achieve absolute stability across the major fracture fragments ( Because of the high incidence of inferior pole comminution and poor fixation of the inferior fracture fragment, fixation may be augmented with Krackow sutures. In these cases, 2 #5 Fiberwire sutures (Arthrex; Naples, FL) are passed beneath the anterior-transverse limbs of the mesh plate and then medially and laterally through the patellar tendon in Krackow fashion ( Surgical dressings are managed as per patient and surgeon preference. We recommend avoidance of compressive dressings and the use of a bulky cotton wrap in the early postoperative period to permit soft tissue swelling. All patients are permitted to bear weight as tolerated beginning on postoperative day 0 while wearing a brace that maintains full extension of the knee. Assistive devices are used based on the recommendations of inpatient physical therapists. Formal outpatient physical therapy is not initiated in the immediate postoperative period, but all patients are taught straight leg raises and isometric quadriceps exercises at a 2-week follow-up appointment. Passive range of motion exercises, including the use of a zero-resistance stationary bike, are initiated at the 4-week mark, but strengthening protocols are not started until 8 weeks after the surgical procedure. Patients are routinely followed up for a minimum of 1 year with clinical and radiographic examinations. Implants are not routinely removed after osseous union. Displaced fractures of the patella are challenging injuries that have historically been associated with inferior surgical options resulting in prolonged postoperative rehabilitation protocols, persistent anterior knee pain, and poor patient satisfaction scores. We believe that the use of a low-profile, custom Synthes mesh plate (Synthes; West Chester, PA) applied circumferentially to the lateral half of the patella with multiplanar fixation permits stable anatomical fixation of patella fractures and addresses the problems associated with inferior pole comminution and implant prominence. Further, exposure through a lateral parapatellar arthrotomy provides direct visualization of the reduction and articular surface without compromising the primary vascular supply of the patella. Overall, we believe that the presented technique for fixation of patellar fractures represents a superior fixation strategy to existing methods and we recommend its use for most of the fracture patterns.