Amorphous calcium carbonate (ACC) is a metastable phase of calcium carbonates and it is a precursor during the biomineralization of calcium carbonate in nature. Different ACC in the absence and presence of the additives of poly(sodium 4-styrene sulfonate) and poly(acrylic acid) were prepared and their transformation processes under controls of water were investigated. It was found that ACC powders generally contained about 15% water. Two different transformations via thermal and solution pathways were studied in the present work. We found that water was released from the ACC samples when the temperature was above 100°C and the calcium carbonate began to crystallize at around 270–400°C, which resulted the calcite crystals. The involvement of the polymer additives could inhibit this crystallization process and the crystallization temperature shifted to the higher values. During the solution transformation, the evolution steps of the ACC in different water–ethanol solution were monitored by FT-IR. In this case, water could accelerate the transformation and crystallization of ACC. An increasing of the water amount in the mixed solvents always led to the promotion of the transformation kinetics. Interestingly, the other metastable crystal phases of calcium carbonates, vaterite and aragonite, were readily to be induced during the solution transformation of ACC when the low water amounts were applied. However, water could still make them turned into the stable calcite phase with the experimental time prolonged. Since the additives influenced the transformation of ACC and inhibited the transformation of metastable crystal phase, they could be used to stabilize different phases of calcium carbonates in the solutions. The current experimental results confirmed that the controls of water amount and additives played important roles in the transformation of ACC.Calcium carbonate is an important biomineral and is widely found in various living organisms. The crystallization of calcium carbonate has been a subject of extensive discussion due to its important role in biomineralization. It is widely accepted that calcium carbonate has different crystal phases such as calcite, aragonite and vaterite in nature. Although amorphous phase of calcium carbonate (ACC) has been discovered for a long time, its importance is always underestimated in the previous studies due to its high solubility and instability in the biological milieu. Usually, ACC is considered as a precursor of the crystallized calcium carbonate phases and it is short-lived as a transition during the nucleation process of crystallized calcium carbonate phases in aqueous solutions. However, it is recently revealed that ACC actually plays a key role in the early stage of biogenic calcium carbonates. Addadi et al. In biomineralization process, soluble macromolecules are always related to the biogenic ACC. It is suggested Here, we separate the transformation of ACC from its formation so that the former step can be regulated in the experiments. Firstly, ACC is synthesized and the phase is stabilized and then the transformation process of ACC is studied independently. The effects of additives, poly(4-sodium styrene sulfonate) (PSS) and poly(acrylic acid) (PAA), on the transformation of ACC are investigated. These two polyelectrolytes are selected since they can be used to mimic the roles of the soluble macromolecules in biomineralization. PSS ( ACC was synthesized according to Wegner's method 1 Thermal behaviors of all ACC samples were studied by using the DSC and TGA methods (SDT Q600, TA instrument). The experiments were performed in a temperature of 35–800 Anhydrous ethanol was used as the dispersion media since ACC could be stable in anhydrous ethanol. Firstly, 15 Pellets were prepared by grinding the solids with potassium bromide (KBr), which were used for IR spectroscopy analysis. The samples were scanned in a range of 4000–400 Pure ACC and the ACC nanoparticles-containing different additives, PSS–ACC and PAA–ACC, were obtained according to Ref. Thermal transformation of ACC was studied by DSC and TGA. Thermal behavior of pure ACC had already been revealed Different from ACC, the DSC curves of PSS–ACC ([Ca]/[PSS]=32/1) showed that only one endothermic peak around 108 The thermal behavior of PAA–ACC was shown in The resulted crystallites of all the samples after the thermal transformation were calcite, which was consistent to the previous understanding IR spectroscopy was convenient and useful to distinguish the different crystal phase of calcium carbonates and herein, it was used to monitor the transformation of ACC. The molecular structure of calcium carbonates, containing two ions of calcium and carbonate, were simple and the vibration of carbonate ion in different calcium carbonate structures could be discriminated by IR spectra. The adsorption bands of carbonate were divided into four areas: In nature, the formation of biomaterials was frequently performed via solution reactions and water was the most important media in the biological milieu. The effect of water amount on the transformation of ACC was shown in The XRD data of the products after 8 days’ transformation in the presence of different water–ethanol solution was shown in IR spectrum of PSS–ACC was similar with that of pure ACC, which showed a characteristic broad The characteristic adsorption peak of PAA–ACC at 865 The morphogenesis of resulted calcium carbonates was another important issue in biomineralization. The current experimental results showed that the sphere-liked morphology and size of the resulted crystals could remain as those of the ACC particles when the added water amount was lower (e.g. only 0.5 ACC is an unstable hydrous phase of calcium carbonate and it has a high solubility so that ACC is easy to transform into the crystallized calcium carbonate phases in the aqueous solution ACC is usually synthesized at low temperature and basic solution ACC is a kind of hydrous calcium carbonate phases. When ACC is heated, the water molecules involved in the ACC solids can be released and ACC can transform into the crystal phases. In our experiments, ACC usually contains about 15% water and can be crystallized around 277 The water content in the water–ethanol solution is another important factor during the transformation of ACC. More water in the solution always results in the faster transformation rate of ACC and water catalyze the crystallization of ACC. The disappearance of ACC is promoted significantly by an increase of water percentage in the water–ethanol system. In the conventional studies of calcium carbonate crystallization in the aqueous solution, the formed ACC can crystallize very rapidly due the great amount of water and its lifetime is extremely short. Thus, the determination of ACC in the conventional crystallizations of calcium carbonate is difficult. However, ACC can become relatively stable in the absence of water at room temperature despite that ACC is thermodynamically unstable. In biomineralization, it is not clear whether the crystal nucleation and growth are induced by epitaxy on organic template, or multistep crystallization, or both of them. Although Langmuir monolayers Soluble macromolecules generally involve in biomineralization, which may be effects on the polymorph and morphology of inorganic minerals The transformation of ACC is significantly inhibited in the presence of PAA. When the water amount in solution is 0.5 In summary, ACC is a kind of hydrous calcium carbonate and usually contained about 15% water, which is thermodynamically unstable and can transform into calcite when the solid is heated. It is found that the metastable crystal phases, vaterite and aragonite, can be formed in the presence of small amount of water. However, they also act as the transitional stages as they will eventually transform into the stable calcite phase as the experimental time period goes on. More water can promote the transformation kinetics of ACC and even result in the fast or direct transformation of ACC into calcite. Anionic polyelectrolytes, PSS and PAA, which are used to mimic soluble protein in biomineralization, exhibit an obvious inhibition effect on the transformation of ACC both by thermal and water-induced pathways. It is suggested that the biomineralization of calcium carbonates in nature is also controlled by the similar mechanisms, which highlight the roles of water and protein in the phase and kinetic controls. The work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant nos. 20601023, 20571064 and 20701032) and the Project-sponsored by SRF for ROCS, SEM. Cho thanks the support from ‘Center for Nanostructured Materials Technology’ under ‘the 21st Century Frontier R&D Programs’ of the Ministry of Science and Technology (Grant code #: 07K1501-01010).