Increasing demand and dwindling supply of crude oil have spurred efforts towards enhancing heavy oil recovery. Recently, applications of ionic liquids (ILs) for heavy oil recovery and catalytic upgrading have been reported. However, ILs are generally considered too expensive for industrial applications. Moreover, certain types of ILs are non-biodegradable and toxic. An alternative class of ILs called Deep Eutectic Solvents (DESs) have recently been discovered and investigated upon. A DES generally composed of two or more components that are capable of self-association, to form eutectic mixture with a melting point lower than that of each individual component. DESs are non-toxic, biodegradable, recyclable, non-flammable, environmentally friendly and cheap. Therefore, DESs have found application in fields like extraction/separation, solvent development/reaction medium, hydrometallurgy, etc. In this study, and for the first time to our knowledge, the effectiveness of two different types of DESs, Choline Chloride:Glycerol (1:2) and Choline Chloride:Urea (1:2), in enhancing heavy oil recovery was thoroughly investigated. Effect of the two DESs diluted with formation brine on emulsification, altering wettability, spontaneous imbibitions, surface and interfacial tensions and tertiary residual heavy oil saturation reduction are studied experimentally at different temperatures. Heavy oil with 16 ˚API and formation brine from one of the Omani heavy oil field were utilized. The core flood experiments were conducted at reservoir condition and using Berea sandstone core plugs.
                  The results showed that the two DESs did not make emulsion with the heavy oil. They increased the IFT of oil-brine system. Moreover, the two DESs altered the wettability of the sandstone rock surfaces from liquid-wetting towards intermediately air-wetting conditions at oil-air-rock system. The core flooding runs at different temperatures showed high potential of using these DESs for enhancing heavy oil recovery; where 14–30% of water flooded residual heavy oil was recovered after injecting the DES solvents as tertiary recovery stage. Wettability alteration phenomenon and viscose forces were known as the main mechanisms of enhancing the heavy oil recovery by DESs injection.In recent years, global demands of energy have been increased due to industrial growth while the worldwide production of conventional crude oil has almost reached to its peak. Recent statistics show that there is a decline in light oil production and composition of produced oil is getting heavier ( Unlike conventional light oil, the heavy oil production is much more difficult. Due to its high viscosity, oil-wet and low permeable matrices at reservoir conditions yield low recovery, around 5% to 10% by primary production ( Many attempts have been made to investigate the efficiency of chemical injection in enhancing the heavy oil recovery in both laboratory and field scale. Almost all the researchers have shown that oil-water IFT reduction (by surfactant flooding), emulsification (by alkaline flooding), increasing sweep efficiency (by polymer injection) and wettability alteration are the main mechanisms of oil recovery enhancement via the chemical injection methods ( Although ILs are, due to their unique properties, regarded as green replacements to volatile solvents in many electrochemical, synthetic, analytical, and engineering processes, they are generally considered too expensive for industrial applications. Moreover, certain types of ILs (i.e. imidazolium-based) are non-biodegradable and toxic Therefore, researchers continue to search for new and even greener alternatives to ILs that may overcome the said limitations( DESs compared to ILs have many advantages such as biodegradability and biocompatibility as a green solvents, chemical compatibility with water, easy preparation, non- toxicity and very low prices ( In this work, we experimentally investigate the potential effects of two DESs on the main possible mechanisms of heavy oil recovery including viscose forces, emulsification, IFT reduction, wettability alteration, spontaneous imbibition and core flooding under reservoir condition. The effect of temperature on IFT, wettability and core flooding is also studied. To our knowledge, these set of experiments are the first of their kind as the use of DESs in EOR application has not been tested before. Heavy dead crude oil with 16 °API gravity and viscosity of 4200 Two different DESs - choline chloride:Glycerol (molar ratio 1:2; molecular weight: 107.93 Berea homogeneous and consolidated sandstone core plugs were used as porous medium in the core flood tests. On average, the core samples were 7 Emulsification between the brine and oil occurs due to shear in the porous medium of the reservoir rocks. More aggressive mixing and mixing duration will result in smaller droplets and hence tighter emulsions. The size of droplets ranges from around 0.1 to 100 Emulsification is promoted by the fact that oilfield operations involve the use of chemicals during chemical enhanced oil recovery ( The mechanism of emulsification and entrainment of oil has been suggested for heavy oil recovery. The emulsions are expected to have less viscosity compared to crude oil and, therefore, low viscosity oil/water emulsion would be produced more easily ( Spinning drop video tensiometer (DATAPHYSICS—SVT-20) with interfacial tension measurements range of 1×10 The procedure used in this work for measuring the IFT is as follows: First, a capillary glass tube was filled with the more dense phase (DES/brine mixture), making sure that no air bubbles are present. Then, a small drop of oil (~10 It is vital to understand formation wettability since it affects relative permeability, capillary pressure and residual oil saturation. Hence, the oil-versus-water wetting preference has significant impact on the efficiency of the various enhanced oil recovery techniques. Recently, wettability alteration has been proposed as one of the mechanisms of oil recovery enhancement from unconventional and heavy oil reservoirs where several studies reported the relation between IFT reduction and alteration of wetting conditions ( Contact angle measurement, as a qualitative measurement of reservoir wettability ( One of the most commonly used methods for oil/brine/rock systems wettability characterization is the Amott test. Since the Amott test is based on spontaneous imbibition process, it is affected mainly by capillary pressure and microscopic displacement efficiency. In this study, the Amott tests were done by first saturating the core fully with brine. This was followed by displacing the brine with the heavy crude oil until no more brine was produced. At such stage, the core sample was fully saturated with oil at irreducible water saturation (SW The cell was kept in the oven at 45 Six core flooding experiments conducted in this study (detailed core properties are listed in After cleaning, the core was dried at 65 As shown in Isco syringe pump model 500D; two high pressure floating piston transfer vessels; high pressure-high temperature core holder that can house 38.1 constant temperature air bath (oven) which can work up to 220 back pressure regulator; digital pressure gauges and differential pressure transducers to measure injection/production pressure and pressure drop across the core. Effects of two different DESs (choline chloride:Glycerol (1:2) and choline chloride:Urea (1:2)) on heavy oil recovery enhancement were investigated. The experimental work includes emulsification tests, oil/brine IFT measurement, wettability alteration measurement, spontaneous imbibitions tests and reservoir condition core flooding runs.  The results are illustrated in  Contact angle measurements give a general qualitative indication of the wetting tendencies of the surfaces and fluids. Generally, at liquid-air-rock systems when the contact angle of liquid drop is between 0° and 60° to 75°, the system is defined as liquid-wet, whereas when it is between 180° and 105° to 120°, the system is defined as air-wet. In the middle range of contact angles, the system is considered as neutrally or intermediately wet (  The results of oil recovery verses imbibition time are shown in These results match with the contact angle measurements which showed that the wettability is changing from strongly oil-wet conditions to neutral-wet state by aging in DES1 and DES2 solvents. During the spontaneous imbibitions process, changing the core wettability leads usually to higher oil recovery ( The heavy oil recovery factors after waterflooding and solvent injection at different temperatures are illustrated in The results reveal that the heavy oil recovery increased by increasing the temperature during the brine flooding. The cumulative oil recovery by brine injection was 36.7%, 40% and 42% at 45 Injection of DES1 in tertiary recovery mode (i.e. after brine flooding), resulted in heavy oil recovery enhancement by 14.0% at 45 Additionally, the results show that DES2 was always outperforming the DES1 in reducing the water flood residual oil saturation. This can be attributed to the fact that DES2 is more alkaline compared to the DES1. The performed work in this study proves the ability of both solvents to change the wettability of sandstone rock surfaces. It is anticipated that this wettability alteration phenomenon by the two solvents is one of the major mechanisms of enhancing the heavy oil recovery. The effects of wettability alteration on oil recovery have also been discussed in literature ( In this study, and for the first time to our knowledge, the effectiveness of two different types of DESs emulsification, interfacial tension, wettability alteration, and tertiary heavy oil recovery were studied. The following conclusions can be drawn: The two tested DESs did not form stable emulsions at the different tested conditions. Both DESs increased the oil-brine IFT where the increase caused by DES1 is higher than that caused by DES2. In addition, increasing the temperature resulted in lower IFT values. The 2 solvents have good potential to change the wettability of the surface towards more neutral-wet. It is depicted that the DES2 has more effect on wettability alteration from oil wet to neutral wet condition compared to the DES1. Contact angle measurements show that the more the period of gaining, the more the effect of DES1 and DES2 is on wettability alteration. Spontaneous imbibitions tests using the 2 DESs confirmed the contact angle measurements results on wettability alteration. The oil recovery by DES2 spontaneous imbibition was higher than that produced using DES1 solution. It is also concluded that increasing the temperature of the test increased the volume of solvents imbibed into the core significantly. The core flooding experiments showed high potential of using both DESs for enhancing heavy oil recovery; where 14–30% of water flooded residual heavy oil was recovered after injecting the DES solvents. Moreover, both DESs have generally better performance in enhancing the oil recovery at higher temperatures. The DES2 was always outperforming the DES1 in enhancing the oil recovery. This can be attributed to the fact that DES2 is more alkaline compared to the DES1. Wettability alteration phenomenon and viscose forces were known as the main mechanisms of enhancing the heavy oil recovery by DESs injection.