This paper reports on a comparative study of tribological and corrosion behavior of plasma nitrided 34CrNiMo6 low alloy steel under modern hot wall condition and conventional cold wall condition. Plasma nitriding was carried out at 500°C and 550°C with a 25% N2
                     +75% H2 gas mixture for 8h. The wall temperature of the chamber in hot wall condition was set to 400°C. The treated specimens were characterized by using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), microhardness and surface roughness techniques. The wear test was performed by pin-on-disc method. Potentiodynamic polarization and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) tests were also used to evaluate the corrosion resistance of the samples. The results demonstrated that in both nitriding conditions, wear and corrosion resistance of the treated samples decrease with increasing temperature from 500°C to 550°C. Moreover, nitriding under hot wall condition at the same temperature provided slightly better tribological and corrosion behavior in comparison with cold wall condition. In consequence, the lowest friction coefficient, and highest wear and corrosion resistance were found on the sample treated under hot wall condition at 500°C, which had the maximum surface hardness and ε-Fe2–3N phase.Plasma nitriding is one of the surface modification techniques that widely used to improve wear and corrosion resistance, fatigue strength and surface hardness of various steel components So far, no researches have been carried out on the comparison of surface properties of plasma nitrided steel under hot and cold wall conditions. In the present work, the tribological and corrosion behavior of plasma nitrided 34CrNiMo6 steel under these conditions were investigated. The specimens in the form of 20 Samples were cleaned with acetone and placed in the plasma chamber. Plasma nitriding was performed in a 5 The treated samples were sectioned and mounted before grinding. The ground samples were polished and etched in 2% Nital. The microstructures of nitrided layers were investigated by Philips XL30 scanning electron microscopy (SEM). In order to analyze the phases formed in the treated surfaces, X-ray diffraction (XRD) with Cu Kα ( Then, wear rate was determined from Eq. The track widths of the worn surfaces were then measured by scanning electron microscopy. To improve results accuracy, each experiment for the wear test was repeated three times and the results were averaged. The corrosion behavior of the specimens was characterized by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and potentiodynamic polarization techniques. The tests was carried out using an Autolab PGSTAT302N connected to a standard three electrode cell consists of the specimens (with exposed surface area of 1  The thickness of the compound layers of nitrided samples is depicted in The surface roughness of the untreated specimen and nitrided samples are listed in XRD patterns for the nitrided specimens are presented in The surface hardness values of the samples nitrided under different processing conditions are given in  Variation of friction coefficients for the samples nitrided are illustrated in  Potentiodynamic polarization curves of the untreated and nitrided specimens under different conditions are displayed in Moreover, in both treatment conditions, as the nitriding temperature increased from 500  Based on the obtained results, the following conclusions can be drawn: The formed compound layer on the hot wall plasma nitrided samples was thicker than samples treated under cold wall condition, at the same temperature. The thickest compound layer was formed on the sample that had been nitrided under hot wall condition at 550 Intensity of ε phase decreased while intensity of γ′ phase increased by raising the temperature from 500 Plasma nitriding under both conditions improved the tribological and corrosion behavior of studied steel, and the slightly better performance was achieved for the hot wall condition. This can be mainly due to presence of more ε phase in the compound layer of the specimens nitrided under hot wall condition in comparison with samples treated under cold wall condition, at the same temperature. The lowest friction coefficient and wear rate and also the best corrosion resistance belonged to the sample that was nitrided under hot wall condition at 500