Deformed two-phase Zr–2.5Nb was subjected to 700°C annealing and associated coarsening. After primary recrystallization, the second-phase body-centered cubic β was well dispersed on the grain boundaries of hexagonal α matrix. Prolonged annealing led to the presence of the β, mainly at the α tri-junctions. The two-phase coarsening was associated with clear trends of widening in the second-phase size distribution and changes in phase boundary nature. The former is contrary to what is expected. Changes in phase boundary nature were through increased concentration of 45°[001] phase boundaries—good-fit interfaces, present in larger β particles, which were estimated to have higher three-dimensional lattice coincidence and hence lower energy. Simple analytical modeling, assuming dissolution-controlled particle coarsening and a lower interfacial energy of the phase interface with the 45°[001], was shown to explain these experimental observations.Zr–2.5Nb is a two-phase alloy with important structural applications in today’s nuclear industry The second-phase β is typically located at the α–α grain boundaries—as nearly continuous filaments in the cold-worked state or in a more globularized form at the end of primary recrystallization Grain coarsening in general, and in particular coarsening in a two-phase microstructure, are topics well covered in textbooks Phenomenological studies designed to bring out the role of grain boundary nature giving variable boundary energies and mobilities have provided important insights into single-phase grain coarsening The selected starting structure came from the first pilgered stage of the Indian processing route of Zr–2.5Nb pressure tube The samples were subjected to annealing in a salt bath furnace. Annealing at 700 In each sample, an area of at least 2 Coarsening in the two-phase structure is brought out by the TEM ( Prolonged post-recrystallization annealing, however, led to β presence primarily at the tri-junctions of the α grains (  For the tri-junction β phase, 14 The high-resolution TEM images, The model (using its associated computer program) computes three-dimensional lattice coincidence between any two unit cells. These were taken as standard hexagonal α and bcc β unit cells of the present Zr–2.5Nb. Appropriate rotations were enforced to achieve a specified OR. The number of coincident lattice points, within a given tolerance, was then estimated. The tolerance is expressed as the fraction or percentage of the lowest lattice parameter between the two unit cells. Increasing this tolerance “expands” the unit cells and naturally improves the probability of coincidence. This tolerance is considered more appropriate for the present algorithm than an angular tolerance, i.e. a tolerance similar to the classical Brandon criteria To use this model effectively, the following approach was taken. A computer program checked numerically, for a given orientation (or phase boundary nature) and for incremental tolerance(s), the possibility of lattice coincidence. A tolerance of upto 50% and a minimum coincidence of 1 out of 29 lattice points (similar to Σ29 in grain boundary nomenclature For different tolerances, the fractions of coincident phase boundaries were estimated. This was done for the bulging (B Experimental observations, as described in the earlier section, bring out the following points: The small (below 0.25 During coarsening the phase boundary nature also changed noticeably, High-resolution TEM revealed good-fit interface(s) for the Burgers OR. This is not unexpected, as past studies in Zr As discussed in the introduction, second-phase coarsening can take place by the classical model of solute transport, the standard Greenwood Given that there are two unusual observations in the current results: (i) the increased fraction of α/β phase boundaries with a near 45°[0 To develop a first-order model of the coarsening in this two-phase system we proceed as follows. At the end of recrystallization we consider two types of β particles, each at α triple points and each having the same volume equal to the average volume of all the β particles. One of these particles, type 1, is assumed to have three random phase boundaries and so should ( These three types of interfaces have different spherical curvatures, This model gives two important results. First it explains why the more bulging interfaces, those with smaller radii of curvature, of the triple point β particles predominantly have near 45°[0 In the standard coarsening model of spherical particles, at low volume fractions of particles and with a constant interfacial energy, In applying Eq. Eq. The full analysis, as given in Refs. It is now possible to understand why, in the present study, the two unusual results are seen: the widening of the particle size distribution and a steady increase in the fraction of particle–matrix interfaces with the special, near 45°[0 The present model, again for simplicity, assumes that the two types of particle seen in The solubility of the average-sized, special particle of type 2, with The fastest growing type 1 particle, with a size that is twice that of the average of such type 1 particles, that is with 2< As a result, after a certain period of competitive coarsening, all coarsening of the random particles is predicted to cease. Since these type 1 particles cease growing there will only be the steady loss of the number density of the type 1 particles, those lacking a good-fit interface. The only growing particles will then be those of type 2 The model of competitive coarsening of two types of particle, one (type 2) with a good-fit or low-energy interface and the other (type 1) with a higher energy interface, appears to predict the following changes in the microstructure during extended coarsening: The observed particle size distribution will widen significantly with particles of type 2 coarsening, and particles of type 1 dissolving up with a steady fall in number density and insignificant increase in their sizes. Coarsening of particles of type 2, at the expense of particles of type 1, will increase the frequency of 45°[0 The observed growth of mean β phase particle size, shown in Here n1 and n2 are the respective number densities of the two types of particle. As n1 falls, rav will coarsen both by the loss of the smaller particles and by the fast growth of type 2 particles at the expense of particles of type 1. These outcomes are indeed what the experiments found. It should be noted that these changes are not true predictions since the model was developed to explain these observations. The only true prediction is that A further interesting observation is that, as seen in  The starting pilgered Zr–2.5Nb had deformed hcp α and nearly continuous filaments of second-phase bcc β. After primary recrystallization, 700 Coarsening also brought significant changes in phase boundary nature. This was in terms of increase in 45°[0 Simple analytical modeling (by extending the classical model of coarsening through solute transport) established that a significant difference in interfacial energy between near 45°[0 Support from BRNS (Board of Research on Nuclear Science) and from DST (Department of Science and Technology) are acknowledged. Also acknowledged are the support from the National Facility of Texture and OIM (a DST-IRPHA project) and IIT Bombay’s support to Roger Doherty as a visiting professor. The helpful comments of our reviewer are also gratefully acknowledged.