An extraction process to recover vanadium from low-grade vanadium-bearing titanomagnetite was developed. In this study, a mixed solvent system of di(2-ethylhexyl) phosphate (D2EHPA) and tri-n-butyl phosphate (TBP) diluted with kerosene was used for the selective extraction of vanadium from a hydrochloric acid leaching solution that contained low vanadium concentration with high concentrations of iron and impurities of Ca, Mg, and Al. In the extraction process, the initial solution pH and the phase ratio had considerable functions in the extraction of vanadium from the hydrochloric acid leaching solution. Under optimal extraction conditions (i.e., 30–40°C for 10min, 1:3 phase ratio (O/A), 20% D2EHPA concentration (v/v), and 0–0.8 initial solution pH), 99.4% vanadium and only 4.2% iron were extracted by the three-stage counter-current extraction process. In the stripping process with H2SO4 as the stripping agent and under optimal stripping conditions (i.e., 20% H2SO4 concentration, 5:1 phase ratio (O/A), 20min stripping time, and 40°C stripping temperature), 99.6% vanadium and only 5.4% iron were stripped by the three-stage counter-current stripping process. The stripping solution contained 40.16g/LV2O5,0.691g/L Fe, 0.007g/L TiO2, 0.006g/L SiO2 and 0.247g/L CaO. A V2O5 product with a purity of 99.12% V2O5 and only 0.026% Fe was obtained after the oxidation, precipitation, and calcination processes. The total vanadium recovered from the hydrochloric acid leaching solution was 85.5%.Vanadium and titanium are important industrial raw materials used as constituents of several alloys, catalysts, and white pigments Titanomagnetite and ilmenite concentrates cannot be produced even from millions of tons of low-grade vanadium-bearing titanomagnetite in China. However, bulk titanomagnetite and ilmenite concentrates can be easily obtained from low-grade vanadium-bearing titanomagnetite through the ore-dressing process. Bulk titanomagnetite and ilmenite concentrates contain 30–40% Fe, 25–35% TiO The present study developed an extraction process to recover vanadium from a hydrochloric acid leaching solution that contains low vanadium concentration with high concentrations of Fe and impurities of Ca, Mg, and Al. Specific factors that influence the extraction of vanadium and iron in the extraction process, such as initial solution pH, extraction time, phase ratio, D2EHPA concentration, and extraction temperature, were investigated. The factors that affect the stripping of vanadium and iron in the stripping process, namely, H The commercial extractant D2EHPA was supplied by Luoyang Aoda Chemical Co., Ltd. and used without further purification. Tri- The hydrochloric acid leaching solution used in the present study was prepared using a direct leaching process that involved the reduction of pre-treated bulk concentrates of titanomagnetite and ilmenite with HCl solution at atmospheric pressure. The pH-extraction isotherms of D2EHPA showed that the extraction order was Fe Solvent extraction was carried out by placing the aqueous solution and organic phase into a separating funnel. To improve the phase separation characteristics, 5% TBP was added into the organic phase as the diluent phase modifier. The funnel was then fixed in an oscillator (81 Given that the organic phase could not be analyzed directly with ICP–OES, the H The effect of the initial solution pH on the extraction of vanadium and iron under the conditions of 1:3 phase ratio (O/A), 20% D2EHPA concentration (v/v), 40  The effect of extraction time on the extraction of vanadium and iron under the conditions of 1:3 phase ratio (O/A), 20% D2EHPA concentration (v/v), 40  The effect of extraction temperature on the extraction of vanadium and iron under the conditions of 1:3 phase ratio (O/A), 20% D2EHPA concentration (v/v), initial solution pH of 0.43, and 30  The effect of phase ratio (O/A) on the extraction of vanadium and iron under the conditions of the 20% D2EHPA concentration (v/v), initial solution pH of 0.61, 30  The effect of D2EHPA concentration (v/v) on the extraction of vanadium and iron under the conditions of the initial solution pH of 0.55, 40 The results indicated that vanadium extraction increased with the increase in D2EHPA concentration (v/v). Iron extraction slowly increased as D2EHPA concentration (v/v) increased. When D2EHPA concentration (v/v) was 20%, vanadium extraction was 78.9% and iron extraction was less than 5%. Therefore, the optimal D2EHPA concentration (v/v) of 20% was selected. The loaded organic phase can be stripped by hydrochloric and sulfuric acids. Given that sulfuric acid can be used for the selective stripping of vanadium from the loaded organic phase, the stripping process that uses dilute H The effect of stripping temperature on the stripping of vanadium and iron from the loaded organic phase was investigated. The results are presented in  The effect of stripping time on the stripping of vanadium and iron from the loaded organic phase was investigated. The results are presented in  The effect of phase ratio (O/A) on the stripping of vanadium and iron from the loaded organic phase was investigated. The results are presented in  The effect of H  The feeding liquid was extracted by a three-stage counter-current extraction process under the optimal extraction conditions (i.e., initial solution pH of 0–0.8, 20% D2EHPA concentration (v/v), 1:3 phase ratio (O/A), 40 The experimental results show that the remaining Fe The major component of the final stripping solution was vanadium(Ⅳ), which was oxidized to vanadium(V) by NaClO The XRD pattern of the V The present paper reports a novel process to recover vanadium from low-grade vanadium-bearing titanomagnetite. In this study, the extraction process realizes selective extraction of vanadium from high acidity complex chloride system that contained low vanadium concentration with high concentrations of iron and impurities of Ca, Mg, and Al using D2EHPA dissolved in kerosene with TBP as phase modifier. The experimental results indicate that vanadium extraction is significantly affected by initial solution pH and phase ratio (O/A). The optimal initial solution pH is 0–0.8, which can prevent the hydrolysis of Al and Fe and the formation of SiO This work was financially supported by the