Chalcopyrite has been milled for up to 50 h in oxygen, air and argon atmospheres using a laboratory ball mill. No phase changes were evident in argon but the XRD peaks were weaker and broader indicating crystalline refinement. In oxygen, even after 1 h milling peaks for CuSO4·5H2O were present and these became predominant after 20 h milling where the chalcopyrite peaks were absent. In air, partial oxidation to CuSO4·5H2O was evident after 50 h. Leaching of the resultant powders with water showed 80% dissolution after 50 h milling in oxygen, significantly greater than the 20% and 6% dissolution after milling for 50 h in air and argon respectively. Solution analyses showed the Cu/Fe ratio increased with milling time in oxygen suggesting selectivity may be possible. The insoluble residue was found to consist of haematite, elemental sulphur and unreacted chalcopyrite.Chalcopyrite is the most important global source of copper and is almost invariably smelted producing 2 tonnes of SO It has been shown that ultrafine grinding of sulphide minerals leads to enhanced reactivity ( Interestingly, However, in most of the above instances the minerals were ground in air which would be expected to lead to some oxidation. For example, enargite, Cu This paper examines the effect of extended milling in an oxygen atmosphere on the dissolution of chalcopyrite in non-oxidising media. The chalcopyrite used was from the 5–10 mm fraction screened from a bulk sample from Mount Lyall, Tasmania. Pieces were hand picked to minimise quartz which was the major mineral impurity. The selected pieces were ground in a ring mill and the 106–212 μm fraction used in the experiments. XRD of the resultant powder showed the major phase present was chalcopyrite, a small peak for quartz was also present at 31° 2 A 7.0 g sample of chalcopyrite was loaded into a laboratory scale ball mill ( The unmilled concentrate and the milled powders were subjected to 24 h agitated leaching in both water and 0.1 M HCl at room temperature to determine whether solubilisation had occurred during milling. Solutions were analysed for copper and iron by atomic absorption spectroscopy. All powders were analysed by XRD using monochromatic Co  At 25 °C there are three major stages of reaction, an initial oxidation to iron(II) sulphate and CuS, oxidation of the CuS to CuSO Despite their presence in the thermodynamic model, neither sulphur dioxide nor elemental sulphur was predicted to occur under the conditions examined. Elemental sulphur is a well known product of chalcopyrite oxidation ( This reaction scheme suggests that it may be possible to separate the copper and iron by controlling the oxygen content of the system to form a soluble iron product, FeSO The high affinity of these anhydrous sulphates for water is likely to lead to hydration of the milled products on exposure to atmospheric moisture or during wet milling. If the solubilities of FeSO The XRD traces for samples milled in oxygen, air and argon for up to 50 h are shown in The sample milled in oxygen showed significant changes in the phases present with new peaks evident after 1 h of milling. The most obvious new peak is at 41.6° which can be ascribed to Fe After 20 h milling, the peaks for chalcopyrite were absent. The only phases which could be confirmed as present were Fe The mass losses of the as-milled powders after 24 h agitated leaching in water and 0.1 M HCl ar shown in The solubility of the starting material was extremely small with only 1.6% mass loss after 24 h in 0.1 M HCl. However, after 1 h milling the acid solubility had increased to ∼ Milling for more than 20 h resulted in a 4% increase in acid solubility but 13% increase in water solubility, clearly the longer milling time resulted in conversion of acid soluble to water soluble. Inset in  Thus, in the early stages of milling it seems that iron is preferentially solubilised in both water and acid, but as the system became more oxidised either the copper became more soluble or the iron less soluble.  Thus, the greater ratio of copper to iron in the longest milling times is due to increased copper dissolution and a decrease in iron solubility, presumably due to Fe XRD traces of some acid leach products are shown in Several other peaks are evident which were previously weak, or absent from, in the unleached powder, the peaks are clearly for insoluble intermediate phases. In the 20 h residue, the peak at ∼  The presence of elemental sulphur was unexpected from the thermodynamic prediction in From these results, it seems that the initial stage of oxidation is to form a soluble iron compound and an insoluble copper compound. The copper to iron ratio is less than unity confirming the enhanced solubility of iron over copper. This scenario can be explained by the occurrence of reaction As milling time increased, the conversion of CuS to CuSO It should be noted that the tumbling type of ball mill used in this investigation is extremely inefficient at energy transfer and other types of mill (e.g. planetary, vibratory, stirred ball) could be expected to produce the same results in a shorter milling time. A model based on number of ball impacts per gram of powder has indicated a vibratory mill would be around 300 times faster than the mill used here ( Chalcopyrite can be oxidised to soluble phases by milling for extended periods in oxygen. A thermodynamic assessment indicated oxidation could occur in three stages, oxidation to a soluble iron phase and CuS, oxidation of the CuS to CuSO