The capability of oxalic acid produced by Aspergillus niger was investigated for bioleaching of platinum from a refinery reforming catalyst. The spent medium mode was selected for bioleaching because of its higher efficiency at favorable pH and temperature conditions. The effects of several important factors such as the pulp density, pH and temperature on platinum recovery were optimized using Box-Behnken design of response surface methodology. The results indicated that pH adjustment during the bioleaching process increases the final platinum recovery significantly. The obtained optimum conditions were 1% for the pulp density, 0.5 for the medium pH, and 70 °C for the temperature which led to 37% platinum recovery. The significance of oxalic acid as the leaching agent in platinum bioleaching was highlighted by investigating the recovery of a blank medium without oxalic acid at the optimum conditions which was just about 13%. The presented method can be utilized in an environmentally friendly process to recover platinum from industrial catalysts.Platinum group elements are widely used in industrial catalysts because of their remarkable catalytic qualities ( Several processes for the metals recovery have been developed on the basis of pyro-metallurgy, hydro-metallurgy and bio-hydrometallurgy principals ( The most common microorganisms capable of metal solubilization include chemolithotrophic autotroph bacteria as well as some heterotrophic bacteria and fungi ( On the basis of the above, the aim of the work was to investigate the effects of pH adjustment with mineral acids on the bioleaching of Pt from a spent refinery catalyst by The spent de-coked Sn-Pt/Al The spent de-coked catalyst from a continuous catalytic reforming unit which contained platinum on an alumina support (Sn-Pt/Al The composition of the spent catalyst was analyzed by an X-Ray fluorescence (XRF) analyzer (Bruker, S4 pioneer) and the obtained results have been shown in  The ability of Generally, a bioleaching process can be performed either as a direct (one or two-step process) or an indirect two-step approach. In the direct single-step method, fermentation and leaching will be taken place simultaneously which means that leaching of metals from the catalyst and cultivation of microorganisms are happening at the same container. In the direct two-step process, the leaching and cultivation are still taking place at the same container but the leaching will begin later than the cultivation. In the indirect method, the catalyst will be added to a previously cultured medium meaning that leaching will be performed in a microorganism free medium obtained from the fermentation (the spent medium) ( Several flasks containing 100 mL liquid culture of To investigate the leaching efficiency of the spent medium, the fungal cultivation was carried out according to the procedure explained in The influence of the addition of excess acid to platinum recovery was investigated in a single step bioleaching process as described above with a modification in the added catalyst powder. In these experiments, the liquid culturing media were supplemented with certain amounts of catalyst powder to obtain 0.5, 1, 2 and 4% (w/v) pulp densities. At the end of the ten day incubation time, the oxalic acid content of each sample was measured. After that, nitric acid was added to samples to the final concentration of 1.5 M. The flasks were incubated at 70 °C for 6 h and then, the extracted platinum was measured. Response surface methodology (RSM) is a common approach to optimize the process outputs because of its convenient application and high efficiency ( The required spent medium for bioleaching was provided by the fungal cultivation in an adjusted pH condition as described in To measure the oxalic acid concentration, the obtained spent medium was subjected to high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC; Knauer, smart line system) with a UV visible detector at 210 nm and a C18 column. The HPLC-grade oxalic acid solution was injected into the column as the standard ( The dissolved platinum in the system was analyzed by taking appropriate samples from the bioleaching flasks. The samples were centrifuged and the concentration of platinum in the obtained supernatants was measured by inductively coupled-plasma optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES Perkin Elmer, Optima 7300DV). Metal recovery percentage was calculated through Eq.  In the medium with controlled pH, the initial pH of the culturing medium was set to 6 by the nitric acid solution. After 2 days of incubation, the medium pH decreased because of the production of oxalic acid. At this time, the pH was adjusted in the range of 7–8 and controlled daily during the fermentation period. By the end of the fermentation, oxalic acid concentration in the medium with controlled pH was 12 g/L, while the culture without pH control just produced about 3.6 g/L oxalic acid with the final pH equal to 3.1. The observed positive effect of adjusting the pH on biosynthesis of oxalic acid by To evaluate the efficiency of different bioleaching approaches (i.e. single step, two-step and spent medium) the produced oxalic acid concentration and metal recovery were measured for each case. As it can be seen in  The positive effect of adding acid (reducing the pH) in platinum recovery for the spent medium method was verified by the above results. It was also demonstrated that the oxalic acid production was higher for one-step bioleaching with pH control. Therefore, the combination of one step bioleaching conditions with the consequent pH reduction might have a synergistic effect on platinum recovery. To examine the idea, nitric acid was added to the medium at the end of the single step bioleaching process to reach the final concentration of 1.5 M equal to [94.5 g/L]. Simultaneously, the effect of pulp density on oxalic acid yield and metal recovery was investigated and the obtained results have been shown in Apparently, increasing the pulp density up to 4% did not affect the fungal oxalic acid production significantly. On the other hand, the pulp density had an adverse effect on platinum leaching and bioleaching efficiency reduced significantly for pulp densities above 0.5%. This could be explained by the adsorption of dissolved platinum to fungal biomass or reduction of catalyst contact area as a result of its entrapment in the biomass ( The platinum recovery percentages of Box Behnken experimental runs were calculated and reported in The normal probability and residual plots of the model have been shown in  The effect of pulp density and temperature on platinum recovery at the pH value equal to 1.5 as the holding value has been shown in  The suggested optimum conditions by the software were pulp density of 1%, pH equal to 0.5 and bioleaching temperature of 70 °C. Under the mentioned conditions, the platinum recovery was predicted to be 37.6% by the model. To evaluate the accuracy of the model, an additional experiment was performed under the optimal conditions. According to There are few reports on the recovery of platinum from spent catalysts through bioleaching in the literature. Recently, Biological processes are time-consuming in general but they are promising due to their undeniable advantages. In fact, the time-consuming step in this process is bio-production of oxalic acid by the fungus. The bio-production of oxalic acid is a cost effective option because it can produced on low cost carbon sources such as the dairy wastewaters. Since the oxalic acid production and leaching are two separate steps in the presented spent medium method, the slow rate problem of the oxalic acid bio-production could be addressed conveniently. Moreover, the spent medium bioleaching has the privilege of not restricting the users to limited pH, temperature, pulp density and other operating parameters hence higher recovery efficiencies can be achieved which is favored for industrial purposes. Platinum recovery was measured in a cell free bio-oxalic acid solution (spent medium) and an uncultured medium (i.e. not inoculated by fungi) with the same composition as the control. The test has been repeated for two conditions, namely the obtained optimum criteria and the unchanged pH conditions (with no nitric acid addition). According to All the performed experiments in this study were carried out at a constant leaching duration of 6 h. In order to examine the effect of leaching time on the platinum recovery, an extra experiment was conducted under the optimum conditions but the leaching duration was doubled (12 h) and the Pt recovery under this condition was found to be 35.5% which is almost the same as the 6 h leaching duration. This showed that increasing the leaching duration did not make a notable change in the extraction efficiency in the current conditions. It seems that the reactant exhaustion could be the reason for stopping the leaching progress by time. When a higher concentration of oxalic acid (27 g/L) was examined (results are in the As previously mentioned, the pH of all the experiments in this study was adjusted by nitric acid. To investigate the difference between nitric and hydrochloric acid on metal recovery, an experiment was conducted under optimum conditions in which HCl was employed to set the pH to 0.5. The results proved that the platinum recovery in the sample with HCl was 4% higher (Pt recovery of 41%) than the sample in which nitric acid was used for setting the pH (Pt recovery of 37%). This could be due to the formation of complexes such as PtCl Chemical leaching experiments were conducted using commercial oxalic acid as the leaching agent at the concentrations identical to those of the fungi produced oxalate at the optimum conditions (13.5 g/L oxalate, pulp density of 1%, pH adjusted to 0.5 by adding hydrochloric acid and bioleaching temperature of 70 °C) as well as the twice of the fungal production (27 g/L). As can be seen in The comparison between platinum recovery of chemical leaching at oxalic acid concentrations of 13.5 g/L and 27 g/L revealed that the increase in organic acid concentration in this range did not enhance the leaching efficiency considerably since the recovery at 27 g/L is only 5% higher. In this study, bioleaching of platinum from a refinery reforming catalyst sample by the This work has been partially supported by the National Iranian Oil Refining & Distribution Company (NIORDC). Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: