This paper presents the difference of behaviour between fully grouted bolts with and without free end slip when loaded in tension. An analytical approach is proposed for fully encapsulated bolts when the free end of the bolt slips. This model is based on the existing bond–slip relationship of bolt–grout interface with no free end slip. The derived analytical solutions of load–slip relationship, slip distribution, the shear stress and strain distributions presented in this paper are all connected with free end slip. The analytical approach is validated by experimental results. Free end slip has a significant influence on rock bolt behaviour and should not be ignored.Rock bolts have found extensive application in tunnelling and mining engineering to reinforce the jointed rock mass or to support underground openings. Fu et al. In the field, rock bolts usually experience tensile and shear loading. When the reinforced rock mass deforms, a load transfer mechanism takes place between the bolt and the rock surface and transfers the applied tensile and shear load into the surrounding mass. The load transfer mechanism plays an important role in the reinforcing function of the rock bolt system. Better understanding of the load transfer is helpful in optimising bolt design for ground support. Throughout the last few decades, many Analytical approaches, regarding fully encapsulated bolts, have been significantly researched in the past several decades. Farmer Free end slip was taken into consideration in this paper. A shear bond–slip relationship of bolts without free end slip presented by Ma et al. Thus Eq.   Differentiating Eq. For the elementary length of In this study, the bolt is assumed to be in elastic deformation and accordingly, Substituting Eq. According to Eqs. As shown in In this study, two distinct approaches are presented to derive the relationship of load and displacement with consideration of free end slip The following mathematical approach has been used in the derivation of the slip distribution relationship of Externally-Bonded Fibre Reinforced Polymer (EB-FRP) by Liu and Wu Multiplying 2 Hence: By integrating both sides of Eq. Considering the boundary condition Eqs. Eq. Substituting Eq. At Thus the load at the loaded end of the bolt can be expressed by: By setting Eq. According to Eq. The lateral surface between the bolt and resin at 0 The work generated by external forces acting on the bolt in the range 0 The volume of the bolt at 0 Equating Eq. Substituting Eq. Substituting Eq. At Substituting Eq. It can be noted that Eq. The slip distribution of rock bolts having free end slip is derived in this section by integrating Eq. Eq. Differentiate Eq. Substituting Eqs. Integrating both sides of Eq. Substituting Eq. Solving Eq. Letting: Eq. Substituting The strain distribution Substituting Eq. Substituting According to boundary conditions, we have Substituting Letting: Eq. According to Eq. Because Because 0 Therefore: the solution of Eq. Considering Substituting Considering Differentiating Eq. Substituting Eq. When The unknown coefficients Farmer Slip of the free end can be calculated once slip of the loaded end and the corresponding strain measurements at different loading levels are known. The computed free end slips were 0.52, 1.1258, 1.955, 3.09 and 5.35 The proposed model is applicable to predict the strain distribution of the bolt. In this section, Eq. In this section, the proposed model is used to evaluate the shear stress distribution of the bolt–grout interface. The applied parameters The relationship of load and displacement were predicted by Eq. Through this section, it is clear that there is a very good agreement between experimental results and the proposed analytical solutions. To evaluate the influence of the free bolt end on the shear behaviour of the bolt–resin interface the calculated results for two cases were compared. From the above analyses it can be seen that the free end bolt slip is not zero in Farmer’s test. Again Farmer’s test is used here, first with the assumption that free end slip For the second case where free end slip is considered, the parameters The free end slip needs to be taken into account when the surrounding confinement of rock bolts is weak or the length of rockbolt is short. The significant difference in bond–slip prediction curves shown in When the rock bolt has free end slip, axial strain distributes through the whole bolt rather than concentrating in the front section close to the collar. He and Zhang An analytical approach has been presented to describe the mechanical behaviour of fully grouted rock bolts in tension with free end slip. The bond–slip relationship presented for bolts without free end slip was used to predict the response of bolts with free end slip. Closed form solutions of slip distribution, axial strain distribution of the bolt, shear stress distribution along the bolt–grout interface and the load–slip relationship are proposed by taking into account free end slip factor. The proposed analytical approach is validated by Farmer’s test The first author would like to acknowledge financial support from the China Scholarship Council and University of Wollongong.