We designed a new electrostatically driven scanning mirror which consists of a circular mirror plate and an elliptic outer frame with vertical combs. The rotational actuation is done by the vertical combs attached to the elliptic outer frame. To increase the actuation force, stationary vertical comb electrodes are arranged on the upper and lower sides of the moving comb fingers, simultaneously. This eye-type mirror showed larger deflection angle compared to those of the previous works such as using rectangular and elliptic mirrors. The diameter of the mirror plate is 1.0mm, and the lengths of the major and minor axes of the outer frame are 2.5 and 1.0mm, respectively. Using this scanning mirror, we obtained an optical scanning angle of 32° when driven by sinusoidal driving voltage of system's resonant frequency in range of 22.1–24.5kHz with 100V dc bias voltage. We demonstrated a full color XGA-resolution video image with screen diagonal size over 30in. using the eye-type scanning mirror.As the multimedia devices have come to overspread societies, need of large-screen display is increasing more rapidly. Hence, many types of projection displays have been developed. Although flat panel displays, such as LCD and Plasma, increase their sizes very fast, projection displays still have merits in manufacturing cost and simplicity of structure especially when the screen size is getting larger. Laser scanning display is being developed as one of the future projection displays. It is well known that the conventional displays using phosphors or lamps as light sources can express only about 30% of visible natural colors. Recently, various technologies are being tried in order to expand color gamut of displays. The most efficient one is the laser display using lasers as the light source. Since lasers have the most saturated colors, the laser display has wider color gamut than those of the conventional displays using phosphors or lamps. There are several kinds of methods to make video images with laser sources. Galvanometric-mirror-type optical scanners are widely used for laser printers, bar-code readers, optical data storage, optical communication, laser machining, projection displays and so on. Recently, many of researches have been carried out to make optical scanners by using MEMS technology for compact size, low cost, low power consumption and lightweight The laser display has potential to enable a new generation of large-area display for its merits of an excellent brightness, high contrast ratio and natural color expression In this work, the topology of vertical comb drive is optimized to get large deflection angle. There are two key design variables that determine the deflection angle: first one is the location of the vertical comb that influences the driving torque to mirror, and the second is moment of inertia of moving part that determines dynamic resistance against the torque. Both of location of vertical combs and net moment of inertia of moving part are optimized simultaneously by using the suggesting eye-type topology. Electrostatic driving scheme using vertical combs is selected as the fundamental driving mechanism of this work since the vertical comb driving can provide relatively large force with small voltage input compared to in-plane comb drives. The optimized scanner showed resonant frequency higher than 20 Our ultimate development goal is the palm-top-sized laser display for consumer electronics applications in 3 years. The successful development of compact laser display will open a new area of mobile display applications. The scanning-type laser display has merits of simple structure and high optical efficiency. These make compact display system possible. For a palm-top-size laser display, we need compact components of lasers and scanners. Typical mechanical scanners are not proper for such consumer applications, because of the large size and high cost. MEMS scanners have a very high potential of acquiring the small size and low cost. Also, it does not make any acoustic noise whereas mechanical rotating mirror does. For increasing the performance of the scanning mirror such as high driving frequency and large scanning angle by reducing the moment of inertia and increasing the rotational moment (torque), we designed a scanning mirror consists of the circular mirror plate with an elliptic outer frame. It is electrostatically driven by vertical combs arranged at the outer frame, as shown in To increase the driving force, stationary comb electrodes are built on the upper and lower sides of the moving comb fingers, simultaneously as shown in    Using this scanning mirror, we acquired the optical scanning angle of 32° when driven by the 65–75  Eye-type scanning mirror was designed and fabricated using a MEMS technology. We obtained optical scanning angle of 32° with resonant frequency of 22.1–24.5