The present paper focuses on a rigorous procedure using statistical inference leading to the determination of practical laboratory strength and deformability parameters obtained on rock specimens. Using statistical inference, upper or lower bounds of deformability properties can be obtained following a methodology involving chosen confidence interval and precision index along with statistical parameters of laboratory test results. A similar approach gives strength property bounds, which insure failure or nonfailure with a given probability. These property values can then be used with appropriate extrapolation models to estimate the rock mass strength.More and more structures in and on rock masses must be constructed to satisfy society's increasing needs. Both strength and deformation properties of such masses are of prime necessity in designing underground openings and foundations. Consequently, determining rock mass mechanical properties is still an important issue in rock mechanics. It is widely recognized that laboratory tests on small specimens cannot provide direct information on rock mass strength properties and deformation parameters. In situ tests, which provide, in principle, more direct information on rock masses' mechanical properties, are expensive and time-consuming. Moreover, some of these tests cannot be performed at sufficiently large scale to yield results that are representative of the rock mass. This explains why literature provides many approaches to extrapolate to the rock mass scale, results obtained from laboratory tests on rock specimens prepared from samples gathered in the field, usually from diamond drill holes. Reviews of such models were presented for instance by The If one performs a series of identical tests on a given rock type, following scrupulously the best standard published for that test, one will be confronted with the fact that the results vary from one test to the other, sometimes showing an important scatter. This is recognized as being typical of rocks. That is why a mean value of the results obtained is recommended to be substituted into any of the above extrapolation approaches. However, these approaches generally make no reference to the confidence interval of the mean (or to the confidence limits) that should characterize the observed average values substituted into the empirical relationships. Moreover, they do not consider the fact that designing underground excavations and foundations with observed mean values might be misleading. Obviously, the uncertainty aspect of the values of the mechanical properties used in such designs cannot be ignored. To take the first of the two previous points into account, The present paper has two objectives: first, to present an equation that allows determination of the confidence interval characterizing a mean value of a mechanical property in cases where the number of tests conducted has been determined arbitrarily, which is often the case; and second, to propose mathematical expressions leading to numerical values for deformability and strength properties to be substituted into extrapolation models. These expressions take into consideration the fact that there is a probabilistic aspect to the problem. The algorithm proposed by Considering that The number of degrees of freedom to use while reading the Student's Solving Eq. It should be noted that the value of   It should be noted that a precision index of 1.0 can be reached only theoretically. An infinite number of specimens have to be tested, which means that the entire population would be tested. Under these circumstances, the observed mean and the observed standard deviation are the true mean and the true standard deviation, and the confidence interval is 100%. To determine the confidence interval characterizing the mean value of a mechanical property when the number of tests conducted has been determined arbitrarily, Eq. Once the tests are conducted, the value of variables in the right-hand side of Eq. The value of A simple solution to this problem is presented in Deformability properties are used to predict deformations of rock structures and the resulting displacements. Monitoring and predicting load on support systems or settlement of foundations are examples where displacements are required. The displacement between two points of a rock structure is the result of integrating the strain components occurring along a line joining the two points. If the displacement between the two points is divided by the distance separating them, then the mean strain between the points is obtained. Hence, the displacement prediction can be made using the mean deformability of the rock mass. This is acceptable when the rock mass is assumed to be linearly elastic. Most of the extrapolation models found in the literature accept this assumption. From a practical standpoint, only the observed mean deformability value If the number of tests conducted was such that a selected precision index To illustrate how to use the DPV Assuming that the RMR of the rock mass is a deterministic variable, lower and upper bounds of the rock mass Young's modulus However, if the rock mass RMR is considered to be a random variable, its variability and confidence interval should be taken into account in determining the bounding values of the true mean of the rock mass Young's modulus. Showing how this should be done is beyond the scope of this paper. In order to show the pertinence of Eqs. The 10 simulations were made first to determine the minimum sample size using the optimization algorithm proposed by As can be seen from Under normal circumstances, the true mean and true standard deviation of the population are not known, but in order to perform the Monte Carlo simulations, these parameters were required and thus known a priori. This allows expressing the practical deformability values calculated using Eqs. To illustrate the fact that it is impossible to predict a priori precisely the number of specimens to be tested to attain a given precision index and a specific confidence interval, simulation L2 was carried further on to reach successively precision indices of 1.35, 1.20, and 1.15. The results obtained are presented in The evolution of both the observed mean value and of the bound values of the true mean interval as a function of the precision index can also be seen from For a given precision index, reaching a higher confidence interval would not reduce the span between the lower and the upper bounds of the true mean but would require performing a greater number of tests. As presented by Parameters Considering that for a structure to be stable, the strength of a material must not be exceeded at points where the stress state would satisfy the failure criterion, one question arises: What strength value should the rock engineer use for his or her design? The answer to this question leads to statistical inference, when the strength properties are considered random variables. In order to perform the required calculations, the engineer must first establish a stability probability he or she assumes acceptable for the design. In civil constructions, the instability probability must be very low, public safety being at stake. In mining excavations, since only trained and knowledgeable personnel have access to the workings, instability probabilities may be higher. When the stability probability (nonfailure probability) is given, the strength property values to consider in the stability analyses are obtained from the lower bound of the true value of the mean (first term of the right-hand member of Eq. The nonfailure probability It follows from Eq. Moreover, when the observed mean is small and the observed standard deviation is large, a nonnegligible fraction of the Gaussian probability density function may be in the negative portion of the abscissa. Consequently, the maximum To illustrate how to use the practical strength value obtained from Eq. If the Hoek and Brown rock mass parameter To illustrate the characteristics of the results given by Eq.  The first five columns of In the present paper, the true mean and the true standard deviation are assumed to be known (this was a requirement for performing the simulations) and it is of interest to express the practical strength values calculated with Eq. Knowing the true mean allows calculating the true nonfailure probability of the practical strength values obtained from Eq. The results of these calculations are presented in column (10) of The data presented in To show this trend more specifically, Examining the probabilities presented in column (10) of The calculations giving the results shown in The observed mean/practical strength value ratios could have been added to There are situations in which the rock engineer is looking for instability. The rock strength must then be exceeded at critical points of the rock structure. Designing undercuts or mining with block caving are examples of such requirements. Rock blasting is another example for which the instability or failure is required. When the instability probability (failure probability) is chosen, the mechanical property value to use in the stability calculations is known as the practical value and is also obtained from the observed mean and standard deviation. The practical value ensuring a given instability probability can be written as ( As for Eq. Practical strength values obtained from Eq. Various calculations were done using the data and results of the three set of 10 simulations to which Column (9) of It should be recalled that, in practice, the true mean is unknown and such calculations cannot be done.   The true probabilities reported in column (10) of A failure probability of 75% has been considered in the calculations giving the results shown in The calculations giving the results shown in It has been assumed that the laboratory test results leading to the means and the standard deviations used for the various simulations, the results of which are presented in this paper, follow normal distributions. Goodness-of-fit tests performed by When seeking stability, use of the Gaussian probability density function has a drawback when the observed mean is low and the standard deviation is high. As previously mentioned, in such conditions, large fractions of the Gaussian pdf are on the negative side of the abscissa, which might correspond to negative PSV if too large Obviously, as shown in the present paper, the observed standard deviation (or the observed coefficient of variation) is an important factor in determining rock mechanical property practical values. When the rock properties show characteristics of regionalized random variables, the sampling grid used to provide specimens for testing should ensure that the distance between sampling points is sufficient to avoid having a spatial correlation between the test results. If such a correlation exists, the observed standard deviation is underestimated. The minimum distance between sampling points, which allows the sample values to be uncorrelated, gives the highest possible variance. This distance, called lag in geostatistics, is obtained from the variogram ( The number of test results required to satisfy both a selected precision index and a specified confidence interval might be considered to be unacceptable for various reasons. For example, this could be the situation for the cases reported in (  This paper proposes a procedure that takes into account the random aspect of the rock mechanical properties measured in the laboratory, when dealing with extrapolation models that lead to rock mass mechanical properties. Ideally, the number of specimens tested to assess the value of a given rock mechanical property should be determined following a procedure like the one suggested by In addition, mathematical expressions leading to numerical values for deformability and strength properties to be substituted into extrapolation models are proposed in the paper. These expressions take into consideration the number of specimens tested, the precision index selected, the confidence interval reached, the observed mean, and the observed standard deviation. To illustrate the major trends shown by these suggested mathematical expressions for the determination of the practical value, the results of four sets of 10 simulations done using the Monte Carlo technique are reported. Although the present paper suggests how laboratory test data should be considered, it is emphasized that it only deals with statistical concepts and it is up to the engineer to select appropriate rock parameters and extrapolation models best suited for his or her design. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the National Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada (grant OGP0003412) for supporting part of this research. The authors also thank H.J. Pincus for the helpful suggestions he made on the original manuscript. Let us assume that five specimens of a given rock type were tested in a laboratory. The calculated mean value of the test results is 122.7 MPa and the calculated standard deviation is 27.3 MPa. To determine the confidence interval ( Assuming that If linear interpolation is considered to be unacceptable, one can use second-degree interpolation or even Microsoft Excel Student's Let us determine a practical strength value by assuring a probability of nonfailure of 70%—PSV(70%)—for the data of the previous example. Eq. The number of degree of freedom is 4 ( All the values of the parameters appearing in Eq. If, instead of referring to pdf tables, one uses Microsoft Excel statistical functions, one would find that The maximum value for Let us assume that 40 MPa is arbitrarily chosen as a nonfailure PSV for the data of the examples previously presented. To determine the probability of nonfailure characterizing this value, one has to refer to Eq. Solving, one finds If one uses Microsoft Excel normal distribution function to determine the value of If 10 MPa had been arbitrarily chosen as a PSV(