The effect of mechanical activation on the atmospheric pressure leaching of a lateritic nickel ore was investigated to develop a superior alternative. Under the influence of mechanical activation, certain physico-chemical changes were observed. Accelerated leaching kinetics and less sulfuric acid consumption were found as the most beneficial effects of mechanical activation. 80.6% Ni and 84.5% Co in leach were obtained with the mechanically activated sample after 2h of leaching in 30% H2SO4 at 85°C and 1/2.5 solid/liquid ratio (w/w). When non-activated sample was leached under the same conditions, similar metal extractions could be obtained after 8h of leaching. Finally, a process flow sheet was developed including mechanical activation of the laterite, agitation leaching, iron precipitation step, and nickel-cobalt solvent extraction.Nowadays, due to the declining reserves of sulfide type nickel ores, there is a growing interest in laterite processing. Lateritic nickel ores, which have low nickel grade and complex mineralogy, constitute 70% of the world nickel resources ( Goethite (α-FeOOH) can dissolve in sulfuric acid medium as Fe In industry, both pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical methods are applied for laterite processing. While energy intensive steps such as drying, calcination, and smelting employed in the pyrometallurgical flow sheet, the hydrometallurgical methods consist of atmospheric leaching (AL), high pressure acid leaching (HPAL), and the Caron process. Among these, while the Caron process involves drying, calcination, and ammoniacal leaching steps, HPAL needs high pressure and temperature within autoclaves. The disadvantages such as high capital expenditure and energy consumption make these two processes less attractive. Therefore, the AL methods – agitation and heap leaching – are thought to be feasible in nickel extraction from the laterites. But higher acid consumptions, slower extraction kinetics, problem of the residue volume in agitation leaching, and less permeability in heap leaching are the challenges to improve the AL methods ( In order to overcome these difficulties, researchers have tried to find other solutions. However, increase in temperature, leaching time, and redox potential, addition of various substances, and pre-treatment of laterites led to higher sulfuric acid consumptions and/or high iron content in the pregnant leach solution ( Mechanical activation, which is not just fine grinding, involves physicochemical changes in bulk and surface properties of the material. However, the aim of fine grinding is just size reduction and it has an intermediate position between coarse grinding and mechanical activation ( The mechanical activation process results in an increase in the structural disorder in the solid and consequent increase in energy and reactivity of the solid. Fresh and newly exposed surfaces can also result in enhanced reactivity; besides phase transformations and various chemical reactions including oxidation-reduction and decomposition etc. In order to analyze the mechanically activated materials, various methods such as specific surface area measurement, particle size and morphology analyses, and X-ray diffraction analysis are applied for characterization ( By means of mechanical activation, reduction in leaching temperature and time, increase in dissolution rate of metals, and formation of water soluble compounds can be achieved ( Mechanical activation of bauxite ore is used to develop an environmentally friendly Bayer process in which losses of soda and alumina in the red mud are minimized. In addition, this process improved the rheology and settling properties of red mud (       The improvement in nickel and magnesium extractions from serpentine minerals using sulfuric and hydrochloric acid solutions after mechanical activation has been investigated by various researchers (  The OH group in the goethite structure was released due to an increase in temperature during milling. Mechanical activation resulted in dehydroxilation of goethite in nickeliferous laterite (   The ball mill, planetary mill, vibratory mill, attritor (stirring ball mill), pin mill, and rolling mill are used for mechanical activation applications ( In this study, the effect of mechanical activation of laterite in an eccentric vibratory mill on its atmospheric leaching was examined. In this scope, the mechanical activation time and leaching conditions were optimized. Subsequently, the whole process of lateritic nickel ore leaching was completed by applying the iron precipitation and solvent extraction (SX) steps, in order to obtain pure nickel and cobalt pregnant solutions. Distinct from the other studies conducted on laterites about mechanical activation, in this study, a whole process including iron-nickel-cobalt separations was investigated in detail using the eccentric type vibratory ball mill before leaching. The use of eccentric type ball mill provided an increase in the amplitude of the vibrations, which enhanced the impact mode of mechanical activation on the laterite ore. While the nickel was associated mostly with limonite group in our study, the tests were performed considering industrial applications in terms of solids ratio in leaching, iron precipitation, and solvent extraction. The lateritic nickel ore sample taken from the Çaldağ (Manisa, Turkey) was used in this study. The chemical analysis of the ore as carried out using PerkinElmer-OPTIMA8300 inductively coupled plasma spectroscopy (ICP) and Thermo Fisher- QUANT'X EDXRF X-Ray fluorescence spectroscopy (XRF) is given in In terms of mineralogy, the nickel and cobalt bearing phases in the laterite sample were found in amorphous structure and contained clays. These phases in the lateritic nickel sample belonged to limonite group (Fe hydroxides), Fe-Mg hydrosilicate, Fe-Cr-Al hydrosilicate, Mg scarnclay, Fe-Mg clay, high Si clay, Fe oxy/hydroxide, chromite-spinel (CrFeAlMg), and Fe-Al clay. On the other side, hematite, magnetite, chromite group minerals, quartz, feldspar, clay minerals (chlorite, montmorillonite, smectite, halloysite), calcite, dolomite, and muscovite were present as the gangue minerals. Nearly 20% of the ore was composed of quartz, which was primarily in the form of opal and chalcedony. In addition, by a combination of image analysis employing atomic number contrast imaging (from back-scattered electron – or BSE-signal intensity) and Energy Dispersive Spectrometry (EDS) using Bruker 5010 SDD detectors, minerals and other attributes are directly measured on automated SEM systems. The BSE images can be seen in The quantitative evaluation of the ore sample, which was an inference of the data obtained from modal and chemical analyses, is given in The mechanical activation of the lateritic nickel sample was performed in an industrial eccentric vibratory ball mill ESM 656–0.5 The ore sample was subjected to mechanical activation as a pre-treatment method before atmospheric agitation leaching. After determining the optimum mechanical activation time, the mechanically activated sample was used in the leaching tests, in which the effect of H After neutralizing the pregnant leach solution (PLS), iron precipitation test was conducted in 0.25 The remaining nickel and cobalt bearing solution was subjected to solvent extraction experiments in order to separate nickel and cobalt. The tests were carried out by mixing desired volumes of solutions in 100 The distribution of the particle size and specific surface area of the non-activated (0 The BSE (back-scattered electron) analysis was performed on the mechanically activated samples, too, in order to reveal the effect of mechanical activation. When the BSE images given in On the other side, the effect of mechanical activation can be observed from the XRD patterns given in In addition, modal mineralogy analysis was also performed on the mechanically activated sample in order to reveal the effect of mechanical activation. The comparison of the non-activated and mechanically activated samples is demonstrated in It was observed that the amount of nickel and cobalt bearing clayey and amorphous Fe-Mg hydrosilicate phases decreased. But, formation of clay like compounds was observed. In this case, the mineralogical structure, which was composed of Fe-Mg hydrosilicates and determined as serpentine in XRD analysis, underwent a phase transformation. It is thought that a type of clay (Fe-Mg clay – According to  Also, during the transformation of the phases, it may be suggested that the nickel got exposed and became ready to be dissolved. In terms of oxyhydroxide minerals, although it was difficult to make any mineralogy determination on amorphous phases, it is thought that goethite also lost its crystal water in some degree with the effect of stress and external forces during mechanical activation. The ball collisions caused local temperature pulses in the mechanically activated sample. According to In order to investigate the effect of mechanical activation on leaching of laterite, non-activated (0 It was observed that Ni, Fe, and Co dissolutions were completed after 2 In this part of the study, different solids to liquid ratios by weight (1/4 and 1/2.5 The effect of different H Besides, the results given in Thus, 80.6% Ni, 72.2% Fe, and 84.5% Co were extracted from 2 To compare the results in terms of the milling effect, the non-activated sample was also leached under similar conditions: 1/2.5 S/L ratio (w/w), 30% H Iron precipitation is applied in lateritic nickel processing to remove iron from the PLS before nickel and cobalt separation. In this study, iron precipitation was carried out using the para-goethite precipitation technique. However, the PLS required neutralization before iron precipitation, since its pH value was below 1. The PLS was neutralized by addition of raw ore sample at room temperature and 1/4 S/L ratio (w/w). It was observed that pH was stabilized at 2.1 after 1.5 After the iron precipitation, the precipitate was dried and analyzed by XRD. Based on the literature, ferrihydrite – Fe After the removal of iron, the solution contained 3.65 The cobalt extraction runs according to Eq. According to the results given in Based on the results obtained in this study, the beneficial effect of mechanical activation on atmospheric agitation leaching of a lateritic nickel ore was established; acceleration of the leaching kinetics reduced leaching time from 8 It was postulated that during mechanical activation, the decomposition (dehydroxylation) of nickel and cobalt bearing hydrosilicate phases made nickel and cobalt more amenable to leaching. After mechanical activation, new amorphous phases were created, which resulted in acceleration of the metal dissolution kinetics. In the proposed process flow-sheet for this laterite ore, mechanical activation is suggested as a pretreatment before atmospheric agitation leaching. Even though vibratory milling adds to extra cost due extra energy consumption, the acceleration in the leaching kinetics of nickel and cobalt results in a significant advantage in terms of operational cost. Also, it should be mentioned that the leaching tests were carried out considering industrial scale operations, where the solids ratio of the pulp was 1/2.5 In this study, the effect of mechanical activation on agitated atmospheric leaching of a lateritic nickel ore sample was investigated. The mechanical activation of the lateritic nickel sample was performed in an industrial eccentric vibratory ball mill ESM 656–0.5