Explosive weapons remain the leading cause of death, injury, and disability to combatants in battle. Recent conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan have seen considerable advances in the surgical knowledge and skills needed to save life and limb of multiply injured casualties. Global terrorism has seen explosive weapons move from battlefield to urban centres, often with devastating effects.
                  Orthopaedic training prepares for the management of general civilian trauma scenarios, but blast injury pathophysiology and management is rarely considered. It is important that future trauma surgeons have a working knowledge of blast injury and how it affects the musculoskeletal system so that they can manage such patients.Explosive devices account for the majority of deaths and injuries in combat. Recent world events have highlighted that civilian surgeons in densely populated urban areas, can be expected to manage these complex injuries in multiple casualty situations. An explosive is a material capable of producing an explosion using its own energy. Upon detonation the explosive is converted into a hot (up to 6000 °C), high pressure (35 × 10 The blast wave energy dissipates in an inverse proportion to the third power of the distance from the detonation point. The components of the blast wave that are responsible for the pathophysiological effects on biological tissue are the amplitude of the peak pressure, the impulse (the time integral of pressure), and the duration of the positive phase overpressure. It has also been proposed that the dynamic overpressure of the detonation products (blast wind) and thermal energy released in the explosion contribute to blast injury. Blast injuries can classified according to the mechanism by which they are produced and these are summarized below Blast waves, interacting with the body, transfer energy at interfaces between tissues of differing acoustic impedance. Hull (1992) Secondary blast injury is caused by penetrating trauma from materials within the explosive, fragments from its casing or debris energized by the explosion. These projectiles can cause fracture either directly or indirectly. High-energy fragments colliding with bone typically result in a highly comminuted fracture with extensive periosteal stripping. In addition, these high-energy transfer wounds are associated with significant contamination which, in conjunction with avascular bone, increases the risk of long-term infective complications. This has been reflected in military studies, for example Brown et al. (2010) Indirect fractures can be caused by a high-energy fragment passing in close proximity to bone. A propelled fragment colliding with the body directly damages soft tissue in its path and, if sufficiently energized, generates a radial high pressure compression wave in the tissues just as an explosion does in the atmosphere, as described above. The wave creates a temporary cavity of sub-atmospheric pressure as the fragment traverses, which pulls in external debris, increasing the risk of wound contamination. The sizes of the temporary and permanent cavities are determined by the kinetic energy of the causative fragment and the nature of the tissue through which it passes. If the victim is situated close to the seat of the explosion, the effects of the blast wave and detonation products occur almost instantaneously. Once bone has fractured due to the blast wave impact, the detonation products expose surrounding tissue to continuing destructive forces. Nechaev et al. (1994), Zone I, closest to the seat of the explosion, is characterized by traumatic amputation with widespread destruction of all tissues. There is significant contamination and, based on the degree of soft tissue injury, surgical amputations performed through Zone I are considered non-viable. Within Zone II, arteriograms performed in animal studies demonstrate that there is persistent impairment of blood flow. Of note, focal areas of damage are seen, localized near neurovascular bundles and osteofascial planes, suggesting that the transmission of the blast wave is through these structures. The main features of injuries in Zone III are avulsion of arterioles, impaired venous return and reactive changes in the axons of peripheral nerves. Serial biopsies taken from Zone III, revealed that in the first 5 days there remains extensive tissue oedema with pronounced necrosis of the muscle margins. From days 6–14, biopsy of the peripheral nerves revealed hyperplasia of the Schwann cells and the formation of traumatic neuromas. Based on these findings, Nechaev et al. (1994) Tertiary orthopaedic blast injuries occur as a result of bodily displacement of the casualty or impact against solid structures. Kress et al. (1995) The displacement of casualties by the blast wind can result in severe soft tissue damage due to crush injuries caused by impacting solid objects, but also significant injury secondary to bone fracture. A critical effect of tertiary blast is the development of compartment syndrome. This is a limb-threatening condition observed when perfusion pressure falls below intra-compartmental pressure in an osteofascial space. Bleeding, oedema or inflammation may increase the pressure within a compartment, and a vicious cycle can arise that ultimately leads to ischaemic necrosis within 12 h. In a study from the USA, Ritenour et al. (2008) If a person is driven against a solid object or is trapped under debris, crush injuries can occur. The extent of the muscle injury is dependent on the magnitude and the duration of the force applied. If the crushing force is applied for less than 6 h the damage is a direct result of mechanical compression. The recent conflict in Iraq and ongoing military operations in Afghanistan have seen huge advances in the understanding and management of severe lower limb trauma sustained on the battlefield. Military surgeons rotating through the field hospital at Camp Bastion are exposed to a significantly higher volume of complex cases than they would see in their usual place of work. All deployed surgeons from the UK have a National Health Service (NHS) practice in trauma and the skills learnt should be transferrable across to civilian trauma practice. The mechanism of injury in the battlefield has changed over the years, with the improvised explosive device (IED) becoming the weapon of choice for insurgents. The patient with open fractures is assessed in the operating theatre as soon as possible, where surgery and resuscitation can occur simultaneously. The wounds are dressed with a topical negative pressure dressing (RENASYS EZ Smith & Nephew Healthcare Ltd). Second look surgery takes place approximately 24–48 h post injury. The wound will frequently have evolved and meticulous wound assessment and debridement by an experienced consultant-delivered orthoplastic team must again be carried out. Fracture fixation follows AO principles with the anatomical reduction of joints, the correction of rotation and the restoration of length ( The spectrum of orthopaedic interventions available to manage limb fractures has the broad aim of reducing suffering, limiting bed days and enhancing functional outcome for the individual. Familiar robust and traditional constructions are used, but have often been adapted for use in this cohort of young, contaminated, frequently critically ill patients with injuries that are not isolated. Traditional surgical prescriptions for individual fracture management: plate, nail, frame, or ex fix, can be theatre-, resource- and time-consuming. Performing a series of “ideal for each fracture” procedures is often impossible due to on-table deterioration; performing them in parallel can be confounded by simple space constraints. Where prolonged periods of critical illness and ITU support are certain, there can be infrequent and unpredictable opportunities for planned reconstruction surgery. Where five co-existing injuries would each individually have a major effect on functional outcome, treating four in a traditional manner, but leaving one untreated (for whatever reason) would give major functional disadvantage. By modifying standard treatment to all five injuries in a way that is “better than not at all” there is no untreated injury that lowers the functional ceiling. Soft tissue envelopes that are open due to injury or fasciotomy and fragile due to energy laid down from projectile or blast are very vulnerable. Every effort is made to bring the skeleton to an anatomical position in order to reduce the volume of dead space within the injury zone and to bring muscles that are still attached to bony fragments back to their anatomical positions; muscles in the correct place are likely to optimize long-term function. Early reduction of fractures to an anatomical position takes advantage of the early healing response of bone, allows adherence of stripped soft tissues to the bone and allows early primary repair of nerves, tendons and the like over a stable local skeleton. Where intramedullary nails are indicated the authors favour fracture reduction under direct vision using existing wounds and the use of undreamed, narrow devices to best preserve intramedullary vascularity. This reduces operating time and avoids the systemic effect of reaming in a critically ill patient ( It is essential to give meticulous respect to the tissues and use every technique possible to minimize further surgical stripping of soft tissues from each other and from bone. Wherever possible, access given by the injury is used as the window to approach the fracture and stabilize it without dissection of intact soft tissues. Further reduction of soft tissue stripping can be achieved by downsizing the choice of implant. In a simple long bone fracture, after thoroughly washing the ends of the bone until they will never be cleaner, one or several lag screws may be used to oppose clean surfaces. The construct can then be neutralized with an external fixator distant to the zone of injury instead of by a plate within it. Reducing the volume of metal within the open wound reduces the surface area for biofilm formation and can allow simpler wound closure techniques to be used ( The use of therapeutic/suppressive antibiotics is essential. The duration of prescription is tailored to the individual patient's physiology as well as the virulence of the infective organisms. This is facilitated by developing close working relationships with the microbiologists who form an integral part of the multidisciplinary team. Blast injury, particularly that produced by improvised explosive devices, can produce a heterogeneous mixture of sharp, blunt and penetrating trauma, which may affect the entire body. These injuries are of discontinuous distribution. Manifestations of primary blast injury include fractures, amputations, crush injury, burns, cuts, lacerations, acute thrombotic occlusion of arteries, air embolism–induced injury, compartment syndrome, and others. Secondary injuries are the most common extremity blast injuries. Like primary injuries, they may necessitate limb amputation, they can be life-threatening, and can be associated with severe contamination. Tertiary blast injuries of the extremity may result in traumatic amputations, fractures, and severe soft tissue injuries. Quaternary injuries are most often burns. The presence of multiple injuries often leads to competing priorities of care and these are discussed at daily planning meetings by the ‘Role 4’ multidisciplinary team. The principles of war surgery: arrest of haemorrhage; thorough wound debridement; temporary stabilization of fractures; removal of contamination and foreign bodies; copious wound lavage and administration of antibiotics are well recognized. In the reconstruction of blast injuries a hierarchy of management goals exists, these are to achieve: a clean non-contaminated wound; the removal of all dead tissue; timely coverage of exposed tendon and bone; timely coverage of open fractures; provision of robust, well vascularized coverage over nerve grafts and musculotendinous units, and, provision of robust soft-tissue coverage of amputation stumps. It is usually not possible to reliably debride highly contaminated blast wounds in a single sitting, and severe infective complications can result from premature flap closure of open fractures in these injuries. It is important to delay soft-tissue reconstruction until the wounds are macroscopically clean, and remain so on two successive washouts 48 h apart with no physiological signs of sepsis. The timing of reconstruction must be dictated by the clinical condition of the patient: a comprehensive reconstructive plan for each patient must be produced, balancing any competing reconstructive priorities. This plan must make the most advantageous use of often limited reconstructive options available. The decision of whether to embark upon immediate complex reconstruction in an acutely sick patient or to obtain wound closure by simpler methods, deferring complex reconstruction until the patient is stabilized, poses a challenging clinical conundrum for the treating clinicians. To aid this process it is worthwhile to ask three questions: What can the patient tolerate?, What must be done? and What can wait? In general, in the multiply injured blast patient, it is wise to limit operative time, keeping reconstruction as simple as possible. However, complex microsurgical reconstruction should be considered when there is a clear benefit to be had from early (rather than delayed) reconstruction and the patient is physiologically well enough to tolerate prolonged surgery. In selecting flap options, every effort should be made to minimize donor morbidity in the often already disabled patient. Local flap options are often not available due to extensive, discontinuous multiple fragmentation injuries. As blast wounds may take a considerable length of time before they are clean enough to close, it is possible to delay locoregional flaps, avoiding prolonged microsurgical operations. All patients should undergo angiography prior to free tissue transfer as fragmentation injuries to proximal pedicles may be present and thrombosis of recipient vessels can occur. The nature of blast-fragmentation injury means it is often not possible to get proximal to the zone of trauma and microanastamosis must be performed within the zone of trauma. However, if blood flow is good and the intima shows no sign of trauma, free tissue transfer can be safe and reliable. Flap selection is a challenge in young, fit patients. Potential donor site morbidity should be a major factor in flap selection. Low donor morbidity flaps should be first choice in the multiply injured patient, avoiding core stability muscles such as latissimus dorsi or rectus abdominis free flaps if at all possible. Shoulder extension strength deteriorates permanently after removal of part of the latissimus dorsi muscle, even though subjective morbidity is minimal. Similarly, there is a clinically significant functional donor-site defect when measuring abdominal wall functional status following segmental rectus abdominis harvest. In an amputee these functional deficits could become significant. Bilateral amputees expend almost three times more energy than non-amputees when walking on prostheses and pectoral girdle strength is of great importance for the lower limb amputee, who will spend much of his time in a wheelchair. The anterolateral thigh flap, if available, is an ideal fasciocutaneous flap ( Skin substitutes may be safely used in blast injured tissue following adequate debridement. Integra (INTEGRA™ Bilayer Matrix Wound Dressing), both bilayer and single-layer, can be used and gives a softer, more pliable result when compared with simple split skin grafting, with less wound contraction. The successful management of patients who have sustained injuries secondary to blast relies on the coordinated response of a large multidisciplinary team. A thorough working knowledge of both the physical and physiological effects of blast is the cornerstone of the reconstructive process. Patients need to be aware that the process of bone and soft tissue healing and functional rehabilitation takes much longer than is observed with simpler injury patterns. 