In order to sustain food production in a resource-scarce scenario it is vital that maximum utility is derived from available reserves while simultaneously promoting their recycling. Further, substantial value can be sourced if approaches are devised that utilize resources that were erstwhile considered wastes. To look towards alternative fertilization techniques, this study suggests a novel fertilizer combination of two waste products: low-grade Rock Phosphate (RP) tailing and human urine. It is demonstrated that the combined use of urine (nitrogen) and low-grade RP (phosphorous) can indeed act as a substitute to synthetic inorganic fertilizers. Crop trials were carried out for Cicer arietinum using RP enriched urine at various application rates on a red loamy soil (pH of 8.11). Observations made from plant growth response indicated that direct application of this fertilizer combination resulted in performance equivalent to mineral fertilizer Di-Ammonium Phosphate added in the same ratio. The use of RP enriched urine thus holds a lot of promise for simultaneous waste minimization, waste utilization, and improved resource-use efficiency.The continual harvesting of crops from arable land for human consumption affects the natural supply and balance of nutrients in soil. In order to ensure long-term soil fertility and good harvest, cultivated fields require timely addition of soil improving supplements. Commercial agricultural production has achieved this through the external application of synthetic inorganic fertilizers. In recent years, urea and ammonium nitrate have been by far, the most popular sources of nitrogen (N) for soil supplements in crop fertilization. However, in comparison to other N sources, ammonium nitrate is relatively expensive and its production is likely to decline over the coming decades ( Moreover, highlighting the inherent dependency of food production on soil supplements like P, in an alarming forecast, To this effect, human urine has been advocated as a safe, high quality–low cost alternative fertilizer that can provide a rich source of nutrients to supplement agricultural productivity ( However, the large concentration of N in the urine results in a lower P:N and K:N ratio than most inorganic fertilizers manufactured for commercial agricultural practices. This necessitates the external addition of P and K. P is the second limiting nutrient after N in soils that influences and determines crop growth. However, the cost of applying conventional water-soluble P fertilizers like single super phosphate (SSP) and triple super phosphate (TSP) in developing countries is high as their manufacturing requires import of high-grade RP and Sulfur ( In a resource-scarce scenario recycling is of paramount significance. Resource-use efficiency is another dimension to consider in addition to recycling. Acknowledging the need to sustain the use of our available resources, it is vital that maximum utility is derived from what is available. In this vein, devising new ways to utilize resources that were erstwhile considered unusable or whose production and application were considered unfeasible could be an approach. Both low-grade RP and human urine are examples of such resources. This study presents a novel approach to increase soil fertility through the combined application of low-grade RP and human urine. Although the use of RP-enriched composts has been the subject of recent studies ( Human urine was obtained from twenty healthy young male volunteers (in their early twenties) with well-balanced diets. Fresh urine samples were collected in plastic air-tight containers and refrigerated at −20 Plant growth studies were performed at the VIT University Research Farm, Vellore, India (12°55 Prior to the treatments the unamended soil (control), was characterized for its major properties (see The treatments investigated and the responses of plant growth parameters have been summarized in With phosphate input of 30 kg It is acknowledged that the objective of the study is not merely to compare the agronomic yield of the waste-based RP enriched urine and commercially available DAP. Instead, the outcomes illustrated here from the crop trials are indicative of the potential that can be harnessed from waste resources such as low-grade RP and human urine towards providing fertility to depleted soils. A relative agronomic efficiency of 1.2, calculated based on experimental observations carried out in 8 replications confirms the feasibility of employing these waste resources as recycled crop nutrients ( In a resource-dependent yet resource-scarce society, it is vital that processes or approaches are developed to use waste resources. To this effect, the present study demonstrated an approach to fertilize crops through the combined use of two waste resources; low-grade RP and human urine. Through the observation of various plant growth parameters it can be concluded that significant potential exists for such fertilizers to act as alternatives to inorganic fertilizers currently in use. This was validated through the high performance observed in response parameters of The use of human urine in agriculture through urine diversion and its subsequent utilization as a N source for enhancing productivity has a two-fold advantage; it reduces health risks to humans by diverting urine from water systems where it is a pollutant, while recycling nutrients back quickly into food systems ( The authors wish to acknowledge Dr. Prabhu Linghiah of Eshidiya Mines, Jordan Phosphate Mines Company PLC, Jordan for his insights and discussion during the study and for providing the RP tailings. The authors also acknowledge the financial support provided by