The possibility of recovering residual amine present in the water phase of tailings pulps of the reverse cationic flotation of iron ore was investigated. The samples collected in the tailings from mechanical and tank cells and also from flotation columns were kept under rest to promote the separation between the water and the solid particles. The water was used for determination of the residual amine concentration and for flotation tests. The residual amine concentration was determined through indirect quantitative analysis using a spectrophotometer. The flotation tests were performed using, separately, each tailings water and a composition of them. Four sets of tests were carried out. The first three sets indicated the strong possibility of reusing the amine present in the water. As a consequence, the dosage of amine was reduced and the residual amine concentration of three out of four collection points was below the detection limit in the sampling for the last set.The plant practice of the reverse cationic flotation of iron ores started in Brazil in 1977. Starch is used as depressant for iron minerals and amine acts as quartz collector and also as frother. Amine is an expensive reagent and its consumption tends to be higher with the increasing contents of quartz in the ores being processed. Controlling the costs related to amines represents a major challenge for the process engineering team in charge of the iron ore concentrators. Samarco uses approximately 1500 tonnes per year of amine, at a production rate of 16 Most of the amine added to the flotation circuit is discarded to tailings ponds either adsorbed onto quartz particles or dissolved in the water fractions of the tailings. The reuse of part of this amine combines economical issues with environmental targets. Despite the lack of evidences of toxicity of the amines used in ores flotation (  Nevertheless, experimental results show that extreme conditions are not necessarily required for desorption.   The topic of residual amine in flotation waters was addressed by The amine concentration in aqueous phases was determined as a function of the absorbance in a UV visible spectrophotometer. Two calibration curves were plotted based on an ether monoamine and an ether diamine, manufactured by Clariant and used in the plant practice. Tailings samples were collected in the four circuits of the concentrator: mechanical cells (76% of the total tailings), tank cells (10%), recleaner columns (8%), and slimes columns (6%). It is worthwhile recalling that in reverse flotation the tailings consist of the fraction collected at the top of the cell. The tailings samples were left under rest for 12 The iron ore sample for the laboratory flotation experiments was composed from the feed of the first stage of concentration (mechanical cells) during a three months operation period. The overall sample was homogenised and quartered. The experiments were performed in a Wemco laboratory machine, operated at 1300 In a first set of experiments, amine from residual water was the only source of collector. Later, experiments were performed with the addition of amine dosages of 20 The results of the tests with water containing residual amine were compared with those from the standard test, performed with distilled water and amine solution prepared in the laboratory. The control parameter was silica content in the concentrate. The time sequence of the concentration of residual amine in the tailings of each individual circuit is illustrated in Results of standard tests, illustrating the effect of amine dosage on silica content and iron recovery in the concentrate are presented in Results of silica content in the concentrate in tests performed with residual water from the mechanical cells circuit, in the absence of extra amine, are presented in Results from the test carried out in July 2006 (residual amine dosage 21.0 Results of silica content in the concentrate in tests performed with residual water from the tank cells circuit, in the absence of extra amine, are presented in The results are erratic and it is difficult to explain the lack of correlation of the results of the tests carried out in May and July 2006. All experiments were performed in duplicate and the results are reliable. A possible explanation for the poor performance of the residual water containing 73 Results of silica content in the concentrate in tests performed with residual water from the recleaner flotation columns circuit, in the absence of extra amine, are presented in A thick froth layer was observed on the top of the tailings of the recleaner column flotation circuit even after a 12 Results of silica content in the concentrate in tests performed with residual water from the slimes flotation columns circuit, in the absence of extra amine, are presented in The sharp drop in the concentration of residual amine was a consequence of the decrease of the addition level of collector from 200 The results in The next series of results corresponds to tests with the use of the composition water plus extra amine solution. The values plotted in abscissa correspond to extra amine. The results of standard tests are also plotted for the sake of comparison. The composition water enhances the performance of the amine solution suggesting the reuse of tailings water as a route to reduce the amine dosage.   As expected, the very low content of residual amine in the residual water did not suggest that its use would lead to a decrease in the collector addition level. The difference in performance between the composition water collected in 2005 and those collected in 2006 may be due to circuit changes in the concentrator. The tank cells were moved from ahead of the regrinding mills to after this stage, generating ultrafines that were entrapped in the water phase, impairing its reuse.  There is a strong indication that the addition of residual water itself does not impair the flotation performance suggesting the possibility of reuse of water from the tailings fractions, since they do not contain fines from regrinding stage. Residual amine, if present in the water phase from flotation tailings, may be reused for flotation. The effectiveness of the previously used amine depends on its concentration and is impaired by the presence of ultrafines. The reuse of water from mechanical cells tailings, even at low amine concentration, does not impair the flotation process, representing a significant benefit, for this fraction contains 76% of the total water in tailings from different circuits.