The permeability of coal reservoir is dynamically changed during CO2 enhance coalbed methane recovery projects (CO2-ECBM) and is controlled by the two main influencing factors: effective stress and CO2 adsorption. Six coal core samples parallel and vertical bedding plane directions were drilled, which were then adopted to conduct the permeability tests under conditions of cyclic loading/unloading and supercritical CO2 saturation. Results show that the permeability is depended on the coal rank, the middle rank coal possesses the highest initial permeability because of its moderate compaction and largely generated cleats during the coalification. The permeability is anisotropic, manifesting in the permeability in parallel bedding plane direction is larger than that in the vertical bedding plane direction. The stress sensitivity coefficient and IPLRi in parallel bedding plane direction exceed that in vertical bedding plane direction, however, PALR exhibits the opposite law. Hereat, the fractures parallel to bedding plane are susceptible to the stress change and the cleats vertical to bedding plane are sensitive to the ScCO2 adsorption. In view of the irreversible permeability damage by the stress change and CO2 adsorption, experiments in this paper confirms that prefracturing can dramatically decrease the IPLRi, stress sensitivity coefficient and PALR of coal seams, which may be the potential and effective measure to enhence the injectivity of CO2 in coal seams.As an attractive approach, CO Since the 1950s, lots of experimental investigations about the relationship between the permeability and effective stress have been performed The fracture network structure is developed in coal at different degrees, which mainly serves as the flow paths for fluids Apparently, the permeability attenuation is unavoidable in CO Based on the above, in this work, coal core samples drilled in PBD and VBD were prepared to launch the permeability experiments, aiming to: a) discuss the characteristics of anisotropic permeability under influences by the effective stress and ScCO To obtain coal core samples in different ranks, coal blocks in this work were collected from the representative Xigou No. 1 coal mine, Pingdingshan No. 8 coal mine and Yuwu coal mine in China (see Located on the thrust nappe, the Fukang coalfield is affected and bounded by the Yaomoshan reverse fault and Fukang overthrust fault, which forms the principle frame of the regional geological structure. The intense fold-and-thrust tectonic deformations are commonly developed in this coalfield, accompanying with a series of strike-slip faults, reversed faults and anticlines The gathered coal blocks were cut to acquire the standard cores measuring 50 mm in diameter and 100 mm in length by a coring machine. Before samples preparation, the bedding planes and cleats were carefully distinguished, the coal core samples with different orientations were drilled along PBD and VBD. A grinder was used to manufacture reasonable parallelism and smoothness of the natural samples. The coal core preparation process has been refered to the Chinese National Standard GB/T23561.1-2009. Then the intact natural samples with no apparent fractures on the surface were selected for the laboratory analysis, as shown in Coal sample 3–0 was prepared to simulate the coal reservoir after fracturing, which was first sawed in half by a line cutting machine and then spread some quartz sand in the artificial fracture, this method was referred to Tan et al. The sketch of the experiment setup in this paper was given in The steady-state method is adopted to determine the permeability in this work. Liu et al. considered that the lowest value measured by steady-state method is around 10 To eliminate the existing moisture in coal, the coal samples were placed into a PCD-C 3000 thermostat box at 60 °C for 24 h before permeability tests. Then, according to Deng et al. To investigate the effect of loading path and cycle times on the permeability of coal samples, five loading and unloading cycles were successively conducted on coal. Specially, for each loading and unloading cycle, the confining pressure was varied by the following loading path: 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 11, 9, 7, 5 MPa (see Considering that the permeability of coal with propped fracture is quite large, the test conditions are different. During the experiment of effective stress affecting permeability, the injection pressures were 2 MPa for coal sample 3–0 and 1 MPa for coal sample 3–1, the confining pressures were 5, 7, 9, 11, 13 MPa for coal sample 3–0 and 5, 8, 11, 14, 17 MPa for coal sample 3–1; during experiment of ScCO Coal possesses a strong heterogeneity, in which the bright bands and dull bands are staggered overlay with each other in VBD (  From The test results demonstrate that permeability is anisotropic in coal. For the three coals, the permeabilities in PBD are all larger than that in VBD, which is consistent with the previous researches The permeability of coal is highly stress dependent The permeability changes before and after being saturated ScCO Generally, after loading and unloading cycles the permability can not be returned to the initial value completely, which can be described by the irreversible permeability loss rate The The cycle times of loading and unloading also influence the permeability of coal, especially for the During CO Changes of To quantificationally visualize the permeability difference after being saturated by ScCO The Apparently, the experimental result shows that the Relationship between effective stress and permeability of coal sample without and with propped fracture was shown in Relationship between ScCO The injection of CO  The initial permeability of middle rank coal is larger than low and high rank coals because of its moderate compaction and largely generated cleats during coalification. The initial permeability in PBD is larger than that in VBD, regardless of coal rank. And the increasing stress can reduce the permeability anisotropy index of coal. The stress sensitivity coefficient and After ScCO During CO This work was sponsored by the