A sensitive, rapid and robust method based on the use of stabilizer-free silver nanoparticles was developed for lead detection in honey. Silver nanoparticles were synthesized without the presence of any stabilizers using silver nitrate and sodium borohydride as precursors where the latter was applied as reducing agent. The optimization of the experimental variables (AgNO3 and NaBH4) for the formation of the nanoparticles was carried out using varying volumes of these solutions. Spectrophotometric measurements at 393nm showed a linear working range between 0.0500 and 0.167mgL−1 lead (R
                     =0.994), with limits of detection (LOD) and quantification (LOQ) of 0.0135 and 0.0451mgL−1, respectively. The proposed method proved to be a significantly sensitive mechanism for lead detection in honey samples.Honey is a natural product known to be endowed with nutritional properties and valuable therapeutic applications Pollutants, in particular, heavy metals, may be deposited directly on bees, or contaminate them indirectly through nectar, pollen or from ingested water The detection and determination of trace elements in honey essentially require the application of appropriate analytical methodologies. This determination of inorganic constituents in honey is, clearly, not a trivial task given the high level of carbohydrates present in this complex matrix and the low concentration of these analytes. Several techniques have been developed and improved for a better investigation of these compounds in honey and in food products in general. Some of these techniques that merit mentioning include: anodic redissolution voltammetry Concentrations of different heavy metals in honey produced in different locations and in different flowering have already been determined in some countries, such as Croatia For the intended purposes of our investigation, we proposed the application of a colorimetric assay technique for the determination of Pb Absorbance measurements were performed using a spectrophotometer (Model HP 8453, Hewlett Packard) equipped with a quartz cuvette (b All reagents were of analytical grade. The glassware was maintained in 10% (v/v) HNO The working solutions of AgNO Silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) were synthesized by chemical reduction of silver nitrate using sodium borohydride as a reducing agent in aqueous solution in the absence of organic stabilizers prepared via the method described by Solomon et al. After the synthesis, the obtained nanoparticles were stored in a refrigerator at 4 Borohydride is found to play a crucial role in the stabilization of silver nanoparticles. This reducing agent when present in large excessive amount increases the total ionic strength of the system besides promoting the aggregation of the nanoparticles The pH, considered a relevant factor, was likewise tested so as to verify the interference in an eventual possibility of aggregation of the silver nanoparticles obtained. The pH was changed from 9.0 to 2.5 using 0.50 Upon the optimization of the working nanoparticle, the analytical curve was constructed by adding 200 Six samples of honey, from three different flowering plants (eucalyptus, orange and grapevine), were purchased directly from a beekeeper in the city of Araraquara/SP and were used to evaluate the performance of the proposed method. Based on the method proposed by Conti and Botrè The interferences were evaluated by studying the behavior of the reaction in the presence of some metals commonly found in honey including cadmium, copper, cobalt, chromium, iron, aluminum and nickel. The concentrations, being 10 times greater than that of lead metal, were assessed under the same conditions described for the samples. After having defined some of the probable interfering ions, a study aimed at confirming the interference hypothesis was performed using the interference factor (I.F.) for each ion. The interference factor is calculated by the mathematical ratio of the absorption of the lead ion (II) to the interfering ion (ΔAbs (Pb(II) The proposed method was validated through standard addition and by investigating the possible effects associated with the matrix under study - honey. The samples were fortified with lead solution at 50, 100, 150% of the maximum concentration allowed by the legislation Flame atomic absorption spectrometry (FAAS) presents a relatively low cost and has excellent analytical performances. It is probably the most widely applied technique for the analysis of a variety of metals in foods. The conventional way to perform such determinations involves a mineralization phase in order to obtain a suitable solution to be introduced into the spectrometer. Honey samples were analyzed by FAAS as a comparative method Preliminary tests with silver nanoparticles synthesized with different volumes of AgNO Following the synthesis of the AgNPs, a stability test was performed. As can be observed in Based on the stability test, the nanoparticle number 5 was chosen as the working AgNP owing to the fact that it presented the highest stability and the greatest absorbance compared to the other nanoparticles tested. All nanoparticles were synthesized in the absence of stabilizing agents. Bittar et al. A study of the interference of the electrolyte present in the colloidal medium of the nanoparticles was performed. Based on the data obtained, we observed that the stabilization of the AgNPs is less efficient in the presence of high concentrations of the electrolyte. This can be explained by the fact that in the presence of high salt concentration, the sodium borohydride ceases to be a good stabilizing agent, thereby providing a weak steric stabilization of the silver ions The pH was evaluated starting from the original AgNP solution, which after synthesis presented pH equal to 9.2. As the pretreatment of the honey samples investigated entailed the addition of concentrated HNO Based on what was observed, we arrived at the conclusion that following the mineralization of the honey samples there was a need to correct the final solution pH to pH The merit figures of the analytical method included the limits of detection (LOD) and quantification (LOQ), precision, accuracy, and linear range. Under optimized experimental conditions, a linear response was obtained for the final lead concentrations between 0.0500 and 0.167 LOD and LOQ were determined according to IUPAC recommendations As the studies evolved, new maximum limits were established for contaminants in honey, as established by the normative instruction n In 2011, MERCOSUL established a maximum lead limit of 0.30 The study of potential interfering metals was performed considering the typical composition of the honey samples, with evaluation of the effects of seven metals commonly found in this type of matrix. By observing the values of the interference factors calculated and presented in Preliminary tests for lead quantification in honey samples were performed. It is noteworthy that none of the methods (both proposed and comparative) indicated the presence of heavy metals. As a result, we evaluated the need to perform standard addition tests on the analyzed samples. The accuracy of the proposed method was assessed by fortification tests performed on the complex honey matrix of three different flowering plants (a eucalyptus flora, an orange flora and a grapevine flora). The results obtained by The use of AgNPs for lead detection in complex honey matrix has not yet been described in the literature. Several other methods have already been used for the detection of lead as well as other trace metals in honey samples at extremely low concentrations. For instance, for Italian honeys, the concentration of lead found was between 3.2 and 186 In a study by Vanhanen et al. Thus, the results presented in our present work are, in essence, coherent and reliable. They point to the absence of lead metal in the samples analyzed. Furthermore, acceptable values were obtained for the recovery tests conducted. Clearly, the proposed screening method using silver nanoparticles devoid of stabilizers is, indeed, a method that has great potential for application in honey samples. The proposed method has demonstrated to be an essentially efficient alternative and clearly more advantageous compared to most of the previously reported methods for the analysis of lead in honey. The fact that it is fast, easy to conduct, and allows viewing the detection signal through the naked eyes makes this method analytically worthy of appreciation. While the method exhibited lower sensitivity compared to the other methods described in the literature, it is sufficiently sensitive for the determination of lead in honey in amounts lower than those established by law. In this work, the proposed methodology for lead determination using stabilizer-free silver nanoparticles has proven to be suitably effective and reliable. With the aid of calibration curve, we were able to obtain an LOQ of around 0.0451 The authors would like to express their sincerest gratitude and indebtedness to the Brazilian research funding agencies -