An aqueous/nonaqueous hybrid bitumen extraction (HBE) process for mined oil sand has the potential to reduce thermal energy demand and greenhouse gas emissions while integrating the productivity and robustness of the current commercial process. The process involves the application of a small amount of solvent to pre-soak the mined ore prior to slurry conditioning, followed by the currently used water-based process, albeit at a lower temperature (e.g. 20 °C) and with no need for caustic addition. In this work, the HBE technology is advanced to the testing of a pilot continuous flow system of 100 kg per hour. This communication describes the extraction outcomes of a series of pilot HBE flotation tests conducted at various extraction conditions, and determination of the respective residual solvent contents in the extraction tailings. Results showed that bitumen recoveries and froth qualities from the pilot HBE process depended on the type and dosage of solvent used to soak the ore prior to slurry conditioning, as well as on the slurry conditioning and residence time. Importantly, lower-temperature HBE could produce comparable or higher bitumen recoveries than those achieved using standard Clark hot water extraction; bitumen froth generated from ambient HBE contained lower fines or water contents. The amount of residual solvent in the tailings produced from the pilot hybrid extractions largely correlated to the unrecovered bitumen percentage. For good-processing ores, for which over 90% bitumen recoveries were achieved, the amount of solvent lost to the tailings was below the regulatory limit even without the use of a tailings solvent recovery unit.Given available technologies, the amount of oil in the form of extra-viscous crude bitumen, recoverable from Canadian oil sands is estimated at approximately 170 billion barrels ( In an effort to alleviate these challenges, the concept of an aqueous/nonaqueous hybrid bitumen extraction (HBE) process was successfully demonstrated on a batch and laboratory scale by In this study, we execute a scale-up development of the lower-temperature HBE to a higher technology readiness level — a continuous pilot-scale flow process. We first describe continuous/pilot HBE flotation protocols, and then study the effects of various process conditions on bitumen recoveries and froth qualities in pilot HBE tests, in particular the dosage and type of solvent. In this paper, we also investigate the residual solvent contents in the tailings generated from HBE at pilot scale. Assessment of the impact of HBE on the dewatering properties of tailings produced from pilot-scale extraction is published in our separate article ( Three Athabasca oil sand ores were used, denoted ores The pilot-scale hybrid bitumen extraction (HBE) process was similar to the water-based extraction process using a continuous flotation pilot facility we described previously ( Immediately after tumbling, the soaked oil sand ore was quickly transferred to the slurry tank where tap water equal to the mass of oil sand was added to make a slurry, all at room temperature. After the slurry had been conditioned for the desired time, a second round of tap water was added to the slurry tank, and air was introduced simultaneously via the circulation loop of the flotation cell. The slurry was then fed at the desired flow rate (i.e., controlling residence time) to the flotation cell where the froth was collected throughout the entire flotation process. The froth was analyzed for bitumen, solids, and water contents using a Dean-Stark apparatus. The ratio of the total mass of bitumen recovered in the froth over the total mass of bitumen in oil sand ore represents bitumen recovery. The ratios of bitumen content in froth to solids or water contents in the froth represent froth quality. Pilot HBE tests were carried out in a class-1 zone-1 ventilated area. For most of these tests of the three ores for different solvent types and dosages, processing parameters were identical: in particular, 20 min of conditioning time and 10 min of residence time. In a few tests, conditioning time was varied at a fixed flow rate, or residence time (i.e. flow rate) was changed at a fixed conditioning time. Gas chromatography equipped with flame ionization detector (GC-FID) was used to determine solvent content as it is a very accurate technique with a parts-per-million (ppm) detection level. Details of the GC-FID technique and the general analytical procedure are given in our recent article ( Continuous tests of pilot-scale hybrid bitumen extraction (HBE) were conducted in a solvent-proof ventilated enclosure. All the HBE tests were conducted at the ambient temperature of 20 °C. Bitumen recovery and froth quality were used as measures of the effectiveness of the extractions. Bitumen recovery and quality data reported in The data shown in The data in The increase in bitumen recovery by cyclohexane addition to the ore, as shown in Other important factors that significantly affect bitumen recovery and froth quality are the interfacial properties of mineral solids and bitumen, which are controlled by ore quality and process conditions (e.g. solvent addition). Some theorize that, due to evaporation of connate water, the coarse and fine solids of an aged/oxidized ore are more hydrophobic than the typically hydrophilic good-processing Athabasca ores ( Solvent soaking of the ore, as previous work clearly suggested, could significantly increase solids wettability at an optimal dosage, causing the solids become less hydrophobic or more hydrophilic ( Results in  Tests were conducted using ore Residence time in the flotation stage was changed from 5 min to 10 min and 20 min and its effect on extraction performance was studied also using ore The data in Results in It is clear from The above-mentioned data on solvent losses in the pilot-extracted tailings are plotted as a function of unrecovered bitumen rate. The results in In this communication, the extraction outcomes of a series of pilot flotation tests conducted using various extraction parameters in an aqueous/nonaqueous hybrid HBE process were discussed. The results suggest that bitumen recoveries in ambient-temperature HBE depended on several factors, including the dosage and type of the solvent used to soak the ore, as well as the conditioning and flotation process conditions. Importantly, both bitumen recoveries and froth qualities in term of bitumen/solids and bitumen/water ratios from ambient temperature HBE were comparable to or higher than those achieved using standard higher-temperature water-based bitumen extraction (WBE). Solvent losses to tailings were also studied: Results indicated that solvent losses to the pilot-extracted tailings were largely correlated to the unrecovered bitumen content. The HBE process used should achieve sufficiently high bitumen recoveries to meet the regulatory limit for solvent losses. This research was conducted under the auspices of Government of Canada’s interdepartmental Program of Energy Research and Development (PERD) and Alberta Innovates. The authors acknowledge the late Dr. T. Dabros for his valuable mentorship during the initial period of this project, and thank N. King, J. Pang, and F. Li for their assistance with Dean-Stark analysis of extracted bitumen froth samples. © Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada, as represented by the Minister of Natural Resources, 2018.