Dermal exposure to Aluminium nanoparticles (AlNPs) can occur in occupationally- and non occupationally exposed- population, due to the use of Al salts-based antiperspirants. No AlNPs transdermal permeation data exists. Our study investigated in vitro the permeation of 30–60 nm Al2O3NPs dispersed in synthetic sweat (20 g/L) using excised human skin on Franz cells. Experiments were performed using intact (experiment 1) and needle-abraded skin (experiment 2). After 24 h traces of Al were detectable in receiving solution of exposed cells (35.0 ± 6.0 ng/cm2 for intact and 88.5 ± 34.2 ng/cm2 for damaged skin, mean and SD) and in blank cells (36.3 ± 7.0 ng/cm2), without statistical significance (p = 0.08, Mann-Whitney test). The average amount of Al into intact and damaged skin samples was 3.96 ± 0.20 μg/cm2 for intact and 4.36 ± 0.47 μg/cm2 for damaged skin (p = 0.08). Al content was similar in epidermal and dermal layers of intact and damaged skin (1.95 ± 0.13 μg/cm2 and 2.31 ± 0.12 μg/cm2 epidermal, 2.01 ± 0.25 μg/cm2 and 2.05 ± 0.35 μg/cm2 dermal). Al is a trace element in human body and the amount found in receiving solutions could be due as background impurity. This data suggest a reassuring transdermal permeation profile for Al2O3NPs.Aluminium oxide (Al Conflicting opinions are present in literature over whether nanoscale alumina presents health risks. The most investigated effects are cell viability and DNA damage, but results on citototoxicity and genotoxicity are not conclusive ( Almost all available Data on Al and Al oxide nanoparticles skin penetration (Al into the skin) and permeation (Al that pass through the skin) are currently lacking ( All chemicals were analytical grade. Urea, sodium chloride, sodium hydrogenphosphate, potassium dihydrogenphosphate, were purchased from Carlo Erba (Milan, Italy); lactic acid (90% The commercially available dispersion of aluminium oxide (Al Al In order to evaluate the ions release from NPs once they were put in synthetic sweat, 4 mL of the donor phase (the Al The solution has been analyzed by ICP – OES (Inductively Coupled Plasma-Optical Emission Spectroscopy) to quantify the aluminium concentration. This operation has been repeated on three different aliquots of donor solution. Human abdominal full thickness skin was obtained as surgical waste from 2 female healthy patients aged 45–65 years, who underwent plastic surgery for esthetic reasons. The ethical committee approval was obtained. The use of this type of skin allows a possible comparison with other Skin integrity was tested before and after each experiment using electrical conductivity by means of a conductometer (Metrohm, 660, Metrohm AG Oberdorfstr. 68 CH-9100 Herisau) operating at 300 Hz and connected to two stainless steel electrodes. The conductibility data in μS were converted into KΩ cm Percutaneous absorption studies were performed using static diffusion cells following the Franz method ( The donor solution was prepared just before the experiment, diluting the Al At time 0, the exposure chambers of 6 Franz diffusion cells were mounted with intact skin samples and filled with 1 mL of the donor suspension (6.06 mg cm The same experimental conditions used in Experiment 1 were applied in parallel in Experiment 2, with the only exception of the skin used, which was abraded by drawing the point of a 19-gauge hypodermic needle across the surface (20 marks in one direction and 20 perpendiculars) as suggested by Bronaugh and Steward was used ( Each donor contribute equally to both experiments (exp. 1 with intact skin: 3 samples from donor 1 and 3 samples from donor 2; exp. 2 with damaged skin: 3 samples from donor 1 and 3 samples from donor 2; blanks: 1 sample from donor 1 and 1 sample from donor 2 in each experiment). For each experiment, two cells were added as blank. The blank cells were treated as the other cells with the exception that only synthetic sweat was used in the donor compartment. After the experiment, the skin pieces were washed three times with physiological solution to remove residual Al ICP-MS 7500 CE Agilent Technologies Inc., Santa Clara, CA, USA instrument (with integrated autosampler) was used to determinate the total aluminium concentration in the receiver phases. A six-points standard curve, obtained by dilution of aluminium standard solution for ICP-MS analyses (by Merck, Germany) was used for ICP-MS measurements (0.1, 0.5, 1, 5, 10, and 100 μg/L, ion mass 27 u.m.a.). The limit of detection of aluminium was 0.1 μg/L for ICP-MS and the precision of the measurements as repeatability (RSD %) for the analysis was always <5%. Total aluminium concentration in the donor phases and in the solutions resulting from the mineralization of the skin samples were performed by (ICP-OES) using an Optima 8000 Spectrometer (PerkinElmer, U.S.A.), equipped with an S10 Autosampler. Analysis were conducted using a calibration curve obtained by dilution (range: 0–10 mg/L) of aluminium standard solution for ICP-OES analyses (by Sigma Aldrich, Milan, Italy). The limit of detection (LOD) at the operative wavelength of 396.153 nm was 0.01 mg/L. The precision of the measurements expressed as relative standard deviation (RSD %) for the analysis was always <5%. Aluminium concentration data (μg cm Data analysis was performed with Excel for Windows, release 2007 and Stata Software, version 11.0 (StataCorp LP, College Station, TX, USA). Skin absorption data were reported as mean ± standard deviation (SD). The difference among independent data and donors were assessed by means of the Mann-Whitney test. A Representative TEM images of Al After 24 h of exposure only traces of Al were detectable in the receiving solution of cells exposed to NPs (35.0 ± 6.0 ng cm The average amount of Al in intact and damaged whole thickness skin samples was 3.96 ± 0.20 μg cm Dermal exposure to Al can occur in some occupational scenarios and using personal care products (PCP). In the first case Al micro- and nano-powders (diameter in the range of 10–300 nm) can be intentionally added in the production of automobile paints ( Experimental data on Al dermal absorption are limited and all of them investigated the behavior of Al salts, while actually no data at all exist regarding transdermal permeation of Al and Al oxides nanoparticles. Our study investigated This is in line with results of Putterman and colleagues (  Comparing our results with the latter cited study ( Therefore, albeit with the limitations due to the “ This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. The authors report no current nor previous conflicts of interest.