An appropriate estimate of rock mass strength is necessary for the design of civil and mining structures built in or on rock. Rock mass is an inhomogeneous and anisotropic material with complex behaviour, which contains random planes of discontinuities that tend to reduce its strength. The direct estimation of this strength is practically unfeasible, due to difficulties in sampling and testing. This has led to the development of empirical failure criteria. These, express the strength of the rock mass in terms of properties of the intact rock and the discontinuities. The Hoek–Brown criterion is the most widely accepted one. However, albeit its use for many years, no experimental in situ validation with the actual rock mass strength has been demonstrated. Therefore, the Hoek–Brown criterion is investigated analytically through an extended plane of weakness theory, already validated with experimental evidence on physical specimens. Various intact rock qualities with blocky and very blocky structure are examined. The results indicate deviations in the rock mass strength predicted by the two approaches, especially when the intact rock strength is low.Civil and mining structures involve the disturbance of large volumes of rock masses, which consist of interlocked intact rock pieces separated by various kinds of discontinuities. Such a disturbance is associated with the changes in the force field within the mass. By modelling this prototype rock mass as an equivalent continuous rock mass medium, evolved from a homogenization procedure, this force field can be represented by a Cauchy type stress field. This stress field, by definition, may nowhere overcome the pertinent Cauchy type strength of the rock mass. Any experimental procedure appropriate to define this Cauchy type strength should be applied on a rock mass that contains a statistically adequate number of intact rock pieces and discontinuities. For a sparsely jointed rock mass, this would involve large size testing of the prototype rock mass, which in general may be considered, amongst others, practically unfeasible. Therefore, the most common way to express this Cauchy type strength of the rock masses is through the use of empirical failure criteria. These criteria evaluate the in situ rock mass strength as a fraction of the laboratory defined intact rock strength, according to the rating of the quality of the rock mass. The latter depends on the structure and the surface condition of the discontinuities, and is quantified by the various rock mass classification systems. The most widely used Cauchy type strength failure criterion is the one presented by Hoek and Brown In the above expressions, The failure loci of the Hoek–Brown failure criterion for an intact rock can directly be compared with the respective loci based on triaxial laboratory tests. However, failure loci (envelopes to Mohr circles) of the jointed rock masses produced by the GSI model have not been adequately confirmed either in the laboratory or in situ, which led Kolymbas An analytical investigation on the strength of jointed rock masses has already been attempted more than 40 years ago by Jaeger and Cook The limited persistence of the discontinuities is simulated assuming an equivalent shear strength, which includes a percentage of the strength of the original discontinuity and a percentage of the strength of the intact rock. Because the failure of the jointed rock undergoes complicated processes The discrete rock mass model may be declared for an abbreviation as the EPW model, and its strength the EPW strength. Below, an attempt is made to correlate the GSI strength with the analytically derived EPW strength, of the continuous and the discrete models, simulating the same prototype sparsely jointed rock mass. Continuous and discrete models have to be attributed pertinent parameters. The strength of the continuous GSI rock mass model depends on the three parameters: The strength of the latter discrete EPW rock mass model depends on the strength parameters for the intact rock Two rock structure configurations are considered for the sparsely jointed rock mass, which is assumed to be either blocky or very blocky, according to the GSI system. The blocky structure is presented in The joint quality according to the GSI system varies from very good to very poor. These quality characteristics for the EPW model have to be assigned pertinent joint shear strength parameters To compare the discrete EPW model with its equivalent continuous GSI model, both models are examined for all combinations of their properties. Three intact rock properties, two rock structural configurations with two types of persistence, and four joint quality categories of the prototype rock mass are simulated by both types of models. The strength of these models in a confining stress regime up to 8 A blocky rock mass, which contains three joint sets with the same engineering properties, is modelled initially as an EPW rock mass. The initial dip angle of the joint sets is 0°, 45° and 120°. The dip angle of the joint system is defined as The same methodology is followed for the case of a very blocky rock mass. The EPW theory is applied for four joint sets with equal engineering properties. The initial dip angle of the joint sets is 0°, 45°, 90°, and 120°. The joint system is rotated by 180° and the EPW rock mass strength is calculated for every 5° of rotation. This procedure is repeated similarly, assuming various joint persistence combinations. All joints initially are fully persistent. Then, sequentially, one, two, three and four of the joint sets are assumed as being 50% persistent. In   As shown in the previous section, the strength of blocky and very blocky discrete EPW rock models fluctuates with joint sets dip angle about a mean value. The HB failure criterion is applied to isotropic jointed rocks, so for rock masses with blocky and very blocky structures it is taking into account an equivalent isotropic strength. An equivalent isotropic strength for the discrete EPW rock models can be defined by the estimation of the mean strength, i.e. the average strength over all joint sets dip angle values. This average strength is computed at an interval of 5° of joint system rotation. This interval is small enough, so it is regarded as satisfactory for the computation of the mean strength. Thus, this mean value of the strength of the EPW models is evaluated at all levels of the considered confining stress. Following this procedure, isotropic EPW model failure strength loci (failure locus of the Mohr circles) within the considered geotechnical engineering confining stress range, are drawn for the discrete rock models. These are then compared to the failure strength loci evaluated for the equivalent continuous GSI rock models. Initially the models are considered to have low intact rock strength. For each discrete EPW rock mass model, the mean isotropic strength is calculated at each value of confining stress. This procedure is repeated for four values of confining stress and the isotropic EPW failure locus (failure criterion), is drawn. This failure locus may thus be compared with that of the equivalent GSI continuous model, i.e. the HB failure criterion.  A possible explanation for the linear form of the EPW failure locus and the high divergence between the two approaches for high values of confining stress is the low value of uniaxial compressive strength of the intact rock (  Next, the intact rock strength is considered to be moderate. For each discrete EPW model at each value of confining stress, the mean isotropic EPW strength, is calculated. This procedure is repeated for four values of confining stress and the isotropic EPW rock mass model failure locus is drawn. The equivalent GSI model failure locus may thus be compared to the discrete EPW one.   Finally, the intact rock strength is considered to be high. For each discrete EPW model at each value of confining stress, the mean isotropic EPW strength, is calculated. This procedure is repeated for four values of confining stress and the isotropic EPW failure locus is drawn. The failure locus for the equivalent GSI model may thus be compared to the discrete EPW model one. In In Difficulties in sampling and testing of jointed rock specimens have led to the development of empirical failure criteria for the estimation of the rock mass strength. The Hoek–Brown failure criterion is the most widely accepted one, but failure loci of this criterion, for jointed rock masses, have not been adequately confirmed either in the laboratory or in situ. This fact raises issues of uncertainty about its applicability to jointed rocks. Here, an analytical investigation of this criterion is attempted, with the application of the extended plane of weakness (EPW) theory on multiply jointed rock. The intact rock obeys the HB failure criterion, whereas the discontinuities obey the non-linear Barton–Bandis (BB) failure criterion. This criterion has been chosen, as it predicts the non-linear behaviour of the joints, with relatively easily estimated input parameters. Nevertheless, to simulate any more complex behaviour of the joints, a more sophisticated joint failure criterion may be easily adopted, to further improve the strength prediction capability of the EPW model. Two rock structure configurations are considered for the sparsely jointed rock mass, which is assumed to be either blocky or very blocky. The two rock structures considered may contain either persistent or non-persistent joints. An equivalent GSI model is produced by scaling the BB parameters to the GSI joint surface quality categories. This methodology allows a direct comparison between the EPW theory and the HB failure criterion, via their failure loci. The EPW model failure envelopes exhibit variations compared to those obtained by the HB failure criterion. These variations are due to the limited joint persistence and when the low intact rock strength is considered. Initially, the EPW theory is applied to a jointed rock mass of low intact rock strength and blocky to very blocky structures. In both cases, the EPW theory predicts higher strength than that of the HB failure criterion. Also, the joints persistence affects the failure loci estimated by the EPW theory. When all joints are assumed to be non-persistent, the equivalent isotropic failure locus approaches that of the intact rock. The application of the EPW theory to a blocky and a very blocky rock mass with moderate to high intact rock strength leads to different observations. When all joints are persistent, the EPW theory predicts lower strength than that of the HB failure criterion. The strength predicted by the EPW theory approaches that provided by the HB failure criterion when some of the joints are non-persistent. When all joints are assumed to be non-persistent, the equivalent isotropic failure locus approaches that of the intact rock. According to these, it is obvious that the joint persistence is a dominant factor affecting jointed rock strength. The effect of joint persistence is simulated by the EPW theory, but not with the HB criterion, as GSI does not consider joint persistence explicitly. The failure locus produced by the EPW theory is non-linear, as in the case of the HB failure criterion. However, when rock mass with low intact rock strength is considered, the equivalent isotropic failure locus is almost linear, in contrast to that of the HB failure criterion. A possible explanation, for the linear form of the EPW theory failure loci and the high divergence between the two approaches for high values of confining stress, is the low value of uniaxial compressive strength of the intact rock and, in turn, of the joint wall strength The EPW theory can be applied by using different values of joint basic angle of friction. In the methodology presented here, the basic friction angle does not affect the equivalent GSI value. It is considered as a property depending on rock type and a mean value equal to 30° is selected for the calculations. Increase in the friction angle will increase the strength of joints and, in turn, the strength of rock mass. Oppositely, GSI does not consider explicitly this engineering parameter; so, according to the HB failure criterion, a higher value of joint basic angle of friction will have no impact on jointed rock strength. The usually employed HB failure criterion is independent of the intermediate effective principal stress The EPW model requires much more data for the estimation of jointed rock strength than the HB model does. The engineering properties of intact rock are common in both methods. The HB criterion, in order to take into account the presence of the discontinuities, uses the GSI system which is based on field observations, and combines the structure of jointed rock and the quality of joint surfaces, in an oversimplifying way. Hoek and Marinos