The present work pertains to the improvement of high temperature stability of age hardenable AA2219 aluminium–copper (6.3%) alloy. Addition of scandium, magnesium and zirconium to the base metal AA2219 was adopted to improve this high temperature stability. These additions were systematically varied by preparing alloys of different composition using gas tungsten arc melting. Long time ageing studies and impression creep technique were used to study the high temperature stability of the alloys. These modified compositions of the alloy resulted in fine equiaxed grains, refined eutectics, large number of high temperature stable and finer precipitates. Among all the compositions, 0.8% Sc+0.45% Mg+0.2% Zr addition was found to be significant in improving the high temperature stability of AA2219 alloy. This may be attributed to the possible microstructural changes, solute enrichment of the matrix and pinning of the grain boundaries by the finer precipitates.AA 2219 alloy contains about 6.3% copper and is used in cryogenic tanks, fuselage and shells for space vehicles. The main advantages of this alloy include better toughness, high strength and good weldability. However lower anti-recrystallization temperature of the alloy results in poor high temperature stability. Study of recent literature indicates that scandium can provide the necessary grain refinement, strengthening effect as well as antirecrystallization effect Cast AA2219 alloys with different levels of scandium, magnesium and zirconium were prepared by melting with Inert gas (Argon) Tungsten Arc welding. This was done by placing the weighed amounts of strips of master alloys (Al–2% Sc, Al–5% Mg, and Al–3.5% Zr) in the groove of size 5 Optical micrographs of AA2219 alloy with and without scandium are presented in Optical micrographs of AA2219 with addition of scandium and zirconium are shown in Addition of magnesium is aimed for its solid solution strengthening and it forms Ω (CuAl Scanning electron micrographs of eutectic morphology in the modified alloys is shown in Elemental mappings of copper, obtained by electron probe micro analysis for both AA2219 and 0.8% Sc, 0.45% Mg, and 0.2% Zr added AA2219 alloy were shown in To ascertain the identity of possible precipitates that form due to the addition of scandium, magnesium and zirconium, pieces of the aged as cast metal were cut and dissolved in NaOH solution and the precipitates were extracted by filtration and drying. The powders so obtained were subjected to X-ray diffraction, and the diffraction pattern for the Scandium added AA2219 is as shown in Hardness values of the alloys of modified compositions in as cast condition are given in Impression creep testing was conducted mainly to verify the thermal stability of modified AA2219 alloy at temperatures of 250 Relatively thinner and finer eutectics are formed due to addition of magnesium and zirconium along with scandium. This may be due to formation of fine and thermally stable precipitates of Al Availability of the more number of finer thermally stable precipitates in the modified AA2219 may cause precipitate interaction with dislocations, which was reported The gradient of copper from the matrix to the eutectic is very high in AA2219 alloy when compared to that of modified alloys. EPMA of the modified alloy shown that copper distribution in the eutectics and matrix was uniform. This solute enrichment in the matrix of the microstructure may be one of the reasons for the improvement in high temperature stability of the alloy. Pinning of the grain boundaries by the finer precipitates like Al Modification of AA2219 alloy with scandium Sc