In the present study, a novel drying technique using a combination of ultrasound and vacuum dehydration was developed to shorten the time for the drying of beef and chicken meats. The meats were dried using three different techniques, namely ultrasonic vacuum (USV) drying, vacuum drying and oven drying at 55, 65 and 75°C. The meats dried faster with USV than with the vacuum and oven drying techniques. The drying time for the USV, vacuum and oven drying techniques at 75°C was determined as 300, 480 and 750min for beef and 330, 570 and 780min for chicken, respectively. The drying rate was significantly influenced by the drying techniques and temperatures. The lowest energy consumption was determined in the USV technique. The drying data were successfully fitted to 10 models (R
                     2: 0.9140–0.9991). According to the results, the USV drying technique shortened the drying period of beef and chicken.
               
                  Industrial relevance
                  Beef and chicken meats dried faster with the USV drying method than with the vacuum and oven drying techniques. The novel drying technique could be used to improve efficiency of the vacuum drying technique. Combination of ultrasound and vacuum treatment consumed lower energy compared with oven and vacuum drying.Foods tend to deteriorate chemically and microbiologically during storage due to their high water activity, which negatively influences the nutritional value and sensory properties of the product as well as the formation of detrimental compounds. Therefore, various preservation methods have been improved to extend the shelf life of products since ancient times. Drying is one of the oldest preservation techniques in which mass and heat transfers occur simultaneously ( In recent years, attempts have been made to shorten the drying period to improve the energy efficiency of the drying process and the quality of the dried products ( The objective of the present study is to develop a new drying method by combining ultrasound and vacuum processes. For this aim, beef and chicken meats were dried with oven, vacuum and ultrasonic vacuum techniques at different temperatures (55 Top round beef and chicken breast, used as raw material in the present study, were obtained from a butcher in Istanbul, Turkey. Top ground beef meat was obtained from beef at 2-years old (Balıkesir, Turkey). Chicken breast meat was obtained from broiler chicks (Ross 308) at 6 Dry matter, ash and protein content of meat samples was determined in the present study. Dry matter content of sliced meat samples was determined by a modified procedure of The USV technique is composed of an ultrasound water bath (Daihan, WUC-D10H, South Korea) and a vacuum pump (KNF N838.3KT.45.18, Germany) as shown in Both meat samples were dried with US–vacuum (USV) drying, vacuum drying and oven drying at 55, 65 and 75 In the present study, the obtained drying data (time versus Temperature dependency of Energy consumed at each process during drying of the samples was measured using an energy meter (PeakTech 9035, Germany) as mentioned in the study of Drying kinetics data of the samples were analyzed using Statistica 6.0 software (StatSoft Inc., USA). Nonlinear regression analysis was performed based on the Levenberg–Marquardt algorithm to calculate corresponding parameters of the models mentioned in The dry matter content of the beef and chicken meats was 25.94% and 25.29%, respectively ( The drying curves (time versus moisture ratio ( Consumption of energy during the drying process should be considered when selecting a drying technique to decrease the cost of the process used. Therefore, the amount of energy consumed during drying is also summarized in Drying time versus USV drying technique at 55 Vacuum drying technique at 55 Oven drying technique at 55 Those for chicken meat were as follows: USV drying technique at 55 Vacuum drying technique at 55 Oven drying technique at 55 Obtaining drying kinetics data and their modeling are necessary to design, simulate and optimize the drying process or equipment (  Drying is the oldest method for preserving food products. In recent years, researchers have exerted efforts to find a drying technique to produce dried products that have higher quality and to reduce cost of the process by shortening the drying process. For this aim, ultrasound treatment and vacuum were combined as a novel drying technique to dry beef and chicken meats. To observe the efficiency of this novel technique, the results were compared with those obtained for vacuum and oven drying techniques. According to these results, this novel technique (combination of ultrasound and vacuum) markedly accelerated the drying process, which is very important for the food industry considering energy efficiency and the quality of dried products. In future research, the effect of this novel drying technique on the functional and nutritional properties of different food materials will be observed. The authors of this work acknowledge financial support from the ‘