Commercial processing of tomato utilizes only juice, while the wet pomace is considered merely as a waste product. However, tomato pomace represents a very significant source of lycopene, lipids, ascorbic acid, fibers, and proteins. High protein and lysine content tomato seeds, a major part of the pomace waste, are an unexplored source of non-conventional oil which possesses properties similar to conventional oils. However, tomato pomace is highly perishable in its fresh state because it contains about 95% moisture. Therefore, it is just dumped and allowed to decay, causing a serious environmental problem and a waste of resources. Tomato pomace must be dried immediately to reduce moisture before microbial spoilage and mold develop. The aim of this work was to investigate the effect of temperature and osmotic dehydration on air drying kinetics of tomato pomace, and assess the ability of selected drying models to quantify the moisture removal behaviour in tomato pomace over the range of temperatures normally encountered in industrial dryers for the purpose of simulation, scaling up of the process and saving energy. In general, increasing drying-air temperature increases drying potential and consequently decreases process time. Osmotic pre-treatment was found to be effective for enhancing drying rate and reducing drying time by approximately 30%. The effective moisture diffusivity varied from 0.3×10−9 to 2.6×10−9
                     m2/s in the temperature range (40–80°C). The effective moisture diffusivities of NaCl-treated samples dried at 60°C was 1.1×10−7
                     m2/s (80 times higher than untreated samples). The temperature dependence of the effective diffusivity was described by the Arrhenius relationship with an activation energy of 52.1kJ/mol. Colour analysis showed that the values of the colour parameters (L*, a*, b* and h*) increased with drying temperature made the colour of the pomace samples brighter, shifting it towards yellow and red. Pre-treatment with NaCl had a small effect on colour parameter values.Agro-industrial byproducts that are produced as a result of diverse agricultural practices represent one of the most important and promising energy and protein rich sources. Further additional processing of these byproducts could generate substantial benefits, transferring from a low value status to a stream of numerous industrial applications ( Drying is one of the most important unit operations in chemical processing. Moisture removal by means of different drying techniques from solids is an integral part of food processing ( Thin-layer drying mathematical models have found wide application due to their ease of use and lack of required data in complex theoretical models (such as phenomenological and coupling coefficients) ( Osmotic dehydration as a partial dehydration process involves direct contact of plant tissue with a hypertonic solution leading to removal of water through the semi-permeable membrane of the food material and transferring of solute from the osmotic solution into the food. This process is normally used to partially remove water from vegetable tissues to obtain stabilization without acidification or pasteurization treatments. The driving force for the diffusion of water from the tissue into the solution is provided by the higher osmotic pressure of the hypertonic solution. The diffusion of water is accompanied by the simultaneous counter diffusion of solutes from the osmotic solution into the tissue. In recent years, osmotic pre-treatment has received considerable attention due to low operating temperatures and reduced energy requirements ( The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of temperature and osmotic dehydration on air drying kinetics and quality of tomato pomace and to assess the ability of selected drying models to quantify the moisture removal behaviour in tomato pomace over the range of temperatures normally encountered in industrial dryers for the purpose of simulation, scaling up of the process and saving energy. Pomace from a tomato paste-manufacturing unit, located in the Jordan valley, was collected, washed in distilled water and stored at 4 Tomato pomace samples (ca. 50 Osmotic concentration was conducted by soaking the sample for 4 The colour of tomato pomace samples during drying was measured using a colourimeter (Lovibond The experimentally determined moisture contents were converted to moisture ratios using the following equation: The values of Selected thin-layer models, listed in A graphical representation of the change in moisture content of tomato pomace with drying time at different air temperature (40–80 Representative drying rate curves for tomato pomace samples dried under convective conditions (40–80  The experimental moisture content data obtained at different drying temperature were converted to moisture ratios using Eq. The values of the statistical parameters range between 1.00 To validate the suitability of the Midilli model, the experimental and predicted moisture ratio values were compared ( The Midilli model was found to be the most suitable model for describing the drying behaviour, with the drying constant (  The results obtained in Section For long drying periods, i.e., when MR This could be further simplified to a straight-line equation as: Effective moisture diffusivity was determined by plotting experimental drying data in terms of (ln The calculated values of The effective moisture diffusivity of NaCl-treated samples dried at 60 The effect of temperature on moisture diffusivity can be described by an Arrhenius-type equation: The activation energy was found to be 52.1  The following conclusions can be drawn from the present work in which drying mechanism of tomato pomace has been studied. Water removal during drying of tomato occurs in the falling-rate period, with a short warming-up and constant rate stage which corresponds to solid heating, and non-isothermal drying conditions. Drying-air temperature plays a vital rule in characterizing the drying behaviour of tomato pomace. Increasing drying-air temperature increases the drying potential and consequently decreases drying time. Of the six thin-layer drying equations considered in this study, the semi-theoretical Midilli model provided the best representation of tomato pomace drying kinetics, followed by the Page model. This was based on three statistical test methods adopted to evaluate the goodness of fit of each model. Pre-treatment with NaCl solution was found to be effective in facilitating moisture diffusion and hence reducing drying time by approximately 30%. Colour analysis showed that the values of the parameters Authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Scientific Research Committee at Al-Hussein Bin Talal University and Mr Atalah Al-Khalayfeh at the Department of Chemistry for his technical support.