This work is focused on the behavior of zinc, iron and calcium during leaching EAF dust in sulfuric acid solutions. The influences of leaching time, temperature, sulfuric acid concentration and L:S (Liquid:Solid) ratio on the extraction of zinc, iron and calcium were studied. The leaching experiments were preceded by a thermodynamic study consisting of calculations of ΔG0 and E–pH diagrams of the Zn–Fe–Ca–S–H2O system. A thorough characterization of the input sample of EAF dust was performed. The highest zinc extraction, 87%, was achieved by using 1M H2SO4 at the temperature of 80°C and L:S ratio 50. From the perspective of a selective leaching of zinc, where no iron is passing into the solution, concentration 0.1M H2SO4 at L:S ratio=50 and 0.25M H2SO4 at L:S ratios=20 and 10 can be considered as optimal concentrations. The calculated values of the activation energy confirmed different mechanisms of leaching zinc, iron and calcium. The rate limiting step in the case of zinc and calcium is represented by a rate of diffusion, while in the case of iron it is a rate of chemical reaction.In 2013, more than 1.6 Despite the hazardous nature of EAF dust there are three main reasons for its processing. The first reason is recovery of iron concentrates suitable as a raw material in the production of steel or pig iron. The second main reason for its processing is the recovery of zinc for commercial products. The current price of zinc on the LME (London Metal Exchange) is 2070 The third reason to process EAF dust is to reduce the amount of hazardous waste and/or its transformation to non-hazardous waste, i.e. saving disposal costs. The most common phases of metals present in EAF dust are listed in In general, there are three basic ways of processing EAF dust: pyrometallurgical, hydrometallurgical and a combined method. A product of pyrometallurgical processing is usually represented by impure ZnO which has minimal commercial value. This product has to be further processed by the hydrometallurgical method in order to obtain high purity metallic zinc. Hydrometallurgical processes are mainly based on acid or alkaline leaching. The form of the presence of zinc is a key indicator of the efficiency of the processing of EAF dust. Zinc can be present in EAF dust, according to Acid leaching is generally characterized by better kinetics, better recycling of solutions after leaching and the benefit of not requiring concentrated solutions compared to alkaline leaching. Relatively low cost of reagents and higher metal extraction into a solution are additional benefits. A disadvantage, however, is that high zinc extraction leads to a significant amount of iron passing into a solution. In addition to already mentioned hydrometallurgical methods also new methods of processing EAF dust are recently studied in a laboratory scale. These new approaches include using of deep eutectic ionic solvents based on choline chloride for dissolution of zinc and lead from EAF dust ( Currently, no hydrometallurgical technology is used on an industrial scale, which is mainly due to the lack of research aimed at the behavior of individual compounds of EAF dust in leaching reagent ( This work is focused on the influence of temperature, sulfuric acid concentration and L:S ratio on the leaching kinetics of zinc, iron and calcium into sulfuric acid solutions. Based on the shape of kinetic curves, the value of activation energy, as the main indicator of leaching mechanism, was estimated. A sample of EAF dust with chemical composition listed in Chemical composition of the sample used in this work corresponds to a chemical composition listed in a technical literature ( As a result of XRD phase analysis and its evaluation, five main phases were identified — ZnO, ZnFe A content of Mn and Cr in the sample was under detecting limit of the method; Mn and Cr can be present in ferritic form whose peaks can be covered by the peaks of magnetite and franklinite — coincidence of peaks; Mn and Cr can be present in the spinel phase lattice of franklinite and magnetite and not as separate phases.  It can be seen from The sample of EAF dust was observed through the SEM–EDX analysis where the morphology and chemical analysis of surface areas were studied. The observation was carried out using scanning electron microscope JEOL JMS-35CF with EDX analyzer LINK ANALYTICAL AN10/85S. A spherical particle marked in In the case of the rectangular particle showed in As it results from the SEM–EDX observations, there is a close relationship between the shape of the particle and its chemical composition. Particles with high content of zinc and iron have mostly spherical shape while rectangular particles contain significant amounts of calcium. It confirms different mechanisms of formation of dust particles as described in ( A thermodynamic study presented in this work was focused on the determination of the values of standard Gibbs free energy change (ΔG  Iron passes into the solution together with zinc from franklinite (reaction In the presence of oxygen from the atmosphere: Calcium can pass into the solution according to the following reactions: It results from the thermodynamic values in Given values describe the situation in the equilibrium state and relate only to individual phases. However, the real system consists of more than one phase, so it is necessary to verify how the system will behave under specified conditions. For this purpose, thermodynamic study through E–pH diagrams was carried out. The resulting E–pH diagrams of the Zn–Fe–Ca–S–H It results from given E–pH diagrams that zinc is present in the form of soluble compounds in a wide range of pH, from 0 to 5, practically in the whole range of the water stability area. Similarly, calcium is also present in the form of soluble compounds in that area. However, the case of iron is more complex. In very acidic areas, with pH close to 0 and with potential higher than 0.77 The leaching experiments were carried out on the equipment shown in A glass reactor of 800  It results from  Leaching kinetics of passing iron into the solution is, according to In case of iron, the influence of the temperature rises with increasing acid concentration. This phenomenon can be observed in It results from  As the amount of calcium in the solution is determined by its limited solubility, most of the calcium that is leached out into the solution precipitates in the form of gypsum crystals ( The influence of the sulfuric acid concentration on calcium extraction into the solution at various temperatures and L:S ratios It can be seen from The effect of temperature is the biggest difference between leaching zinc and iron. In the case of zinc, the temperature has only minimal influence while in the case of iron the influence of the temperature is significant. This phenomenon indicates a different mechanism of leaching zinc and iron from EAF dust in a sulfuric acid solution. The influence of temperature on the rate of chemical reactions can be expressed by Arrhenius equation. In order to determine the mechanism of leaching zinc, iron and calcium, a calculation of the activation energy In the case of leaching zinc, the most important stage is The values of the activation energy indicate that the rate limiting step in leaching iron is dependent on the rate of the chemical reaction. It is a similar mechanism as in the case of zinc ( Diffusion rate is the rate limiting step in the case of leaching calcium too. Contrary to leaching zinc, calcium after reaching saturated solution precipitates as CaSO For determining optimal leaching conditions also the influence of sulfuric acid concentration must be taken into account. The influence of sulfuric acid concentration on the extraction of zinc, iron and calcium at L:S ratios Determining optimal conditions of hydrometallurgical processing of EAF dust is often a compromise between the highest zinc extraction and the lowest iron extraction into the solution. From this perspective, concentration of 0.1 EAF dust studied in this work was subjected to the elemental analysis (AAS). The following contents of the main compounds were discovered: 17.05% Zn, 27.23% Fe, 4.42% Ca and 6.88% Si. The subsequent XRD analysis confirmed the presence of the following phases: ZnFe Granulometry analysis showed that EAF dust is fine-grained materials where 90% of all particles are below 50 Kinetic study of zinc leaching showed that zinc passes into the solution very fast and maximum possible zinc extraction into the solution can be achieved in the first minutes of leaching. Leaching of zinc takes place in two stages ( Kinetic study of iron leaching showed that iron passes into the solution significantly slower than zinc. Temperature has a significant effect on iron extraction into the solution. The rate limiting step in leaching iron is represented by the rate of chemical reaction. Kinetic study of calcium showed that leaching of calcium is a very fast process, but most of the calcium which reacts with sulfuric acid precipitates from the solution in the form of CaSO From the results of this work, the scheme of hydrometallurgical processing EAF dust can be designed ( This work was supported by