This study was performed to investigate the effect of fibre length and fibre type on fire performance of a polymer with an intermediate char yield, Polycarbonate (PC). Glass, basalt and carbon fibre reinforced PC with 6 mm, 12 mm, and 20 mm long fibres were tested. Samples were manufactured via compression moulding from pre-compounded PC pellets containing the reinforcing fibres of given lengths. Cone calorimetry tests with incident heat fluxes of 35 kW/m2, 50 kW/m2, and 70 kW/m2 were used to investigate the fire properties of PC glass fibre composites. Flame spread tests and thermal conductivity measurements were also performed. Transient plane thermal conductivity measurements were taken from 30 °C to 160 °C to determine the in-plane and out-of-plane thermal conductivity. Flame spread test was conducted to measure flame spread rate and critical heat flux for flame spread. These rare to find complementary information provides a more complete picture of factors driving the various fire performance aspects. The results show that the role of fibre length in fire performance is more significant when the fibre used has a high thermal conductivity. Knowing the role of fibre length and type on fire performance can help in the design of composite materials for optimised fire performance.Fibre reinforced polymer composites are common in a wide range of applications including aerospace, construction, and transportation. The popularity of fibre reinforced composites is driven by light weighting potential, favourable mechanical properties, and relatively low cost. Polycarbonate (PC) is amongst the most commonly used thermoplastic matrices. Compared to other engineering thermoplastics, Polycarbonate has a high char yield of approximately 20–25% Fire retardants are usually added to polymer matrixes to improve the fire performance of the composite The mechanical properties of composite materials are widely known, and over the past 50 years, methods to predict mechanical properties from the constituent properties have been developed and validated The literature regarding the effect of fibre length and fibre type on the fire performance of composite materials is ambiguous. The majority of prior art is focused on continuous fibres and thermosetting resins For example, one study suggests that the increasing fibre length may lead to better fire properties The same ambiguity is also found when looking at the effect of fibre type on the fire performance. While it is well accepted that carbon fibre has a higher thermal conductivity than glass fibres From literature the following gaps can be identified: Most of the work reported is performed on composites containing fire retardants. This makes it hard to resolve the effect of matrix and fibre The compound formulation of short fibre compounds are often not adequately controlled and/or reported, making it difficult to compare results and studies. Thermal properties (heat capacity, thermal conductivity) are rarely measured. Knowing these properties is a crucial factor in determining fire performance from constituent properties To address the above gaps this study attempts to rigorously control and measure the critical aspects often omitted in order studies. This involves the manufacture of purposely compounded PC composites where the only varying parameter is reinforcement type and fibre length. The selected fibre types are glass fibres, basalt fibres, and carbon fibres with fibre lengths of 6 mm, 12 mm, and 20 mm. This represents the most significant permutations from an industry standpoint. Both thermal properties as well as fire performance are investigated. The transient plane source (TPS) thermal conductivity test is used to measure the effect of fibre length and type on the in-plane and out-of-plane thermal conductivity of the composites. Cone calorimetry tests and flame spread test are performed to compare the effect of fibre type and fibre length with respect to fire performance. Lotte Advanced Materials Infino SC-1220R Polycarbonate with a melt index of 22 g/10 min and density of 1.2 g/cm The compound pellets were dried for 4 h at 100 °C and compression moulded at 270 °C under a constant pressure of 1.5 MPa for 10 min. Samples were cooled to 50 °C while maintaining pressure prior to releasing the press. Pellets were moulded into 250 × 250 mm plates. Samples were manufactured according to the combinations shown in  Samples were tested using a Incident heat fluxes of 35, 50, and 70 kW/m Horizontal flame spread tests were conducted using an apparatus based on ASTM E1321. Different heat fluxes were applied over the sample length ranging from 26 kW/m   Naming conventions are as shown in TGA was completed for unreinforced PC, glass, carbon, and basalt fibre reinforced PC compounds.   Glass fibre reinforced PC samples were heated for 140 to 150 s, while carbon fibre reinforced PC samples were heated for 180 to 210 s (time to ignition was determined using cone calorimetry) before using the torch to pilot ignite the sample at the leading edge. The flame spread velocity was determined by measuring the flame travel time for every 25 mm of the sample starting from the sample leading edge. Flame spread test was not possible for unreinforced PC due to its high critical heat flux. Successful tests were conducted on glass and carbon fibre reinforced PC. All samples were tested for flame spread velocity, flame spread parameter, ignition temperature, and critical heat flux for flame spread. Flame spread velocity was calculated by image processing of the test videos. The velocities were found to be similar for all samples. Ignition temperature was determined by using a thermal camera as shown in  The TGA results show that the char yield of the PC grade used in this study is 22% when measured in N When comparing the results of the cone calorimetry, flame spread test and thermal conductivity measurements, it becomes evident that the major constituting factor affecting fire performance is thermal conductivity. For this reason, the behaviour is discussed in more detail distinguishing between the low thermal conductivity composites (containing E-glass and basalt fibres) and the high thermal conductivity composites (containing carbon fibres). It is also worth noting that lofting of the fibres was not observed in this study. This is in contrast to a previously performed similar study where a non-charring polypropylene matrix was used instead of PC. Clearly the char yield of 22% is sufficient to prevent the lofting of the fibres. Preventing lofting not only improves the overall fire performance but also improves the repeatability of the experiments. When lofting is encountered the variability of the measurements typically due to the erratic nature of the lofting phenomena. Fibre length did not seem to have a major effect on the fire performance of glass and basalt fibre reinforced PC. The cone calorimetry results in The negligible effect of fibre length on the fire performance of glass and basalt fibre reinforced PC can be explained by the low thermal conductivity of both. As seen in Fibre length has a major effect on the thermal conductivity of carbon fibre reinforced PC due to the much higher thermal conductivity of the fibre when compared to glass and basalt. The cone calorimetry results in The significant effect of the fibre length on the fire performance of carbon fibre reinforced PC can be related to its high thermal conductivity. As shown in The increase in thermal conductivity directly leads to an increase in thermal inertia and thermal diffusivity. This results in an increased time to ignition and also affects the flame spread rate. This aspect is discussed in the next section. An increase in thermal inertia also influences heat release rate and mass loss rate. However, the effect of thermal inertia on heat release rate and mass loss rate is more complicated and will not be discuss further in this paper. The flame spread test cannot be carried out for unreinforced PC due to the significant difference between PC processing temperature (260 °C) and critical heat flux for piloted ignition (~445 °C). As a consequence of this large temperature difference, the sample will melt and drip before ignition is achieved. In the hope that the fibre will hold PC together and prevent it from collapsing (as shown in Substituting 3 and 5 into 4 yields With As seen in the results, the type of fibre used has a major effect on the flame spread. While fibre length does not seem to have much effect on the flame spread behaviour of glass fibre reinforced PC, a 110% increase in flame spread parameter is noticed when the fibre length of carbon fibre reinforced PC is increased from 6 mm to 20 mm. This variation in flame spread properties between glass and carbon fibre reinforced PC is due to the difference in thermal inertia which is greatly influenced by thermal conductivity and volumetric specific heat capacity. An interesting finding is that critical heat flux for flame spread of glass fibre composites is lower than carbon fibre composite despite carbon fibre composites having higher flame spread parameter. By only looking at Eq. It is worth noting that the total convective heat transfer parameter and flame spread parameter for unreinforced PC shown in Results showed that thermal properties are the key driver of fire performance for the fibre reinforced PC composites analysed in this research. Factors such as fibre type, fibre length, matrix type, and the material temperature has an effect on the thermal properties. The level at which the fibre length influences thermal properties is dependent on the thermal properties of the fibre. For fibres with low thermal conductivity, only a minor effect of fibre length is observed. On the other hand, for fibres with high thermal conductivity, fibre length has a major influence, especially on in-plane thermal conductivity. It is concluded that thermal properties can, to certain extent, be used to estimate fire performance aspects, i.e. time to ignition, heat release rate, thermal conductivity, and mass loss rate using the approach described in this paper. Determining the thermal properties of a composite material based on its constituents is relatively straight forward and can be for example achieved analytically by employing the model proposed by C. Chen The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The support of SABIC in the form of research funding, material processing and PhD scholarship for Yousof M. Ghazzawi is gratefully acknowledged.