Short rotation coppice willow is an energy crop used in Sweden to produce electricity and heat in combined heat and power plants. Recent laboratory-scale experiments have shown that SRC willow can also be used for biogas production in anaerobic digestion processes.
                  Here, life cycle assessment is used to compare the climate impact and energy efficiency of electricity and heat generated by these measures. All energy inputs and greenhouse gas emissions, including soil organic carbon fluxes were included in the life cycle assessment. The climate impact was determined using time-dependent life cycle assessment methodology.
                  Both systems showed a positive net energy balance, but the direct combustion system delivered ninefold more energy than the biogas system. Both systems had a cooling effect on the global mean surface temperature change. The cooling impact per hectare from the biogas system was ninefold higher due to the carbon returned to soil with the digestate.
                  Compensating the lower energy production of the biogas system with external energy sources had a large impact on the result, effectively determining whether the biogas scenario had a net warming or cooling contribution to the global mean temperature change per kWh of electricity. In all cases, the contribution to global warming was lowered by the inclusion of willow in the energy system. The use of time-dependent climate impact methodology shows that extended use of short rotation coppice willow can contribute to counteract global warming.combined heat and power short rotation coppice dry matter carbon soil organic carbon greenhouse gas life cycle assessment global warming potential carbon dioxide methane nitrous oxide global mean temperature change volatile solids lower heating value higher heating value organic loading rate hydraulic retention time energy ratio moisture content introductory carbon balance model indirect land use change In order to decrease the climate impact from the European power sector, it is important to increase the share of renewable sources in the European power supply. Bioenergy is an important resource in the Swedish energy system making up 40% of the energy input in 2011 Short rotation coppice (SRC) willow is a well-established woody energy crop that has received particular attention over the last 30 An alternative way of generating electricity and heat is through gas engines. For instance, the majority of the biogas produced in Germany is used in small-scale CHP units that feed into the electricity grid. Farm-scale biogas is still a marginal bioenergy producer in Sweden Converting biomass to biogas enables the recycling of nutrients and C back to the field with the digestate, which can affect the soil organic carbon (SOC) levels When evaluating the climate impact of electricity generated from biomass, one has to consider both greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and the energy efficiency of the system used to generate the electricity. Life cycle assessment (LCA) methodology The most common way of characterizing the climate impact in LCA is to determine the global warming potential (GWP) The aim of this study was to compare the energy efficiency and climate impact of two ways of generating electricity and heat from SRC willow. The two energy conversion pathways investigated were (1) direct combustion in a central CHP plant and (2) conversion of the willow feedstock to biogas through co-digestion with liquid manure before burning the biogas in a small scale gas engine CHP. A trade-off between energy production and carbon sequestration similar to that of biochar systems Life cycle assessment methodology was used to assess the climate impact and effect on the energy efficiency from all relevant GHG and energy flows taking place throughout all life cycle stages of electricity and heat generation A model of a bioenergy production system using willow established on fallow land was set up. A dairy farm with 300 cows and with existing infrastructure for anaerobic digestion of the liquid manure and generation of electricity and heat from the biogas was assumed. Emissions and energy requirements related to construction and decommissioning of the infrastructure was excluded from the LCA for both scenarios. In the biogas scenario, the willow was used within the current infrastructure on the farm, i.e. the willow biomass was co-digested with manure in the anaerobic digester and the biogas was combusted in a gas engine to generate electricity and heat ( The production of inputs, cultivation and harvest of willow, storage losses, transportation of biomass to the conversion facility, preparation of the biomass to be converted and return of the residues to the field were all included within the system boundaries ( All energy and GHG fluxes were recorded in a time-distributed life cycle inventory Results were calculated on a per hectare basis for heat and electricity and converted to per kWh of electricity delivered. The climate impact was calculated as global mean surface temperature change ( Allocation of emissions and primary energy was done using the alternative generation method Mean annual temperature at the willow plantation was 5.5 To ensure a constant supply of willow to the biogas process, one-third of the total area needed was established each year over a period of three years. The willow contributed a 50% share of the volatile solids (VS) to the substrate mixture entering the anaerobic digestion process. The management of the willow plantation followed established guidelines At the biogas plant, the willow chips were comminuted to a particle geometric length of 2 Electricity and heat were generated in a gas engine and 20% of the heat generated The digestate was stored in covered tanks at ambient temperature before being spread on annual crops on the dairy farm. The average one-way transportation distance to the field was calculated to 3.7  The organic loading rate (OLR) of the manure fraction before and after the establishment of the willow was set to 1.5 Eighteen percent of the C in the willow substrate was converted to gas, yielding 83 The willow chips were transported 30 The amount and composition of the bottom ash was based on Swedish CHP plants using similar fuels and technology (wood fuel and grate furnace) Primary energy and emissions from operations were based on the primary energy factors and life cycle emissions of the energy carriers used The energy efficiency was calculated as the energy ratio (ER) between the energy delivered and the primary energy input. The HHV of the willow was set to 17.64 Dry matter losses during storage were based on a 0.8% DM reduction for every month of storage CH Both systems were assumed to recycle part of the nutrients exported from the field with the harvested willow back to the dairy farm. These nutrients reduced the need for inorganic fertilizers, affecting GHG emissions and the energy balance of each scenario through avoided production. The reduction was calculated based on the primary energy consumption and emissions from the production of mineral fertilizer The amount and timing of fertilizer application was taken into account when generating the life cycle inventory ( All nutrients present in the feedstock of the biogas scenario were assumed to end up in the digestate. In the direct combustion scenario, all of the N present in the feedstock was assumed to be lost, while 51% and 45% of the P and K present in the feedstock was assumed to be returned to the field with the bottom ash Fertilizer-induced N The net CO The above-ground humification factors ( Annual net C flux in the standing biomass was calculated assuming a 45% C content in willow DM and a 50% C content in the DM of other crops. In this study, SOC pool changes refer to the entire soil profile, since C allocation to different depths varies between crop types. The C input throughout the entire soil profile was calculated as in Land use prior to establishing the willow was assumed to have been green fallow for a period of 20 Annual net C flux due to the digestate was determined as the difference in SOC change between applying co-digestion digestate and applying manure only digestate to the same area of application. The C input and initial SOC values of the green fallow and the digestate application area are found in The The manure and willow The resulting Converting biomass to biogas before generating electricity inevitably leads to lower energy efficiency compared with direct combustion in a large-scale CHP. Since the biomass output per hectare of land was identical in both scenarios a strict comparison of the climate impact per energy service becomes biased. One approach used in LCA to overcome this problem is to make the reference flows of both systems equal Here, the outputs of heat and electricity were equal in both scenarios in relation to the area used. The lower energy efficiency of the biogas system was compensated for by adding the emissions and primary energy input from the production of other heat and electricity sources ( Two cases for compensation of energy were modeled. The electricity used was either the Swedish electricity mix or a fictional mix (here after referred to as the ’other mix’). The Swedish mix represented electricity with a high share of renewables, while the energy source in the ’other mix’ was 30% nuclear, 30% natural gas, 30% hard coal and 10% wind. In both cases the heat used represented a typical biomass-fired DH system. In order to understand the effect of each system on climate over time, the time-dependent climate impact In order to investigate how the system affected The contribution to Parameters used in Eq. Both the biogas and direct combustion scenarios were net producers of energy, having an ER of threefold and 19-fold, respectively. The average amount of energy delivered over the study period was 16 GJ per (ha The ER between the electricity delivered and primary energy input allocated to electricity (see The willow biomass was carbon–neutral over each rotation, as the amount of C emitted when generating energy was the same as that taken up by the willow during its growth. The net CO Differences in total GHG emissions between the scenarios were mainly due to SOC stock changes induced by willow C returned with the digestate and CH The introduction of willow in the biogas process gave rise to additional digestate, increasing the SOC pool of the digestate application area by 11 t of C per ha (325 The average sequestration rate was 432 CH Longer transport distance to the CHP plant gave higher CO Biomass and fertilizer-induced emissions were the main sources of N Both scenarios made a negative contribution to The effect of the biogas system on All three scenarios counteracted global warming the first 18 The effect of all activities taking place in the direct combustion scenario during the study period on The sensitivity of ER and The effect of the CH The CH The  Growing SRC willow to generate electricity and heat can be energy-efficient and counteract the current trend in global warming. The direct combustion and biogas scenarios studied were both net energy producers and had a cooling effect on Climate impact from the SOC and biomass stock changes in the biogas scenario was several-fold higher and of an opposing sign to the impacts from the fossil inputs and fertilizers used. This came at the cost of net energy output since there was a clear trade-off between maximizing energy efficiency and sequestering C. The biogas conversion step enabled a high recycling rate of nutrients and C back to the soil. This higher recycling rate of nutrients may be important for closing the loops in agriculture, but had little impact on the energy efficiency and climate impact in this study. However, the effect of recycling C was very large for both the energy efficiency and climate impact of the system. The biogas system was shown to offer a sustained cooling contribution to The energy sources used to compensate for the lower ER of the biogas scenario proved to be critical. After adjusting the reference flow of the biogas scenario to be equal to the direct combustion scenario, the external production source of electricity and heat chosen effectively determined whether the biogas scenario had a cooling or a warming influence on If the lower output in the biogas scenario could be compensated for by expanding the area of willow cultivation on existing fallow and marginal land which would otherwise not be used for forestry or food production the beneficial climate effects would be very large since more C could be sequestered. If the demand for bioenergy sector products increases, it is possible that the profitability of bioenergy plantations might surpass those of conventional crops on primary farmland. If that is the case, the consequences of indirect land use change (iLUC) have to be taken into account when determining the possible consequences of choosing biogas over direct combustion An important observation from this study was the long-term effects on yield in a scenario where recycling rates are high From an energy security perspective it seems preferable to utilize the feedstock in the most energy efficient way, which in this case was direct combustion. If regional development and economy is in the focus of policy makers it makes more sense to support other resources for biogas production which can offer higher yields at lower costs and where technology development needs are smaller. The most obvious advantage of the biogas system was its high mitigation effect against global warming. It is however not obvious that it would be a good policy to support biogas production from willow to mitigate global warming. There might be other systems that may provide the same benefits with higher energy efficiency, for example pyrolysis systems Another important insight is that SRC willow systems have the potential to produce electricity and heat while counteracting the current trend in global warming at the same time. Whether direct combustion, optimizing the net electrical output, or prior conversion to biogas, optimizing recycling and C sequestration, is preferable is a question of societal priorities. To answer that question, factors other than the energy efficiency and climate impact of the system need to be considered. Some of the issues that need to be taken into account are the economic, social and general environmental aspects of the system, as well as how society uses energy in general. The climate impact and energy efficiency of producing electricity and heat from SRC willow using either a biogas conversion pathway or direct combustion were compared using LCA methodology. Both systems may be net generators of electricity and heat, and may also contribute to counteracting the current trend in global warming due to potential SOC increases, providing an additional benefit to that of replacing non-renewable and fossil fuels in climate change mitigation strategies. An important temporal difference in the climate effect was shown. The cooling influence of the direct combustion system was stabilized after the first rotation of the study period, while the biogas system continued to exert a cooling influence throughout the entire study period. This offers two different options in a policy context, depending on the climate goals considered more important. A clear trade-off between C sequestration and energy efficiency was shown in the biogas scenario, where a decreasing CH We are grateful to the  See    suffix suffix      For further explanation of ICBM see See