The poisoning effects of KCl and As2O3 on selective catalytic reduction (SCR) of NH3 with NO over Mn-Ce/AC catalysts were investigated with the reaction temperature range of 100–250 °C. KCl and As2O3 poisoned catalysts were synthesized by impregnation method and catalytic activity test was performed under the condition of simulated flue gas. The changes of crystal structure, microstructure, surface atomic state, surface acidity and functional groups were characterized by XRD, SEM, BET, XPS, NH3-TPD and FT-IR. Deactivation for single KCl or As2O3 doping catalyst was observed and severe synergistic inactivation occurred with the common effect of KCl and As2O3 on the catalyst. KCl destroyed the porosity of active carbon (AC) and could react with OH and CO on the surface of AC to ultimately form -O-K and Cl-C-O-K, resulting in the decrease of NH3 and NO adsorption. Besides, KCl caused the reduction of oxygen vacancies and chemisorbed oxygen on the Mn-Ce/AC catalyst. Lattice oxygen of MnO
                        x
                      may be transformed to surface chemisorbed oxygen to oxidize As2O3. As2O3 was oxidized to As2O5 and some layer was formed on the surface of catalyst preventing NH3 and NO adsorption. In addition, As2O3 could increase the number of oxygen vacancies and decrease the surface acidity of Mn-Ce/AC catalyst. According to the experimental results and theoretical analysis, the synergy poisoning model of KCl and As2O3 on Mn-Ce/AC catalysts was schematically established.Nitrogen oxide (NO The flue gas from sintering plants always contains alkali metals and heavy metals, such as K, Na, As In this study, single and combined effects of KCl and As The original coal-based activated carbon was purchased from Shanghai Xinhui Activated Carbon Co. Ltd. It was ground and sieved to 10–20 mesh and oxidized by 60% HNO The Mn-Ce/AC catalyst with MnO The KCl poisoned samples were prepared by impregnating the KCl aqueous solution onto the obtained Mn-Ce/AC catalyst. The received samples were labeled as K To obtain As The activity tests of various catalysts were evaluated in a fixed-bed quartz reactor containing 1 g sample. The simulated flue gas contained 500 ppm NO, 500 ppm NH Crystal structure of the catalysts was analyzed by the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns obtained through a powder diffractometer (Rigaku D/max-2500), using CuKα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å, 40 kV, 40 mA). Microscopy images were obtained to analyze the microstructure of the catalysts, using Scanning Electron Micrograph (SEM, VEGAⅡ-LMU/Tescan) at a voltage of 20 kV. BET surface area, pore volume and average pore diameter were measured by adsorption of N Surface atomic state of catalysts was analyzed via X-ray Photoelectron Spectra (XPS). It was measured by Thermo Scientific ESCALAB 250 with Al Kα X-ray ( Temperature-programmed desorption of NH Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FT-IR) was recorded with Nicolet 5DXC spectrometer in the range of 4000–400 cm The NO conversion of Mn-Ce/AC and K    XPS characterization was performed to determine the chemical composition and valence state of elements on the surface of catalysts. As shown in The Mn2p spectra were presented in  O1s XPS spectra of different catalysts could be fitted into two sub-peaks relating lattice oxygen (O NH In order to explore the functional-groups situation after doping KCl and As Based on the experimental results and preceding XPS analysis, the following chain of reactions could represent the synergistic catalytical mechanism of MnO In the process of denitration, MnO When As According to FT-IR results, KCl caused a marked decrease for the intensity of In the reactions above, R Based on above analysis, the synergetic poisoning mechanism model of KCl and As In the SCR process of NH The produced solid As In addition, the addition of As Therefore, the change of the AC structure and the reduction of chemisorbed oxygen, the adsorption and the activation of NO and NH Both KCl and As