Green field projects demand relatively large amounts of sample from drill-cores. Besides chemical analysis, samples are required for mineralogy and liberation characterization, physical characterization, concentration tests and a number of tests for crushing and grinding parameters. If the project’s process route includes a possible HPGR grinding stage, lab-scale tests for scale-up and variability analysis are required. HPGR grinding characterization can be carried out in a small diameter roll HPGR, such as the LABWAL. Some commercial labs recommend 20–30kg samples for steady-state tests, but this is a rather large sample from the point of view of a green field project campaign. The question that is being assessed here is how much sample is really required? Surely, the more material that is available the more reliable will be the test results. However, when the sample mass size is reduced, what is the impact on the data that is produced? In this work, six phlogopitite samples weighing 20kg were tested in the LABWAL HPGR using six initial hydraulic pressures, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50 and 60 BAR. The specific capacity and specific power factors were determined, as well as the critical angle of nip, and the critical gap. Size distributions were measured and size-mass balance parameters were determined for the Austin model under the range of grinding pressures that were produced. With the data, a hypothetical industrial HPGR for the phlogopitite was designed for a standard capacity of 100t/h and operating at 2N/mm2 specific grinding force. The work was then repeated using 10kg samples and 5kg samples. Results show that, under the conditions that were chosen, samples weighing 5kg are sufficient for characterization in the LABWAL HPGR.Drill core samples are very expensive. This is the major reason why mining companies that use modern geometallurgy techniques are interested in the development of characterization procedures that do not require large amounts of samples. A typical comminution variability campaign at the conceptual stage of a new project will involve about 150 drill core samples weighting 20 Usually the five large samples are used in more elaborate tests such as the complete DWT, all work indexes and the abrasion index, batch grinding tests and the PLT as well as density measurements. These samples do not provide variability information but they do provide enough information to design a grinding circuit, including crushing and milling stages. It is possible to run HPGR tests as well, but these tests must contemplate at least a couple of grinding pressures and the effect of moisture. If the conditions are pushed to the minimum limit, with four grinding tests in a LABWAL roller press, for example, using 10 For HPGR testing, it has been established that the minimum amount of sample that is required is from 20 to 30 Over the past few years thousands of grindability tests were run at Vale S.A. (hereafter “Vale”) research facilities aimed at green field project variability assessment and also for the development of HPGR grinding models ( The answer to these questions can be easily obtained by comparing test results from varying amounts of sample masses. If the grindability results are different for the larger samples, then larger samples should be adopted rather than smaller samples. Eighteen samples of phlogopitite, a rock mainly composed of phlogopite, were prepared for testing in the LABWAL roller press at CETEM. The samples were carefully prepared so that they all have very similar size distributions . The composition of the samples is homogeneous because the original sample is composed by a single mineral, phlogopite mica. This rock is used as a fertilizer because it releases potassium when it is added to soil at fine grind sizes in tropical climates. Eighteen samples were prepared, six samples weighting 5 A 300 The tests are easy to conduct and the entire LABWAL testing procedure was carried out in less than four hours. After turning the machine on, the nitrogen pressure is adjusted in both cylinders to the desired value with the oil valves opened letting the oil flow freely between the cylinders and the oil pump. After this procedure the nitrogen hose is removed and the oil pressure adjusted to the desired setting. Roll velocity is always checked with a tachometer prior to each test campaign. The data acquisition system is turned on and the sample is fed to the feed hopper. The tests last only a few seconds. The ground sample is collected, the data from the data acquisition system are saved and the system is restarted, the rolls and feed hopper are cleaned and the next sample is milled. In this test campaign the data acquisition system was set to acquire oil pressure, motor power and the gap between rolls for each sample tested. The oil return valves were set half way open as recommended except for one test. The first 5 The ground samples were split into smaller fractions and approximately 500 All samples were ground dry. Under this condition one would expect that steady-state grinding is reached at a later stage when compared with samples containing some moisture. The reason is that the addition of some water increases the internal friction coefficients of the bed and consequently larger grinding forces arise, and the gap between rolls opens up faster, to a larger value increasing capacity. In this scenario, dry samples would require larger amounts of sample to go through before grinding reaches steady state. All tests were recorded on digital video so that the quality of each test can be verified in case an anomaly is found in the test results. As it will be seen in the results section, all tests produced excellent, consistent results. The measurements of apparent density followed a procedure similar to the one used in the Bond standard grinding test, in triplicate. The measured apparent density of the crushed phlogopitite is 1397.5 The gap measurement system acquires twenty-five measurements per second. The gap measurement system is independent of the data acquisition system that was provided with the LABWAL roller press. The variation of gap during a typical grinding test is illustrated in In The data acquisition system provided with the LABWAL HPGR can record a number of operating variables. Here, hydraulic pressure and motor power are of most interest. The oil pressures of both cylinders are measured as well as the power draw from both motors. The system measures approximately eight data points per second. The results are illustrated in The results shown in It is easy to transfer the data acquisition system output to Excel™ spreadsheets. However, the analysis of so many data points, including decisions as to where each test starts and ends to make estimates of averages (power, pressure, gap, etc.), is quite laborious. In order to overcome this, a simple command line program was written that reads in all the data acquisition files, determines the starting and ending elapsed times of each test, and outputs average no-load power, average grinding power, average grinding gap, average initial hydraulic pressure and average grinding hydraulic pressure. This analysis of the test results is shown in Although it is possible to start comparing numbers directly from The size distributions measured in each test set of six samples are shown in From these size distributions and the data in The parameters in It is not even necessary to run simulations to show that the resulting parameters in Derived quantities can be calculated from the measured densities and the operating data in There are two variables that are key in scaling-up a roller press based on LABWAL test results, the specific capacity factor The results show that capacity and power as a function of specific grinding force are basically invariant with the size of the test sample. This implies that the same roller press size and motor would be scaled-up with 5 One final comparison has to be made in order to make a case for sample size requirements. This is to compare the size distributions produced in the tests at similar grinding pressures. The comparisons are shown in  Clearly sample requirements for the phlogopitite are low, with good quality data produced with only 5 Continued funding from Norsk-Hydro for SAG mill pilot plant tests and model development is greatly appreciated. The financial support from