Nano-structured duplex and ferritic stainless steel powders are prepared by planetary milling of elemental Fe, Cr and Ni powder for 40h and then consolidated by conventional pressureless sintering. The progress of milling and the continuous refinement of stainless steel powders have been confirmed by means of X-ray diffraction and scanning electron microscopy. Activation energy for the formation of duplex and ferritic stainless steels is calculated by Kissinger method using differential scanning calorimetry and is found to be 159.24 and 90.17KJ/mol respectively. Both duplex and ferritic stainless steel powders are consolidated at 1000, 1200 and 1400°C in argon atmosphere to study microstructure, density and hardness. Maximum sintered density of 90% and Vickers microhardness of 550HV are achieved for duplex stainless steel sintered at 1400°C for 1h. Similarly, 92% sintered density and 263HV microhardness are achieved for ferritic stainless steel sintered at 1400°C.Duplex stainless steel contains almost equal proportions of ferrite and austenite phases in its structure Ferritic stainless steel is one of the important types of stainless steel having body centered cubic (BCC) lattice structure. It contains Cr with very less percentage of expensive Ni, hence it is known as cost saving material whereas more weight percentage of Ni is required to stabilize austenite structure. Ferritic stainless steel is magnetic in nature, hence used as sticking memos on the fridge, storing knives and other metallic implements. It is also used as pans in induction cooker which involves the generation of heat by transfer of magnetic energy. Some of the properties such as low thermal expansion, excellent oxidation resistance at high temperature, high thermal conductivity, creep resistance, high yield strength and less stress corrosion properties make ferritic stainless steel an important type of stainless steels Dobrzanski et al. synthesized duplex stainless steel by mixing austenite base powder of composition Fe–17Cr–13Ni–2.2Mo along with alloying elemental powders such as Si, Mn and Cu in a turbula mixer. They consolidate the powder sample at 800 Usually materials at nano-range behave entirely different from their bulk form Elemental powder mixture of Fe (99.5% pure), Cr (99.8% pure) and Ni (99.5% pure) was used as starting materials. Elemental compositions of Fe–18Cr–13Ni (Duplex) and Fe–17Cr–1Ni (Ferrite) were selected from Schaeffler diagram Milled powder samples of both duplex and ferritic stainless steel powders were compacted using hydraulic pressing machine with a load of 700 The XRD spectra of Fe–18Cr–13Ni (duplex composition) and Fe–17Cr–1Ni (ferrite composition) powders milled at 0, 2, 5, 10, 20 and 40 The lattice parameter is calculated using Nelson–Riley (N–R) extrapolation method The lattice parameters for (111), (200) and (220) planes in the case of duplex and (110), (200) and (211) planes of ferrite at 0 to 40 The considerable broadening of XRD peaks is due to the instrumental errors, decrease in particle size and lattice strain Williamson–Hall method of crystallite size and strain determination was executed by plotting sinθ in x-axis and β cosθ in y-axis (β in radians). From the linear fit, crystallite size and strain are extracted from intercept and slope respectively. The crystallite size and strain of duplex and ferritic stainless steels were calculated from Williamson–Hall method and are represented graphically in SEM micrographs of duplex and ferritic stainless steel powders milled at different time intervals are represented in      Nano-structured duplex and ferritic stainless steel powders were prepared by mechanical alloying method for 40 Financial support for this work from the