Spiral concentrators are used in the iron ore industry to separate heavy iron oxide carrier particles from the light silica ones. Losses of iron occur mainly in the fine (−75μm) and coarse (+600μm) size fractions. This paper analyzes the radial distribution of iron oxide and silica particles in the reject of a 7 turn spiral. A splitter divides the reject flow into six (6) streams that can be sampled individually. Results show that coarse iron carrier particles settle mainly in the inner part of the spiral trough. Although fine iron particles are mostly concentrated in the outer part of the spiral trough, a significant proportion of these particles remain captive close to the concentrate ports. Coarse silica particles (+600μm) are not concentrated in the innermost part of the spiral trough, while a significant concentration of silica particles in the size range of 75 to 212μm is found close to the concentrate ports. This observation is coherent with the size of the silica particles that contaminate the spiral concentrate.Spiral concentrators classify particles according to their specific gravity and size ( In this study, a flow splitter is used to divide the reject of a spiral into 6 parallel streams that can be sampled individually. The results of such reject sampling are usually summarized at the end of a paper dedicated to the calibration of a model for spirals. This paper focuses on the observations of the radial distribution of particles at the discharge of a 7 turn spiral. Results are presented in terms of flow distribution, slurry solids concentration, species concentration and size distribution along the spiral trough. The objective of the paper is to add information about the iron ore processing in a spiral operated with wash water addition. The paper consists of four sections. The first section describes the experimental methodology. The second section presents a preliminary analysis of the measurements conducted through sampling campaigns. The following sections analyze the distribution of solids and some species across the spiral trough as a function of particle size and density. This section describes the test set-up, the ore characteristics and the tests conditions. The collected measurements are described with the data processing method in the last part of the section.  The ground ore and water are added into the main tank from where the slurry is pumped into a distributor that feeds 12 flexible pipes. Depending on the desired spiral feed rate 1, 2, or 4 pipes can be placed into a feed box for each spiral. The flow from each pipe exiting the distributor varies between 0.8 and 1.2 The spiral concentrate is collected by 2 cutters per turn except for the first turn where the cutters are closed to allow the initial sorting of the particles. The reject flow at the discharge of the spiral is divided into 8 streams by the splitter shown in The tests are conducted using an iron ore provided by the Mount Wright concentrator plant of ArcelorMittal Exploitation Minière Canada ( The results presented in this paper come from 4 replicate tests that are conducted at the recommended operating conditions for WW6E spirals indicated in The samples of the feed, reject and concentrate streams, as indicated in Solids mass flow rate; Slurry density; Chemical assays (SiO Particle size distribution analysis (size range of 1180 to 38 Chemical assays of the solids within the size intervals. The measurements from the tests are reconciled using BILMAT ( The preliminary analysis of the data provides an overview of the spiral operation prior to analyzing the radial distribution of particles along the trough. The average compositions of the feed, concentrate and combined reject streams from the four (4) tests are given in The concentration and recovery of iron and silica in the concentrate stream for the four (4) tests are given in The recovery of a species within a size interval in the concentrate is given by: The partition or size recovery curves for the Fe and SiO Results of This section presents the radial distribution of solids, iron and silica in the reject streams of the spiral. The reject stream bands are identified according to their relative distance from the central spiral tube, i.e. R The slurry solids concentration and the mass splits are shown in The slurry solids concentration varies from 55% solids by weight in the inner stream bands (R The concentrations of iron and silica in the reject stream bands are shown in The distributions of iron and silica carriers from the feed to the reject stream bands are presented in There is significantly more variability in the results for silica carriers as shown in The size distributions of the iron carriers in the spiral feed, concentrate and reject stream bands are shown in About 45% of the iron carrier particles flowing in stream band R The size distribution of silica carriers in the spiral feed, concentrate and reject stream bands is shown in The split of species i in the size interval j from the feed to reject stream k is given by: The splits of the iron carriers to the reject stream bands are shown in The splits of the silica carriers from the spiral feed to the reject stream bands as a function of particle size are shown in A 7 turn spiral equipped with a splitter, which divides the reject flow into 6 stream bands is used to analyze the species radial distribution in the spiral trough. The spiral feed is an iron oxide ore from ArcelorMittal consisting mainly of hematite (47%) and quartz (49%) with a top size of 1.2 The authors acknowledge Jean Robitaille from COREM for his help in conducting the tests and the