There has been a great transformation in the nature and location of use of coal, as well as in the location of its production. China and India have emerged as the major producers and consumers of coal. Electricity generation has become its main use. Interest in coal as a replacement for depleting oil and natural gas resources remains, but at a greatly diminished level. Fears of global warming have supplemented traditional concerns about pollution from coal. These and other concerns have led to extensive policies regulating the production and use of coal. The United States has programs affecting labor standards in coal mining, reclamation of mined land, leasing of coal resources on federally owned land, and air and water pollution. Air pollution controls try to directly control pollution through standards on the allowable pollutant content in the atmosphere and to indirectly regulate it by setting emission standards at individual pollution sources. These complex and overlapping regulations are proving difficult to design and implement. As global warming control must be worldwide, its achievement involves daunting implementation barriers.The coal sector has undergone extensive transformation throughout its history, which extends over more than two centuries. These changes have massively altered the size and composition of coal use and changed the location of both its production and use. The principal determinant has been the rise of massive supplies of petroleum and natural gas, two fuels with numerous advantages over coal in transportation, conversion, and use. As a result, the use of coal as the world's main general-use fossil fuel has to an increasing concentration into electric utility use. China and, to a lesser extent, India have emerged as major producers and consumers. Western Europe and the former Soviet Union have greatly decreased their coal production and use. During this transition, the public-policy evaluation of coal has severely reversed focus. Particularly in the 1970s, coal was treated as the potential savior of an oil- and natural gas-depleted world. Several countries, most notably Great Britain and Germany, frittered away billions, at least nominally, in the vain hope that domestic coal would be an important component of the rescue from depletion. While this folly probably reflected the standard inability of governments to abandon bad policies, the coal ambitions elsewhere reflected a genuine fear of oil and gas depletion. This enthusiasm peaked with the Carter administration's wildly unsuccessful creation of a Synthetic Fuels Corporation to subsidize development of alternative fuels with stress on the gasification and liquefaction of coal. In any case, that argument is in a shambles. The threat of immediate depletion has vanished, although the prophets of doom about oil persist. Extensive ongoing work claims an impending peak in world oil production. To top these numerous alarmist efforts, a website makes available the classic work of M. King Hubbert. The availability of cheaper-to-extract coal in several other countries always made the preservation of old industries a mistake, and the fears of depletion were, and continue to be, based on a misunderstanding of the underlying economics. Oil and gas were simply so much more available than feared and easier to employ than coal. This reality has now largely sunk in. More critically, the long campaign to lessen the environmental impacts of fossil fuel use has extended to concerns over the greenhouse gases emitted from combustion causing a harmful increase in atmospheric temperatures, necessitating radical changes in the way energy is provided. This stress on climate change has also led to a strong reversal of concerns over resource depletion. Instead of worrying about fossil fuel availability, much advocacy of rapid moves away from fossil fuel prevails, at least among environmentalists, who treat as outdated efforts to allay exhaustion fears. (The main example is John Holdren's contribution to the intemperate attack on Bjørn Lomborg's It is elementary economics that the role of coal and its alteration reflect the changing comparative costs. Part of the cost consideration is that the side effect (or in economic terminology, externality) aspects of coal production and use are deemed serious enough to warrant extensive regulation. This has produced intercession that goes far beyond the conventional vision of externalities. At the outer extreme, it was felt that private operation was so inept that coal industries should be nationalized. This occurred not only in the communist states devoted to as much as possible of government control, but also in social democratic states such as Great Britain and France that selectively nationalized industries deemed important. (While Britain reprivatized these industries, France did not. It did, however, close its coal industry.) Clear environmental pollution externalities arise from the mining, transformation, and use of coal. There is considerable uncertainty, however, regarding the nature and effects of such pollution. Concerns have escalated over time. The initial stress was on the highly visible emission of ash. Attention then turned to the health effects of the ash and sulfur contained in coal and released during burning. This extended to the acid rain effects on streams and forests of both the sulfur dioxides from the sulfur in coal and the nitrogen oxides produced by any combustion process. At one point, the trace amounts of mercury emitted from coal emerged as an issue. More precisely, the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments included a long list of toxic chemicals including mercury whose pollution effects were deemed serious enough to warrant regulation, and over time, mercury emerged as a prime concern. However, the potential coup de grâce is the widely publicized concern that the carbon dioxides emitted from fossil fuel combustion were producing a worldwide harmful rise in surface temperature. Since coal emits more carbon dioxide per unit of input than other fossil fuels, restriction of coal use (or at least its carbon dioxide emissions) is particularly critical to policies to reduce carbon dioxide emissions. In the United States, a further more immediate complication is the rise of formidable competition from natural gas. For many decades, natural gas grew in importance in electric power as the addition of natural gas-fired plants proved attractive because of low capital costs, stable natural gas prices, faster construction time, and lesser regulatory barriers. The development of technology to extract at dramatically reduced costs gas trapped in shale has increased the competition from gas.  The United States at 15% of 2010 consumption and production fell to a distant second-place participant in coal. The United Kingdom, the birthplace of the modern coal industry, was selected as the cutoff country because of its striking change in coal use. Another striking feature is the decline in the levels of coal production and use in major European countries including the former Soviet Union, Great Britain, Germany, and France. The last three substantially reduced coal production. Indeed, France and Japan eliminated coal production. Japan thus has the unique position of a large consumer of coal that is obtained entirely from imports (principally from Australia and Indonesia). Taiwan also has ceased coal production, and South Korean output has fallen to about 2 million tons. Another feature of the change is the growing role of electricity generation in coal use. The US alteration is particularly dramatic. The share of US electricity generation in coal consumption has risen from 17% in 1949 to 92% in 2010. However, the share of coal in energy use for electricity was 48% in 2010. This was a decline from the 54% peak reached in 1997. The natural gas share went from 12% to 20% over the same period. The roles of other sources changed in many different ways. Despite the absence of new nuclear capacity, the nuclear share rose slightly to 21%. The oil and hydro shares declined, and the only unconventional source to gain ground was wind (from 0.1% to 2.33%). In 2009, electricity accounted for 52% of coal use in China, but this produced 90% of the electricity; the corresponding Indian shares were 80% and 70%. Production is similarly skewed, but because of wide differences in involvement in international trade, the leaders after China, the United States, and India are quite different. In the world coal industry, a few producers primarily for export have emerged. The dominant cases are Australia and Indonesia. They rank fourth and fifth respectively as producers. (The rankings differ by source. BP shows India producing more than Australia in tons of physical coal but less on a heat content basis. However, EIA's heat content figures show India as a somewhat larger producer than Australia.) Conversely, Japan, Germany, South Korea, and the United Kingdom with sharply declining coal production rank much higher as consumers than as producers. Within the United States, the location of production has altered profoundly. In particular, Wyoming has risen from 1% or less of output from 1946 to 1970 to 41% percent in 2010. The leading eastern mining states – West Virginia, Kentucky, Pennsylvania, Illinois, Ohio, and Virginia – display declines in amounts for varying time periods and varying magnitudes too intricate to present here. The change involves both the rise of coal-fired generation west of the Mississippi and displacement of Middle Western coal not only from the West North Central States, but also in coal-producing states, particularly Illinois. Another element of US coal development is the turnover in company ownership. Basically, the industry historically was comprised of companies for which coal was their only business. In the 1970s, oil companies became heavily involved, mainly by creating new coal operations but sometimes by buying existing ones. Then the oil companies retreated, but foreign mineral companies entered. Most notable were the multinational Rio Tinto; RAG, the sole German producer of bituminous; and Rheinbraun, the leading German lignite producer. All of the last three exited. Thus, in 2012, most leading US coal companies are US domiciled publicly traded operations producing only coal. The exceptions include several untraded firms. In contrast, a quartet of firms has emerged to dominate coal production in Australia, South Africa, and Colombia. These are the long extant BHP-Billiton, Rio Tinto, and Anglo-American and the newer Xstrata. Coal-related intervention unremarkably follows patterns endemic to modern government policy. The enabling legislation is characteristically complex, and the convolution has grown over time. A further problem is that these laws routinely leave details for the relevant executive agency to complete. That implementation often proves protracted. Moreover, this incompleteness and imprecision of the laws leaves them open to lawsuits that can and do produce long delays in implementation and then lead to orders to expand the scope of the controls. A vast literature exists on how this resulted from the Progressive movement with its belief that good government would flow from delegation of operation to boards of ‘impartial’ experts. Many observers argue that this vision was fatally flawed. The core defect is the invalidity of the underlying faith in the existence of expertise that could soundly and dispassionately design controls of complex systems. That complexity precluded centralized determination of optimal results. Second, the faith in insulated implementation proved a delusion; political pressures still dominated. Third, often the wrong expertise was employed; attorneys and other generalists, rather than specialists in the areas regulated, took charge. Even when such specialists were utilized, they could not match the quality and quantity of their counterparts in the industries being regulated. The Progressive thrust, in turn, was an effort to use the emergence of modern social science to justify the long-standing pressures to supervise market economies. The left proposed socialism better to enrich the masses. The right wanted the aristocracy to continue to achieve glory rather than ceding to a nation of shopkeepers. These broad doubts necessarily apply to the massive delegation involved in pollution control. Advocates of pollution abatement tacitly argue that the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), in the face of the complexities, still produces net environmental improvement. Critics see a mindless effort ever to increase controls without regard for the costs involved. EPA regularly generates massive documents presenting both the broad case for its interventions and that for specific decisions. Both skeptics and affected industries offer responses. As a result, applied environmental economics suffers from an ill-resolved conflict. The relevant literature deals poorly, if at all, with the implications of inept implementation. The literature unanimously recognizes that the absurdly detailed procedures adopted to cure perceived environmental dangers are monstrously inefficient. These are routinely denounced as command and control. Some concern also exists over the tendency to regulate in areas where the damages are too small to justify action. However, the standard tacit reaction is that this is better than nothing. As is so often the case in many policy areas, this ignores the much cited, but inadequately applied, work of Ronald Coase. (Many reprints are available of that article, and hundreds of commentaries exist, none satisfactory as a guide to the others.) The key points for appraising environmental policy start with his recognition that real economies are not frictionless and action involves implementation (transaction) costs. When such transaction costs are considered, the total costs of removal of apparent market imperfections may exceed the benefits. Governments can pool resources to reduce such transaction costs but so can private alliances. It is unclear first whether either can attain total costs less than benefits. Moreover, given the limitations of government, even if a net benefit arises, the superiority of government action is not certain. The possibility that actual environmental policies fail to meet the Coase criteria is inadequately considered. The patchwork of programs designed to offset the supposed ill effects of the production and use of coal are prime examples. On the production side, deficiencies arise with leasing of the extensive coal resources owned by the US government, the regulation of mine health and safety, and the control of reclamation of land disturbed by coal mining. The rationales for intervention range from the dubious to the clear with some of the most critical involving imperfectly understood problems. The most questionable interventions relate to second-guessing market decisions particularly about the terms and conditions of work in coal mines. This type of intervention into market decisions has received remarkably little analytic attention. A key exception is Daniel Spulber's discussion of ‘internalities,’ essentially intervention to offset supposed limited information. Spulber concludes information provision is preferable, but the long tradition in intervention, now termed libertarian paternalism, argues otherwise. The next step of controlling the surface-land effects of coal mining is at the edge of relevance. Both the internality of effect on the surface-land owner and possible external effects on others are involved. In each case, enormously complicated enabling legislation and creation of a new specialized enforcement agency were involved. US federal coal leasing, in retrospect, proved an area of fruitless intervention. A long frustrating process of rationalizing policy turned out both ineffective and irrelevant. A flurry of coal leasing in the 1960s without corresponding immediate production surges produced a 1971 moratorium on coal leasing. Efforts in the Carter administration were stymied in 1977 by a successful suit objecting to the adequacy of the environmental impact statement on the program. Completion of compliance was so protracted that leasing did not resume until 1981. However, the first major sale after resumption was criticized for its deficiencies. The initial concern was over a reputed leak of data, but that allegation has never been substantiated. Attention turned to questions of administration. The Department of Interior decided to produce estimates of what would be adequate bids for the leases. However, data were available only on one recent sale. Interior employed and modified necessarily ad hoc adjustment measures to cover the differences between that prior tract and the lands to be leased. Such adjustments were unavoidably subject to and, therefore, were subjected to second-guessing. The situation was aggravated by a hasty revision of the estimates. The effect was a series of predictable responses. First, a study commission was appointed to review the situation; I was a member. Second, that commission correctly found the process sloppy and predictably but unwisely advocated better procedures. Third, Interior dutifully produced extensive documents setting up absurdly complex procedures to guide future leasing. Fourth, leasing remained limited during the following three decades. The prior rush to lease had provided enough access to permit the extensive expansion that occurred after the moratorium, led by that in Wyoming noted above. Thus, everyone's premises proved false. The initial leasing was to meet the demands that emerged, and development followed. The stated fixation among politicians for impeccable appraisal methods clearly unwisely makes seeking assurance for the highest possible payments for access excessively dominant over providing the maximum possible market availability of economically viable coal resources. The demands for extensive appraisal, moreover, are unrealistic. Even so, the coal leasing fiasco is simply a further example of the dysfunction of US government land ownership. That land is largely leased for routine commercial use. The procedures are set up to favor particular uses and thus preclude transfer to more efficient options. The limited-duration approach taken in coal, oil, and natural gas leasing is but one of many prime examples. Others include the favoritism toward grazing on western land, the inability to produce the promised efficiency gains by creating national forests, and the creation of many Park Service sites devoted to obscure people and events. Buyers with a mineral extraction goal care only about prospects during the lease life; those who believe that permanent nonextraction is preferable need to offset these offers to exploit every time a lease is offered and reoffered. The system also tries to do too much. A key is that the concept of optimal lease timing is a chimera. Market forces are such that if it is not efficient immediately to develop a lease, the lease simply will be held until the best time to start. Ofcourse, lease length limits will prevent optimal holding when the best starting date is after the lease expires. The only efficiency problem in timing is that the mineral is not leased initially or after forfeiture early enough for extraction to occur at the optimum point. The stress on percentage royalties and securing initial payments equal to the net value of the lease produces further administrative nightmares. Given the royalty requirement, the remaining net is by definition greatly reduced. The total value is difficult enough to predict; the reduced amount after deducing royalties is necessarily even tougher to estimate. Royalties have the textbook defect of discouraging otherwise profitable output. A further practical problem is that collection requires at least output monitoring. In addition, locational and output quality differences often complicate calculation of the correct price of that output. However, the key problem policy area is the five-decade long federal effort to control pollution from the burning of coal. The first federal pollution law was the 1955 Air Pollution Control Act; it concentrated on research. Many modifications arose – particularly in 1963, 1970, 1977, and 1990. (The 1963 revisions were so extensive that some sources treat the changes as the first meaningful law.) The program has involved multiple, overlapping governing principles. The key organizational problems are that implementation is left to EPA, and its decisions can be and have been subjected to court reviews that at a minimum slow and in many cases disapprove of the proposed execution. Among the consequences of these problems, several major changes in environmental law implementation were made in 2011 – twenty years after the last major changes in the law. Basically, these new actions used several different provisions of the acts to tighten emission limits. A more fundamental difficulty is that of satisfactorily quantifying the costs and benefits of action. The initial main distinction was between criteria for the air quality in each state and emission limits for specific sources. Both concepts became increasingly convoluted over time. The first regional distinction was simply between noncompliance areas where the pollution levels were not met and those areas with better than required air quality. The latter ultimately were required to prevent significant deterioration of air quality – a concept so vague that quantitative criteria for allowable change had to be legislated. An additional regional goal of preserving visibility near national parks also arose. Emission limits began with new-source performance standards. These were initially set as simply maximum rates of emission from specific types of facilities. The 1977 amendments shifted to requiring best available control technology (BACT). It became mandatory to comply by employing scrubbers – devices to capture sulfur oxide emissions after burning. (Interestingly, the prime critics of the rule are advocates of active intervention.) The key difference from prior requirements was giving no credit for shifting to coals naturally lower in sulfur content. In principle, this could lead to increases in emissions. The maximum feasible pollution reduction scrubbing high-sulfur coal could produce higher discharges than from burning a low-sulfur coal without scrubbing. The amendments compounded the problem by adding a provision allowing requirements to use locally produced coals; that provision was never implemented. As is routinely noted in the applicable economics literature, the new-source approach has the intrinsic drawback of encouraging maintenance of old units. Thus, an irony of 2011 efforts to tighten standards on old plants is that one justification is that the plants had been exempt from the pollution controls applied to new plants. This exemption, to the extent it existed, was conscious policy, and thus, it is questionable to use backdoor measures to reverse legislative decisions, no matter how ill advised. Moreover, these plants were already subject to indirect control through state implementation plans and direct control through other measures. BACT and the local-coal requirement were obvious but futile efforts to thwart the tendency to adopt low-sulfur western coal as a compliance strategy. A further issue that arose is determining how much plant modification constitutes development of a new source. The tighter the criteria, the less attractive is upgrading old plants. Predictably, EPA, nevertheless, opted for rules that subjected most improved units to new-source rules. The 1990 amendments added two major complications. The first and most immediately relevant was imposing emission limits on high-polluting units of electric power plants; the law listed the affected This ignores two serious problems. Most obviously, the enthusiasm for market implementation ignored the heavy-handed nature of the initial targeting. Second, the law was rushed through before completion of a national acid rain study. When that study appeared, it concluded that the damages to forests and lakes that were the nominal basis for the controls were far smaller than previously claimed. At best, the remaining rationale for action was that further reduction in health damages was produced. The second area of toxic chemicals proved difficult to resolve. In late 2011, EPA issued its latest effort to set compliance rules. These rules were justified almost entirely (all but a billion dollars of the $33–$89 billion cumulative benefits on various assumptions) by reduction in particulate-matter emissions. Nominal benefit was attributed specifically to reducing mercury pollution or actually improving visibility. An obvious issue is that the law covered a large list of specific chemicals while particulates were always an EPA concern. This disconnection produced extensive criticism of this use of a policy directed at one specific problem to further control of a different, long heavily regulated pollutant. Of course, toxic chemicals are a type of particulate. This leaves open why special controls should be added on top of general limits. This particular action inspired an extensive counterattack by those affected, and extended litigation is expected. Another 2011 regulation dealt with cross-state pollution. These rules required reduction in sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide emissions in the eastern United States because these emissions lead to concentrations of ozone and fine particles that produce violation in other states of the air quality criteria for those pollutants. Still another 2011 regulation presented the latest effort to enforce the visibility requirements. Again, the solution was increasing limits on already controlled pollutants. While these rules had very different bases, the chosen rationales of all three were identical – substantial health benefits. The minimum concern is that so many routes are open to dealing with the same problem of seemingly dangerous emissions. In the toxic material and visibility cases, the claimed health benefits, as noted, arise from controlling pollutants so long regulated that adequate control should already exist. An immediate further difficulty is the slowness with which these rules are formulated, a tardiness to which extended litigation is a major contributor. The situation is aggravated by the readiness of judges to require changes. Further regulation ruled that mountaintop coal mining caused water pollution under the Clean Water Act. Such determinations are a vexing aspect of that law; the application of the law to puddles often produces news reports (and extensive more formal criticism). At a minimum, the experience shows why emissions taxes are far preferable to command and control. What remains open is whether in a world in which action depends on complex command and control, multiple concerns of wildly varying merit, delegation of implementation to EPA, and ease of judicial challenge, the policies actually yield benefits in excess of their costs. The EPA valuation estimates are based on its own mathematical model whose bases are not clearly delineated. Global warming is yet another environmental issue in which moral indignation tries to silence technical debate. Proponents of action assert that the disasters resulting from failing to control are so severe that further analysis is irresponsible. The advocates of additional study stress the defects of the supporting research. Their implicit moral argument that massive action against an imaginary problem would divert resources from reducing world poverty is mildly stated. In any case, given the moral arguments supporting both sides, only careful analysis can resolve the debate. Similarly, the source of research funding is never a valid way to evaluate the reliability of results. The government does not allocate all its research funds on the sole basis of merit. Even if private firms seek to advance their interests, their concerns are not automatically invalid. Consultants are hired because their prior independently formed views support the sponsor, public as well as private. Thus, denunciation of research sponsorship is invariably a way to evade making a reasonable response to the criticism. Yet, it is perennial. Three decades ago, my membership on the coal leasing commission was denounced because of one small grant from Exxon. The part available on Amazon of Penn State climate researcher Michael Mann's book defending his questionable statistical analysis of global temperature change uses the fuel industry support calumny early and often. The vast literature suggests that the physical science and economic impact research is far less settled than proponents insist. Certainly, the physical science dissents involve respectable academics. More critically, physical science is only the first part of the argument. The costs, benefits, and feasibility of action must also be considered, and the deficiencies are vast. The economic modeling to evaluate the payoff is clearly and necessarily inadequate. The task of analyzing the next century cannot succeed given the inherent limitation of economic modeling – particularly the impossibility of foreseeing what new things will emerge. Simply observing the work makes clear that the results, as is so often the case in economic modeling, are extremely sensitive to assumptions. The work by the British research team headed by Nicholas Stern produced large benefits from action mainly by using a far lower discount rate than most other modelers. (This difference produced strong criticism from many of these other modelers.) Richard Tol's 2009 survey of the literature explicitly concludes all the economic modeling is unsatisfactory. Thus, caution is appropriate. On top of these problems, designing a sensible implementation policy proved infeasible. Another key aspect of Coase's analysis is that either a tax on damage creation or a subsidy of damage avoidance can efficiently produce control of social cost and no clear a priori basis exists for preferring taxes over subsidy. (The essence of the enormous literature trying to critique these findings is that the proper tax or subsidy is dauntingly difficult to design.) The debate over how to respond to the threat of global warming is a dramatic illustration of Coase's policy choice argument. A subsequent prices versus quantity debate examined the potential equivalence between an optimum tax and setting the optimum level of compliance as a quota. Curiously, this literature concentrated on which method was best given different areas of uncertainty. Conceptually, this overlooked that given multiple different uncertainties all with unknown impacts, a sensible choice was unclear. A more critical, probably fatal neglect was of the practical experience with tariffs versus quotas in international trade. At a minimum, unseemly debates arise about to whom to award the windfalls from quotas; often, rampant bribery for access arose. This alone suffices to make charges clearly preferable to cap and trade. As shown, three nations dominate coal use. Given the high rate of greenhouse gas emissions from coal, these states must undertake substantial reduction or control of coal use. A basic concern is whether it is fair for countries emerging from poverty to pay for control of emissions made dangerous by the actions of the already rich. Thus, China and India demand compensation for their compliance, but rich-country governments, already facing fiscal stress, have no inclination to provide such assistance. This reality dominates the literature on control of climate change. Proponents of action, perhaps more than opponents, stress the centrality of getting a control agreement including China and India. Reductions elsewhere would fail to offset rises in China and India. In the meantime, the European Union succeeded, but the United States failed, in implementing a unilateral emissions policy. The 2009 United States failure is yet another graphic example of the complexities that plague environmental policies. The US House of Representative passed a massive bill centering on greenhouse gas control. The core was setting caps on emissions and devising rules to allocate quotas within these caps. These were designed initially to favor those, particularly coal-using electric utilities, most affected by the caps. However, these grants were to be phased out. Numerous provisions indirectly to produce emission reductions by favoring nonfossil fuel alternatives supplemented the direct controls. The cap-and-trade approach proved doubly problematic. The blatant political bribery involved in the initial grants produced a backlash. The ultimate turnover of the income from permit sales to the federal government involves major public policy concerns. Optimists hoped that this revenue from a tax that ideally would enhance, rather than reduce, economic efficiency would allow reduction of reliance on the highly distorting existing income tax system. Predictably, doubts arose about that hypothesis. This array of provisions proved so unattractive that the US Senate failed to act on the bill or the various alternatives offered. A further factor in the decision was a (5-4) decision by the United States Supreme Court that the Clean Air Act required EPA to consider regulating any potentially dangerous emissions. This produced the expected divide. Advocates of action considered accepting the Supreme Court approval of action a desirable route and argued that the environmentally concerned Obama administration could and would act. Believers in limited government (and at least one leading advocate of heavy intervention – Lawrence Tribe) considered this an unwarranted expansion of government power. In any case, efforts are already underway indirectly to lessen greenhouse gas emissions. Critics suspect that the rash of tighter regulations just sketched of coal use is itself another roundabout way to control. Most certainly, the massive federal and state efforts to foster ‘alternative’ energy clearly are designed as indirect climate change policy. On 27 April 2012, EPA announced rules for carbon dioxide emissions from power plants. These rules state that new coal-fired plants are expected to employ still totally unproved technologies to ‘sequester’ (i.e., store underground) these emissions. The key problem is that the desirability of the chosen options and the means adopted to stimulate them are questionable. The goal in electricity is to make competitive technologies that are centuries old – wind and solar technology. These have not emerged as important power sources because of severe problems including the limited number and remoteness of sites at which these resources can be employed and the stark conflict between the need of electric power systems for uninterrupted flows and the irregularity of sunshine and wind. The various energy bills since the oil price shock of 1973 include numerous efforts by subsidy and tax breaks to improve the competitiveness of these sources. The results are at best unimpressive and have led to massive failures. The clearest defect of these mandates is neglect of the unmanageable scale of the stated ambitions. The task of radically altering how electricity is generated is expensive and time-consuming. Given that the best sites for wind and solar are far from the locales of existing power plants, the requirements include massive investment in transmission lines. The variability of the sources is such that backup (fossil fuel) generation will be needed. A further dilemma is that many of the leading proponents of action on global warming long ago declared that nuclear energy, the one proven nonfossil energy source that is physically capable of providing electricity on a large scale, was an anathema. Thus, the advocates are caught between recanting or insisting that solar and wind suffice. Examples of both positions arose. Of course, securing new nuclear capacity by the government guarantees provided is no better policy than subsidy for any other alternative. Severe critics of these initiatives observe, correctly, that the environmental groups seemingly pushing these initiatives also oppose implementation. Offshore wind farms and transmission lines for renewable energy in remote locations draw the same attacks as coal-fired power plants, new natural gas production technologies, and oil pipelines. Economists dealing with this issue tend to oppose these backdoor choices as further undesirable command and control. These economists prefer a tax or an emission limit. Moreover, the long unhappy history of quantitative controls, of which the failed House of Representative bill is but another reminder of a proven but politically unpopular point, suggests that a tax is far preferable. In any case, any policy radical to reduce greenhouse gas emissions would require massive adjustment by coal consumers. The proposed response of capturing the gases and storing them underground is still an untested technology. Its physical feasibility and cost remain to be determined. Neither the prior enthusiasm for increasing coal use nor the current desire to ban coal use is well grounded. The ardor was based on erroneous views about oil and gas availability. The pressure to eliminate fossil fuel use is based on physical science whose very strident promotion should raise doubt, grossly inadequate economic analyses, and to date insuperable implementation problems. Those who lived through such prior confident predictions as of famine, overpopulation, resource depletion, and nuclear power disasters wonder about the similar confidence about action on global warming. In the global warming case, the proponents of action want several countries massively dependent on coal to undertake the enormous, time-consuming task of coal replacement. The stress on alternatives that vary radically in availability is a further problem. A profound paradox arises in analysis of coal. The literature primarily concerned with coal is thin, but the material that treats aspects of coal treated here is unmanageably large. The isolated coal policy issues that arise are insignificant compared to those over oil and natural gas. Examining the leading energy economics journals ( At least three sprawling realms of related material exist – the energy prognosis literature, the energy data area, and the environmental policy writing. On the first, see Gordon for note of the many surveys of overall energy issues that have appeared. The authors range from governments to freelance writers. No obvious focal treatments are available on the other two areas so the basics are sketched here. At least four sources of worldwide energy data exist, and they differ radically in coverage, accessibility, and usability. The United Nations (UN) has long published total production and consumption data on energy in every country of the world and at some point added statistics on the end use details. However, these data are not easily accessible. The International Energy Agency (IEA) provides both a four-part collection of energy data and coal-, petroleum-, natural gas-, and electricity-specific compendia. The energy reports consist of (1) figures in oil equivalent tons for OECD members, (2) similar figures for nonmembers, (3) statistics in regular units for members, and (4) similar data for nonmembers. The fuel-specific reports include commentary. These reports are downloadable from libraries that are OECD depositories, but the underlying computer files must be purchased. The IEA data start with 1960 with at least older members and 1971 for nonmembers. BP has a special role in making available without charge more quickly than others Excel files of its The US energy data system is elaborate but variable in the form of availability and historical continuity. When the Energy Information Administration (EIA) was established in 1979, it assumed the energy data gathering efforts of the US Bureau of Mines, the Federal Power Commission, and the Federal Energy Agency. Initially, the result was generation of more numerous, more formal reports, and making the underlying data available. Over time, the coverage has diminished, and most reports are available only as PDF files on the Internet. In the case of reports covering individual electric companies and plants, database files replaced reports. However, data accessibility has generally increased. In many but not all cases, the PDF versions are supplemented with Excel spreadsheets. The availability online of PDF and Excel versions differs among reports. EIA maintains three data sets showing historical data. First is the still printed In some realms, data availability has declined. Two key cases are federal lands data and electric utility fuel receipts. Reports of total federal acreage and agency ownership seem to have vanished as have data on production from federal coal leases. EIA has deemed confidential fuel receipts by ‘nonutility’ generators, generously defined nonutility, and thus lessened the completeness of plant coverage. An enormous, indigestible literature covers the environmental issues sketched here. The contributors include governmental agencies, the numerous groups arguing for increased environmental controls, private research organizations including several devoted to limited government, and many independent observers. The Lomborg survey noted above is but one of the skeptical reviews coming from various sources including both committed advocates of free markets and clearly independent observers. The environmental movement has undertaken so excessively comprehensive an agenda of opposition that book-length critiques of excesses regularly appear and often produce vigorous efforts to refute. EPA generated many massive documents relevant to the issues discussed. They include statements of policies in specific area, supporting regulatory impact studies, surveys of the impacts of the major pollutants, and even three overviews of the estimated costs and benefits of pollution control. The core of global warming advocacy is the work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. The US State Department prepares a periodic report on US progress in the area. The supporting literature is enormous. The dissenting literature comes largely from several market-oriented research organizations such as the Cato Institute, the Heartland Institute, and the Competitive Enterprise Institute; a weekly newsletter   A term to describe policies to require regulators to define and mandate use of the technically best emission control technology. A policy to set limits on emissions from a given facility that allows selling the excess of the limit over actual emissions and buying reductions from sources with emission rights to spare. A component of the atmosphere essential to all forms of life on earth but which it is feared could cause undesirable environmental impacts if its concentration greatly rises. The US law that with its amendment governs air pollution policy. The concern for the undesirable effects of rising carbon dioxide concentration in the atmosphere. Derisive term for policies that tightly define rules to comply with environmental regulations. Harm to air quality in one state from migration of pollutants emanating from another state. The using up of a natural resource. Appraisals of the environmental effects of ′major′ policy decisions; interpretation led to an expansive definition of major. The using up of a natural resource. The effect of individual actions on others rather than the conscious participants. The various gases that contribute to increased carbon dioxide concentrations. A UN body of scientists engaged in the appraisal of climate change dangers. Daniel Spulber's term for policies that regulate the effects of economic action on the direct participants. An organization created in the 1970s to effect cooperation among and supporting studies for industrial countries. It is associated with the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). All IEA members are OECD members, but some OECD members initially did not join IEA. A term devised by Richard Thaler and Cass Sunstein to justify intervention in cases in which experts knew that individuals would regret their unregulated decisions. Chemicals form as the result of combustion. Term for those in the United States who argued that the rise of learned professions created the expertise to allow successful expansion of governmental control of the economy. A charge by public or private landowners on the production of a commodity. It can be ad valorum - a percent of revenues - or a specific amount per unit of output. Chemical released during combustion because of the sulfur contained in the fuel. Term for the indirect costs of information and implementation associated with buying and selling goods. The US cabinet agency with land management responsibilities including administering most of the US governments extensive land holdings. An ‘independent’ component of the Department of Energy charged with producing energy data, energy forecasts, and policy studies. The agency charged with promulgating and enforcing US environmental policies.