In the Bayer process, diasporic bauxite is dissolved in a caustic soda solution in the presence of lime at high temperature. During this process, concentration of carbonate and oxalate gradually increases causing problems in the alumina refining process. In this work, removal efficiency of the carbonate and oxalate pollutants from sodium aluminate solution has been increased using thermal and chemical techniques. The pollution of sodium aluminate solution has been reduced by heating the bauxite and removing the carbonate and oxalate by applying a chemical method. Bauxite heating leads to the organic compounds and carbonates in magnesite and calcite minerals exit as CO2, preventing addition of these substances into the sodium aluminate solution. In the method of chemical removal of the carbonate and oxalate soluble in sodium aluminate liquor, barium aluminate with structures of Ba2Al2O5, Ba2Al4(OH)16 and BaAl2O4, calcium aluminate (Ca3Al2(OH)12) and sodium phosphate (Na3PO4)–lime were separately used. As a result, these substances were sedimented as carbonate or barium oxalate, calcium and apatite. The results also showed that soda was retrieved as sodium aluminate or sodium hydroxide. Investigating the effect of temperature, time, concentration of caustic soda, Al2O3 and sodium carbonate revealed that using Ba2Al4(OH)16 and the heating methods are the most efficient technique to remove the carbonate and oxalate, respectively.The Bayer process is known as extracting alumina from bauxite ore ( The bauxite is the main source of organics in the Bayer process ( Carbonate and oxalate pollutants enter into the Bayer process through bauxite, lime and sodium hydroxide solution and cause a number of problems in the alumina production cycle ( Reviewing the conducted studies indicates that some reported methods resulted in low efficiency of the Bayer process. In addition, some other methods are carried out in undesirable operational conditions including temperature, pressure and concentration of the pollutants in the solution leading to incapability of some of these methods to be applied. Among these, using the method of chemical elimination by the use of additive compounds to remove carbonate and oxalate impurities from the Bayer process solution has more efficiency and flexibility due to the conditions governing the alumina refining process. The aim of this work was to increase the removal efficiency of the pollutants for the Bayer process using simultaneous chemical and heating methods. Bauxite heating and removing method has been applied using phosphate–lime, calcium aluminate with the structure of Ca An electric furnace (Carbolite-RW1400, England), a dryer (Ecocell, England) and a heater equipped with temperature control and magnetic stirrer were used to perform the experiments. The quantitative analyses of the compounds in the bauxite and red mud were performed using XRF (Siemens-SRS3000, Germany) and AAS (Unicam, England) devices. XRD (Siemens-D5000, Germany) was used to qualitatively analyze bauxite, red mud, final sediments of the tests and the prepared required materials (such as calcium aluminate and barium) and with the aim of identifying the nature and type of the combinations. The chemical analysis of the solution phase was done before and after the experiments. During the experiment, the values of Na The required bauxite and lime have been used from mine and lime kilns located in Jajarm Alumina Company. The required barium aluminate was prepared and produced using barium chloride, barium carbonate and barium oxide from Merck Company, and alumina and sodium aluminate solution produced in Jajarm alumina company. The applied calcium aluminate was prepared and used by lime milk and sodium aluminate solution. Phosphate and sodium carbonate used in the experiments were obtained from Merck Company. The XRD diffraction patterns of different barium aluminate forms including BaAl The experiments were carried out in an autoclave and a 1 The most important issue in the experiments is to find the optimum value of barium aluminate with the structure of (Ba The time to achieve the best possible efficiency and minimum tank size required for the reaction is another important parameter in the experiments. In this part, 1 Each operational unit in Jajarm Alumina Complex has especial conditions in terms of temperature, pressure and concentrations of the compounds in sodium aluminate solution. In order to study the removal efficiency of the carbonate, the Bayer process solutions with certain chemical and physical conditions were separately mixed with 14.55, 11.6 and 11.2 The effect of sodium phosphate–lime and calcium aluminate with structure of Ca Despite good efficiency of eliminating carbonate and oxalate, the challenge of this method is the phosphate, remaining in the solution phase. It is clear that if the reaction is done more completely, in addition to high removal efficiency of the carbonate and oxalate, there would be more phosphate sediment in form of hydroxyapatite and its concentration would be reduced in the solution phase. After eliminating the carbonate and oxalate from the solution, a test was conducted to reduce the phosphate concentration in solution of sodium aluminate. In the Bayer process, a part of spent liquor is returned to the beginning of the process (wet milling unit). Moreover, in this unit, lime and bauxite are added to the system and the Bayer process begins. Besides reducing the phosphate solution, the presence of lime can cause to eliminate more carbonate and oxalate contaminants. Therefore, by simulating the current process in Jajarm Alumina Complex, 500 To study the effect of bauxite heating to reduce carbonate and oxalate pollution, Jajarm's diasporic bauxite was calcined at 800 To find the optimal temperature of bauxite heating, 133.35 Sodium phosphate–lime and barium aluminate have been used separately to remove carbonate. Phosphate can react with carbonate and oxalate in the presence of lime and according to reaction The important issue in this part is to examine, if the removal reaction is not complete, the residual lime can directly react with alumina in sodium aluminate solution and sediments in the form of calcium aluminate, or if exposed to silica, sediments in the form of calcium aluminum silicates ( The experiments were carried out to find the optimum amount of sodium phosphate–lime and barium aluminate to achieve the highest removal efficiency of carbonate. Thus, using stoichiometry of the reaction, various amounts of the additives needed to remove certain amount of carbonate were calculated and expressed as Na Carbonate removal efficiency was calculated based on the amounts of removed sodium carbonate (in terms of Na In  These results indicate that the reaction of carbonate removal has occurred and hydroxyapatite carbonate and barium carbonate have been formed in sodium phosphate–lime and barium aluminate methods, respectively. The results also showed that by decreasing the values of β and γ, more amounts of sodium carbonate have been removed, while according to the definition, the efficiency of recovering caustic soda and removing carbonate has been reduced. As it was predictable, the results indicate concentration of alumina increases in the existence of barium aluminate and it decreases in the existence of sodium phosphate–lime. In fact, through increasing phosphate and lime, in addition to reducing the efficiency of caustic soda recovery, more amounts of Al In this part, sodium phosphate–lime and calcium aluminate were separately used to remove 5.5 Calculations of the removal efficiency of carbonate have been conducted based on relation  In these experiments, in order to remove 5.5 The result in These results also imply if the reaction of purifying carbonate has higher efficiency, the lower amount of Al To study the effect of additives on the removal efficiency of carbonate and oxalate, sodium phosphate–lime, calcium aluminate and barium aluminate with different structures were used. Based on the stoichiometry of the reaction, these additives were added to the spent liquor for removing 5.5 The reactions show that, the operation of carbonate removing is associated with caustic soda recovering. The relation of the reaction for removing oxalate was similar to the reaction of carbonate except that instead of carbonate; there was an oxalate ion (C The results indicate that Ba This experiment was conducted in order to reduce the phosphate concentration in the sodium aluminate solution. The results obtained from the previous experiments were utilized to perform this experiment. Hence, the test was carried out on spent liquor. The amount of added phosphate–lime in the first stage was applied to eliminate 5.5 The results show that the first solution of sodium aluminate contains 364 XRF analysis of sediments in stages 1 and 2 indicates phosphate departure from the solution phase and formation of carbonate-hydroxyapatite. Thus, by performing the two-step process the amount of phosphate in the initial solution has increased and at the end of the operation it has decreased. Hence, by doing this operation, the efficiency of caustic soda recovery can be enhanced and also concentration of the remaining phosphate can be reduced.  Heating was performed at the temperature of 800 The results indicate that the operation efficiency is increased with escalation of calcination time. In addition, the time effect on the removal efficiency gradually declines with time so that its amount does not make much difference from 60 to 100 The temperature experiments were performed at 800 to 1100 The results imply that there is an increase in the efficiency of the operation due to raising the temperature. Since there is a little difference between the results at 1000 and 1100 In the Bayer process, the reaction of silica in bauxite with caustic soda causes the loss of great amount of NaOH ( In this study, several methods were applied to prevent carbonates and oxalate to enter into or remove from the Bayer process. The first is to reduce the entrance of these compounds into the sodium aluminate solution by heating bauxite so that volatile materials including carbonate and organic materials could exit. The second is to remove the impurities from sodium aluminate solution. So the chemical methods were applied using additives of sodium phosphate–lime, calcium aluminate and barium aluminate. The third is the recovery of soda which is a major advantage for this method because it does not require an additional stage for causticization. The results showed that using barium aluminate with the structure of Ba The experiments indicated that spending 30 In the chemical method, reaction stoichiometry and the amount of sodium carbonate were first calculated for various additive amounts. Then the carbonate removal efficiency was obtained from the ratio between the removed carbonate and the carbonate equivalent to additive amount. Another parameter such as β was also defined from the ratio between carbonate in the initial solution and the carbonate equivalent to the additive. The results showed that by increasing β, the removal efficiency of carbonate also increased which means that by targeting smaller amounts in removing carbonate, higher efficiencies can also be achieved. These results indicated that the maximum removal efficiency of pollution in the chemical method has been obtained from the output solution of units of wet grinding and spent liquor. Comparing the methods of bauxite heating and chemical elimination, the first method in addition to eliminating carbonate and oxalate change aluminosilicates to active corundum and silica which can be used in bauxite beneficiation ( In the chemical elimination method, the operating efficiency when using calcium aluminate is lower than the other methods, but lesser price of calcium aluminate can economically justify the use of this compound compared with barium aluminate and sodium phosphate–lime. In addition, after chemical elimination of sodium aluminate solution, the resulting cake, which contains unreacted calcium aluminate, can be reacted with pure sodium carbonate solution that can be sold to while recycling its alumina. It leads to provide a part of required caustic soda of the alumina refinery process.  the concentration of caustic soda as Na total caustic and carbonate sodas as Na the concentration of sodium carbonate as Na the concentration of alumina (g/l) the ratio of alumina to caustic soda the ratio of caustic soda to total soda total of sodium salts active lime (%) wet (%) the ratio of alumina to silica in bauxite the amount of sodium carbonate equal to sodium phosphate–lime as Na the concentration of sodium carbonate in the solution before test as Na the concentration of sodium carbonate in the solution after test as Na the ratio of sodium carbonate in the solution to Na the amount of sodium carbonate equal to Ba the ratio of sodium carbonate in the solution to Na the concentration of sodium oxalate in the solution before test (%) the concentration of sodium oxalate in the solution after test (%) change in the alumina concentration in the liquid phase Loss on ignition This work was funded by the