Schizophyllan is a natural polysaccharide that has shown great potential as enhanced oil recovery (EOR) polymer for high-temperature, high-salinity reservoirs. Nevertheless, the adsorption behavior of schizophyllan over carbonate minerals remains ambiguous element towards its EOR applications. Here, we investigate the adsorption of schizophyllan on different carbonate minerals. The effect of mineral type, salinity, and background ions on adsorption is analyzed. Our results indicate the adsorption capacity is higher on calcite and dolomite compared to silica and kaolin and the adsorption capacity decreases with salinity. Moreover, the adsorption kinetics follows pseudo-second order mechanism regardless of the mineral type. Adsorption over calcite is diminished in presence of water structure making ions and enhanced in presence of structure breaking ion and in presence of urea. Gel permeation chromatography results reveal the preferential adsorption of longer chains. The adsorption over carbonate minerals proceed via complex formation between polymer molecule and mineral surface.High-performance water-soluble polymers are used in Enhanced Oil Recovery (EOR) applications to increase oil recovery from depleted oil reservoirs. However, applications of polymer EOR in high-temperature, high-salinity carbonate reservoirs typical of the Arabian Gulf reservoirs remains very challenging due to the stringent requirement of thermal stability, salt tolerance, and low adsorption on the carbonate rocks that are difficult to meet with even the latest generations of acrylamide or saccharide-based polymers ( Conventional synthetic EOR polymers including HPAM and Xanthan have been utilized in some of the most successful polymer projects, but their application is still limited in high-temperature, high-salinity reservoirs due to their hydrolysis at high temperature and precipitation in high-salinity conditions ( To overcome these challenges in high-salinity, high-temperature reservoirs, a new biopolymer ‘ SPG is a non-ionic, homoglucan polysaccharide, which is an extracellular product of Schizophyllum Commune. It has a backbone of β glucopyranose residue units linked at 1–3 position with a single β glucopyranose linked via 1–6 linkage to every third unit of the backbone as shown in Polymer adsorption is characteristic of polymer-solid interaction and is usually reported as either mass of polymer per unit mass of the solid or mass of polymer per unit surface area of the solid. Polymer adsorption is generally classified based on the energy of the interaction between the surface and polymer as chemisorption if the energy change during adsorption is During the adsorption of polymer chains, several thermodynamic interactions between the segment-surface, segment-solvent and segment-segment take place. The change in enthalpy during adsorption and the change in conformational entropy, which is a measure of the number of chain configurations available to the adsorbed molecule to the number available for a free molecule in solution, govern the adsorption process. The entropy change by the displacement of solvent molecules from the surface by the polymer molecules is also responsible for the thermodynamics of the process. It is also worth noting that the adsorbed polymer does not have a fixed configuration; rather different segments of the polymer chain are in constant motion changing from attached train segments to unattached loop or tail segments ( For a polymer to be an EOR candidate in harsh carbonate reservoir conditions, it should exhibit high salinity tolerance, long term thermal stability, good injectivity and low/manageable adsorption. The first three aspects of SPG have been studied thoroughly in the past ( SPG polymer solution was supplied by Wintershall as a stock solution of 5600 ppm and was further diluted using brine to reach the required polymer and salt concentrations. In addition, a solid SPG sample was supplied by Invivogen. Synthetic brine (TDS  ∼167 g/L) containing NaCl (134.7 g/L), KCl (1.4 g/L), CaCl The chemical structure of SPG was determined by analyzing the FTIR spectra acquired in the range of 4000–525 cm The specific surface area of minerals was measured via nitrogen adsorption using BET technique (Quantachrome Autosorb-3b). Zeta Potential and particle size of the minerals were measured after equilibrating overnight in reservoir brine using Malvern Zetasizer Nano-ZS (Malvern Instruments). To study the effect of polymer concentration, salinity and temperature on the adsorption of SPG on various minerals, a biopolymer solution of the desired salinity and concentration was prepared by diluting the stock solution of 5600 ppm with brine solution. A known amount of the mineral was added to 40 mL of the polymer solution in 50 mL centrifuge tube. The tube was flushed repeatedly with nitrogen and then sealed. The tube was then placed on a reciprocating water bath shaker operating at 200 rpm at the desired temperature. At the end of the experiment, the centrifuge tubes were kept static overnight and then centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 10 min to precipitate the rock. A control experiment was carried in the same manner but without the addition of rock. After centrifugation, three samples were drawn from the supernatant and the adsorbed polymer amount was determined by measuring the residual polymer concentration using the Phenol-Sulphuric Acid method ( The polymer structure was analyzed using FTIR and the spectrum is provided in Fig. S3 of the supplementary information. The FTIR spectrum for SPG indicates the appearance of OH stretching/vibration peak at 3300 cm The atomic composition of all the minerals were measured using XPS and the results are shown in The SEM images of the four minerals is provided in Fig. S4 of the supplementary information and shows calcite has a uniform particle size distribution from 2−3 μm, dolomite has a broad particle size distribution extending from 1 μm to 8 μm, while kaolin has a small particle size and disc-shaped particles with very small diameters and silica’s particle size is ∼ 5 μm. The BET surface area, zeta potential and particle size distribution of the four synthetic minerals are presented in Table S2 of the supplementary information. The four minerals have particle size ranged between 1.9 and 5 μm. The BET results show that calcite, dolomite and silica have low surface area (1–1.7 m The zeta potential results (Table S2) indicate that in reservoir brine, silica and kaolin are negatively charged (-1.5 mV and -4.6 mV), while dolomite and calcite are positively charged (+11 mV and +7.4 mV). Shehata et al. reported zeta potential results for these four minerals (calcite 13 mV, dolomite 19.7 mV, kaolinite −11 mV, silica −2.5 mV) at 55 g/L salinity ( The kinetics of adsorption is very important in designing and carrying the adsorption experiments as well as in determining the affinity of the polymer towards the surface and its propagation in porous media. Several models such as film diffusion, intra-particle and pseudo-first-order were tried to fit the kinetic data. A model which fits both the 25 and 75 °C is the pseudo-second order model. This model is best suited for a system where chemical reaction is the significant rate-controlling step ( The slope and intercept of the equation enables one to calculate the rate constant (  The maximum adsorption capacity (plateau value) may also depend on the particle size of mineral as previously reported (  To further understand this phenomenon, the effect of individual ions on adsorption was also studied. Gel Permeation Chromatography (GPC) of the fresh polymer solution and supernatant after the adsorption experiment were performed to characterize any change in polymer molecular weight distribution on a qualitative basis. GPC experiments were performed following the same protocol reported by Horvathova et al. for a β-1,3-glucans including that of schizophyllan ( When a polymer solution is mixed with mineral particles, the smaller macromolecules diffuse more swiftly and bind to the surface first, but later they are displaced by the larger ones. This has been explained in the literature due to the entropy changes which occur when short chains adsorb and desorb as compared to the longer chains ( Many polysaccharides are used for adsorption application. For example, starch is used in mineral flotation as a selective adsorbate for removal or depression of phosphate from quartz ( SPG is a non-ionic polymer, therefore, electrostatic interactions do not govern its adsorption over calcite. However, adsorption of SPG over calcite in the presence of salinity decreases to a certain level after which salinity has very little effect on adsorption. This initial decrease may be attributed to the screening of calcite surface by adsorption of salt ions preventing the non-electrostatic interactions between SPG and calcite surface. The role of hydrogen bonding in the adsorption of SPG over calcite can be confirmed by the addition of urea. Urea is known to be a strong hydrogen bonding acceptor and thus can affect the adsorption process of polysaccharides over minerals if the adsorption is taking place through hydrogen bonding ( The hydroxyl groups ( The adsorption of schizophyllan on different minerals follows pseudo-second-order kinetic and suggests the adsorption phenomenon is slow over calcite and dolomite requiring around 10 days at 25° C and 3 days at 75° C because the slow surface equilibration of carbonaceous minerals. Moreover, adsorption capacity on calcite and dolomite is more significant than on silica and kaolin and the adsorption over calcite decreases in presence of structure making ions (Na  We acknowledge Abu Dhabi National Oil Company, UAE for funding this research. We also acknowledge Wintershall for providing Schizophyllan sample. Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: