The hot deformation behavior of AISI T1 (18W–4Cr–1V) high-speed steel has been investigated in the temperature range 950–1150°C at strain rates of 0.001–10 s−1 and true strains of 0–0.6. The results show that the activation energy for deformation, Q, decreases with the increase of strain below 1000°C, and it changes slightly with the strain above 1000°C. Metallography shows that there are fine carbide particles precipitated in the grains, and that these lead to dispersion hardening and an increase in the value of Q. There are fewer of these particles above 1000°C than below it. The Zener–Hollomon parameter and the hyperbolic sine function are used to predict the flow stress as influenced by temperature and strain rate for different strain levels.High-speed steel contains many alloying elements. Both the dissolution of alloying elements and the precipitation of carbides result in strengthening the steel during hot deformation. The distribution of carbides in high-speed steel has a large effect on its hot deformation behavior. For example, the activation energy for deformation, To date, there have been few investigations of the deformation behavior of high-speed steel and these investigations centered only on AISI M2 high-speed steel. The objective of this paper is to determine the activation energy for deformation as well as to predict the flow stress of AISI T1 high-speed steel under different continuous deformation conditions. The composition of the AISI T1 high-speed steel studied is given in Sections were cut from the specimens along the longitudinal axis, then the center areas of specimens used for metallographic analysis. The surfaces were prepared by mechanical polishing followed by etching in 4% Nital, then examination by light microscopy. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) analyses were performed using a Hitachi S-2700 and Philips XL30. Transmission electron microscope (TEM) analyses were performed on a Hitachi H 700. The temperature increase caused by deformation cannot be neglected when the strain rate is high. Baragar True stress/true strain curves of AISI T1 high-speed steel deformed at different temperatures and strain rates are shown in   At present, the creep model is widely used in constitutive equations describing the hot deformation of metals and alloys. The Zener–Holloman parameter, the so-called temperature-compensated strain rate, was introduced in the creep model in order to correlate The strain rate- and temperature-dependence of the peak stress It has been proven that As mentioned above, According to the definition of the activation energy for deformation: As shown in The microstructures of AISI T1 high-speed steel before and after straining under different deformation conditions are shown in  TEM observations on specimens deformed at 950°C The presence of the fine precipitated (Fe,M)  The dissolution of the fine precipitated carbide particles in the grain reduces the dispersion hardening effect while the grain boundary coalescence of carbides increases the mobility of the grain boundary. Thus the value of The value of We introduce strain into 1. Divide the flow stress data into several data sets according to strain level and establish a relationship between 2. Calculate the value of 3. Taking natural logarithm of Values of 4. Calculate 5. Taking the natural logarithm of 6. Fitting 7. Taking the following equation, the flow stress in continuous deformation may be predicted: So the flow stress at different temperatures and strain rates can be determined at different strain levels by using 1. The activation energy for deformation, 2. A mathematical model of the activation energy for deformation of AISI T1 high-speed steel has been established and this model is incorporated in the following creep constitutive equation: The constants The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 59675049). Acknowledgment is also due to Professor Dang Zijiu and Professor Zhang Yan who provided assistance in the hot deformation tests. The authors would like to thank Prof. Zhu Zuchang for his help in the scanning electron microscopy, and Prof. Rong Yonghua, and Prof. Wang Yongrui for their help with the transmission electron microscopy. One of the authors (Jiantao Liu) is indebted to Dr. Liu Junliang, Dr. Lou Gang, Dr. Zhou Junbiao, Dr. Zhou Zhijie and Dr. Gu Wentao for their help.