Minor grains such as sorghum, millet, quinoa and amaranth can be alternatives to wheat and corn as ingredients for whole grain and gluten-free products. In this study, influences of starch structures and other grain constituents on physicochemical properties and starch digestibility of whole flours made from these grains were investigated. Starches were classified into two groups according to their amylopectin branch chain-length: (i) quinoa, amaranth, wheat (shorter chains); and (ii) sorghum, millet, corn (longer chains). Such amylopectin features and amylose content contributed to the differences in thermal and pasting properties as well as starch digestibility of the flours. Non-starch constituents had additional impacts; proteins delayed starch gelatinization and pasting, especially in sorghum flours, and high levels of soluble fibre retarded starch retrogradation in wheat, quinoa and amaranth flours. Enzymatic hydrolysis of starch was restricted by the presence of associated protein matrix and enzyme inhibitors, but accelerated by endogenous amylolytic enzymes.Worldwide consumption of products containing whole grain has grown continuously due to increasing awareness of their health-promoting benefits ( Recently, interest in the development for whole grain and gluten-free products has been growing, and the lesser known grains such as sorghum, millet, quinoa and amaranth are postulated as promising alternatives for this purpose ( Although these minor grains are viewed as promising ingredients for whole grain-based products, their current utilization in modern food industry is still limited by availability, price, insufficient product development and research efforts. Due to the fact that these minor grains differ in several important respects from each other and from the common cereals, a sound fundamental knowledge on their grain characteristics and technological properties is required to promote their industrial use. Starch is present as a major component in most cereal and pseudocereal grains. It plays critical roles on technological properties of cereal flours through its physicochemical transformation and interaction with other ingredients. For example, viscosity of starch is one of the key sensory drivers for cereal beverages and porridges. In extruded cereals and snacks, starch constitutes a continuous amorphous phase, and other grain components such as proteins and fibres impact the continuity of the starch phase. In pasta, noodles and baked goods, starch granules represent the discontinuous phase because they are distributed within a continuous gluten network ( Improving sensorial and textural properties of whole grain products is a major challenge for the food industry ( Grains of white and red varieties of sorghum ( Porcine pancreas α-amylase (E.C. 3.2.1.1) (A6255 type I-A approx. 1050 Total starch, damaged starch and phytic acid contents of WGF were determined using enzymatic kits (K-TSTA 07/11 with KOH procedure, K-SDAM 07/11, K-PHYT 12/12, respectively, Megazyme Ltd.). Protein content was calculated from a sum of total amino acids determined by ion-exchange liquid chromatography following the AACC 07-01 and 07-11 methods. Total fat content was determined using a Soxhlet extraction. Total, soluble and insoluble dietary fibres were determined according to the AOAC 991.43 and AOAC 2011.25 methods. The AOAC 991.43 employs the use of thermo-stable α-amylase at 95–100 Starch was isolated from the grains according to the alkaline-protease wet milling procedure ( Isolated starches and starch granules embedded in cereal endosperms and pseudocereal perisperms were observed under a scanning electron microscope (SEM). For the latter, grains were frozen in liquid nitrogen and fractured along the transverse axis using frozen hammer or blade. Samples were mounted on aluminum stubs using a conductive carbon tape. The samples were sputter-coated with a 5 Amylose content of isolated starch was determined by the lectin concanavalin A (ConA) method using the assay kit (K-AMYL 07/11, Megazyme Ltd.). Molar-based branch chain-length distribution of amylopectin was determined on isoamylase-treated starch using fluorophore-assisted capillary electrophoresis (FACE) according to Gelatinization and retrogradation properties were determined using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) (Mettler DSC 820, Mettler Instrument, Volketswil, Switzerland) equipped with a sample robot (TSO801RO). The instrument was calibrated with indium (28.5 Pasting properties of isolated starch and WGF were determined using Rapid Viscoanalyzer (RVA model 3D; Newport Scientific Ltd, Sydney, Australia). Isolated starch or WGF was weighed in a canister and added with distilled water to obtain 8% w/v, dry starch equivalent (total weight of 28.0 Isolated starch or WGF containing 100 Linear regression analysis and analysis of variance (ANOVA) by Tukey’s comparison test (  As listed in Cellular nature featuring the starch granules embedded in storage protein matrix was observed in cereal endosperms under SEM ( Amylopectin is a highly branched glucan polymer and a main component of starch granule. It is characterized by α(1-4)-linked Endothermic transition corresponding to the loss of double-helices upon starch gelatinization was analyzed by DSC, and the effects of non-starch components on gelatinization of starch in WGFs were evaluated. Previous study showed that gluten from wheat demonstrated negligible or no denaturation peak in DSC (  Both isolated starches and WGFs from white sorghum, red sorghum, millet and corn required higher gelatinization temperatures than those of wheat, amaranth and quinoa ( Short-term developments of gel structure and hardness of cooked starches are attributed to retrogradation of amylose, while retrogradation of amylopectin involving re-association of the branch chains occurs at a much slower rate ( For isolated starches, short amylopectin branch chains (DP 6–12) showed negative correlations with T The ΔH values of retrograded starch in sorghum, millet, wheat, and corn retrograded WGFs were 9–28% lower than those of the isolated starches. Interestingly, a large reduction in ΔH values was shown for amaranth, wheat and quinoa WGFs, i.e. 55, 78 and 72% reduction, respectively ( Amylopectin provides basic molecular structure for granular swelling and pasting during cooking. Starch with inferior crystalline structure, i.e. amylopectin with shorter branch chain-length, may display low pasting peak viscosity and large viscosity breakdown because of its lower interaction in holding granule integrity (  As shown in In cereal fermentation, type of grain plays a key role in determining quantity and quality of carbohydrates as primary fermentation substrates, nitrogen sources and other growth factors for microorganism. A conversion of starch to fermentable sugars is resulted from actions of grain-associated endogenous, exogenous and/or extracellular amylases of lactobacilli ( In this study, influences of grain components on enzymatic hydrolysis of starch to glucose were evaluated. For WGFs, other factors including physically damaged starch granules, proteins, lipids, endogenous enzymes, inhibitors, and phytochemicals may have additional impact on enzyme-substrate accessibility and available enzyme activities. As shown in Corn WGF showed higher starch digestibility than its isolated starch, and its digestibility was not largely modified by pepsin. This would be attributed to the loosely adhesion of storage proteins to starch granules as observed in the SEM ( Minor cereals and pseudocereals are considered as emerging food ingredients for several food applications. Whole grain flours made from these grains have different chemical composition, physicochemical properties and starch digestibility. The present study showed that the starch structural features contributed largely to physicochemical properties of each grain type. The additional effects of non-starch components were also grain-specific. Protein and soluble fibre could delay gelatinization and retrogradation of starch in WGF, respectively. Pasting property and starch digestibility of WGF were influenced by several factors including associated proteins, endogenous enzymes and proteinaceous amylolytic inhibitor. This study provides fundamental understanding on chemical and physicochemical properties of whole grain flours from sorghum, millet, amaranth and quinoa. The authors would like to thank Martine Rouvet and Bertrand Schmitt for their great support on scanning electron microscopy, Charlotte Gancel and Christine Théoduloz for analytical support. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 