Between 1997 and 2004, 18 patients (8 men and 10 women, with a mean age of 73.2 years) with failed treatment of intertrochanteric hip fractures underwent hip arthroplasty as salvage procedures at our institution. Cementless, 5/8-porous coated, 6-in. primary diaphyseal locking femoral stems were used. Prospective follow-up ranging from 2 to 5 years (mean, 37.1 months) showed improvement of hip function without prosthesis loosening. Complications included 1 case of postoperative infection, 2 cases of dislocation, and 2 cases of stem subsidence. The clinical results were satisfactory. The 5/8-porous coated, 6-in. cementless femoral stems could be used in the salvage procedures for failed fixation of intertrochanteric hip fractures.Intertrochanteric fractures after low-energy trauma are common in the elderly people. Closed reduction and internal fixation by plates or screws are widely performed The purpose of this study is to review our experience in treating failed intertrochanteric hip fractures by cementless primary diaphyseal locking hip prosthesis. Both functional outcomes and radiographic images were reviewed retrospectively. Particular problems and technical difficulties encountered in this type of reconstruction conditions are also discussed. We hypothesize that cementless primary diaphyseal locking hip prosthesis may be chosen to treat failed intertrochanteric fracture fixation in selected cases. Between 1997 and 2004, 1486 cases of intertrochanteric hip fractures were treated at our institution. One hundred seven cases (7.2%) failed to achieve union after closed reduction and internal fixation by implants. Eighteen of them were selected and treated by a single surgeon (WMC). Primary cementless diaphyseal locking hip arthroplasty (anatomical medullary locking, DePuy, (Warsaw, Ind.) 5/8-porous coated, 6-in. stem) was performed in these 18cases. Eleven patients underwent total hip arthroplasty (THA) due to acetabular cartilage wear, and the remaining 7 received bipolar hemiarthroplasty. The initial fixation devices for the intertrochanteric hip fractures were sliding hip screws in 14 cases (cemented in 4 cases and noncemented in 10) and Eighteen patients, including 8 men and 10 women, between 32 and 86 years of age, had received arthroplasty surgery. There were 13 left and 5 right hips ( Because of relatively old age, most of these patients had other medical comorbidities, including hypertension in 13 cases, diabetes mellitus in 5,cerebrovascular disease in 5, cardiovascular disease in 5, and senile dementia in 3. Two patients died due to unrelated medical conditions at 4 and 7 months after the arthroplasty, respectively. The interval between initial fixation and implant failure ranged between 1 and 16 months (mean, 5.2months). Implants failures were caused by infection in 1 case and loss of fixation in 17 cases (including 9 cases of implant cutting out and 8 cases of implant loosening with migration). The total surgical time ranged between 1.8 and 3.6 hours, with an average of 2.6 hours. Estimated intraoperative blood loss ranged between 400 and 1900 mL, with an average of 822 mL. Cerclage wiring had been performed in 7 cases (38.8%) due to metaphyseal nonunion, loss of abductor mechanism, or intraoperative calcar crack. However, in the 16 cases that had been followed up for more then 2years, neither femoral nor acetabular component loosening had been noted in radiographic images ( In functional assessment, the mean Harris hip scores before arthroplasty was 31.8 (range, 16-46) and improved to 78.5 (range, 54-93) after the operation. Hip pain improved in all patients. Operation-related complications occurred in 5cases (27.7%), including 1 postoperative infection, 2 hip dislocations (occurred within 2 months postoperatively), and 2 cases of stem subsidence. Infection was successfully treated by intravenous antibiotics and repeated debridements. All hip dislocations were treated by use of abduction braces, and no recurrence was observed thereafter. Two cases of stem subsidence, 1.2 and 0.5 cm, respectively, occurred within 2 months postoperatively. Both of them achieved stable bone ingrowth without further stem subsidence at subsequent follow-up. Most intertrochanteric fractures can be treated successfully with internal fixation. However, failed intertrochanteric fixation often leads to profound functional disability and pain. The treatment of failed intertrochanteric fracture fixation is complex and challenging to the orthopedic surgeon There are a variety of choices in arthroplasty to treat failed intertrochanteric fracture fixation. The use of a cemented prosthesis provides immediate weight-bearing but may be associated with cement leakage and embolization. Cement leakage from previous cortical screw holes leads to poor control of cement technique and effect of rigid fixation. Plugging the cortical screw holes has been suggested Mariani and Rand In this study, a higher complication rate of 27.7% was noted. This might be due to poor bone stock and abduction mechanism, advanced age with comorbidities, and the more complicated surgeries. The high dislocation rate might be due to weak muscles, loss of abductor mechanism, and poor bone stock. More blood loss during the operation might be related to the hypervascularized soft callus and complex surgery with longer operating time. Postoperative infection may be related to repeated surgery, and difficulty of the surgery, with longer operating time. Postoperative femoral stem subsidence probably resulted from deficiency of calcar support and bone stock. However, extensive coating of the stem provided circumstance for bone ingrowth in the diaphyseal area and achieved stable status without further subsidence. Fortunately, all prostheses were preserved after proper management. Salvage procedures for failed intertrochanteric fracture fixation are difficult and complicated. Primary extensive coated diaphyseal-locking femoral stem can bypass the weakened proximal femur and achieve stable fixation in the diaphysis, provide immediate postoperative weight-bearing, preserve more bone stock, and reconstruct abductor mechanism by cerclage wiring. In our experience, the clinical results were satisfactory. However, stress shielding may prove a concern in the future. Therefore, a longer followed-up period is required.