This paper explores the solvent extraction of KAu(CN)2 from alkaline cyanide solutions using quaternary ammonium cetylpyridinium bromide (CPB) as an extractant with the addition of tributylphosphate (TBP) as a modifier. It also investigates the influence of several variables on gold extraction, including the molar ratio (β) of CPB to Au(I), the volume percentage of TBP (φ
                     TBP), NaCl concentration, phase ratio (AQ/ORG), and gold concentration in the aqueous phase. The results indicate that nearly all of the Au(I) (>98%) was transferred from the aqueous phase into the organic phase when β
                     =1 and φ
                     TBP
                     =30vol%. We also carried out experiments for treating 20L synthetic aurocyanide solution containing 10mg/L Au(I) with column-shaped extraction equipment. The results demonstrated the recovery of more than 94.5% of Au(I) after two successive stages of extraction, and the Au(I) concentration in the raffinate was less than 0.5mg/L. KSCN solution was used to strip the gold-loaded organic phase, and about 90% of Au(I) could be reverse extracted into the aqueous phase when the KSCN concentration reached 3.0mol/L. The results obtained in this paper establish that the CPB/TBP extraction system has potential for practical application in the extraction and separation of gold from alkaline aurocyanide solutions.Gold is normally leached using an aqueous alkaline cyanide solution. Subsequently, the pregnant leachate solution undergoes zinc powder cementation or activated carbon adsorption for enrichment. During the past decades, studies on direct solvent extraction of Au(I) from alkaline cyanide leaching solution have received much attention since To obtain further information and better knowledge of the chemistry of gold extraction by the new quaternary ammonium salt extraction system, in this work we attempted to study another typical cationic surfactant, cetylpyridinium bromide (CPB, structure in Analytical Reagent (A.R.) grade cetylpyridinium bromide, potassium thiocyanate (KSCN), tributylphosphate (TBP) and The organic phase was prepared by dissolving TBP (typically 30 In the extraction experiments, 10.0 Pilot extraction experiments were run in column-shaped extraction equipment as shown in To determine the influence of CPB on the extraction of Au(I), we investigated the effect of the molar ratio of CPB to Au(I) in the aqueous phase. The effect of concentration of the modifier TBP on the extraction of Au(I) has been studied by varying the volume percentage of TBP (  Generally, increasing the concentration of inorganic salt ions, such as NaCl, in the aqueous phase can effectively reduce emulsification of the extractive organic phase due to the salting-out effect of the aqueous phase. Recently, the extraction mechanism of Therefore, it is hypothesized the gold extraction reaction for CPB/TBP system occurs according to, The salting-out agent NaCl added in the aqueous phase could combine with water molecules. This would reduce the concentration of free water molecules ( Different ores can produce different gold content. The increase of the AQ/ORG phase ratio is beneficial to the decrease of the organic phase used and to production costs. The influence of the volume ratio of the aqueous phase to the organic phase (AQ/ORG) on the extraction percentage is shown in The gold-loading isotherm ( A heap-leaching process usually produces a very diluted alkaline gold cyanide solution (typically 1–20 In the present work, KSCN solution was employed as the stripping reagent of the gold-loaded organic phase. The process of gold stripping by KSCN from the loaded organic phase follows the ion-exchange reaction. The stripping reaction could represent a competition between SCN The Au(I) stripped into the KSCN solutions could be recovered by electrowinning or other chemical reduction methods. This paper investigates the extraction of gold from an alkaline aurocyanide solution by quaternary ammonium cetylpyridinium bromide with TBP as modifier. The extraction was found to be nearly quantitative, and almost all of the Au(I) (>98%) was extracted into the organic phase. The experiments using 20 The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the Chinese National Natural Science Foundation Projects (50764008), National High Technology Research and Development Program of China (2006AA06Z127) and 973 program of China (2007CB613607).