The possibility of replacing the natural gypsum, used in cement production, by a jarosite/alunite chemical precipitate was investigated. This precipitate is a by-product of a new hydrometallurgical process, which was developed in order to treat economically low-grade nickel oxide ores. For this purpose, nine mixtures were produced by substituting gypsum, from 0% to 100%, by the jarosite/alunite precipitate. All samples were tested by determining the setting time, compressive strength, grindability and content of water soluble chromium. Furthermore, XRD analysis was used to determine the hydration products after 2, 7, 28 and 90 days. The jarosite/alunite precipitate was produced from a real laterite heap leach liquor by precipitation at atmospheric pressure, during a series of six runs. More specifically, iron and aluminum were precipitated at 95 °C. That was accomplished by gradually raising the initial pH of the leach liquor to an equilibrium pH value of 3.5, at such a rate as to keep supersaturation of iron and aluminum below a critical value.The general trend of today for the industrial wastes or by-products, which are produced in industrial countries, is to develop alternative ways for their exploitation in order to eliminate the cost of disposal and avoid soil and water contamination. Many of these undesirable industrial materials contain significant amounts of inorganic ingredients that can be used in the production of Portland cement clinker. The Laboratory of Metallurgy of the National Technical University of Athens has developed a new integrated hydrometallurgical method, suitable to treat, efficiently and economically, low-grade nickel oxide ores. It involves heap leaching of the ore by dilute sulphuric acid at ambient temperature, purification of the leach liquors and recovery of nickel and cobalt In the framework of the above method, a new process of leach liquors purification was invented relating to the removal of iron, aluminum and chromium, as existing methods were not satisfactory. This process relates to the precipitation of the above metals as crystalline, easily filterable chemical precipitates of the jarosite/alunite type, at atmospheric pressure The idea of substituting natural gypsum by the jarosite/alunite precipitate in order to produce Portland cement was based on the high sulphate content of the mineralogical phases and the need to find an industrial use for this by-product. Besides, it is assessed that the cost of using the jarosite/alunite precipitate would be lower than that of quarrying, grinding, and transporting of natural gypsum Replacement of natural gypsum by non-calcium sulphate salts was investigated by Bombled Another important factor that should probably be taken into account is the SO In the present work a series of runs was conducted to produce the jarosite/alunite precipitate from a real laterite heap leach liquor by precipitation, at atmospheric pressure, to be used as a substitute of gypsum in cement production. Nine different mixtures were produced by substituting gypsum from 0% to 100% with the above precipitate. All mixtures were tested for setting time, compressive strength, grindability and water-soluble chromium, in order to determine optimum percentage of substitution. Six (6) runs were conducted to produce the jarosite/alunite precipitate, according to the method which was developed by the Laboratory of Metallurgy of the National Technical University of Athens, in order to remove the aluminum and chromium from laterite leach solutions, in a crystalline and filterable form At the end of the runs, the content of each reactor was filtered under vacuum. The resulting precipitates were washed with water by re-pulping, dried overnight at 110 °C and weighed. During the first two runs, the neutralizing agent used was magnesium carbonate (industrial grade) in the form of a slurry with water (100 g/l). However, it exhibited slow reactivity and, consequently, high reaction times and consumption were induced. For this reason, magnesium carbonate was replaced by a slurry of magnesium oxide (100 g/l) in the next runs. Nine (9) different mixtures were produced, with 95% clinker content, by replacing gypsum, from 0% to 100%, with jarosite/alunite precipitate and the grindability index of each mixture was determined (as the ratio of specific surface to mill revolution). Furthermore, all samples were analyzed for water soluble Cr Finally, the cement paste samples, which had been prepared by mixing 300 g of ground mixtures with 75 ml of water, were examined by XRD analysis. These pastes were left to cure for 2, 7, 28 and 90 days. The chemical analysis of the feed solution used for the production of the jarosite/alunite precipitate is shown in The corresponding results of the iron, aluminum and chromium simultaneous precipitation are shown in The chemical analyses of the jarosite/alunite precipitate, produced by mixing of the produced precipitates, clinker and gypsum are given in Grindability index of each sample was determined and is presented in The samples were analyzed for water soluble Cr The setting times of the cement mixtures, determined by the European Standard EN 196, are given in The compressive strengths at 2, 7 and 28 days, as well as the % SO Finally, the cement paste samples, which had been prepared by mixing 300 g of ground mixtures with 75 ml of water, were examined by XRD analysis. The pastes were left to cure for 2, 7, 28 and 90 days. The XRD of the mixture with no jarosite/alunite, as well as the mixture with 20% replacement, are given in The fact that the grindability index, setting time and compressive strengths were similar to those obtained with the mixture with no jarosite/alunite addition (sample 1), lead to the conclusion that the optimum mixture was the one, in which 20% (sample 5) of the gypsum had been replaced by the jarosite/alunite precipitate. In this paper, the possibility of using jarosite/alunite as a substitute for natural gypsum in cement production was investigated. More specifically, a jarosite/alunite precipitate was produced from a real laterite leach solution, according to a novel method developed by the Laboratory of Metallurgy of the National Technical University of Athens. According to this method, iron and aluminum were precipitated by 99% and 95%, respectively at 95 °C. That was accomplished by gradually raising the initial pH of the leach liquor to an equilibrium pH value of 3.5 at such a rate as to keep supersaturation of iron and aluminum as low as possible, within a practical period of time (up to 12 h). The evaluation of the data of chemical analyses, X-ray diffraction analyses, grindability tests, measurements of setting time and compressive strengths, showed that the substitution of jarosite/alunite for gypsum up to 20% does not affect the properties of the cement mixtures produced. Higher substitution leads to shortening of the setting time and to a decrease of water-soluble chromium Cr The authors are grateful to the General Secretariat for Research and Technology of Greece for financial support in the framework of the Program “Industrial Exploitation of the Solid Wastes Produced from Hydrometallurgical Treatment of Greek Laterites––PENED 99”. They also express their warmest thanks to Mr. J. Marinos, Director in Quality Assurance and R&D Manager of Hercules Cement Company of Greece, for his constant advice.