In this study, degradation of hydroxyoxime extractants by nitration was studied in nitrate media. The effect of nitrate concentration in the range of 10–40 g/L, pH value range of 1.5–2.3, temperature in the range of 25–35 °C and different modifiers including 2,2,4-trimethylpentanediol diisobutyrate, tridecyl alcohol and nonyl phenol on the nitration of hydroxyoxime extractants was investigated. A new type of inhibitor reagent consisted of tertiary butylhydroquinone (TBHQ) and styrolfenol blend (1:2, w/w) was investigated in a nitrate media under 180 g/L H2SO4 at 30 °∁ for required time. It is shown that the new inhibitor reagent (3%, w/w) can reduce the nitration to half for hydroxyoxime extractants. In addition, other measures such as increasing the pH to above 2.3, using more stable reagents like ketoximes, to reduce nitration were suggested.It is difficult to leach copper from sulfide ores with sulfuric acid without pretreatment, while better leaching can be obtained with nitric acid ( The degradation of copper extractants by nitration has caused serious operation problems. For example, in northern Chile, there are several plants with severe nitrate problems. In these plants the PLS pH is below 1.8 and the nitrate concentration is >5 g/L. After a long period of time these conditions have resulted in more entrainment, more emulsification and slow phase disengagement ( How to reduce or prevent the degradation of hydroxyoxime extractants by nitration has attracted increasing attention ( In this paper, the factors affecting the nitration of hydroxyoxime extractants were studied, nitration inhibitors were developed and measures to reduce nitration were proposed. The synthetic nitrate aqueous solution containing 35 g/L Cu A number of mixed organic solutions, containing aldoxime, TXIB, TDA or ketoxime modified aldoxime in aliphatic diluent Mextral DT-100, were prepared. The compositions of the mixed organic solutions were shown in All experiments were carried out in sealed glass bottles with flat bottom. Mixtures were agitated vigorously using a Teflon coated magnetic stirrers. The pH values of the solution in all experiments were adjusted to the desired value by adding drops of 5.0 mol·L The maximum Cu loading of fresh organic solutions (10%, v/v) were measured before use by mixing the fresh organic solution and equal volume of the stock aqueous solution containing (g/L) Cu The maximum Cu loading of each fresh organic solution was calculated by determining the Cu concentration in the blended strip solution using titration method (EDTA) and which was recorded as ρ(Cu After determination of the maximum Cu loading, the fresh organic solution was continuously mixed with synthetic aqueous solution containing nitrate at an O/A ratio of 1:1 and required time and temperature. Organic samples were taken periodically and stripped with 200 g/L H The natural degradation of the extractant under acidic conditions was ignored in the above equation since the degradation rate was very slow below 40 °C. HPLC analysis for aldoxime and ketoxime were performed by Agilent 1260 Infinity II instrument using a described method ( Phase disengagement time (PDT) tests were performed on fresh organic solutions by organic continuous (O/C) modes at 25 ± 1 °C as described previously ( Add 250 mL organic solution into the test vessel at 25 °C, start the stirrer and adjust the impeller speed to 1750 ± 25 rpm ( The remaining mixture was continued to mix for a total of 300 s and then stop the stirrer. After finished phase separation, sample 20 mL organic solution and filter it through Whatman 1PS filter paper. The Fe concentration in the organic sample was directly determined by atomic absorption spectroscopy and recorded as E  Hydroxyoxime extractants such as aldoxime and ketoxime can be nitrified by nitrate under acidic conditions which results in the conversion of hydroxyoximes into nitro hydroxyoximes. Nitro hydroxyoximes have extremely strong extraction ability but are difficult to strip. In many cases, even using a high acid stripping solution (200 g/L H It can be seen that the nitration of hydroxyoximes has negative effects on Cu extraction in hydrometallurgy. It was necessary for the Cu SX plants to reduce the nitration of the extractants, as a result, the effect factors on the nitration of hydroxyoxime extractants were studied. The synthetic feed solutions, containing 35 g/L Cu and 30 g/L NO From the results listed in It showed that the nitration rate was about 7 times faster when the pH value decreased from 2.3 to 1.5. Taking leaching efficiency and impurities separation under consideration, if there was more NO As shown in From the results it can be seen that aldoxime, TDA or TXIB modified aldoxime have the similar nitration trend under the same conditions. However, for aldoxime and ketoxime blends, the nitration rate is relatively slow compared with aldoxime and modified aldoxime, which is mainly due to the relatively good stability of ketoxime under nitrate conditions. Compared with a pH range of 1.5–2.3, the nitration rate is faster when the acid concentration increased to 10 g/L. At a pH 1.5, even after 50 days of continuously operating, the nitration percentage is not >7.2%. But when the H Compared with 10 g/L H From the experimental results obtained above (See From the formula it can be seen that the rate of producing NO The organic solutions containing aldoxime, TDA or TXIB modified aldoxime were mixed at an O/A ratio of 1:1 with the synthetic solution respectively at 30 °C. Sample the organic solution every hour (180 g/L H As shown in In From Among the formula “r” represents the nitration rate, “k” is the rate constant, “m” and “n” were the order of reaction. In this case, “m” and “n” is 1 respectively because nitrate react with oxime at a mole ratio of 1:1. As a result, the rate formula can be simplified to r = k [NO In order to reduce the nitration of extractants, nitrate should be controlled to a relatively lower range. Generally speaking, in extraction stages, because the acid concentration of the PLS is not high, in most situations, the pH value is >1.0. So the nitrate concentration in the PLS should be controlled below 10 g/L ( If there was much nitrate in the electrolyte, urea and sulfamic acid can be used to reduce nitrate due to their function of quenching nitronium ions. As is well known, increasing temperature can greatly accelerate the reaction rate of chemicals. The organic solution was continuously mixed with an equal volume of synthetic solution containing (g/L) NO If the extractants were completely nitrified it is difficult to determine the maximum Cu loading due to the phase separation problem, therefore, HPLC method was used to investigate the nitration of the extractants. The above results (See The tests were carried out under 180 g/L H If there was more nitrate in the PLS or electrolyte, ketoxime or extractants with higher ketoxime content should be selected preferentially due to better stability in nitrate media. For modifiers, NP is a phenol with good reaction activity compared with aldoxime and ketoxime in the presence of nitrate. So when NP is present with oximes, it reacts with nitrate preferentially. As a result, the oximes are protected. Therefore, if NP is present in the organic solution, the nitration rate is slowed. A suitable inhibitors selected should be nontoxic and environmentally friendly. Furthermore, the inhibitors should not affect the performance of the extractants including extraction ability, phase separation performance, extraction kinetics and Cu/Fe selectivity. TBHQ is an excellent reductive agent due to the two phenol hydroxy groups and can be used as food antioxidant, suggesting that TBHQ is environmentally friendly. Styrolfenol is a phenol having similar structure compared with hydroxyoximes and it has good solubility in diluent. Styrolfenol and TBHQ are both aromatic compounds and have better reaction activity compared with hydroxyoximes in nitrate media. Styrolfenol and TBHQ can react with nitrate preferentially in the presence of hydroxyoximes. In solutions containing both Styrolfenol and TBHQ, hydroxyoximes are protected from being nitrified. As an inhibitor, TBHQ has the good ability of slowing down the nitration of hydroxyoximes but has relatively poor solubility in the diluent. Compared with TBHQ, Styrolfenol has excellent solubility. Considering both inhibition performance and solubility, a nitration inhibitor containing 2 parts of Styrolfenol and 1 part of TBHQ ( The synthetic solution containing (g/L) H Aldoxime was 50% ( In the experiments, TXIB (30%, w/w) was added to the aldoxime to investigate the effect of S-T on the nitration of aldoxime in the presence of TXIB. The synthetic aqueous solution contains 35 g/L Cu, 180 g/L H The nitration results for TXIB modified aldoxime are shown in But under very high nitrate concentration, such as 40 g/L, the inhibitive function of S-T decreased. The nitration rate of S-T protected extractant was very close to the non-protected extractant. As is shown in the test, TXIB modified aldoxime was completely nitrified after 6 h in case of 40 g/L NO S-T has a stronger reaction activity compared with aldoxime, so it has superiority to react with nitrate in the presence of aldoxime. But under higher NO TDA is an alcohol with a certain degree of reducibility, as a modifier, compared with TXIB, which can be oxidized by HNO For TDA modified aldoxime, the addition of S-T can also slow down the nitration rate of aldoxime. In case of 30 g/L NO Ketoxime has better stability than aldoxime in the presence of nitrate, so compared with aldoxime alone, the blend of aldoxime and ketoxime (25%:25%, Under relatively lower nitrate conditions, such as 10 g/L, the inhibition function of S-T was evident, while with increasing nitrate concentration, the inhibitory ability of S-T on aldoxime and ketoxime blend was not as effective. Under the same operation conditions, the complete nitration time increased from 168 h to 386 h when adding S-T into aldoxime and ketoxime blends in the presence of 10 g/L nitrate, while it changed from 76 h to 180 h, 32 h to 52 h in case of 20 g/L and 30 g/L nitrate, respectively. The results revealed that S-T (3%, w/w) also has the inhibitive function for aldoxime and ketoxime blends. The addition of inhibitors should not change the physical properties of extractants, especially create any negative effect on performance, such as phase separation, extraction ability, kinetics and Cu/Fe selectivity. Phase separation performance is one of the most important physical properties. In order to investigate the effect of S-T on the phase separation, the experiments were carried out on phase separation comparison. The organic solutions were diluted to 10% ( Generally, the PDT for copper extractants should be <90 s both in extraction and stripping stages. From Except for phase separation performance, the extraction performance was another important factor should be considered, such as extraction ability, extraction kinetics and Cu/Fe selectivity. Therefore, the effect of S-T on the extraction performance of hydroxyoximes was studied. The experiments were carried out followed the steps as described in 2.2 and 2.5. For aldoxime and TXIB modified aldoxime, the content of aldoxime was 50% ( The effect of S-T on the extraction ability, extraction kinetics and Cu/Fe selectivity of aldoxime, TXIB modified aldoxime, aldoxime and ketoxime blends were investigated, as shown in The results obtained from The results obtained above showed that S-T has no obvious effect on the phase separation performance and extraction ability of the extractants. As an inhibitor, S-T was suitable to choose for the Cu SX plants when there was nitrate in the PLS since it can slow down the nitration of the extractants and protect them from being nitrified. The factors on the nitration of hydroxyoxime extractants are outlined as follows: The H In case of 30 g/L NO The NO At a concentration of 180 g/L H The operating temperature The nitration of extractants is faster with increasing temperature. The nitration rate increases >3 times when the temperature increased from 25 °C to 35 °C. Modifiers Nonyl phenol has an inhibitory ability on the nitratin of extractants, while TXIB and TDA do not exhibit any inhibiting function. Anti-nitration reagent S-T, a blend of 3% ( The authors acknowledge with gratitude for financial support of the Hunan Provincial Science and Technology Plan Project, China (No.