Purpose: This prospective clinical study sought to evaluate the possible effects of routine compartment pressure monitoring in tibial fractures and to assess the previously published criteria.
                  Pressures in the anterior compartment were measured in consecutive cases of tibial fractures. In 95 patients, the protocol was completed with a follow-up after 1 yr.
                  An optimal threshold pressure with both good sensitivity and specificity could not be identified.
                  Such monitoring is a useful tool in the diagnosis of compartment syndrome, mainly in symptomatic patients or those who are difficult to assess, but routine monitoring and the use of most popular threshold pressures, which have low specificity, can result in overtreatment.Delay in the diagnosis and treatment of a compartment syndrome can lead to contractures, infection and occasionally amputation or even death In August 1996, a prospective study was started: clinical symptoms were recorded and pressures monitored in the anterior compartment in all patients with tibial fractures. Polytraumatized patients and children were also included. Patients who could not be monitored because no monitor was available or because they refused to co-operate were excluded. Between 1 August, 1996 and 16 November, 1997, 100 patients (104 limbs) were included in the protocol. Two severely polytraumatized patients with bilateral fractures died, one from a cerebral injury and the other from a thoracic injury. Three other patients moved and were lost to follow-up. The other 95 patients (with 97 fractures) had a follow-up of at least 1 yr (average, 393 days; range, 365–810 days). Stryker Monitoring was continued for 24 h and, in cases treated surgically, for at least 24 h postoperatively. Clinical symptoms and compartment and blood pressures were checked every hour during the first 6 h postoperatively and then every 3 h for at least 24 h. The data collected were patient characteristics, injury mechanism, fracture type (ASIF classification Patients were re-evaluated clinically after 12 months for function and possible late functional deficiencies caused by a compartment syndrome. Statistical analysis used the For all fractures, data on age, sex, trauma mechanism, fracture type, soft tissue damage, fracture treatment, fasciotomy and sequelae are shown in   In clinical symptoms; highest ICP>30 mmHg; PP as calculated by DBP−ICP<30 mmHg; PP as calculated by DBP−ICP<20 mmHg; PP as calculated by MAP−ICP<30 mmHg; PP=MAP−ICP<30 mmHg for more than 1 h; clinical symptoms and DBP−ICP<30 mmHg; clinical symptoms and MAP−ICP<30 mmHg. These data are presented in two-way tables with the diagnostic criterion (positive or negative) in the columns and the classification in fractures with a “true compartment syndrome” or not in the rows. Anyone who did not undergo fasciotomy and had no residual symptoms clearly did not have compartment syndrome. Anyone who underwent fasciotomy (14 patients) or had residual symptoms consistent with compartment syndrome (minimal toe contractures, persisting hypo-aesthesia in the peroneal nerve or relative muscle weakness in four patients) was considered a “true compartment syndrome”. Although all the patients who underwent fasciotomy may not have had a “compartment syndrome”, there was no other logical way to analyse the data. For every criterion the specificity [=true negative/(true negative+false positive)] and sensitivity [=true positive/(true positive+false negative)] were calculated. In the diagnosis of compartment syndrome, there is no consensus about the clinical indications for monitoring compartment pressure. Some surgeons state that a clinical evaluation is sufficient McQueen and coworkers Beside ambiguity about the indications for compartment pressure monitoring, the evaluation of the compartment pressure and the threshold value for diagnosis and treatment is also a hotly debated topic Although we found many papers presenting the results of experimental animal models for compartment pressure monitoring, papers that describe clinical compartment pressure monitoring in large groups of patients were rare. Triffitt et al. If we had decompressed all legs with a PP (DBP−ICP) under 30 mmHg, as advocated by McQueen, 45.4% of them would have been fasciotomized. The difference between this 45.4% and 2.5% (3/116 patients) operated in the study by McQueen and Court-Brown can be explained by the fact that they used the 12-h means for their analysis and we used the actual individual values. If we had calculated the 12-h means, we would have ended up with only nine legs with a mean PP of <30 mmHg over a 12-h period, not including those that had been treated by dermatofasciotomy before the first 12 h elapsed. The use of a 12-h mean is, in our opinion, of no clinical value, because it is not appropriate to postpone the therapy until the 12- or 24-h mean is known. The major clinical problem with compartment pressure monitoring and the threshold value is made clear in Retrospectively, using the threshold value for PP recommended by Mars et al. [PP=MAP−ICP<30 mmHg, with MAP=DBP+1/3(SBP−DBP) (SBP – systolic blood pressure)], 13/97 (13.4%) of the legs in our study showed a pathological PP Monitoring the compartment pressure influenced the treatment in 12 patients. In four patients without clinical symptoms, a dermatofasciotomy was performed because the PP was too low. On the other hand, eight legs (8%) with some clinical symptoms of compartment syndrome (excessive pain, restricted toe movement, para- and hypo-aesthesia), but persistently normal PPs did not need a dermatofasciotomy. They healed without the sequelae of compartment syndrome. So the use of compartment pressure monitoring can reduce the number of dermatofasciotomies if used in patients with clinically suspected compartment syndrome. Monitoring the compartment pressure itself did not result in any complications. Yet, as mentioned above, most threshold values might result in unnecessary dermatofasciotomies. Indeed, the fasciotomy rate in our study is rather high; indirectly, this could be regarded as a complication. Based on our clinical results, we cannot recommend an ‘optimal’ threshold ICP for the diagnosis of compartment syndrome. An absolute ICP of more than 30 mmHg or a PP, calculated as the difference between the DBP and the ICP, of <30 mmHg, has an acceptable sensitivity but poor specificity. The use of these threshold pressures might result in unnecessary dermatofasciotomies. The PP calculated from the MAP minus the ICP, used in combination with clinical symptoms or a second measurement after 1 h, has excellent specificity but low sensitivity and might result in a missed diagnosis. The use of ICP measurement did influence the treatment in a positive way. In eight symptomatic patients, a dermatofasciotomy could be avoided and in four patients, early diagnosis was possible before symptoms occurred. We did not encounter complications caused by monitoring the compartment pressure. However, the use of a non-specific threshold pressure might result in excessive fasciotomies. Compartment pressure monitoring is a useful tool for the diagnosis of compartment syndrome, especially in symptomatic patients or those who are difficult to assess. Further clinical evaluation is necessary to identify the optimal threshold pressure for diagnosis. The monitors were lent by Stryker-Howmedica, Doornveld 1 bus 45, 1731 Zellik, Belgium and Sherwood Davis & Geck, Generaal De Wittelaan 17, bus 23, 2800 Mechelen, Belgium.