Ore body formation and mineralization are the consequence of transport, focusing and mixing processes of geofluids from the deep earth into the upper crust of the earth. These processes largely depend on geological structures, particularly heterogeneity such as cracks and faults. Both geological stress and geofluid-induced hydraulic pressure can create and alter the heterogeneity, thus changing the transport, focusing and mixing patterns. As a preliminary study, this paper investigates the intrusion and focusing of geofluids through simulation of the hydraulic fracturing process. First, the deformation of porous media and geofluid flow are coupled through the Biot's consolidation theory to consider both the elastoplasticity of porous media and the deformation induced evolution of permeability. Second, the crack induced anisotropy of stiffness and permeability is described, on the basis of a smeared theory and an equivalent anisotropic medium, to establish a criterion for tensile crack initiation and propagation at an element level. Finally, the resulting nonlinear equations are solved by a coupled algorithm of the meshless method and the finite element method (FEM). Numerical examples indicate that the proposed method is able to simulate the stress-induced crack propagation, geofluid intrusion and focusing in fluid-saturated porous media. It thus provides a potential tool for simulating the detailed mineralization process associated with the geological stress and geofluid intrusion.The penetration and focusing of geofluids (such as magma, water and other fluids) can play important roles in the mineralization process ( The numerical simulation of the dynamic process of intrusion, focusing and mixing of geofluids is a challenging work. This dynamic process is complicated in both mathematical description and numerical solution algorithm. This is because the process usually involves local nonlinear deformation and damage of porous skeletons, initiation and opening of cracks, alteration of stiffness and permeability in the local damage zone, and coupling with geofluids flow, intrusion and focusing in the altered and interconnected porous channels. Generally, this complexity can be analyzed from following four aspects: First, the full coupling of this process is not easily described within a simple framework, but the Biot's consolidation theory ( As a preliminary step, this paper will investigate the intrusion and focusing of geofluids based on the Biot's consolidation theory and a smeared theory. It is organized as follows: This section describes the interaction of porous skeletons and geofluids. As shown in Equilibrium equation of the porous skeleton–geofluids mixture or its incremental form in time interval [ Relationship of displacement and strain for the porous skeleton Constitutive law of the porous skeleton in differential form Darcy's seepage law for geofluid flow Terzaghi's effective stress principle Continuity equation including the compressibility of the pore-fluid The volumetric strain of the pore skeleton is given as For the porous skeleton boundary For the pore-fluid boundary Initial condition The variables within the time interval [ The weak form of the continuity equation is obtained as follows: A spatial discretization for displacement and pore pressure is as follows: For a plane strain problem, the sub-matrices of matrices After differentiating with time, Eq. The continuity equation (i.e. Eq. A single step method is applied to the time domain: A system equation for a transient response problem is obtained as If the pore pressure, The smeared theory improved by Our test results for compacted clay show that cracking occurs along a crack plane perpendicular to the minor principal stress Test results further suggested a combined criterion for both tensile failure and shear failure, as shown in After cracking, the porous medium is assumed to lose its stiffness along the normal direction of the crack but other directions are not affected. The porous medium becomes anisotropic. This change is expressed through the alteration of the stiffness matrix at each stress point. For example, the Hooke's law of isotropic and crack-free materials (plane strain) is expressed as In the global coordinate system, the stress–strain relationship is obtained through the following coordinate transformation: The crack will enlarge the existing flow channel and may create new channels for pore-fluid flow, thus enhancing the permeability of the porous medium. The local permeability matrix is The permeability in global coordinates is Our laboratory test results revealed that the compacted clay has softening deformation even when in tension. The softening deformation depends on its dry density and moisture. In order to rule out the mesh-dependency in crack zones, the concept of fracture energy of a crack is introduced to adjust the stress–strain relationship in the softening zone, thus guaranteeing the uniqueness of solutions. The fracture energy of a crack refers to the dissipated energy per unit length of crack propagation. In computation, the fracture energy is kept constant in a given medium. The principle used in smeared theory has been proved to be equivalent to the opening width theory where a crack is treated as a discontinuity of displacement. However, the smeared theory is still in the framework of continua while the opening width theory introduces strong discontinuity in computation, thus affecting computational complexity and efficiency. As discussed in the introduction, meshless methods are superior to FEM in the treatment of moving boundaries. However, their computational efficiency is much lower than FEM. A good choice is to take advantages of both methods simultaneously in computation, where the moving boundary zone is treated by the meshless method and the rest zones are treated by FEM. The radial PIM meshless method has following fundamental interpolation: The radial basis function is taken as The polynomial basis function can be taken as The shape function has following two important properties: First, the Kronecker delta property Second, the reproducing properties of polynomials in zero- and one-order depending on polynomial basis With these properties, the coupling algorithm of the radial PIM and FEM is simple. As shown in Two examples are used to check the capability of the currently proposed algorithm.  For the shear locking, A typical laboratory test shown in Ore body formation and mineralization are controlled by complicated physical and chemical processes that involve the transport, focusing and mixing of geofluids. The penetration of geofluids can create and widen the flow channels in permeable rocks, while the focusing and mixing of geofluids can cause significant enrichment of minerals so that high grade and large ore deposits can be produced in the ore forming systems. For permeable rocks, it is known that the heterogeneity such as cracks and faults plays an important role in the focusing and mixing of geofluids. Since both geological stress and geofluid-induced hydraulic pressure can initialize and alter this kind of heterogeneity, it needs to be considered in the ore forming process. Toward this direction, a numerical simulation tool is proposed in this paper to dynamically simulate the initiation and propagation of cracks and faults in fluid-saturated porous media. This tool is based on the Biot's consolidation theory and a smeared theory. It has been applied to a dry porous medium sample and a hydraulic fracturing example. From these preliminary investigations, the following understandings and conclusions can be drawn: First, the initiation and propagation of cracks can be described by the proposed coupling algorithm of the radial PIM meshless method and FEM within the framework of the Biot's consolidation theory. This algorithm can effectively avoid the sensitivity of node density on numerical results after introducing fracture energy in the softening zone, so that shear locking in the crack propagation zone was not observed. Second, the transport and focusing of geofluids mainly occur along the weak and fractured zones. It has also been observed that the geofluids intrusion can further penetrate a porous medium through hydraulic fracturing if the breakdown pressure of the porous medium is exceeded. At the tip of the crack, the focusing of geofluids is intensified, and in two sides of a crack/fault, leakage of geofluids is observed and pressure gradient is rapidly reduced. Further, the focusing and penetrating of geofluids locally interact with the deformation of surrounding materials in the crack tip zone. Ore body formation and mineralization are commonly treated as a fully coupled problem involving multi-physical and chemical processes ( This work is financially supported by