Bubble-particle attachment and detachment are fundamental subprocesses of flotation, a deep understanding of which is essential for predicting flotation kinetics. This paper focuses on the kinetics of bubble-particle attachment and detachment at a single-bubble scale. Kinetics experiments of attachment, detachment, and flotation using coal samples with low-density fraction (LDF), middle-density fraction (MDF), and high-density fraction (HDF) were conducted. Models of bubble-particle attachment and detachment kinetics were proposed by an analogy with flotation kinetics equations. With an increase in coal density, the attachment rate constant decreased, while the detachment rate constant increased, which was consistent with the decrease in floatability of coal. In addition, the experimental data of the attachment and detachment kinetics was compared with flotation kinetics (multi-bubble scale). The optimal fitted models for LDF and MDF were the classical first-order models of attachment/detachment/flotation kinetics. These consistencies indicated the floatability of coal could be characterized by the attachment and detachment kinetics at a single-bubble scale. This was not the case for HDF (gangue minerals in essence), since its optimal models of the attachment/detachment kinetics were the third-order models, while for flotation kinetics was the first-order model with rectangular distribution. This contradiction indicated the flotation of the high-density particles might be significantly affected by the bubble concentration.Froth flotation is one of the most widely used methods for the separation of fine particles, and is based on the difference in the chemical and physicochemical properties of the particle surface [ Kinetics is an important aspect in flotation technology that describes the recovery changes of floating particles over a period of time. Research on flotation kinetics is necessary for the automation of the flotation process [ An in-depth understanding of the subprocesses of bubble-particle interaction, that is, collision, attachment, and detachment, is a fundamental step in predicting the flotation kinetics [ In recent years, an image technique was extensively used to research kinetics of bubble-particle attachment [ The objective of this study is to investigate the kinetics models of bubble-particle attachment and detachment at a single-bubble scale, as well as their connections with flotation kinetics. A recently developed home-built instrument was employed to conduct bubble-particle attachment and detachment experiments using coal samples with different densities. The establishment of attachment and detachment kinetics models is expected to improve the understanding of bubble-particle attachment and detachment processes, and be an effective tool to characterize floatability of coal. The sample used in this study was raw coal with a size fraction of <13 mm, collected from the Xuehu coal preparation plant (Henan Province, China). A laboratory jaw crusher and a double roll crusher were used in sequence to crush the lump coal into <1 mm size fraction. A dry screening method was used to obtain 200–400 μm rough particles by employing 200 μm and 400 μm sieves. Then, these 200–400 μm rough particles were wet-screened with a 125 μm sieve to remove the potential deposition of ultra-fine particles. The ash content of the obtained 200–400 μm sample was 34.62%. The obtained 200–400 μm sample was separated into three density fractions, namely <1.4, 1.4–1.6, and >1.6 g/cm For the ash analysis, approximately 10 g of the dried sample from each product was first ground using a mortar and pestle. Then, approximately 1 g of a ground sample from each product was burned in an oven at 815 °C for 2 h. The left-over ash was weighed to calculate the ash content. Each sample was tested twice and the average value was presented. The coal samples were ground in a mortar to <0.074 mm, and then pressed to plate using a tablet machine. The plate of each sample was measured using a Drop Shape Analyzer (DSA100, KRUSS, Germany). Firstly, the plate was placed on a mobile platform of the Drop Shape Analyzer, and a water droplet above the plate was generated using a microinjector. Then, the plate was moved upward to contact the water droplet and the image was recorded. The image of 2 s after the contact was used for analyzing the contact angle. A recently developed in-house bubble-particle attachment and detachment kinetics instrument was used [ A capillary-pinned bubble was first generated for bubble-particle attachment kinetics tests, following which a fixed square wave vibration was applied to the particle-covered bubble to conduct the detachment kinetics experiments. The detailed experimental procedures are shown as follows: Attachment kinetics experiment: Four grams of sample were mixed with 200 mL of deionized water in a 5 × 5 × 10 cm Detachment kinetics experiment: Following the attachment experiment, a fixed square wave vibration (shown in Flotation experiments were conducted in a 0.5 L mechanical flotation machine. Chemically pure 2-octanol was used as frother, and its dosage was 200 g/t of sample. The impeller speed was 1800 rpm. 30 g of coal sample and 0.5 L of tap water were added into flotation cell, and agitated for 2 min. The frother was added, and the pulp was further agitated for 30 s. Subsequently, the aeration valve was opened, and then the froth above the pulp was scraped into the concentrate collection vessels. Concentrate products were collected after cumulative times of 15, 30, 60, 120, 180, and 300 s, respectively. The flotation time of HDF was only 60 s because the froth layer no longer appeared by this time. All the products were filtered and dried in an oven at 80 °C for 5 h, and then were analyzed for the mass and the ash content. Each flotation test was performed twice for LDF and MDF, but seven times for HDF. Average values of the combustible recoveries and ash contents were used for analysis. Eq. The bubble-particle attachment at the single-bubble scale is a microprocess of flotation [ The solution of Eq. The relative mineralization area ( By combining Eqs. For consistency with the flotation kinetics models shown in The second- and third-order models of attachment kinetics are obtained by substituting The bubble-particle detachment process at the single-bubble scale is another microprocess in flotation. The number of particles attached to the bubble surface decreases with proceeding detachment. Detachment intensity is thought to be proportional to the number of particles attached to the bubble surface [ Considering that the number of particles attached to the bubble surface is almost linearly proportional to wrap area ( Similar to the attachment kinetics models in Similar to models of flotation kinetics and attachment kinetics, Eq. The second- and third-order model of detachment kinetics are expressed by substituting The attachment kinetics and fitting results of LDF, MDF, and HDF are shown in According to the  The optimal fitted model for both LDF and MDF evaluated by R The flotation kinetics and fitting results of LDF, MDF, and HDF are shown in With an increase in coal density, In this study, bubble-particle attachment and detachment kinetics at a single-bubble scale were investigated. Models of bubble-particle attachment and detachment kinetics were proposed to fit the experimental data. The following conclusions were obtained: The relative mineralization area increased sharply at first and then showed a gradually slower trend with proceeding bubble-particle attachment, while the relative mineralization area decreased sharply firstly and then showed a gradually slower trend with proceeding detachment. The proposed models of bubble-particle attachment and detachment kinetics showed a good fit with the data from attachment/detachment kinetics tests. The optimal models of attachment kinetics for LDF, MDF, and HDF were respectively first-order, first-order, and third-order attachment models, and their With an increase in coal density, the attachment rate constant This work was supported by the