A model for the description of nutrient, oxygen and plankton dynamics in Lake Zürich, Switzerland has recently been developed. Because, with this model, an attempt is made to describe mechanistically the most important mass fluxes and conversion processes in the water column and sediment of the lake, it is already too complicated to allow all of its parameters to be identifiable from the monthly measured profiles. This raises the questions of how to select a subset of model parameters to be included in a formal parameter estimation process and how to estimate model prediction uncertainty. In this paper, a systematic approach to tackle this problem is applied to this model. The technique consists of the combination of an analysis of the sensitivity of model results to single parameters with an analysis of the approximate linear dependence of sensitivity functions of parameter subsets. It is demonstrated that the most severe parameter identifiability problems are caused by the parameterization of light dependence of algae growth, by competing effects of production, respiration and death of algae and zooplankton, and by the interactions between algae and zooplankton. The dynamics of dissolved variables is much easier to describe. The results of the analysis are used to select a parameter subset for a fit with measured data, to analyse the effect of other, fixed parameters on the estimates of the selected parameters, and to estimate the uncertainty of model predictions.The parsimony principle of system identification states that a model should not be more complicated than necessary for the description of the data. This implies that its parameters are identifiable from the available data set ( Summarizing the state of knowledge in a given field or even integrating knowledge from different fields. Creation of a model structure that is not specific to a given situation but transferable to similar systems. Design of a model with the goal to predict the behaviour of a system under different driving conditions than those observed. In this study, the parameter identifiability analysis techniques outlined in The model describes the dissolved compounds phosphate, ammonia, nitrate and oxygen and the particulate compounds algae without This paper presents the results of the application of the procedure described in The selection of the parameter subset to be estimated from the lake data is discussed in The weighted least-squares parameter estimation procedure applied in this study minimizes the sum In this section, the model parameters are grouped into parameters potentially to be estimated from lake data and parameters for which an estimation from the available data of Lake Zürich did not seem to be meaningful. Then, based on prior knowledge, for each parameter, a relative range of uncertainty is estimated subjectively. Finally, the uncertainty ranges of the parameters together with linear error propagation through the lake model are used to obtain a ranking of the sensitivity of model results with respect to all parameters. The analysis here is done as proposed by The parameters of the lake model can be classified into four types: physical parameters, stoichiometric parameters, kinetic parameters and parameters related to input fluxes into the lake (all parameters of the first three types are listed in the appendix of It is very difficult to estimate the prior uncertainty of model parameters. In addition, the large number of parameters makes it extremely time-consuming to make a search on published values and uncertainties. In order to keep the expense within reasonable bounds while making the assessment not too subjective, only three classes of relative uncertainty were distinguished, and parameters were classified systematically into these classes. The three classes were accurately known parameters (class 1), very poorly known parameters (class 3) and an intermediate class of moderately inaccurate parameters (class 2). The uncertainty range was selected to be comparable with a standard deviation of the distribution, and the relative uncertainties were selected to be 5% for class 1, 20% for class 2 and 50% for class 3. This means that under normality assumptions, the value of class 3 variables would not be significantly different from zero at a 95% confidence level. A general criterion was to classify stoichiometric parameters and specific growth rates into class 2, and other kinetic parameters into class 3. Input-related parameters were typically classified into class 2, and physical parameters had to be treated individually.    In linear approximation to the model equations, the contribution of the uncertainty Δ  The values of the sensitivities given in In this section, the information on the sensitivity of model results on parameters shown in If the sensitivity functions Note that both analyses, the sensitivity analysis done in  As discussed above, the overview of collinearity indices shown in Because this collinearity analysis leads to the identification of severe identifiability problems among the most influential model parameters, a systematic analysis of approximate linear dependence of the most influential parameters was performed. The results of this analysis are shown in A first analysis of possible approximate linear dependence problems involved calculating the collinearity indices and condition numbers for the sets of most influential parameters of various size. The results of this analysis are listed in the columns labelled ‘Analysis 1’ in Estimation of the seven parameters What is the significance of the identifiability problems caused by the parameters The model used in this paper contains more parameters than can be estimated from the available data. This raises the question of the dependence of the parameter estimates on parameters that were hold-fixed during the estimation process. If there is a high degree of approximate linear dependence of one of the fixed parameters with the set of fitted parameters, a significant influence of the value of the fixed parameter on the estimates for the fitted parameters can be expected. This is especially true for a parameter with a large error contribution to the simulation result.  The word ‘validation’ can be misinterpreted by assuming that the model is checked for its truth (to be ‘valid’). This is not possible. A model of an ecological system is always a rough simplification of reality that can only be ‘invalidated’ or ‘falsified’ for given environmental conditions by a comparison with data. In order to stress this point, the validation process is sometimes called a model confirmation or corroboration ( A useful technique of testing (validating) a model is using only a subset of all available data for calibration and testing model performance with the rest of the data. This procedure is called cross-validation ( The purposes of modeling Lake Zürich were to gain a scientific understanding and to predict future states of the lake ( In the present application, the model was fitted to the data from the years 1988 and 1989 and was validated using the data of the year 1990 and 1991. Using monthly spatial profiles of oxygen, nitrate, phosphate and algae and monthly averaged epilimnion and hypolimnion concentrations of zooplankton, as described in The external driving forces on the lake did not change significantly from the fit period to the prediction period. This means that this test mainly confirmed that the model runs in a stable mode and does not lead to significant trends that are not present in the data. This does not give an indication that the model is also able to predict the reaction of the lake to significant changes in driving forces (cf. discussion of prediction uncertainty in the subsequent section). Validation was only performed for Lake Zürich. This does not lead to conclusions with respect of the transferability of the model to different lakes. Both of these properties, predictive capabilities for changes in external driving forces and for different lakes would be highly desirable properties of a lake model. It should also be noted, that the measure given by The computation time required for simulations with the lake model make it very expensive to do non-linear or regional uncertainty analyses with the aid of Monte Carlo simulations and/or Bayesian inference ( The crucial point in the application of the error propagation formula ( In Besides this relative importance of different causes of uncertainty the magnitude of the uncertainty is also interesting. If we consider the fact that our uncertainty estimates are estimated as measures in the order of one standard deviation of the distributions characterizing the knowledge on the parameters, under the assumption of normally distributed uncertainties, 95% confidence intervals would be about twice as wide as the uncertainty intervals plotted in A systematic investigation of the influence of the sensitivity of results to model parameters and of approximate linear dependence of sensitivity functions on model parameter identifiability, as proposed by Contributions to model prediction uncertainty of the model results (oxygen, nutrients and plankton concentrations in the water column of the lake) were largest for the half-saturation light intensity of algal growth and for parameters proportional to algae and zooplankton growth, respiration and death. Mineralization and nitrification rate coefficients, coefficients of temperature dependence of biological processes, and stoichiometry-related parameters contributed less to the uncertainty of model predictions. Among the external parameters nitrogen and phosphorus loadings, discharge and mixing contributed most to the prediction uncertainty. Due to the possibility of compensating effects, the parameters of algal and zooplankton growth, respiration and death could not all together be estimated from the available data (monthly profiles of nutrients, oxygen and plankton). With assumed values for most respiration and death parameters and a fit of growth parameters, a good correspondence of model results with data could be achieved. As compared to the literature, all model parameters seemed to be in a reasonable order of magnitude. For small changes in the values of respiration and death parameters, a similarly good fit could be achieved by adapting the growth parameters. This demonstrates again the non-identifiabilty of the parameters. A rough uncertainty analysis led to very large estimates of the uncertainty of model predictions. This result is in contrast to the very good agreement of model results with measurements also in the extrapolation domain of the model. There are probably three main reasons for this result: first, the prior uncertainty estimates were selected very conservatively, second, the omission of (unknown) correlations among the model parameters typically increases the calculated uncertainty, and third, the external conditions of the lake did not change significantly between the calibration and extrapolation periods. This leads to a continuation of the behaviour observed in the calibration period to the extrapolation period for most model variables. For changes in driving conditions of the lake (discharge, loadings, light, etc.), a larger deviation of predictions from observations can be expected. Although parameters that can be expected to be estimated from lake data lead to the largest single contributions to the estimated prediction uncertainty, the effect of all parameters that are not meaningful to be estimated from the data together was a significant contribution to the estimated prediction uncertainty. This limits the possibility of decreasing the predictive uncertainty of the model without additional more specific measurements that lead to more accurate estimates of nitrogen and phosphorus loadings of the lake, of vertical mixing, of sedimentation velocities, of temperature dependence of the biogeochemical processes and of the phosphorus content of algae. It may not be possible to reduce some of these uncertainties without increasing the model complexity (e.g. the large uncertainty in the sedimentation velocity accounts for the existence of different particles that sediment at different speeds; this could be considered by introducing more classes of particles). This would increase the accuracy of subprocesses, but it is not clear whether it would also increase the accuracy of the predictions of the model as a whole ( We thank Richard Forster, Sonja Gammeter and Ulrich Zimmerman from Wasserversorgung Zürich, Switzerland, for their collaboration in the development of the lake model described in more detail in