Freezing points in the ternary ZnSO4-H2SO4-H2O system were measured from (0.25 to 2.0) mol kg−1 ZnSO4 and (0.25 to 2.0) mol kg−1 H2SO4. The experimental data was compared with predictions made with a multi-component Pitzer model and Zdanovskii's mixing rule. Good agreement between measured and predicted results was achieved.Freezing point depression is a common phenomenon both in nature and in industry, having also found a wide range of applications from determination of molar mass to anti-freeze and road salt. Measurement of freezing point depression of an aqueous solution is in essence studying the solubility of ice in the solution, and can be used to derive activity of solvent water at the measurement temperature. It is thus a practical tool for probing both solute and solvent properties at low temperatures, although with knowledge of heat of dilution of the solute, conversion to, say 298.15 K can be made. In this work, we have measured freezing point depressions of the ternary ZnSO In addition to information of the activity of water that can be used to test or fit a thermodynamic solution model, our results find a more direct practical application in the hydrometallurgical zinc processing. Harsh winters in the northern hemisphere, for example in the Nordic countries and Canada, can subject the zinc and sulfuric acid bearing process solutions to sub-zero temperatures. Our freezing point depression data can be directly used to estimate the risk of ice formation in outdoor storage vessels, pipelines and settling basins. H The ZnSO Freezing point depressions were determined dynamically with a custom-built apparatus, following the same approach as in our previous work The apparatus consists of a small jacketed glass vessel, cooled with a steady flow of cold (−25 °C) water-ethanol mixture. The vessel was closed with an insulating lid made of natural cork. A K-type thermopair (Delta Ohm HD 9218), checked regularly against a NIST traceable platinum resistance thermometer (Traceable® Digital Thermometer, VWR), was fitted through the lid. To reduce heat flow from the surroundings and enable lower measurement temperatures, the apparatus and was insulated with a cell rubber shell. The solution inside was mixed slowly with a magnetic stirring bar. The experimental set-up is shown schematically in Cooling of the sample solution was performed at a constant flow rate of the coolant mixture. After a plateau in temperature was reached, freezing was induced by momentary increase in the agitation or by addition of a small ice crystal. The highest temperature reached after the freezing started was taken as a first of approximation of the freezing point. All samples were studied with 3–5 different degrees of super-cooling, ranging (0.2–4) K in magnitude. Following Raoult's method, the true freezing point was estimated by linear extrapolation to zero super-cooling To check proper operation of the apparatus, freezing point depressions of the H Extended combined uncertainties of the freezing points One possible explanation for the low precision is local temperature gradients within the sample solution, caused by the slow mixing rate. It was, however, necessary to use slow mixing to achieve the desired levels of super-cooling. Due to the slow mixing, in some experiments small “rifts” of crystallised ice formed and packed around the thermometer. In these cases, the experiments were repeated. Effect of larger sample volumes (15–20) mL was tested, and a worse reproducibility was noted. The measurements reported in this work were performed with approximately (3–4) mL of sample. Even smaller volumes caused poor contact with the thermometer which resulted in unstable readings. For the binary H Freezing points for the ternary aqueous ZnSO Zdanovskii's rule Eq. Zdanovskii's rule, together with the fact that activity of water in equilibrium with ice is solely a function of temperature, can be used to predict the freezing point surface in a ternary system; mixing of two binary solutions with the same freezing point should result in a ternary solution with the same freezing point. Zdanovskii's rule predictions can be compared to our previously published thermodynamic model Agreement with Zdanovskii's rule predictions is good, considering the rather large experimental uncertainties associated with our method. The larger deviations of about 0.5 K correspond to about 0.5% relative deviation in water activity. One also has to consider that these larger deviations occur for the more concentrated solutions, for which the freezing point lies well below the eutectic temperature of the ZnSO Our previous model The three-phase equilibrium line (ZnSO Freezing point depressions of aqueous ZnSO 