A recent study investigated the mineralogy and basic mineral chemistry of PGE-containing nickel converter matte phases as a function of their iron-endpoints from actual fast cooled production samples. Important findings from the study indicate that the formation of stable phases and their associated microstructures are influenced by the amount of iron present in the bulk composition. Stable phases include the formation of alloy phases into which the PGEs preferentially partition as compared to the copper–sulphide, nickel–sulphide and oxide phases. It follows then that careful analysis must be paid to a more comprehensive understanding of PGE partitioning into the respective phases and the formation of particularly the host alloy phases.
                  A combination of analytical techniques were applied to characterise nickel–sulphide, copper–sulphide and alloy phases with respect to the relatively low iron-endpoint of 0.15wt.%. Representative analytical sub-samples were characterised using electron probe microanalysis and electron transparent samples were characterised using field emission scanning electron microscopy (FEG SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM).
                  The partitioning coefficients of palladium, platinum, rhodium and iridium between alloy and nickel–sulphide phases are indicated at 2.2, 43.4, 2.2 and 7.4, respectively. In comparison, the partitioning coefficient of specifically rhodium between nickel and copper–sulphide phases is indicated at 1.29. The characteristic partitioning behaviour of PGEs in converter matte phases can be described as a strong function of parent sulphide matte chemistry, crystallization sequence and the role played by nickel as facilitator during alloy crystallization. High resolution bright-field TEM images suggest that PGEs are probably incorporated within the alloy structure in solid solution. It has been proposed that uneven cooling rates, heat dissipation, substitutional solid solution chemistry and fractional crystallization could possibly be responsible for the variety in composition and phase morphology, in particularly related to the formation of alloy phases.The effect of changes in the iron-endpoint during Peirce-Smith converting on subsequent matte mineralization can provide significant opportunity for the optimal control and monitoring of nickel converter blow conditions. An important focus in this regard is to further unlock the dependency between iron-endpoint control, resultant fast cooled microstructures, their genesis and potential impact to the integrated processing of nickel converter matte phases as an intermediate product. A previous study by The aim of this study was therefore to investigate the partitioning of trace, minor and major concentrations of PGEs (Pd, Pt, Rh, Ru, Ir and Os) between nickel–sulphide, copper–sulphide and alloy phases from an actual fast cooled (water granulated) production sample with reported iron-endpoint of 0.15 A combination of analytical techniques was applied to methodically characterise nickel–sulphide, copper–sulphide and alloy phases. Electron-transparent sub-samples were characterised using a high resolution JEOL JSM-7001F FEG SEM equipped with a number of detectors. An extremely small probe diameter at accelerating voltage of 15 It became relevant to quantify the PGE distribution between phases. For this purpose, electron probe microanalysis was performed on representative analytical sub-samples with a Cameca SX50 microprobe equipped with four wavelength dispersive spectrometers and an energy dispersive spectrometer. The system was calibrated with reference standards of pure Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Pb, Pd, Pt, Rh, Ru, Ir and Os and a pyrrhotite (FeS) reference was used for S. The analysis was performed exclusively on wavelength dispersive spectrometers and conducted in a semi-sequential manner on three of the spectrometers that were suitably equipped to detect the element suite of interest. An accelerating voltage of 30 A 200 Equilibrium solidification paths were generated with MTDATA supported by the Mtox matte database ( Quantitative X-ray diffraction analysis and subsequent mineralogical examinations with respect to iron-endpoint 0.15 The accurate measurement of the composition of the nickel–sulphide, copper–sulphide and alloy phases using electron probe microanalysis became particularly important for this study. It was furthermore important to have identified most of the phases by then as it assisted in reliable standardisation. Electron probe microanalysis (all percentages are in weight% unless specifically otherwise noted) of twenty-two heazlewoodite grains on various particles confirm the presence of nickel–sulphide phases. The standard deviations as shown in parenthesis are widely used to indicate how much dispersion there is within the electron probe microanalytical data set from the average analysis. The PGEs distributed in nickel–sulphide grains are reported in detail in Section Microanalysis of eighteen chalcocite grains on various particles confirms the presence of copper–sulphide phases. The analysis of eighteen alloy grains on various particles indicates the presence of NiCu-dominant alloy phases. In addition, the respective phases were characterised using a JEOL JSM-7001F FEG SEM with EDS, from which compositional images (mixed backscattered and secondary electron signal), were acquired by high-resolution phase-specific assemblage and element mapping. The compositional image as shown in Notably most intriguing in It was commonly observed for iron-endpoint 0.15 Melt composition is probably the most important process variable influencing the phases formed ( A quantitative comparison based on electron probe microanalysis of PGEs was required to comprehensively investigate the partitioning behaviour between the co-existing converter matte phases. It should be noted that the partitioning behaviour of the non-PGE metallic elements is not reported in this study and would be the focus of a subsequent investigation.   The following PGE partitioning behaviour can be described for the element-specific concentrations as shown in Palladium and platinum concentrations vary between minimums of (808 and 801 The compatibility of palladium as influenced by the metal: S ratio is consistent with the behaviour for platinum. The trends for both palladium and platinum suggest that an increase in an element-specific concentration can be associated with a small increase in metal: S ratio. Rhodium and iridium concentrations vary between minimums of (854 and 827 In contrast to palladium and platinum, the compatibility of rhodium as influenced by the metal: S ratio is consistent with the behaviour for iridium. The trends for both rhodium and iridium suggest that a decrease in element-specific concentration can be associated with an increase in metal: S ratio. Additionally, five out of eighteen copper–sulphide grains analysed in various particles contain nominal detectable rhodium at an average concentration of 818   The following PGE partitioning behaviour can be described for the element-specific concentrations as shown in Palladium and platinum concentrations vary between minimums of (2023 The compatibility of palladium as influenced by the combined weight% for nickel–copper is consistent with the behaviour for platinum. The trends for both palladium and platinum suggest that an increase in element-specific concentration can be associated with a decrease in the combined weight% for nickel–copper. Mineralogical examinations reveal that the decrease in the combined weight% for nickel–copper is generally facilitated by the depletion of nickel. Rhodium concentrations vary between a minimum of 1518 and a maximum of 2948 In contrast, the compatibility of rhodium as influenced by the combined weight% for nickel–copper suggest an increase in rhodium element-specific concentration with an enrichment of nickel. Ruthenium, iridium and osmium concentrations vary between minimums of (1262, 896 and 831 The trends for ruthenium, iridium and osmium suggest that an increase in element-specific concentration can be associated with depletion in nickel. The partitioning coefficients of palladium, platinum, rhodium and iridium between NiCu-alloy and nickel–sulphide phases are noted as 2.2, 43.4, 2.2 and 7.4, respectively. Further relevancy includes the microanalysis of a specifically larger dendritic-like alloy structure. The NiCu-alloy phase assemblages are not pure and include significant concentrations of PGEs, in particular platinum. The PGEs can possibly be either dissolved or occur as discrete microscopically identifiable inclusions in the host NiCu-alloy structure. The electron probe microanalysis could not discriminate between PGEs in substitutional or interstitial solid solution and PGEs as discrete micro-inclusions. It therefore became necessary to acquire a fundamental understanding related to the location, distribution and size of PGEs partitioned, as the resultant microstructures form an integral part to the processing characteristics of the host alloy phases. NiCu-alloy phases were therefore further characterised using a JEOL JEM-2001 LaB  In general no direct evidence for the presence of distinct PGE-inclusions or precipitates within the NiCu-alloy structure was found. The PGEs are therefore most likely incorporated within the NiCu-alloy structure in solid solution. To evaluate whether equilibrium calculations can provide comparative results, solidification paths were generated with MTDATA for iron-endpoint 0.15  Diginite (phase 7) crystallizes at approximately 900 The crystallization history relative to the MTDATA generated solidification path for the face-centred cubic structural alloy can be summarised as follows: The MTDATA path assumes that equilibrium is maintained throughout the crystallization sequences and transformations. In equilibrium crystallization, the alloy crystals remain suspended in the parent sulphide matte and solidification occurs between 616 According to Mineralogical examinations in association with electron probe microanalysis with respect to the nickel–sulphide, copper–sulphide and NiCu-alloy phases, suggest the difference in PGE partitioning behaviour can be significant. Electron probe microanalysis confirms the minimal and relative elevated partitioning of iridium–rhodium and palladium–platinum respectively into nickel–sulphide phases. Platinum was detected in most of the grains analysed with a maximum solubility of 6771 Moreover, distinctly different partitioning behaviour with respect to the metal: S ratio is demonstrated for iridium–rhodium and palladium–platinum respectively. Available electron probe microanalytical data indicates for both palladium and platinum, that an increase in element-specific concentration can be associated with an increase in metal: S ratio. In contrast, available analytical data indicates, for both iridium and rhodium, that a decrease in element-specific concentration can be associated with an increase in metal: S ratio. In nature, S The trends in PGE partitioning behaviour were most likely established when the parent sulphide matte exsolved with respect to nickel–sulphide phases. The crystallization history relative to the MTDATA generated solidification path for the nickel–sulphide phase assemblages indicate that the formation of Ni Quantitative partitioning of available PGEs between nickel–sulphide phase assemblages and the preferred face-centred cubic alloy assemblages would occur for a very short temperature range until the subsequent consumption of the parent matte. This would imply that the high temperature nickel–sulphide polymorph (Ni Electron probe microanalysis confirms the almost negligible partitioning of rhodium into copper–sulphide phases. Rhodium was detected in less than half the grains analysed with a maximum solubility of 941 The trend in rhodium partitioning behaviour was most likely established when the parent sulphide matte exsolved with respect to copper–sulphide phases. The crystallization history relative to the MTDATA generated solidification path for the copper–sulphide phase assemblages, indicate that diginite (Cu Quantitative partitioning of available rhodium between phase assemblages for copper–sulphide, alloy and nickel–sulphide would occur for a very short temperature range until the subsequent consumption of the parent matte. The partitioning of rhodium in copper–sulphide phases would occur between 900 There is hardly any data available in the open literature describing the partitioning of PGEs into NiCu-alloy phases as influenced by the iron-endpoint during the pyrometallurgical Peirce-Smith converting process. Further relevancy includes that the PGE characteristics would form an integral part to the processing characteristics of the host NiCu-alloy phases. The partitioning coefficients of palladium, platinum, rhodium and iridium between NiCu-alloy and nickel–sulphide phases indicates that the respective PGEs would preferentially partition into alloy phases. Electron probe microanalytical data therefore confirm that the NiCu-alloy phases are the prime collectors of PGEs from the parent sulphide matte during solidification. The marked specificity of platinum for the alloy phases is demonstrated by a maximum solubility of 18.24%. Osmium (although fewer detectable analyses) and iridium indicate average solubilities of 1.51% and 7508 The partitioning behaviour (relative to the combined weight% of nickel–copper) of notably rhodium into alloy phases is inconsistent with the partitioning behaviour for the remainder of the PGEs. The partitioning behaviour, in particular for platinum, is characterised by an increase in element-specific concentration (more platinum) with a decrease in the combined weight% of nickel–copper, generally facilitated by the depletion of nickel (less nickel). The trend in platinum partitioning behaviour was most likely established when the parent sulphide matte exsolved with respect to alloy phases. The crystallization history relative to the MTDATA generated solidification path for the face-centred cubic alloy assemblages predict an overall Ni:Cu ratio varying between a maximum of 2.4 to a minimum of 0.85. Under equilibrium conditions one would expect platinum to co-crystallize with the alloy crystals during solidification. During this event one would further expect the first alloy crystals to acquire more platinum than subsequent crystallizing alloy as the platinum is only at minor concentration levels. For complete equilibrium solidification sufficient time must be allowed for also the additional PGEs to diffuse into the already crystallizing alloy phases. There is considerable controversy as to how platinum partitioning actually occurs from the parent sulphide melt into the crystallizing alloy phases. The likely explanation is that the surface energy of platinum nuclei would be lower against an alloy interface than the parent sulphide matte interface. Hence, a platinum saturated parent sulphide matte in chemical exchange equilibrium would transfer all its nuclei to the alloy phase. In addition, the partitioning of platinum into alloy and nickel–sulphide phases between 580 Furthermore, mineralogically examined NiCu-alloy phases are characteristic of varying platinum concentrations and Ni:Cu ratios. The average platinum concentration and Ni:Cu ratio is 8.85% and 2.1 respectively. Although good correlation is evident between the electron probe microanalytical data and the solidification data with respect to the overall Ni:Cu ratios, it is more likely that an average Ni:Cu ratio of 2.1 would indicate a failure to reach equilibrium. This lack of agreement between equilibrium and mineralogical data can possibly be attributed to NiCu-alloy crystals losing interfacial contact with the parent sulphide matte during crystallization. High resolution bright-field TEM images suggest that PGEs are probably incorporated within the NiCu-alloy structure in solid solution. This mineralogical observation is substantiated by the fact that complete solubility occurs between nickel, copper and platinum as they are characterised by the same crystal structure (face-centred cubic) and near the same atomic radii. The information obtained from this study is used to derive a more complete understanding of alloy formation with respect to the fast-cooling process. Despite several conflicting alloy morphologies, their close mineralogical resemblance suggests that all alloy phases must have formed by the same general process ( If the alloy crystals remained in interfacial surface contact with the parent matte, but relatively rapid crystallization (related to fast-cooling) does not allow complete reaction between crystals and matte, the effect will be delicate vein-like exsolution structures as shown at the 20 The normalised processing of spectra for the primary formed vein-like and more euhedral-like alloy structures as shown in Failure to reach equilibrium would partially remove the already formed crystals as shown in The growth of alloy crystals would involve the rearrangement and ordering of the respective atoms at the alloy/matte interface ( As the alloy phase assemblages become progressively stable, the parent matte becomes increasingly copper-rich. The earlier formed nickel-rich alloy crystals would serve as nuclei on which increasingly more copper and PGE-rich species, in particular platinum, co-crystallizes. Compositional variation therefore, can be explained in terms of substitutional solid solution with platinum replacing depleted nickel in a specific site within the NiCu-alloy structure ( It should be noted that if equilibrium crystallization cannot be maintained for this multi-component, complex Co–Cu–Fe–Ni–O–S matte system including PGEs, then fractional crystallization would seem a likely explanation for many of the conflicting phase assemblage observations associated with the NiCu-alloy. In addition, under fractional crystallization conditions the cooling and crystallization histories for the respective phases will be different. Although the element-specific partitioning behaviour among the PGE-inclusions are complex and only partly understood, the application of electron microscopy in association with electron probe microanalysis provided a fundamental understanding. The characteristic partitioning behaviour of PGEs into converter matte phases are a strong function of bulk chemistry, crystallization sequence and the role played by nickel as a facilitator during alloy crystallization in particular. It has been proposed that uneven cooling rates, heat dissipation, substitutional solid solution chemistry and fractional crystallization could possibly be responsible for the variety in composition and phase morphology, in particularly related to the formation of alloy phases. A successful solidification process should ensure that crystalline alloy phases represent the lowest energy state by allowing the alloy crystals to form and develop and in doing so act as primary collector for the PGEs. It would then be reasonable to expect the metallurgical extraction of most of the PGEs with the alloy fraction. This would require a dependency between iron-endpoint control and the production of nickel converter sulphide melts of uniform composition and properties, which is important in the control of intermediate product quality. Lonmin, Western Platinum is thanked for financial support and permission to publish the results of this study.