Fiber reinforced gypsum are prevalent building materials in which short fibers with high tensile strength are embedded into a gypsum matrix to produce supplemental strong and lightweight construction materials. Due to confrontation to a rising risk of death and economic disaster in earthquake-prone areas, quake-resistant materials and structures should be employed for building constructions. Gypsum based composites as a unique candidate for this purpose reduce the risks and produce much confident construction materials for residential buildings. In this work tensile strength of gypsum composites with different volume fraction of polypropylene (PP) and poly-paraphenylene terephthalamide (PPTA) fibers up to 15% were studied. Stress transfer ability from matrix to fibers were analyzed using theoretical shear lag analyses, scanning electron microscope, and pull out tests. The interfacial characteristics were also studied by scanning electron microscope (SEM). The ability of the composites to withstand against longitudinal tensile load was also studied by tensile tests of dog-bone shaped, random oriented fiber reinforced gypsum. Tensile strength of randomly oriented short fiber reinforced gypsum was evaluated by a mathematical model. The obtained results from the model and experimental results have been compared and discussed.modulus of elasticity modulus of elasticity of fibers modulus of elasticity of matrix shear modulus of fibers shear modulus if matrix strain in matrix volume fraction of fibers length of fibers radius of fibers ultimate tensile strength tensile strength of aligned short fiber reinforced composites matrix strength tensile strength of random short fiber reinforced composites tensile strength of a composite with parallel fibers oriented at an angle of average fiber axial stress along the fiber/matrix interface normal stress of a composite with parallel fibers in the normal direction (longitudinal stress) normal stress of a composite with parallel fibers in the perpendicular direction (transverse stress) shear lag parameter angle between fiber’s direction and applied load Poisson’s ratio Pi constant (3.14) shear stress of a composite with parallel fibers along the fibers direction distribution of fiber’s orientation Gypsum-based materials that are utilized in residential, commercial, and industrial buildings as wall panels, partitions, and boards has emerged as a unique construction materials due to lightness, cheap price, wide source, and easy application. They have favorable formability and excellent appearance which gains remarkable mechanical properties whilst strengthen with suitable additives or reinforcing fibers. Many investigations on the properties of gypsum-based materials has been improved those applications by mechanical means and microstructural changes. Improvement in the tensile strength and ductility of gypsum reinforced with chopped glass fibers has reported by Surendra and Baehr According to the obtained results from the earlier investigations, the local response of the fiber/matrix interface during fracture is of great importance. Large number of studies has shown that glass fiber reinforced plaster materials possess appreciable toughness values. The major effect of the fibers is to act as bridging ligaments in the crack plane in order to limit crack propagation and opening. This affects the amount of consumed energy till final fracture. However, appropriate adhesion with gypsum also leads to more efficient load transfer from matrix to fibers. The stress transfer between matrix and fibers is frequently taken into account when modeling the mechanical properties of fiber reinforced composites. In fact it seems inevitable to do so, when bond strength established between the constituents along the interface is considerably high. In addition, the fibers should withstand against transferred load through interface. This paper deals with an experimental analysis on bonding behavior of PP and PPTA short fibers with gypsum, along with its effect on tensile strength of random short fiber/gypsum composites. Tensile strength of gypsum composites containing aluminum fibers has already been modeled The present model is based on the following stages: Using the simple rule of mixtures to obtain the ultimate tensile strength of a composite, containing short fibers parallel to the applied load ( Considering the failure criteria for laminated composites and evaluating the tensile strength of a composite with parallel fibers which are placed at an inclined angle, Integrating the obtained equation for tensile strength of the off-axis unidirectional fiber reinforced composites with respect to According to the law of mixtures, tensile strength of the aligned fiber reinforced composites, If the direction of the fibers is different to that of the applied load, some modification should be considered, since the tensile strength of the off-axis unidirectional short fiber composites significantly depends on the off-axis angle, To analyze the laminated composites, the maximum stress criterion together with an interactive failure criterion may be used for anisotropic materials expressed by an inequality known as Tsai–Hill criterion. These two failure criteria that originally proposed for laminated composites could also be assumed to be applicable for random fiber reinforced composites, since the inter-fiber separation (or fiber end gap) is not considered in the original model. To take into account the interaction of stress components, Tsai–Hill equation is considered. The longitudinal stress of a composite with parallel fibers in the normal direction equals to the tensile strength, It may also be assumed that the transverse strength of aligned short fiber reinforced composite is equal to the matrix strength. Substituting the critical stress values from the maximum stress criterion in two dimensional state of stress in Tsai–Hill criterion, the ultimate tensile strength of a composite with parallel fibers oriented at an angle of To determine the strength of randomly oriented fiber reinforced composites, Eq. Commercial gypsum that is mainly used for interior building compartments was used in this work to produce the studied composites. According to the compressive tests conducted on our previous work The short fibers utilized in this study were poly-paraphenylene terephthalamide (PPTA), refers usually as the well-known Kevlar, and polypropylene (PP). The PPTA fibers were provided from a recycling tire industry which was as a form of by-product. Pull out tests were conducted on cubic gypsum ( Tensile tests were conducted on bone-shaped specimens containing five different fiber volume fractions from 0.01 to 0.15. Specimens were made on the basis of 12 The obtained results from pull out tests for cubic gypsum samples containing a PPTA fiber yield 12  The higher post failure strength of PP/gypsum composites may be during the bridging effect. Since the volume fraction of fibers in the studied composites are the same and considering the higher diameter of PPTA fibers, the number of PP fibers per certain volume of the composite is more than PPTA (nearly 60%). The number of short fibers changes the fiber aspect ratio ( Because of the sufficient bond strength of fiber/matrix, more stress concentration develops where the fibers enter the matrix that results lower fracture toughness. This consequence is in accordance with PPTA fiber reinforced gypsum in comparison with PP/gypsum composites that characterized from the area under the load–displacement curves ( Tensile strength of gypsum composites containing different volume fraction of randomly oriented PP and PPTA fibers are given in Using the numerical analysis to calculate the tensile strength of random short fiber composites, the curves in Because of different behavior of the experimental results compared with different models, it can be expressed that, there are many parameters which affect the tensile strength of the composite systems. Fiber random manner, stress transfer ability, elastic and plastic assumptions of the constituents, and different mechanisms of composite fracture are responsible for predictions of tensile strength. To date, there are no computational models that account for the synergistic effects of these factors on tensile strength. The results of this study show that notable improvement of tensile strength along with remarkable enhancement of the gypsum toughness may be obtained by the introduction of synthetic short fibers such as PP and PPTA into a gypsum matrix. Therefore, the application of these gypsum based composites as construction blocks and panels may improve the building resistance against seismic events. These new gypsum based composites as exterior parts of the mid-rise buildings could absorb shocks produce by seismic events. In other words, replacing the rigid walls of the breakable masonry mid-rises by PP or PPTA short fiber reinforced gypsum blocks and panels help hold things together against quake strike. It is strongly recommended that to use these materials in mid-rise and high-rise building structures which earthquake-resistant methods does not employed for the foundations due to reduction of the dead weight in urban cities. By the introduction of PPTA fibers into a gypsum matrix, notable improvement in tensile strength is achieved. This behavior is to be due to appropriate adhesion of PPTA fibers with gypsum crystals in microscopic scale, which is confirmed from the pull out tests and scanning images of the surface of fibers after being pulled out. Despite very smooth surface of the PP fibers, those surfaces are excellent medium for attracting the gypsum crystals which tends to higher consumed energy of PP/gypsum composites during loading. There is a mathematical model which determines the tensile strength of random short fiber composites in our previous work The authors would like to acknowledge the SBDC Department of Industrial Development Renovation Organization (IDRO) for their financial support, and Mr. Ali Talebi, for conducting the mechanical tests.