Wettability is an important property involved in the industrial use of granular solids and powders. It is commonly described with the contact angle and an experimental method for its determination in dynamic conditions is proposed in this work. The method is based on the capillary rise of the wetting liquid into a packed bed of the material under analysis. Differently from the classical Washburn method, the packed bed is closed to the atmosphere and the air pressure increase is measured allowing to evaluate the powder contact angle through a dynamic balance of the pressure forces. In the expression of such forces a new equivalent capillary radius for the powder bed is used based on an alternative definition of the particle equivalent diameter. This diameter is closely related to the length of the three phase line which divide the wet portion of the bed from the dry one and mirrors the physics of wetting process better than the classical Sauter diameter. A way to determine it with optical microscopy is given. Also the measure of the packed bed porosity (entering in the equivalent capillary radius definition) has been improved by using the effective porosity concept [Hapgood et al., J. Coll. Interface Sci. 253 (2002) 353–366] and by modifying the way of estimating it. The proposed experimental technique, coupled to the theoretical model for the packed bed, can describe accurately the packed bed geometry and the wetting dynamics by following the changes of the contact angle from its initial maximum value up to the final equilibrium one.immersion depth of the sample holder in the liquid [m] diameter obtained from optical microscopy [m] mean equivalent diameter related to the ratio (projected area)/(wet perimeter) [m] diameter of the exposed circumference in a spherical particle cross sectioned at height Sauter mean diameter [m] gravitational acceleration [m/s height reached by the liquid [m] height of the sample holder assumed cylindrical with constant section [m] proportionality factor between height and pressure [m/Pa] length covered by the liquid in the bed [m] atmospheric pressure [Pa] final pressure after the compression [Pa] radius of the cylindrical capillary tube [m] equivalent capillary radius [μm] hydraulic radius [m] time [s] (for a particle) height covered by the liquid [m] liquid–vapor surface tension [J/m solid–liquid surface tension [J/m solid–vapor surface tension [J/m relative pressure (referred to the atmospheric one) [Pa] capillary pressure [Pa] generic porosity of the powder bed [–] effective porosity [–] tap porosity [–] porosity value related to the maximum packing of the powder bed [–] viscosity of the wetting liquid [Pa generic value of the contact angle [°] advancing contact angle [°] equilibrium contact angle [°] receding contact angle [°] bulk density of the powder bed [kg/m density of the wetting liquid [kg/m density value related to the maximum packing of the powder bed [kg/m solid intrinsic density [kg/m tortuosity factor [–] The wettability is a physicochemical property which has an important role in the industrial use of powdered and granular solids. Granulation, flotation and dissolution are just some examples of the several operations where powder wettability is important. In the wet granulation process the size of primary particles is increased by binding them into agglomerates using capillary forces The three surface tensions are the solid–liquid The evaluation of the contact angle through Eq. As an alternative to the sessile drop method the contact angle of powders can be evaluated with the rising liquid method Unfortunately in Eq. The evaluation of A different approach is that of modeling, under simplifying assumptions, the structure of the solid bed and the solid–liquid physical interaction during wetting In Section The experimental set-up, shown in The bed of powder was packed at the bulk density, After tapping, the sample holder was placed on the support frame and connected to the differential pressure sensor and to the air reservoir. The experiment started by measuring the atmospheric pressure as the base line for the signal. After 60 The granular materials used in this work were: glass ballottini, river sand, calcium carbonate from quarry (indicated as type A), pharmaceutical calcium carbonate USP (indicated as type B), monohydrate lactose, microcrystalline cellulose Avicel PH101 (MCC) and ground coffee powder. They are listed in This was necessary to avoid the solubilization of the lactose powder during the rise experiment. The rise of the liquid in the packed bed caused the compression of the air in the sample holder and continued until the pressures forces were perfectly balanced. The dynamics of the liquid is described by According to Wei et al. The rising velocity of the liquid was maximum at the beginning of the experiment and decreased with time because of the increasing overpressure and hydrostatic head in the sample holder. A verification of the laminarity of the flow, at the very beginning of the experiment, was therefore necessary. It was found that the Reynolds number never exceeded the order of magnitude of 10 As a consequence of the dynamic nature of the overpressure measurements, the contact angle estimated with this method was not constant but decreased going from a maximum initial value to an asymptotic final value at equilibrium. All the angles measured with the liquid in motion could be therefore considered as advancing contact angles, In order to evaluate the contact angle with Eq. Let us first consider a simplified system made of an empty cylinder of constant cross section At the end of each test, the overpressure Δ The driving forces in the capillary rise are the adhesion forces between the solid and the liquid phases. They act at the boundaries between the wet portion of the powder bed and the dry one. Let us therefore consider a packed bed of spherical particles wet up to a certain height This height ideally identify a transversal cutting plane ( The typical literature approach uses the Sauter mean diameter as the equivalent average diameter for describing the packed bed  The porosity appears in the expression of The solid density, The physical properties of the particles and of the packed bed, necessary for the determination of the contact angle, are collected in Also the overpressure due to the capillary rise was measured and The profiles in Also With the overpressure profiles, In For this reason in  A verification of this value was possible using the sessile drop method on a monolayer of glass ballottini ( In some cases a large difference (up to ∼40°) between the advancing and the equilibrium angle were observed (Δ The aim of this work was the characterization of the wettability of different granular solids in dynamic conditions through the evaluation of their contact angles (advancing and equilibrium ones). An experimental method based on the study of the capillary rise of the wetting liquid in the powder under test was proposed. The sample holder with the powder was closed to the atmosphere and the overpressure increase (caused by the liquid rise) was related to wettability of the powder by using the integrated form of the balance of the pressure forces. In order to transform overpressure information into the contact angle values it was necessary to reconsider the model for the equivalent capillary radius and the way of measuring the packed bed porosity. The model for the equivalent capillary radius was related to the length of the three phase line which divide the wet portion of the bed from the dry one. This led to a redefinition of the equivalent particle diameter characterizing the bed of powder under test. A way for measuring this new equivalent spherical diameter from independent optical microscopy measurements was suggested. Also the packed bed porosity estimation was reconsidered by proposing a modified way of measuring the effective porosity. The results showed that by integrating the pressure forces balance over sufficiently short time periods (10 The method showed good repeatability (as it can be inferred from the low the standard deviations), provided that samples were prepared following an accurate packing procedure. A critical point remained the estimation of the equilibrium contact angle (in particular for materials with small The following demonstration was first given by Gray Volume of the cube Total volume of the particles Bed porosity Two assumptions are made: (1) particles are randomly distributed in the bed and (2) the cube is cut by a plane parallel to one of its faces. The statistical probability of cutting any particular particle is The analysis of the particles by optical microscopy gives the silhouette of the projected particles corresponding to the largest section of the particles. In a randomly packed bed however the area of each particle exposed as a result of cutting by the plane ( The average exposed area (corresponding to the average diameter Considering the particles as spheres ( The average diameter can be obtained as: For the materials with smaller size (lactose, calcium carbonate B, MCC) an optical microscope (Olympus IX2-SP with magnification 20×) was used for the determination of