Pillars are present in most underground hard rock mines and they are mainly designed to ensure the protection of roadways and entries. Pillars are often located within the orebody and the mine operators have to maximise the extraction of this valuable resource while maintaining the stability of the pillars. Pillars must then be properly designed because failure to do this may result in either pillar failure or over conservative designed pillar. Pillar stability must be guaranteed through the entire life of the underground mine that can be years or even decades long, although some of them, such as the yielding pillars, may be allowed to fail. The stability can be analysed by a number of methods and they are generally represented by the ratio between the pillar strength and pillar load that is expressed in Factor of Safety ( Design charts for hard rock pillars that are based on the actual stability data can then be considered as alternative design tools and starting points before a more sophisticated engineering analysis is conducted. These charts have been proposed over the years Binary logistic regression is a statistical modelling technique where the dependent variable ( The binary logistic regression has been recently implemented in predicting the stability of coal pillars which was reported in details in Ref. The binary logistic regression model can be extended to handle the case where the dependent variable has more than two possible values Furthermore, if the dependent variable Again, the logistic regression model parameters can be determined by utilising available logistic regression software. Hard rock pillar stability combined database utilised in this paper was mainly comprised of massive sulphide pillars with Rock Mass Ratings of between 60 and 85 while major structural features were not deemed to be an influence in pillar instability Furthermore, in all of the cases The resulted database is given in  The multinomial logistic regression model from pillar stability data was developed with the independent and dependent variables listed in To date, among others, the confinement formula Furthermore, the Mohr–Coulomb criterion could be expanded to obtain the relationship between In a pillar, Isoprobability contours are lines of equal probability of a given stability outcome that can be drawn onto the stability graph By putting particular probabilities of stable into Eq. The multinomial logistic regression model for predicting the probability of stability of a hard rock pillar for given geometry (width to height ratio) and stress condition (stress to UCS ratio) has been developed. The model can predicts stable, unstable, and failed cases with accuracies of 86.67%, 62.00%, and 85.29% respectively, which gives an overall accuracy of 79.21%. Isoprobability contours for stable hard rock pillars have been developed, which allow the probabilities of risk associated with pillar stability to be determined and presented directly on the stability graph. The contours are a valuable measure of the reliability of the stability zone boundary and allow the statistical meaning of the stability boundaries to be quantified in terms of probable stability outcomes. The research reported in this paper proposes an alternative design tool. It and can be used in the preliminary stage before a more sophisticated engineering analysis is conducted.