The chemical oxidative degradation of oil hydrocarbons was investigated by magnetite catalyzed Fenton-like (FL) and activated persulfate (AP) oxidation. An artificial soil composed of silica sand and magnetite was synthesized and characterized by XRD and Mössbauer spectroscopy. This magnetite rich sandy soil (MRS) was then spiked with (i) an organic extract from a soil contaminated by weathered oil (WO) and (ii) a fresh crude oil (CO) and was subjected to oxidation in batch slurry system at circumneutral pH. Experimental results indicate that approximately 70–80% of WO removal was achieved by both FL and AP treatments after one week. Moreover significant CO abatement was also observed by both oxidants (80–90%). Non-selective degradation was evaluated for FL while AP showed less reactivity towards higher molecular weight n-alkanes. Experiments were also conducted with soluble FeII as catalyst instead of magnetite and only 10–15% of degradation was achieved for oxidation experiments with or without soluble FeII addition. Whatever the treatment (FL and AP), no by-products were observed after oxidation experiments which indicate the complete degradation of oil hydrocarbons. Results of this study suggest that magnetite can be used as iron source to activate both Fenton and persulfate oxidation at circumneutral pH. This study has important implications in the remediation of oil polluted soils by FL or AP oxidation.The soil and groundwater pollution by oil compounds is a serious environmental and health concern worldwide. Soils contaminated with crude oil fail to support plant growth and are a source of groundwater contamination This conventional Fenton’s process is limited by the optimum pH (∼3) and such low pH results in negative impacts on soil properties and quality and is incompatible with subsequent revegetation or biodegradation In case of heterogeneous catalysis, iron minerals can be used to activate both oxidants to produce stronger radicals in order to degrade pollutants at circumneutral pH. Magnetite, mixed Fe Fresh crude oil (CO) was provided by “Le Musée du Pétrole” (Pechelbronn, France), Survey 2962. Ferric chloride hexahydrate (FeCl The 2-line ferrihydrite (F) was synthesized according to the method of Schwertmann and Cornell In order to identify the crystal structure of minerals, solid samples were analyzed by X-ray powder diffraction (XRD). The XRD data were collected with a D8 Bruker diffractometer, equipped with a monochromator and a position-sensitive detector. The X-ray source was a Co anode ( Solid samples were also analyzed by Mössbauer spectroscopy. Backscattering Mössbauer spectroscopy using the miniaturized Mössbauer spectrometer MIMOS II The surface morphological characterization of solid samples was done by Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) using a HITACHI FEG 54800 apparatus. The solid powder was glued on an adhesive surface and metalized with a thin layer of gold. SEM studies were performed in backscattered mode to identify the elemental differences on the surfaces and thus estimate the location of coated and non-coated surfaces. This study focuses on: (1) weathered oil (WO) isolated from an oil contaminated forest soil under natural attenuation from Pechelbronn oil field (Alsace, France) and (2) Pechelbronn crude oil (CO) corresponding to type III oil (reference). For WO organic extract, oil-contaminated soil samples were freeze-dried, sieved at 2 The MRS was spiked by adding WO and CO to obtain a final concentration of 4000 The oxidative degradation of oil hydrocarbons was conducted by using two oxidants: H The freeze dried samples were extracted in chloroform during 45 The hydrocarbon index (HI) was measured according to ISO 16703:2004 procedure using a GC-FID 7890 Agilent technologies. GC–MS quantification of reactant and products were performed by adding internal standards to the samples. An internal The micro-Fourier Transform Infrared (μFTIR) spectroscopic analysis were performed on an infrared spectrometer Bruker IFS55 coupled with a Multipurpose Bruker IR microscope equipped with a MCT detector cooled with liquid N The iron oxide rich sand was characterized by XRD ( Investigations through SEM were carried out in backscattered mode on the FRS before ( In order to determine the effectiveness of oxidation for oil-hydrocarbons degradation, experiments were performed by using H The GC–FID chromatograms for WO ( The oxidation experiments on CO (rich in Investigations by μFTIR revealed that WO and CO organic extracts are dominated by aliphatic bands ( This study reported the ability of magnetite to catalyze Fenton and persulfate oxidation in order to destroy refractory oil residues (UCM, etc.) as well as normal The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the HEC (Higher Education Commission) of Pakistan and GISFI (French Scientific Interest Group – Industrial Wasteland,