Although distally locked (dynamic) nailing is generally recommended for fractures below the isthmus of the tibia in the presence of adequate proximal nail-bone contact, rotational stability in the above situation appears to be a major concern and can increase the risk of malunion. However, there is no published experimental evidence to quantify this mechanical parameter or to relate factors such as the fracture pattern with the final clinical outcome. This in-vitro biomechanical experimental study was set out to measure the initial rotational stability of dynamically nailed fractures of the distal tibial diaphysis. Using a composite tibial model, three non-comminuted types (spiral, oblique and transverse) and various comminuted patterns (comminution, 0–85%) of dynamically nailed fractures of the distal tibial diaphysis were tested. Using a special rig to simultaneously apply axial and torsional loading measurements of torsional stiffness and the previously described ‘spring-back angle’ were carried out. Our results showed that in terms of torsional stiffness and the ‘spring-back’ angle oblique fractures are the most stable followed by transverse and spiral fractures. Furthermore, when testing of the above parameters against the degree of comminution was carried out, a significant reduction of rotational stability was evident with comminution of 50% or above. It is concluded that oblique fractures of the distal tibial third that can be reduced with at least 50% cortical apposition present the optimal rotational stability following dynamic nailing.It has been recommended that distally locked (dynamic) mode nailing should be used for fractures below the isthmus of the tibia in the presence of adequate nail-endosteum contact proximally The high variability of geometrical and mechanical properties of any biological structure increases the experimental set-up variability of in-vitro mechanical testing. In order to reduce the experimental variability, a standardised tibial model has been used in this study. The Sawbones Standardized Composite Tibial Model (Catalogue reference number 3101, Pacific Research Laboratories Inc, Vashnon Island, WA, USA) is a three-dimensional model of the human tibial bone geometry and comprises a variable-thickness layer of fibreglass-reinforced epoxy (modulus of elasticity, 18.6 GPa, Poisson's ratio, 0.3) corresponding to the cortical bone and polyurethane foam (modulus of elasticity, 55.1–413 MPa) corresponding to the cancellous bone. This tibial model has been used with the aim of producing results that would be independent of specimen variability and reflect differences in the variables of direct interest only. In the first stage of the tests three types of non-comminuted fractures were created each at the same level of the distal third of a separate tibial model using a fine band saw, namely a spiral (type 42-A1.3), an oblique (type -A2.3) and a transverse fracture (type -A3.3). The angle of the fracture line with the perpendicular to the long axis of the bone was 45° for the oblique fracture and 15° for the transverse fracture ( The remaining three tibiae were used to study the influence of the degree of cortical contact. In each tibia an oblique fracture (type 42-A2.3) was created at the same level of its distal third. Subsequently, the three tibial fractures were reduced accurately (100% cortical apposition) and fixed with a nail as described previously. During each of the subsequent testing stages lesser degrees of cortical contact (85, 75, 50, 25 and 15%) were created by removing a precisely calculated wedge of bone from the fracture edges. Therefore a total of six constructs of different degree of cortical contact were created ( The nail-bone constructs of the fracture models described above were tested using a special rig that simultaneously applied axial and torsional loading to the tibiae ( The results of testing for non-comminuted (simple) fracture types ( The results of the tested mechanical parameters for the variable degree of cortical contact are presented in Throughout the testing procedure no significant axial instability (axial shortening of more than 3 mm) has been observed. As a result of the applied of axial loading (150 N) the spiral fractures shortened by about 2 mm, while the 15 and 25% cortical contact fracture patterns (Winquist–Hansen type III) showed a shortening of approximately 3 mm. Although it is possible that the application of a greater amount of load could have produced more shortening, this parameter was not investigated in detail as the focus of this study was the rotational and not the axial stability of the fracture constructs. Static nailing is recommend for unstable fractures of the tibial diaphysis Nevertheless, dynamic nailing of the tibial diaphysis invites the risk of postoperative complications such as shortening and angulatory or rotational malunion. The malunion rate varies between the reported series and this might be at least partly due to variable definition criteria, but the available literature shows that this can be estimated to between 2.4 and 5%. Therefore, as most of the tibial shaft fractures are located in the middle and distal thirds (44 and 37.8%, respectively) and about 60% of them are non-comminuted The exact indications for dynamic nailing or early dynamisation in tibial fractures have not been studied as extensively as they have for femoral fractures The potential for instability of femoral fractures has been investigated by Winquist and Hansen So far, there are no biomechanical studies to investigate the influence of factors such as the fracture type, quality of initial reduction and degree of cortical contact on the initial torsional stability of dynamically nailed tibial fractures. Our in vitro study was undertaken in order to provide experimental data on the influence of fracture type and degree of cortical contact on the initial torsional stability of axially stable dynamically nailed distal tibial fractures. This paper is a purely mechanical study in a synthetic bone model. The mechanical contribution of the soft tissue envelope and the effects on the biology and hence the healing of fractures has not been assessed. We initially tested three fixation patterns commonly seen in clinical practice following dynamic tibial nailing ( Our results also showed that, as expected, the rotational stability of the fixation is influenced by the quality of initial reduction in terms of the total area of cortical contact between the main fragments. Fractures reduced with a bony contact area of 50% or more of the diaphyseal diameter, irrespective of the presence of comminution or not, showed significantly higher torsional stability than fractures with a contact area of less than 50% ( In conclusion, the results of this study indicate that, regarding the initial rotational stability of dynamically-nailed fractures of the distal tibial diaphysis, simple oblique (angle of fracture line >40°) fractures are the most stable followed by the simple transverse (<15°) fractures. Spiral fractures of the tibial diaphysis are the less stable in terms of the investigated parameter. Furthermore, it has been found that by increasing the total bony contact area to at least 50% of the diaphyseal diameter the initial rotational stability of dynamically nailed oblique tibial fractures should increase significantly and a significantly lower rate of postoperative rotational deformity can be expected. In clinical practice increased bony contact area at the fracture site could be achieved by the improved quality of reduction, avoidance of per-operative traction during nailing of fractures distal to the isthmus or application of interfragmentary compression by retrograde hammering following distal locking. Finally, the quantified results of this study support the value of the Winquist–Hansen classification and recommendations regarding the rotational stability of tibial fractures treated with dynamic interlocking nailing. The authors would like to thank Richard Weston, Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Bath, for his technical assistance throughout this project.