Titanium has been a successful implant material owing to its excellent strength to weight ratio, toughness, and bioinert oxide surface. Significant progress has been made on the improvement of titanium's bioactivity by coating its oxide surface with calcium phosphates and bioactive molecules. Here, we report on the coating of titanium with a poly(l-lysine)-calcium phosphate hybrid material with a nanoscale texture. This hybrid coating was grown by first nucleating seed crystals of calcium phosphate, directly on the Ti surface and then exposing this surface to solutions containing Ca2+, PO4
                     3−, and poly(l-lysine). The resultant hybrid coating was characterized by electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, thermogravimetric analysis, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, and elemental analysis. This material contained 14% by weight poly(l-lysine), and this organic component decreased greatly the dimensions of the surface features, thus enhancing surface area relative to the inorganic control. The highly textured hybrid material was more susceptible than the control to acidic and enzymatic degradation. The amino acid cysteine was covalently linked to the hybrid material, demonstrating the potential of this coating for further functionalization. These hybrid coatings may prove useful in enhancing the bioactivity of titanium.Titanium and its alloys have been used extensively as skeletal implant materials given their high strength to weight ratio, toughness and bioinert character of the naturally forming oxide layer. Previous studies have explored the use of calcium phosphate coatings on titanium-based implant surfaces to introduce bioactivity to otherwise inert metal oxide surfaces Significant work has been done investigating the interactions of various biological macromolecules with calcium phosphate coatings. The growth of calcium phosphate coatings in the presence of biomolecules such as albumin We describe here a poly( All chemical reagents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Solvents were obtained from Fisher Scientific, (Hanover Park, IL). Titanium foil was obtained from Goodfellow, Inc. (Berwyn, PA). Commercially pure titanium (Ti) foil (0.032 Samples were then preseeded by placing them in a solution of 2 The pH of these mineralizing solutions was tracked with a Fisherbrand electronic pH meter. Mineralized samples were rinsed thoroughly with deionized water and dried by vacuum desiccation. Dry samples were then examined by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), reflective Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (R-FTIR), and scanning electron microscopy including energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDS). XPS was conducted using an Omicron XPS at 15 Non-adherent precipitate was then collected by a series of water rinses followed by centrifugation and lyophilization. Dry precipitate was tested by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) using Cu Degradation experiments were performed on foil samples, coated with the hybrid material and the inorganic controls, grown as described above. Enzyme-based solutions included 0.25% trypsin in Hanks balanced salt solution (HBSS) and 0.2% pronase in HBSS. Coating degradation by pH variation was conducted using HBSS (pH 7.4) and citrate buffer solutions at pHs 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, and 2. Samples were placed in 1mL of each respective degradation solution for 24 Chemical functionality was measured by coupling Boc-S-tert-butylmercapto-L-cysteine (Boc-Cys(StBu)-OH) to free amines exposed on the hybrid coating. Both the hybrid and inorganic control coatings were prepared as described above. Surface concentration of free amines was measured using a quantified ninhydrin test The calcium phosphate growth reactions were tracked visually as well as by pH measurements. The calcium chloride solutions were initially clear and colorless at approximately pH 5.8–5.9. Seconds after adding phosphate solutions, the pH rose rapidly to about 7.8, producing a fine white precipitate. In purely inorganic reactions (e.g. preseeding and inorganic control samples), this suspended precipitate grew coarser over the next 3–4 SEM micrographs of the coatings produced by these reactions are shown in TGA of the precipitate collected from inorganic control mineralizations yielded a mass loss on heating of around 9.5±0.2%, a value consistent with expected water loss from hydrated octacalcium phosphate (OCP) crystals (9.2%). Analysis of the poly( XRD patterns of the hybrid precipitate, displayed in Examining the reflective FTIR spectra in Coating and pretreatment analysis by XPS is summarized in The formation of this seed layer on the titanium surface was critical to the successful growth of the poly( The hybrid coating was also found to be particularly susceptible to biologically relevant degradation. The incorporation of poly( The observations above describe a novel nanotextured poly( The mechanism for the growth of the hybrid coating on the oxidized titanium surface involved several sequential steps. Nucleation of calcium phosphates on titanium surfaces is believed to be related to hydroxyl ions decorating the naturally forming titanium dioxide (TiO The nature of the interaction between the mineral phase and the poly( This hybrid coating could offer a number of advantages over other calcium phosphate coatings. The solution phase growth of the coating makes its application accessible to all surface types, including porous surfaces, where currently accepted methods of calcium phosphate growth such as a plasma spraying may not be feasible. The hybrid coating has very high surface area with feature sizes reasonably consistent with the apatite crystal found in natural bone The poly( Finally, the hybrid coating showed susceptibility to degradation, both enzymatically and under acidic conditions, two primary mechanisms for osteoclastic resorption in natural bone. Coating dissolution may therefore accelerate de novo bone formation and enhance implant interfacial strength We developed a synthetic procedure to deposit a poly( We gratefully acknowledge funding support from the National Science Foundation (DMR0108342) and the Department of Energy (DEFG02-00ER45810). All electron microscopy was performed in the Electron Probe Instrumentation Center (EPIC) at Northwestern University. Fourier transform spectroscopy was conducted in the Analytical Services Laboratory at Northwestern University using a Bio-Rad FTS-40 FTIR spectrophotometer. XPS data was collected in Northwestern University's Keck Interdisciplinary Surface Science Center. X-ray diffraction studies were performed at Northwestern University in the Jerome B. Cohen X-ray Diffraction Facility. Elemental analysis was conducted at the Microanalytical Laboratory at the University of Illinois in Urbana-Champaign.