Concrete-filled double-skin tubes (CFDST) consist of two concentrically placed steel tubes with concrete filled in between and they have more and more commonly been used in the field of civil engineering in recent years. A number of recent researches evidenced the excellent performance of CFDST columns under a variety of loading conditions. However, very limited knowledge is known about the residual axial capacity of CFDST columns following severe blast loadings. This paper presents an experimental study on the residual behaviours of ultra-high performance concrete infilled double-skin steel tubular columns after close-in blast loading. In total, eight CFDST columns, including 3 square ones and 5 circular ones, were first tested under different blast loads with two axial load levels. After the blast tests, all CFDST columns were transported to the laboratory and each of them was then subjected to static axially compressive load until failure. It was found that the CFDST columns with smaller permanent displacement had larger peak residual axial capacity and the CFDST columns which were not subjected to axial load during the blast test exhibited more ductile behaviour than those which were axially loaded during the blast test.Terrorist activities, especially blast attacks, have taken away thousands of innocent lives in the past decades. As a result, countless effort has been made to investigate and improve the reliability of vulnerable structures under blast loads. Progressive collapse, one of the most common types of structural failure, is mainly triggered by failure of the key columns; therefore, the residual strength of these columns after blast loads has become one of the decisive factors when it comes to assessing the stability of a structure A CFDST member consists of two concentrically placed steel tubes with concrete filler poured in between them. One of the advantages of CFDST columns is the passive confinement which is attributed to the interaction between the steel tubes and concrete filler. Wei et al. On the other hand, studies were also carried out to investigate the behaviours of CFDST members under transverse loading It is well known that ultra-high performance concrete (UHPC) has been more and more widely used in the field of civil engineering applications. Since CFDST members are mainly used in building underground tunnels, high-rise buildings or bridge piers, where large axial bearing capacity is required; therefore, by replacing normal strength concrete by UHPC in CFDST members, the cross-section area as well as the self-weight of the structural members can be significantly reduced, owning to its much higher strength. In addition, for UHPC mixed with fibres, crushing and spalling damage of the concrete can be well restrained by the fibres thus can further delay the buckling of the steel tubes. Despite several studies have investigated the behaviours of CFST members filled with high strength concrete In this research, an experimental study is presented to investigate the residual axial load capacity of CFDST columns infilled with UHPFRC. The experimental program mainly consists of three phases: the first phase includes experimentally determining the axial load capacity of undamaged CFDST columns by uniaxial compressive tests along with three point bending tests to determine the flexural capacity. The second phase includes conducting blast experiments on CFDST columns and then sending damaged columns back to laboratory for experiment phase three. The last phase includes conducting residual axial compressive tests on the blast-damaged CFDST columns from phase two. In total, 7 CFDST columns (including 4 with circular cross section and 3 with square cross section) were used for phase one, 12 CFDST columns (including 6 with circular cross section and 6 with square cross section) were used for phase two and 8 CFDST columns (including 5 with circular cross section and 3 with square cross section) were used for phase three. All specimens measured 2500 The mechanical properties of the steel tubes were determined from tensile coupons taken from the outer steel tube of a square CFDST specimen in conformance with Chinese Standard GBT228-2010 The cross sectional classification of the test specimens were determined in accordance with AS4100  For unfilled square hollow tube, the plastic limit, All CFDST specimens used steel-fibre reinforced concrete as the concrete filler and nanoparticles, namely CaCO To obtain the material properties, twenty-nine 100 The axial compression tests and three point bending tests were carried out to investigate the behaviours of CFDST columns when subjected to axial compressive and transverse load, respectively. Those tests were carried out by using the experimental machineries as shown in    In addition, the failure mode of axial-load-free specimen TPB_C1 was also found to be different from the rest axially loaded specimens. As shown in   As shown in In terms of data acquisition, three displacement gauges (LVDTs) spaced at 380 Since this paper mainly focuses on the residual performance of CFDST columns after blast loading, the blast test itself therefore is not discussed in great details. The results of the blast test are given in In order to explore the relationship among the residual deflection, the blast load and the geometry of the specimen, a normalised parameter  The step by step calculations for  The residual performance tests were carried out in the Joint Research Centre of Tianjin Chengjian University and The University of Adelaide. The same experiment machineries used for the previous static tests were also used for this test. During the experiment, instead of directly load specimens to their peak capacities, the loading schematic in  The residual axial load capacities of the test specimens are listed in In order to calculate the damage index for the CFST specimen C3B, its designed axial load needs to be calculated. It was estimated by simply calculating the extra nominal axial capacity obtained by taking out the inner steel tube and then filling the hollow section by UHPFRC.   From It can be noticed in the previous section that the axially loaded CFDST column (e.g. S2B) always had a smaller residual deflection than the axial-load-free column (e.g. S1B) under the same blast loads. However, as shown in  For the circular CFDST columns, it was found that if the damage index was less than 0.3, local buckling of steel tube was more likely to happen (i.e. C1B & C2B); otherwise, steel rupture was more likely to happen (i.e. C2A & C3B). The only exception was specimen C3A, whose failure mode was global flexural failure despite having a damage index of 0.36. However, it can be found in On the other hand, for square specimens, local buckling at mid-span and/or column ends was the main failure mode with no signs of steel rupture. This type of local damage mode was also observed by This paper has presented an experimental study on the static, dynamic and residual performance of concrete-filled double-skin steel tube (CFDST) columns filled with UHPFRC after close-range blast loading. The following conclusions can be drawn based on the test results and observations: The axial load capacities of undamaged circular and square CFDST specimens were very similar, which were 4000 Under static lateral load, the flexural load capacity of a square CFDST specimen was larger than its circular counterpart; also, an axially loaded CFDST specimen, with about 25% of its axial capacity, yielded a larger flexural load capacity than an axial-load-free counterpart, however this also led to a reduction in the ductility. A dimensionless parameter A damage index was used to assess the residual performance of CFDST specimens after blast loading and it was found that the damage indices of all CFDST specimens were less than 0.4, indicating that the CFDST specimens were able to retain more than 60% of its axial load capacity even after severe blast loading. During the residual axial capacity tests after close-range blast loading, localised buckling failure of the outer steel tubes at mid-span and/or column ends always occurred for square CFDST; whereas for circular CFDST, localised buckling failure occurred when the damage level was low and steel rupture happened when the damage level was high. The failure modes were similar to those of CFST members subjected to damage caused by large deformation cyclic loading. The research presented in this paper jointly supported by the National Key Technology R&D Program of the