Gasification fine slag is a kind of solid waste, and there is a large number of fine slags need to be recycled and reused for environmental consideration. The froth flotation kinetics experiment was adopted to recycle the residual carbon, carbon recovery percentage of 52.65% and the loss on ignition (LOI) of 64.47% were obtained. The pore structure and fractal characteristics of fine slag and its flotation residual carbon are essential factors which will influence their physical and chemical properties, including mechanical, adsorption and fuel properties and it is imperative to understand these parameters. In this study, BET, HK, BJH and FHH models of low-temperature N2 adsorption/desorption were used to compare the differences of specific surface area, pore size/volume and fractal characteristics among samples, respectively. As a result, there are larger surface area and fractal dimension value (D), smaller pore volume and average pore diameter of fine slag than that of flotation residual carbon, which is caused by the spherical-ash particles covering the surface and pores of the rough carbon matrix. Comparing the fine slag and flotation residual carbon, surface area decreases from 145 to 111 m2/g, pore volume increases from 0.1288 to 0.1833 cm3/g, and average pore width increases from 5.2141 to 6.0436 nm. Moreover, the values of D2 and D1 decreased by 6.77% and 2.89%, correspondingly. From the perspective of energy utilization, the HHV value of gasification fine slag is elevated from 6.22 to 19.48 MJ/kg after flotation kinetics process and LOI value increases from 24.49 to 64.47% respectively. TGA shows that the flotation residual carbon has better reactivity than raw fine slag. Froth flotation is an efficient approach to recycle residual carbon from fine slag, while the low-temperature N2 adsorption/desorption technology can be innovatively applied to characterize the pore structure and fractal characteristics of gasified fine slag.Coal plays an important role in the energy and chemical fields in China [ The microscopic pore structure of coal/residual carbon is complicated, which will influence its physical and chemical properties, such as mechanical properties, adsorption and reactivity [ In this study, the aim is to propose a three-stage froth flotation method of fine slag, and provide theoretical references for the processing and utilization of gasification fine slag and recycling residual carbon. Gasification fine slag was processed and upgraded by froth flotation to obtain residual carbon, the microscopic surface/pore structure and fractal parameters of raw fine slag/flotation residual carbon were innovatively determined by low-temperature N Gasification fine slag was supplied by an entrained-flow gasification company in Ningxia Province, China. The gasification fine slag was produced via a high temperature (1400-1600℃), high pressure (4.6 MPa) and gasification agent (H Flotation kinetics experiments were conducted in an XFD type variable frequency single-tank flotation machine (made in China, technical performance parameters: flotation tank volume: 1 L, impeller speed range: 0–2800 r/min, scrapers speed: 30 r/min). The flotation process is shown in In the process of fine slag separation, loss on ignition (LOI) and recovery percentage of carbon (RPC) can be used to evaluate the efficiency of flotation processes and equipment [ Ash was obtained via 550℃ of slow heating that is shown in The proximate analysis and element analysis are shown in The micro and mesoporous structures of fine slag and flotation residual carbon were determined by low temperature N The fractal Frenkel-Halsey-Hill (FHH) is an effective approach to calculate D value using nitrogen adsorption data and describe the irregular and complex pore structure (pore surface roughness) of samples [ The particle size distribution of gasification fine slag is show in The intrinsic reactivity of residual carbon in fine slag can be analyzed via non-isothermal TGA method [ In The isotherms exist hysteresis loops when the relative pressure (P/P According to the definition of the IUPAC, micropores are pores having a diameter of less than 2 nm, mesopores are pores having a diameter in the range of 2 to 50 nm, and macropores are pores having a diameter of more than 50 nm [ The respective FHH model is used to describe the fitting process of N As shown in The high D value and surface area of fine slag are responsible for the larger adsorption ability, which will explain its strong water holding capacity of 60% from the first collecting. However, in this study it is an indirect method to describe the de-mineral process, in other word, the lower D value and surface area of flotation residual carbon is associated with the removal of micro-ash particles in the pores and on the surface of fine slag. In this study, fine slag can be upgraded by froth flotation kinetics process to recycle the residual carbon. The differences of microscopic pore structure existed in raw fine slag and flotation residual carbon were investigated, which may provide theoretical references for the processing and utilization of gasification fine slag. A three-stage froth flotation process achieves the recycling of gasification fine slag efficiently. The carbon recovery percentage and the LOI of flotation residual carbon were 52.65% and 64.47% respectively. TGA shows that the flotation kinetics is a useful demineralization process, can effectively remove the ash particles in the pores and on the surface of rough residual carbon, and then the carbon is more easily contacted with oxygen to improve the reactivity of residual carbon. BET, HK and BJH methods can be adopted to characterize the pore structure of gasification fine slag and its flotation residual carbon. Both fine slag and its flotation residual carbon have a high-level surface area which seems to be benefit for adsorption aspects. On the other hand, there is higher surface area, lower of pore volume and lower average pore diameter of gasification fine slag than those of flotation residual carbon, which are caused by the micro spherical-ash particles covering the surface and pores of the residual carbon. FHH model can be used to describe fractal parameters, and the fitting level R None. This work was supported by the “