A cerium-doped MoS2 composite has been synthesized by a simple hydrothermal method. The cerium-doped MoS2 composite has uniform 2D nanostructures. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy results confirm the CeO2-MoS2 nanocomposite has S-rich edges and there is a strong interaction between layered MoS2 and cubic CeO2. The nanocomposite has an enhanced visible light photocatalytic activity than that of bare MoS2 and CeO2. Besides, it also shows excellent photocatalytic activity and stability on reduction of aqueous Cr(VI). Schematic illustration of charge transfer route in the CeO2-MoS2 nanocomposite system is also presented.Heavy metals in both natural water supplies and industrial wastewater streams are a critical health and environmental issue due to their non-biodegradability and high toxicity in the human body through the food chain Up to date, diverse photocatalytic materials have been introduced, including TiO Impurity doping with proper oxidation state is useful for red shifting the absorption edge as well as reducing the rate of electron-hole pair’s recombination which improves the photocatalytic activity of a photocatalyst Cerium (III) nitrate hexahydrate (Ce(NO In a typical synthesis procedure, 0.4343 In a typical synthesis of CeO SEM was examined on a field-emission scanning electron microanalyzer (Hitachi S-4800, Japan). HRTEM and High angle annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) were recorded on a Tecnai G2 F30 S-TWIN transmission electron microscopes. The FT-IR spectra of the samples were measured on a Cary 610/670 microscope (Varian, US), with scanning from 4000 to 400 Photocatalysis experiments were carried out in a BL-GHX-V photochemical reactor (Shanghai Bilon Instrument Co., Ltd). The visible light source (λ A stock solution of Cr(VI) at 1000 All photoelectrochemical characteristics were performed in the electrolytic cell consisted of a CeO The morphology and microstructure of cerium-doped MoS FT-IR spectra of MoS The magnitude of the photocurrent represents the charge collection efficiency of the electrode surface and indirectly indicates the separated efficiency of electron-hole pairs. The LSV technique was used to compare the photocurrent response to Cr(VI) evolution. As expected, CeO  The chemical state of the CeO The photocatalytic property of the photocatalyst is related to its band structure. The band edge positions of conduction band (CB) and valence band (VB) of the CeO Based on the results of PL spectra, LSV and XPS analysis, under visible light irradiation, both CeO The adsorption and photocatalytic performances of the CeO  In summary, the proposed one-step hydrothermal synthesis of cerium-based composite photocatalysts containing a layered MoS This work was supported by the