A novel extractant, 2-ethylhexyl Bis(2-ethylhexyl)phosphinate (EHBEHP, abbreviated as B), was synthesized for the extraction of Cerium(IV) (Ce(IV)) and fluorine (F(I)) from nitric acid (HNO3) media. The effects of HNO3 concentration, extractant concentration, F(I) concentration and the temperature on the Ce(IV) and F(I) extraction were studied and discussed. The experimental results show that EHBEHP has a strong ability to extract Ce(IV), while the presence of F(I) decreases the extraction ability of Ce(IV). The extraction process had nothing to do within the studied temperature range. The extraction of HNO3, Ce(IV) and Ce(IV)-F(I) were studied respectively, and the extracted complexes were found to be 2HNO3·EHBEHP, Ce(NO3)4·2EHBEHP and Ce(HF)(NO3)4·EHBEHP, individually. The extraction mechanisms were determined according to slope analysis method. Saturation loading capacity of Ce(IV) and F(I) extracted by 0.867 mol/L EHBEHP in HNO3 system was about 50.98 g/L and 5.67 g/L, respectively. The stripping experiment shows that 95.3% of stripping efficiency of Ce(IV) can be obtained with 2.4% H2O2. The FT-IR of extracted complexes were measured and characterized. EHBEHP shows higher extraction ability and saturation loading capacity compared with DEHEHP.Rare earth (RE) elements exist in a variety of minerals, some of which, such as bastnaesite, monazite and Bayan Obo mixed rare earth ores ( Cerium atoms' electronic configuration is [Xe]4f Numbers of extractants such as acidic organophosphorus extractants ( As we all know, the extraction ability of neutral phosphorus extractant is related to the number of P-O-C bond. The less the number of P-O-C bond, the larger the electron cloud density on the P EHBEHP (purity >97%) was synthesized and kindly offered by Shanghai Institute of Organic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Its molar mass is 402 g/mol, and its molecular structure is shown in All high-resolution NMR spectra were measured by Bruker AVANCE III 400 spectrometer equipped with a 4 mm standard bore CPMAS probe head for The concentration of Ce(IV) and Ce All the experiments were performed at room temperature except for the temperature experiment. Liquid-liquid extraction were carried out by shaking equal volumes (10 mL) of organic and aqueous solutions in 30 mL separatory funnels for 30 min to ensure the complete reaction. For temperature experiment, 5 mL aqueous phase and 5 mL organic phase were mixed in the 15 mL centrifuge tube, which was held in a constant temperature incubator shaker for 30 min to reach the extraction temperature. The n-heptane in saturated loaded organic phase was removal by vacuum rotary evaporation then vacuum drying at 120 °C to obtain the saturated extracted species. In stripping experiment, 10 mL of loaded organic phase was contacted with 10 mL of 3 M HNO The extraction efficiency (E), distribution ratio (D) and stripping efficiency (S) are defined in Eq. In order to understand the extraction of Ce(IV) in HNO From this equation can be obtained: To obtain the m value, the effect of various concentration of extractant on the extraction of HNO The effect of various HNO The effect of EHBEHP concentration, within the range of 0.01–0.05 M, on the extraction of Ce(IV) was studied in 2 M HNO From the results above and charge balance, the extraction equilibrium of Ce(IV) from HNO  Equal volumes of organic phase (0.867 M extractant in heptane) and aqueous phase (0.0578 M Ce As the As demonstrated in previous work (  Ce(IV) in aqueous phase exists in the form of Ce It can be seen from K According to the Eq. From the above discussion, Eq. Introducing Eq. The effect of HNO The effect of F The effect of EHBEHP concentration on the extraction of Ce(IV) was studied and the result is shown in From the results above and charge balance, the extraction equilibrium of Ce(IV) and F(I) from HNO The effect of the temperature on the extraction of Ce(IV) and F(I) by EHBEHP was studied. From the results shown in Equal volumes of organic phase (0.867 M extractant in heptane) and aqueous phase (0.0578 M Ce The regeneration of extractant had always been the focus of attention. Therefore, it is necessary to study the stripping procedure. Because of the weak extraction of Ce (III) by EHBEHP in HNO In order to better understand the extraction process, the FT-IR spectra of EHBEHP, EHBEHP loaded with HNO The characteristic peaks at 1226 cm In order to further illustrate the extraction performance of EHBEHP, the extraction ability and saturation loading capacity of EHBEHP were compared with DEHEHP. The result of the comparison of extraction ability between EHBEHP and DEHEHP is shown in The method of measuring saturation loading capacity is the same as that described in 3.3.6. The organic phase (0.867 M DEHEHP in heptane) and aqueous phase (0.0591 M Ce The extraction of Ce(IV) and F(I) from HNO Special thanks to Prof. Jichang Xiao and Ruobing Du from Shanghai Institute of Organic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences for the synthesis and supply of extractant. The authors wish to thank the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at