ZrO2 toughened Al2O3 particles (ZTAp) have poor wettability with iron, and therefore some defects are easily formed at the interface between ZTAp and iron matrix, which may lead to material failure. This paper illustrates that the ZTAp were modified on the surface by the active Mo–Mn metallization, and thus, they were used as the reinforcing phases to prepare the iron-matrix composite (ZTAp/Fe composite). It is concluded that the sponge-like skeleton structure was formed on the surface of ZTAp after the metallization. The interface of ZTAp/Fe composite, which has been proved to have bearing and transitional capacity by scratch test, was formed by chemical bonding with elemental diffusion, besides mechanical bonding. The metallization mechanism of elemental diffusion can be explained by the migration of glass phase, and the elements diffusion between the interface and iron matrix is to form solid solution.ZrO Qiu [ The importance of preparing ZTAp/Fe composite with good interface is to form a tight connection between ZTA particles and iron matrix and to achieve better wettability as well, so active Mo–Mn metallization is used, which is found from the brazing of dissimilar materials, namely ceramic and metal sealing [ In this study, the surface modification of ZTAp was carried out by active Mo–Mn metallization firstly and then Ni coating, after that the modified ZTAp were sintered together with iron-based self-fluxing alloy to obtain ZTAp/Fe composite. The interface between the iron matrix and ZTAp was analyzed by XRD, XPS, SEM, EDS and scratch test. The compositions of ZTAp (1–2 mm) and iron-based self-fluxing alloys (100–120 μm) are shown in In the primary metallization, the MnO, SiO The microstructure of metallized ZTAp and the interface of the ZTAp/Fe composite were observed by metallographic microscope (OM), tungsten-filament scanning electron microscope (Hitachi S–3400 N) and cold-field emission scanning electron microscope (Hitachi SU8220). High-resolution elemental analysis of ZTAp/Fe composite was measured by Bruker Flat Quad flat-plug X-ray energy spectrometer (EDS). X-ray diffraction (XRD, Ultima IV X-ray Diffractometer) patterns were recorded at a scanning speed of 2°/min over the diffraction angles of 10–90° (2θ). Additionally, the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, US Thermo Fischer ESCALAB 250Xi) was applied with 14.6 kV and 13.5 mA, and the charge correction is performed with C1s = 284.8 eV combined energy as the energy standard. Scratch test of ZTAp/Fe composite was performed by the WS-2005 Coating Adhesion Automatic Scratch Tester with loading rate 100 N/s and experimental load 45 N. In Generally, for primary metallization, the temperature of approximately 1500 °C was used in the conventional Mo–Mn metallization [ In this study, the activator ZrO The SiO   The ZTAp/Fe composite is subjected to phases analysis by XPS ( The product of the interfacial reaction and the phases of ZTAp/Fe composite are accurately measured by XRD ( The interface layer area is smaller than the area of both ZTAp and iron matrix, so the interfacial products are in the forms of minor phases, which include Zr In In In the scratching process, the sample made from the composite is subjected to not only normal stress caused by the indenter on the surface, but also shear stress which causes by the moving indenter from left to right. Therefore the wear scar is formed under the action of normal stress and shear stress together [ From the above mentioned, we can know that the metallization-modified interface plays good bonding action between the iron matrix and the ZTAp. The iron matrix occurs mainly plastic deformation and the ZTAp fragile pit spalling, however the interface layer, which has typical characteristics of both the iron matrix and ZTAp, plays the gradient role between the matrix and ZTAp and support the applied load by cracks formation releasing stress. We expect that the load-bearing action of the interface layer can vastly improve the property of the composite. In this study, glass phase exists mainly in the metallization layer and slightly in the ZTAp (as shown in The composition of glass phases is complex, and therefore many reactions will occur in metallization layer during sintering. Here the migration theory of glass phases is used to explain the element diffusion and reaction. The migration theory of glass phases is also the most convincing theory to explain the active Mo–Mn metallization at present. The mechanisms of interface layer formation can be explained by the migration of glass phase and elemental diffusion separately. The migration of the glass phase is mainly carried out between the metallization layer and ZTAp in the primary metallization that is most obvious than the other sintering processes. The glass phase becomes most active in the primary metallization and porous sponge-like structure was formed by glass phase and Mo. However, according to the secondary metallization and sintering of ZTAp/Fe composite, the temperature is much lower, and therefore the glass phase is not molten totally. Consequently, what the crucial influence of the formation between ZTAp and interface is the primary metallization and it is appropriate to use the theory of glass phase migration to explain the results of elements diffusion between the interface and ZTAp. Due to the complex reactions involved in the metallization, the theory of glass phase migration is most convincing for explaining the mechanism of the conventional or active Mo–Mn metallization compared with other theories. Cole [ In which There is no glass phase in conventional Mo–Mn metallization layer, so the glass phase can diffuse and migrate into the metallization layer from the ceramic only [ The migration of the glass phase could be described by the modified double capillary model in theory. First of all, SiO On the one hand, the surface of ZTAp is in contact with the metallization layer at the beginning of primary metallization. As the temperature increases to over 850 °C, the melting point of the glass phase begins to decrease gradually, owing to the activator ZrO According to the results of EDS in In In The added elements not only have effects on the interface, but also the iron matrix. The iron-based self-fluxing alloy contains a large amount of Fe and Cr which form {Fe–Cr} solid solution with fishbone-like eutectic microstructure in  The ZTA particles can be metallized by the active Mo–Mn metallization, and the particles are used to prepare ZTAp/Fe composite with visible interface layer which has good bonding between the iron matrix and ZTAp. The interface bonding mechanism in ZTAp/Fe composite is composed of mechanical bonding as well as chemical bonding with elemental diffusion. The interface of ZTAp/Fe composite is improved. The products of the interface reaction of ZTAp/Fe composite are Zr The elemental diffusion can be explained by the theory of glass phases migration between the metallization layer and ZTAp, and by the formation of the solid solution between the metallization layer and the iron matrix. The scratch test is carried out on ZTAp/Fe composite, and the main reason for the cracks is caused by releasing residual stress. Moreover, the interface of ZTAp/Fe composite has the transitional and load-bearing effect. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research project is financially supported by the