In upgrading lean tungsten ore, gravity concentration by jigging of vein quartz produced a pre-concentrate containing 4.5% WO3. For further upgrading the pre-concentrate, beneficiation studies were conducted with an objective of obtaining a product analysing >65% WO3 with less than 1% impurities of SiO2 and S each. The sample contained quartz, topaz and iron sulphides as gangue. The study presented in this paper has shown that a further pre-concentration to remove topaz is necessary for improving efficiency of downstream separation process and to achieve desired product. Results of enrichment studies using −200# ground sample have also been discussed. Desired product could be obtained by pre-concentration of the jig pre-concentrate by tabling followed by flotation at −200# and vanning of flotation tailing.Tungsten is the most widely used metal in defence, steel, industrial, electrical, textile and leather sectors. India's tungsten resources are limited. Demands are mostly met by imports. Resources are very scarce whether they are in quartz veins, alluvial, phyllite, granite or scheelite. Being a metal of strategic importance, its sources have to be exploited judiciously. Wolframite is the main mineral as a source of the metal. Two types of wolframite deposits are being worked at Degana, Rajasthan. One of them is quartz lode where wolframite is mineralised in quartz veins. The other type is finely disseminated tungsten mineralised in granite body itself. The sample studied in this case was a bed concentrate obtained by jigging quartz lode at −12 mm. Mineral characterisation and beneficiation studies were conducted on a sample containing 4.5% WO Wolframite was present as medium to very fine size subhedral to anhedral grains, disseminated along fracture/cleavage planes of quartz/topaz/mica/feldspar. Size of wolframite grains varied between 500 and 10 μm with an average size of 100 μm. About 10% occurred as coarse inter-granular grains. Very fine grains of 10 to 15 μm size constituted about 15% as inclusions within quartz/topaz. Quartz/topaz and sulphides as well as oxide minerals were present as inter-granular grains with a size range of 500 to 250 μm. In rare cases, the impurities occurred as fine inclusions in wolframite grains. Mineralogical composition and chemical analyses of the studied sample are given in Physical beneficiation process depends on the physical properties of constituents in the sample. Separation efficiency in a unit operation for process depends upon many factors such as differences of physical properties of valuable and the gangue, granulometry of the feed and operational parameters. Physical properties of various constituents, which affect directly and indirectly the gravity concentration process, are given in For attaining maximum liberation, recommended mesh of grind of the sample was −200#. Since there was appreciable difference of specific gravity values of between wolframite and most of the gangue constituents, gravity separation tests were conducted with sample to 80% −200# to determine the efficiency of separation. The sample was wet ground in a rod mill and deslimed at 20 μm size. The deslimed feed was used for gravity separation using a vanner. Slime was also run on vanner to recover wolframite. Results of the test are given in The results of the The pre-concentrate could be upgraded to near 65% WO The SiO The slime production is high (43.4%) and, The recovery of the WO Since concentration criterion (gravity separation) of sulphides to Wolframite is <2, flotation was employed to remove sulphides. Two stage flotation of −200# deslimed sample was conducted at pH value of 4 and of 9 to remove sulphides. Sodium silicate was used as depressant, potassium ethyl xanthate as collector, pine oil as frother, H The results of Flotation is essential for removal of sulphides; Vanning could not lower SiO Microscopic examination of the concentrate showed presence of topaz. It was confirmed by the Al Gravity separation studies were conducted at different sizes (−35, −48 and −65#) to see the possibility of rejection of gangue at coarse size so that downstream beneficiation processes had to deal with less gangue. It was observed that tabling of −65# size sample 57.3% of the barren west containing 62.7% of SiO The concentrate obtained by tabling at −65# was wet ground to −200# and subjected to flotation as mentioned earlier. Subsequent vanning of flotation tails produced desired concentrate as shown in The sample was a pre-concentrate with 4.5% WO Burt, R.O., 1984. Gravity concentration Technology, Development in processing-5. Mineral Aspects of Gravity Concentration, pp. 23–24. Gaudin, A.M., 1977. Attributes of comminution, Principles of Mineral Dressing, TMH Edition, p. 137. Srivastava, J.P., Pathak, P.N., Sengupta, S.K., 1992. Beneficiation studies on jig concentrate from Degana, Rajasthan. National Metallugical Laboratory's internal Investigation Report, No. 12622060. Wills, B.A., 1985. Gravity concentration, Mineral Processing Technology, 3rd. edn., pp. 334–335. The authors are grateful to Prof. P. Ramachandra Rao, Director, National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur, for giving permission to publish this paper. They are thankful to colleagues of Analytical Chemistry Division for their invaluable analytical support. They are also thankful to colleagues who helped with petrological characterisation of the sample under study.