Operative fixation is gaining popularity in the treatment of displaced midshaft clavicle fractures. The Sonoma CRx intramedullary clavicular pin (Sonoma Orthopedic Products, Santa Rosa, CA) is a new clavicle fixation pin that addresses the challenges of intramedullary fixation with a flexible head, grippers, and a buttressing screw. Unfortunately, we have seen mechanical failure of this device. We report 2 cases of hardware failure seen over a 2-month period placed by 2 different fellowship-trained upper extremity surgeons using this device to stabilize fractures of the clavicle. A healthy 21-year-old male medical student broke his left clavicle while diving onto the ground during a football game. Radiographs showed a 2-cm shortened displaced midshaft clavicle fracture ( A 52-year-old man, who works as a machinist, fell onto his left shoulder during a bicycle race. He had immediate pain, bruising, and swelling over his clavicle. Radiographs showed a completely displaced midshaft clavicle fracture with a large butterfly fragment ( Clavicle fractures are treated in a number of ways. Traditionally, both displaced and nondisplaced clavicle shaft fractures have been treated nonoperatively; however, this practice has been called into question. Plate fixation has become widely practiced because it provides immediate rigid fixation that relieves pain and allows for early shoulder mobilization. Intramedullary fixation techniques provide less invasive alternatives to plating and are gaining popularity. Liu et al Current efforts to improve intramedullary clavicle fixation look promising. The CRx intramedullary clavicle fixation device was designed to improve on the deficiencies of previous intramedullary fixation techniques. It has addressed the challenges of rotation and pin migration seen with Kirschner wires by adding locking screws and grippers. In addition, it does not protrude from the lateral end of the clavicle as do some previous designs. It possesses a flexible head that becomes rigid on activation to most accurately maintain anatomic reduction and prevent malunion and distraction. This design potentially provides a more stable intramedullary fixation option for clavicle shaft fractures. In contrast to plate fixation, intramedullary fixation disrupts the periosteum of the clavicle to a lesser degree and keeps surrounding soft tissue and hematoma more intact. It utilizes indirect bone healing. The failures with the device suggest that its fatigue resistance is perhaps insufficient to allow early range of motion of the clavicle, particularly in unstable fractures with butterfly fragments, comminution, or long oblique patterns. Therefore proper patient and fracture type selection is crucial to a successful postoperative healing course. On the basis of our own limited experience, surgeons should be cautious with early range of motion in patients when using this device, particularly those with unstable fracture patterns. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.