The electrochemical detection of H2O2 using boron doped diamond electrode modified by silver nanoparticles and haemoglobin is reported. Silver nanoparticle obtained from electrodeposition in the presence of cetyl hexadecylthmoniom bromide (CTAB) surfactant shows the best combination of detection limit, sensitivity and reproducibility. The presence of Ag nanoparticles helps bind haemoglobin to the electrode in an active form, leading to a significantly further increase of electrode response to H2O2. Detection limits below 1μM are achieved by a synergistic effect of both modifiers, and a good linear signal response is seen up to 8mM. Interferences from glucose, uric acid, ascorbic acid and dopamine at typical physiological levels are shown to be negligible.Hydrogen peroxide (H Numerous investigations have been carried out to determine H Although classic metal electrodes like platinum have been well-studied for H One common approach to overcome this problem is by depositing catalytic metal particles onto the electrode surface, including for example Ag, Au, Pt, Pd, Ir, Rh, Ag/Au, Pt/Ag, Pt/Pd However, due to the inertness of BDDE, the Hb is hard to bond into its surface strongly and access to direct electron transfer. Therefore, it is of interest to investigate whether Ag/Hg can bond into the surface actively, on which has been little detailed work done. The present paper is therefore focussed on carrying out this assessment to fully assess the capability of this electro-analytical approach for the detection of H The as-grown polycrystalline BDDEs ([B]>10 The BDDEs were cleaned before use by polishing with alumina powder that was removed by ultrasonication in water, after which the electrodes were scanned repetitively for 15 voltammatric cycles in 0.1 Citrate-stabilized Ag nanoparticles (NPs) were synthesised according to the method proposed by Doty and Lee The Ag NPs-BDDE was also prepared by electrochemical deposition method. The experimental conditions were as follows. A fixed potential of −0.1 The optimised Ag NPs-BDD sensor prepared by electrochemical deposition with CTAB as surfactant, was coated with haemoglobin (Hb) by dipping into the 4 Electrochemical measurements were performed at room temperature (20±2°C) with a μ-AUTOLAB III potentiostat (Eco-Chemie, Netherlands), running GPES software (Version 4.9). The three-electrode system was used consisting of a diamond working electrode of area 0.37 Metal nanoparticle decorated electrodes are often prepared using wet casting of existing metal particles from solution or by electrodeposition on the surface in question. Both methods were therefore compared in this work to identify the optimum approach. In order to compare the Ag NPs-BDDEs by wet chemical and electro-deposition approaches, the total amount of silver particle on BDDE surface needs to be comparable. In electro-deposition, the loading can be calculated from coulometry. Approximately 4×10 Two types of Ag NPs-BDDE samples were studied in the wet chemical method, the fresh and aged, as defined in the experimental section, while the difference between electrodes prepared with SDS or CTAB as surfactant were studied in the electro-deposition approach. The morphologies of these four Ag NPs-BDDEs can be observed from the SEM images displayed in XPS analysis was carried out for all types of Ag NPs-BDDEs. The spectra were similar in each case, as shown in The majority of the experiments were carried out in phosphate buffer, both because of its biocompatibility and because it showed better electrochemical response than other background electrolytes such as acetate buffer, KCl and sulphuric acid. The effect of the pH value of phosphate buffer to the H Deactivation of Ag NPs-BDDE was observed when left in air or in solution for extended periods because the Ag NPs surface is easily oxidised (see SI 1) Ag NPs-BDDEs prepared by both wet chemical method and electrochemical deposition were used to detect H The LOD was calculated from cyclic voltammetry data by dividing three times the background noise by the gradient of the response versus concentration plot. Due to the higher sensitivity (electrodeposition method of 0.83 Ag NPs-BDDE was prepared by electrodeposition in the presence of CTAB as surfactant, and this electrode was immersed into 4 Cyclic voltammetry was also performed for the electrochemical characterisation of Hb/Ag NPs-BDDE after immersing in 4 The deactivation of the electrode by Hb adsorption is also shown clearly in impedance measurements using the [Fe (CN) Further EIS data are measured in [Fe(CN) Hydrogen peroxide was also used as the probe in EIS experiments for various electrodes at the open circuit potential. The Nyquist plot can be seen in The electrochemical response of H Amperometric experiments using the modified BDDEs as the working electrode in a rotating disk electrode (RDE) format at 1200 revolutions per minute and a potential of −0.2 The applied potential of 0, −0.2 and −0.4 The stability and reproducibility of Hb/Ag NPs-BDDE were studied. After 10 days storage in 0.1 The main interference species for hydrogen peroxide in human blood plasma include Uric acid, Ascorbic acid and Dopamine In summary, the electrochemical reduction of H We would like to acknowledge the financial support from Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) in the UK with grant no. EP/F025513/1. Dr Jiang would like to acknowledge the financial support from the program of China Scholarships Council (No.8260100311020). Dr Hu acknowledges support from the Ramsay Memorial Fellowships Trust, and Chinese National Thousand (Young) Talents Programme. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: