During acid leaching of bauxite residue (red mud), the increase in dissolution of rare-earth elements (REEs) is associated with a substantial co-dissolution of iron; this poses problems in the downstream processing (i.e. solvent extraction or ion exchange). Six different slags generated by reductive smelting of the same bauxite residue sample were treated by high-pressure acid leaching (HPAL) with HCl and H2SO4 to selectively extract REEs. Thus, up to 90 wt% of scandium was extracted from the slags using H2SO4 at 150 °C, while with HCl the extraction of scandium reached up to 80 wt% at 120 °C. The extraction of yttrium, lanthanum and neodymium was above 95 wt% when HCl was used as a reagent, but it was much lower (<20 wt%) with H2SO4, presumably due to the formation of a double sulfate (NaLn(SO4)2⋅nH2O) and/or due to the adsorption on the surface of silicon/aluminium-oxides compounds. In addition, HPAL of bauxite residue slags led to a significant co-dissolution of aluminium (>90 wt%, 18 g L−1), while the concentration of the remaining iron (>60 wt%) was of 3 g L−1 in the leachate. The co-dissolution of silicon and titanium was lower than 5 wt%.Over 95% of the worldwide produced alumina is processed by the Bayer process ( Bauxite residue is mainly composed of metallic oxides of aluminium, iron and titanium, but also of rare-earth elements (REEs) ( Although conventional acid leaching with different mineral acids (e.g., HCl, H Smelting of bauxite residue leads to the reduction of iron oxides to produce pig iron, i.e. a metallic product generated from a smelting furnace with an iron content usually above 90 wt% ( It has been reported that during conventional acid leaching of bauxite residue at room temperature, a substantial decomposition of silicate compounds is achieved, which promotes the silicon dissolution and, consequently, the leach solution can no longer be filtered due to the polymerization of silica monomers ( In this work, the bauxite residue sample was mixed with different proportions of lignite coke, silica and lime, and smelted in an electric arc furnace for iron separation, so that different slags with low iron content were generated. The slags were cooled down at two different cooling rates. Subsequently, the leaching behaviour of selected rare earth elements (Sc, Y, La, Nd) by high-pressure acid leaching of the slag was analysed. Firstly, the REEs recovery by acid leaching of a slag with the highest content of aluminium, silicon and iron was studied. The acid concentration of two different mineral acids (HCl and H The bauxite residue used in this work was provided by Mytilineos S.A. - Aluminium of Greece (Agios Nikolaos, Greece). It was generated predominantly from Greek (karst) bauxite ore. Chemical analysis of the major elements (Al, Ti, Fe, Ca, Si, Na) was performed using wavelength-dispersive X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy (WDXRF, Panalytical PW2400). The concentration of selected rare earth elements (Sc, Y, La and Nd) were obtained by lithium metaborate (LiBO The reductive smelting of bauxite residue was performed with three different mixtures of fluxes according to the distribution presented in High-pressure acid leaching experiments were carried out in a titanium autoclave (Parr Company, series 4560, 400 mL capacity) varying the temperature between 60 and 180 °C, in separate experiments, that led to an increase of the pressure by increasing the temperature. Consequently, the pressure increased from 0.3 bar at 60 °C until 15 bar at 180 °C when H The samples before and after leaching were embedded in epoxy resin and polished with SiC abrasive paper down to 1200 grit size followed by polishing with diamond paste (6, 3, and 1 μm) on a cloth disk. Then the samples were coated with platinum and analysed with a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM-EDX, Philips XL30). The mineralogy of the samples before and after leaching was studied by X-ray powder diffraction (XRD, Bruker D2 Phaser). The obtained data were evaluated with EVA V.3.1 (Bruker AXS). The cumulative particle size distributions of the bauxite residue and the slags samples produced after reductive smelting are shown in The composition of major elements in the bauxite residue used in this study and in the slag generated after reductive smelting experiments is shown in In  In view of these results, slag III subjected to slow cooling, i.e. slag III.SC, represents the most unfavourable material to recover rare-earths by acid leaching, due to the high content of silicon, aluminium and iron. It must be noted that during conventional acid leaching, at room temperature, an over-saturation of silica in acid solution can lead to silica polymerization due to the hydrolysis of the silica monomers, i.e. H The slag III.SC contained the highest content of silicon, aluminium and iron. This slag was leached with two different mineral acids (HCl and H The effect of the temperature on the extraction of the major elements (Al, Fe, Ti and Si) with H As a result, the concentration of silicon in solution was <0.5 g L The extraction of titanium was <5 wt%, particularly at high temperatures. This low dissolution of titanium has been attributed by different authors to the formation of TiOSO In The extraction of lanthanum and neodymium was lower than 15 wt% over the whole temperature range. It must be noted that with 1 N H   The effect of the temperature and the HCl concentration on the extraction of scandium, yttrium, lanthanum and neodymium is shown in Other slags than III.SC, presented in The extraction of selected REEs (Sc, Y, La, Nd) from the remaining slags by HPAL, with HCl and H The direct treatment of Greek bauxite residue by HPAL was performed with HCl and H It must be noted that the extraction yields obtained at temperatures <100 °C are comparable to the ones reported by other researchers, who have also investigated the direct treatment of bauxite residue by acid leaching. Thus, Borra et al. have reported REE recoveries in the range of 70–80 wt%, by treating the bauxite residue via direct acid leaching with As described in the previous section, during the treatment of slags from bauxite residue smelting by HPAL, silicon remains undissolved in the solid residue and, consequently, silica polymerization is avoided. Titanium also remains in the solid residue, but its recovery after leaching would be beneficial. Furthermore, HPAL of the slags allows to recover >90 wt% of scandium without bringing too much iron into the solution (<3 g L Iron was successfully separated from Greek bauxite residue by using different mixtures of coke, CaO and SiO The research leading to these results has received funding from the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at