Scaffold-based bone defect reconstructions still face many challenges due to their inadequate osteoinductive and osteoconductive properties. Various biocompatible and biodegradable scaffolds, combined with proper cell type and biochemical signal molecules, have attracted significant interest in hard tissue engineering approaches. In the present study, we have evaluated the effects of boron incorporation into poly-(lactide-co-glycolide-acid) (PLGA) scaffolds, with or without rat adipose-derived stem cells (rADSCs), on bone healing in vitro and in vivo. The results revealed that boron containing scaffolds increased in vitro proliferation, attachment and calcium mineralization of rADSCs. In addition, boron containing scaffold application resulted in increased bone regeneration by enhancing osteocalcin, VEGF and collagen type I protein levels in a femur defect model. Bone mineralization density (BMD) and computed tomography (CT) analysis proved that boron incorporated scaffold administration increased the healing rate of bone defects. Transplanting stem cells into boron containing scaffolds was found to further improve bone-related outcomes compared to control groups. Additional studies are highly warranted for the investigation of the mechanical properties of these scaffolds in order to address their potential use in clinics. The study proposes that boron serves as a promising innovative approach in manufacturing scaffold systems for functional bone tissue engineering.Bone injuries and defects mainly caused by trauma are generally easy to treat in reconstructive orthopedic surgery. However, serious breaks or pathological conditions including critical bone defects as a result of osteoporosis, malformation or cancer require additional treatments for effective healing and regeneration. Conventional autologous and allogeneic bone grafting are still being used despite being inefficient in large injuries due to low cell viability in the host bed, a lack of graft vascularization, and other limitations A vast amount of scaffold materials including synthetic or natural polymers, and bioactive glasses and ceramics have been presented for bone tissue engineering A second key issue to promote bone healing is the source of cells that will be combined with the scaffold. As osteoblasts display a limited repair and regeneration ability, mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) with their high proliferation and differentiation capacity are good candidates for cell implantations. Bone marrow is the major, most studied and well-documented MSC reservoir, but there are serious drawbacks to this source such as painful and invasive procedures during bone marrow collection, limited stem cell yield, age-related decrease in differentiation potential and restricted proliferation ability in Boron has been known as an essential element for plants over 100 In this current work, sodium pentaborate pentahydrate (NaB) incorporated PLGA scaffolds with or without rat ADSCs were evaluated for their bone regeneration capacities in a rat femur defect model. This is the first study to demonstrate that PLGA scaffold combined with NaB can be used in orthopedic regenerative medicine to provide a functional and effective bone healing. NaB (average particle size: 5 Paraffin spheres were prepared by a dispersion protocol. Briefly, 20 Interconnected porous PLGA scaffolds with or without NaB were prepared according to the method described earlier with slight modifications rADSCs were isolated as described previously with slight modifications Freshly isolated cells at passage 3 (P3) were investigated for their cell surface markers. Briefly, cells were fixed with paraformaldehyde for 30 Cell viability, proliferation and attachment of rADSCs were determined by MTS assay. In brief, scaffolds (5 Calcium mineralization of stem cell seeded PLGA scaffolds was detected by using an alizarin red staining kit (Lifeline Cell Technology) according to the manufacturer instructions. SEM analysis was used to determine the porosity and interconnectivity of the PLGA scaffolds. Moreover, morphologies of rADSCs seeded on the scaffolds after 7 Animal handling and surgical procedures were performed according to Ethical permission obtained from the Yeditepe University Ethics Committee of Experimental Animal Use and the Research Scientific Committee at the same institution. 56 Sprague–Dawley rats (250–300 Cultured and expanded rADSCs (P3) were trypsinized, counted and seeded into pre-wetted scaffolds at a cell density of 1 Rat femur defect model was performed under general anesthesia (25 Right bottom extremities of all rats were removed after euthanasia with thiopental sodium. CT analysis was performed using 256-slice helical CT (SOMATOM Definition Flash CT, Siemens Medical Solutions, Erlangen, Germany). 0.469 The femur defective regions of the rats were evaluated Femurs were rinsed in PBS, placed in 10% buffered formalin for 48 Results were statistically analyzed using one way ANOVA and Tukey post hoc tests. Values of less than 0.05 for SEM images of scaffold surfaces and the microstructure of porous implants are given in Attachment and proliferation characteristics of rADSCs on PLGA scaffolds with or without boron were investigated using SEM analysis. Proliferation of rADSCs on scaffolds with or without NaB was investigated using the MTS assay on days 1, 4, 7 and 10. The results revealed that cell number in 0.05% (w/v) NaB containing PLGA scaffolds was found to be significantly greater than in the control and 0.01% NaB containing scaffolds on day 4, 7 and 10. On the other hand, viable cell numbers in 0.01% NaB containing PLGA scaffolds were found to be significantly higher than control group only on day 10 ( Bone mineral densities were analyzed using both DEXA estimations and CT analysis ( The prevalence of VEGF in marrow stromal cells, osteocalcin in both trabecular osteoblasts and stromal cells, and collagen type I (Col1A1) in extracellular architectures near marrow were investigated by immunohistochemical analysis ( It is a well-known issue that advanced tissue engineering tools should ensure well designed scaffold systems with proper osteoinductivity and osteoconductivity for favorable attachment, proliferation, maturation and differentiation of osteoblast and progenitor cells along with offering an interconnected porous structure to provide cell recruitment, and waste and nutrient transport Drilled bone defects were investigated for three proteins of interest (VEGF, osteocalcin, and collagen type I) in the study because of their importance in osteoblast differentiation and bone regeneration In this study, we evaluated the effect of boron incorporation into porous interconnected PLGA scaffolds with or without rADSCs on a rat femur defect model for the first time. Overall findings of the study suggest that boron promotes stem cell attachment, proliferation, osteogenic differentiation and production of mineralized matrices on PLGA scaffolds. Combination of stem cells and boron increased bone tissue formation in comparison with either factor on its own. Boron containing scaffolds should be further investigated for their mechanical properties to be clinically applicable and acceptable in functional tissue engineering approaches. Boron, with its osteoinductive and osteoconductive potential, possesses promise as an agent that might be used in hard tissue engineering. No competing financial interests exist. The following are the supplementary related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at This study was supported by