The influence of thermal exposure on sensing properties of H2 sensor based on Pd MOTIFE (highly mobile palladium thin films on an elastomer) was investigated. This sensor was fabricated on a Poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) substrate and its Pd nanogaps were obtained through mechanical stretching and H2 exposure. When the substrates were annealed at 80–200°C, wrinkles were formed to release the stress due to the mismatch of the thermal expansion coefficients between the PDMS layer and the Pd film. The wrinkling wavelength and the compressive stress of the Pd/PDMS layers were estimated using simple equations as a function of the annealing temperature. The width of the Pd nanogaps of the annealed samples was measured using SEM analysis. Higher annealing temperatures led to a decrease in the wrinkling wavelength and an increase in the width of the Pd nanogap. This was attributed to increases in the individual variation of the compressive stress and strain between PDMS and the Pd/PDMS layers. The enlarged Pd nanogap contributed to a decrease in the performance of the sensor. Nevertheless, the Pd sensor exhibited perfectly on-off operation with a response time of less than 1s when annealed at temperatures up to 100°C.Hydrogen (H In a previous study, we developed hydrogen sensors composed of Pd-based MOTIFE (highly mobile palladium thin films on an elastomer) In this study, we have demonstrated the influence of thermal exposure of the Pd based MOTIFE H The MOTIFE nanogap was fabricated by a previously published method The surface morphology of the MOTIFE nanogap sensor was observed using field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM; JSM-6701F, JEOL Ltd. Japan) and atomic force microscopy (AFM; JPK Inst., Nanowizard I). Phase analysis of the sensor was carried out using High Resolution X-ray diffractometer (HR-XRD; SmartLab, Rigaku). The electrical measurements of the H  The wrinkling wavelength ( The subscripts For a certain annealing temperature, the parameters including the thermal stress of PDMS ( The value of By substituting Eq. To investigate the effect of the annealing temperature on the size of the Pd nanogap, six randomly chosen spots were evaluated on each sample at different temperatures by SEM analysis. The width of the Pd nanogap for each annealing temperature was evaluated by the average value obtained from six spots. As shown in   Real time electrical response of Pd MOTIFE sensors, which annealed at various temperatures (90–150 We investigated the influence of annealing temperature on the H This work is supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: