The authors would like to express their thanks to the discusser for his interest in the paper and for providing us with the opportunity to present additional comments and to clarify certain aspects of our paper that may not have been clear. In the recent paper by Over the years, a number of rock mass classification systems have been introduced in mining and civil engineering with different purposes, but mostly rock mass characterization, stability analysis and support design. In fact, when Keeping the above issues in mind, the reliability of classification systems in their present form for the estimation of rock mass boreability in TBM driven tunnels has always been questionable. As illustrated in the exhaustive literature review in the Paper, the correlation between rock mass classifications and TBM penetration rate has long been researched. Two important results can be noted regarding the research results to date: (1) relationship between the classifications and TBM penetration is quadratic, rather than linear and (2) the correlation coefficient of the more and less quadratic relation is low. The Paper was presented with the goals of investigating and introducing a different approach to TBM prognosis models using FPI and gathering some field data to address issues (1) and (2) above. Meanwhile, the idea of modification of existing rating based classification systems for the prediction of TBM performance by using multivariate regression analyses was proposed. One of the most frequently used rock mass classification systems, namely Rock Mass Rating (RMR) was utilized to illustrate the limitations of such schemes when they are used in TBM performance prediction. Besides, other limitations of such rating based classification systems are subjective uncertainties resulting from the linguistic input value of some parameters, low resolution, fixed weighting, sharp class boundaries, etc. which may be found in previously published paper by the authors ( Table 1 in the Paper lists a number of TBM performance prediction models in which rock mass classification systems are used as a major variable. The TBM performance results obtained from the suggested models have been compared with the measured TBM field performance data in Zagros tunnel database as shown in Figs. 2–5 in the Paper. Hence, the figures’ caption has been selected according to their purposes which were to compare the obtained results from the database in the present study with that of the suggested correlations in Table 1 in the Paper. The caption of these figures may, therefore, be best clarified by “ The empirical correlations in Table 1 offer single variable regression models of rock mass classification systems. However, the relationship between TBM penetration rate and classification systems is not identical for all its input parameters. This limitation was overcome by using multiple and polynomial regression analyses in the Paper using RMR system and its input parameters for illustration of the concept. Five input parameters of basic RMR plus two additional parameters including tunnel depth and α angle were added to the analysis and were investigated based on their influence on the TBM FPI in Figs. 6 and 7. FPI was selected as target TBM performance parameter to include the effects of changing machine thrust or cutter load as has been done by many researchers in the past. Considering the correlation coefficients obtained from the regression analysis, the most significant parameters have been selected for subsequent analysis (i.e. Eqs. (8)–(12)) in Section 4. Due to weak correlation of groundwater condition and tunnel depth with the field penetration index, this parameter was excluded from the list of independent variables. The discusser believed that the two parameters should have been kept constant in the model, not eliminated from the models. Correlation of FPI with Alpha angle showed a relatively low correlation coefficient ( Also, it deserves mention that different studies have shown conflicting results regarding the Alpha angle. For example, in Norwegian NTNU model with the given extensive database, the Alpha angle is included as an input parameter, but its effect is correlated to the joint spacing and is not monotonic. Also, In Fig. 8 of the Paper, one can see some collinearity between UCS and JS. As discusser mentioned, the high interactive relation ( As noted by discusser, the correlation coefficients ( The results of the analysis in this study revealed that the existing rock mass classification systems with the present scheme have limited accuracy in TBM performance prediction. Also, it was concluded that the multiple regression analysis can produce acceptable results for modification of TBM performance prediction when using common rock mass classification systems such as RMR. The subsequent studies on this subject is underway by many researchers and authors hope that with availability of additional data from various projects involving TBM, a more comprehensive model can be developed and introduced in near future. The recent efforts by