This report deals with the synthesis of entropy stabilized (ES) single-phase (Hf,Nb,Ta,Ti,Zr)B2 powders, with specific surface area of about 1.6 m2/g, in a AlB2-type structure using individual transition metal (TM) oxides and, for the first time, elemental boron and carbon as precursors to feed the carbo/boro-thermal (CBT) reduction. Elemental B and C were intimately mixed into a mixture of five TM oxide powders, TM = Hf, Nb, Ta, Ti and Zr through an high energy planetary milling. ES single-phase TM diboride solid solution powders were obtained by a synthesis process consisting of a CBT reduction followed by solid solution formation. A B:C molar ratio = 1.27 (per 1 M mass of metals) was adjusted leading the CBT reduction to completion (i.e., full conversion of TM oxides), applying the synthesis temperature of 2123 K under vacuum. The micro-strain intended as deviation of some inter-planar distances of the entropy stabilized AlB2-type solid solution lattice, was analyzed by x-ray diffraction: a strong anisotropic micro-strain was found, and was attributed to the compositional disorder due to the coexistence of differing TM with different atomic radius.The rare dual combination of ceramic-like and metallic-like properties makes ultra-high temperature ceramics (UHTCs) very attractive to fill the gap of unmet requirements of some demanding applications (high speed machining, neutron or concentrated solar radiation, etc.), that the existing structural materials are not able to fulfill [ In recent five years, on the wave of research and development of advanced materials engineered via the entropy stabilization (ES) approach, novel ceramics ranging from oxides [ The search for new materials via entropy engineering has also fostered the appeal of the UHTC scientific community. In particular, much attention has been switched towards a group of advanced materials already identified in historic studies [ Regarding the resistance to oxidation, key question is whether all components in solid solution of non-oxide ES ceramics (but the question can more generally be extended to ES materials) react with oxygen simultaneously, or otherwise oxidation prefers taking place selectively. In this respect, the recent work of B. Ye and co-authors seems to confirm such a reasoning [ First-principle studies and ab-initio modeling may predict the energetically most favored multicomponent systems. In this regard such tools often provided an helpful guidance to narrow the compositional spectrum of ES ceramics in view to fabricate them [ Though the “ES-UHTC” topic is rousing a plenty of interest, densification but even earlier their synthesis remain an arena of technological challenges in progress. The prototype of the historic work [ The sluggish diffusion rate, one of the four historic “core effects” claimed to tag a “high-entropy” material [ The palette of potential approaches to produce ES diboride SS bulks can actually be more colorful, ranging from processing mixtures of pure metals [ “One-step” experiments, i.e., those conducted to seamlessly process metal oxide precursors and get dense ES diborides, were till now not reported in the published literature. The critical point to allow for the volatile by-products developed during high temperature synthesis to escape rapidly the closed powder bed container (typical of SPS and hot-pressing) remained unsolved. The feasibility of a “one-step” vs a “two-step” synthesis to fully consolidate a dense bulk was in fact object of the authors recent research, but not the matter of this contribution. Indeed, the present work, on one end, primarily addressed phase evolution and final synthesis of a AlB The present work was to develop a synthesis route for single phase (Hf,Nb,Ta,Ti,Zr)B According to reaction (1), stoichiometric molar amounts of TM oxides and C were used. However, the molar amount of B was increased from the stoichiometric value of 2 up to 3.2 to compensate for any B lost during processing. Powder batches were comminuted and intimately homogenized using a high-energy planetary ball milling (HEPM, Fritzsch Pulverisette 6 - Germany) for 90 min under wet conditions of anhydrous ethyl alcohol, with spherical balls (2 mm diameter) and jar both made of Y-stabilized zirconia. HEPM was completed in 6 cycles consisting of 15 min comminution (400 rpm) interrupted by 10 min resting pauses to limit overheating. Preparatory HEPM tests allowed to estimate the expected contamination of zirconia by measuring the total weight of jar + balls before and after increasing milling times: in this way, the weighted content of each TM oxide was adjusted to equi-molarity taking into account the excess in zirconia introduced during HEPM. After HEPM, powder mixtures were let dry overnight at 353 K in a ventilated kiln, passed through a 150 μm mesh metallic sieve and then stored in a evacuated desiccator prior to further handling. After sieving, to improve particle contact, promote reaction, and suppress loss of powder during processing, 2 g of powder mixture were pre-compacted into a disk (10 mm diameter) under a uniaxial pressure of 3 MPa, and then cold isostatic pressed up to 300 MPa. Various disks coming from the same batch were placed in a graphite crucible, which in turn was coaxially inserted into a larger graphite die (inner diameter 60 mm). The sample-crucible-die assembly was then heated under vacuum (10–100 Pa) using an inductively heating system: ramps of 70 K/min up to 2173 K and final isothermal dwells were mastered by measuring the temperature on the outer wall of the graphite die using a two-color pyrometer. The cited assembly was arranged to allow for an unimpeded removal of gaseous by-products released during the synthesis and taken away thanks to the vacuum pumping system of the furnace vessel. To optimize the B:C molar ratio (BCMR) and the temperature range at which reaction 1 (i.e., CBT reduction) and reaction 2 (solid solution formation) reach the best yield, various thermal treatments under vacuum were done at 1923, 2023, 2073, 2123 and 2173 K for 60 min, dwelling for 30 min at 1723 K. The mass change of various powder mixtures was measured before and after their respective heat treatment. The composition of a certain powder batch and its processing temperature (see Thermodynamic calculations were performed using HSC software [ The as-treated powder batches were crushed using pestle and mortar, both made of Y-stabilized zirconia, and stored in a dry desiccator prior to further microstructure analysis. The specific surface area (s.s.a) was determined by the nitrogen adsorption analyzer (Surfer, Thermo-Fischer Scientific): the equivalent particle size was calculated from the s.s.a by assuming a spherical shape. Morphologies, representative particle size ranges and Z-contrast imaging of the as-synthesized powders were analyzed using a field emission (FE) scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, ZEISS Σigma – Germany) with a combination of secondary (SE) and back-scattered electron (BSE) detectors. Atomic percentages of metals were measured using FE-SEM equipped with a EDS detector (INCA Energy 300, Oxford Instruments - UK) at an accelerating voltage of 20 kV. Phase analyses were done by x-ray diffraction (XRD, D8 Advance, Bruker - Germany), 2-theta step-size of 0.04° and 5 s dwell counting time, using Cu Kα radiation. The lattice parameters of some indexed phases were determined by Rietveld refinement of XRD data using TOPAS software [ To extrapolate the XRD peak broadening β The slope of a linear fit to the plot of β This work shed light upon the sequence of chemical reactions which led to the successful solid state synthesis of entropy stabilized (ES), sub-micron and single phase (Hf,Nb,Ta,Ti,Zr)B In HEPM-1.3-2123 and HEPM-1.5-2123, the only indexed phase was ES-MeB. For the representative HEPM-1.3-2123 sample whose XRD pattern is plotted in Attention was also paid to the analysis of the anisotropic micro-strain. In our reasoning, such a feature is not related to one of the historic core effects known as lattice distortion [ The minimization of Gibbs’ free energy of reaction (1) was calculated at non-standard conditions, and emphasized the beneficial effect of the vacuum in the working furnace vessel: besides reactants and products of reaction (1), also individual pure MeC, boron carbide (B The XRD analyses of various batches have never indexed individual MeB Compared to the as-prepared HEPM-0.9 powder batch, strictly speaking As A thermogravimetric test was performed using the HEPM-1.3 powder batch: this batch was judged the best candidate because its starting formulation combined to a processing temperature as low as 2123 K allowed to convert all the oxides and obtain the only pure ES-MeB phase (see If the mass loss up to about 620 K can be ascribed to residual solvent removal, the as gradual as modest mass gain up to about 1350 K was interpreted as oxidation of a minor quote of the added amorphous B. Actually, the most significant part of the expected CBT reaction is marked above 1350 K when copious mass loss occurred (see Phase analysis by XRD of HEPM-1.3-1823 (not reported in On one side, the overall mass loss of 32% apparently matches the theoretical value of 32.1% calculated from reaction (1). On the other side, phase identification by XRD has shown that reaction (1) did not proceed to full completion: it follows that, though the B:C molar ratio with excess B was adjusted, processing temperatures higher than 1823 K and reduced working pressure below 1 bar are necessary to bring precursors to the highest degree of conversion. It is readily understandable that the available overall contents of B and C influence the degree of conversion of the starting TM oxides into the targeted ES diboride SS (labeled ES-MeB). The possible use of B A decisive progress towards the products side of reaction (2), i.e., towards the formation of the targeted single phase ES diboride SS, took advantage by processing HEPM-1.1-yyyy, HEPM-1.3-yyyy and HEPM-1.5-yyyy at 2073 K and above. The HEPM-1.3-2123 sample was recognized as the best compromise of the current experimental campaign (see SEM-EDS analyses were done to provide evidence that the as-synthesized HEPM-1.3-2123 powder is a multi-element diboride SS: in To the best of the author’s reasoning, the present work for the first time presents a CBT route as an approach to obtain single phase (Ta,Nb,Ta,Ti,Zr)B By only increasing the absolute content of B over that of the stoichiometric C, the boro-thermal reaction of the TM oxides competes versus the CBT reduction. According to thermodynamic considerations, boron can be lost via release of volatile oxides so that some C, exempted from carrying oxygen out through CO(g), may remain unreacted and prone to form boron carbide. The low x-ray scattering factor of the atoms in the B A special focus was dedicated to the HEPM-1.3-2123 powder batch and its XRD analysis. In particular, besides the Rietveld refinement to extract some key characteristics of the hexagonal closed packed (hcp) lattice (see It was reported that Me–B bonds, whose crystallographic lengths were calculated (see The electron density distribution was calculated via VESTA [ SE-FESEM analysis of the as-synthesized ES-MeB powder pinpointed primary particles with obvious terraced nano-plates with a prevailing hexagonal shape ( Coming back to the anisotropic sample peak broadening β On the contrary, another measurable effect of lattice disorder, analogous to the thermal Debye-Waller effect but primarily due to chemical inhomogeneity, did not escape our XRD analysis, manifesting as a damping in the Bragg peaks intensities at increasing theta angles. In any case, quantitative analyses like extended x-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) [ A carbo/boro-thermal (CBT) reduction of transition metal (TM) oxides reacting with elemental B and C followed by solid solution formation was adopted to synthesize near equi-molar entropy stabilized (ES) AlB XRD analyses assessed the ES diboride SS has a AlB  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors thank the colleagues D. Dalle Fabbriche and A. Sangiorgi for the high temperature testing campaign. The authors also acknowledge the generous support of Prof. William Fahrenholtz (Missouri Science & Technology University – Rolla, US) for helpful scientific discussion.