Silica nanomaterials (SNMs) and their composites have recently been investigated as scaffolds for bone tissue engineering. SNM scaffolds possess the ability to encourage bone cell growth and also allow the simultaneous delivery of biologically active biomolecules that are encapsulated in the mesopores. Their high mechanical strength, low cytotoxicity, ability to stimulate both the proliferation and osteogenic differentiation of progenitor cells make the SNMs appropriate scaffolds. Their physiochemical properties facilitate the cell spreading process, allow easy access to nutrients and help the cell-cell communication process during bone tissue engineering. The ability to deliver small biomolecules, such as dexamethasone, different growth factors, vitamins and mineral ions depends on the morphology, porosity, and crystallinity of SNMs and their composites with other polymeric materials. In this review, the abilities of SNMs to perform as suitable scaffolds for bone tissue engineering are comprehensively discussed.The capability of bone cells to undergo cell spreading, proliferation, migration, adhesion and differentiation is necessary for the regeneration of bone tissue [ The fabrication of SNMs with one-, two-, and three-dimensional structures is of great interest for the fundamental understanding of the roles of dimensionality and size in governing mechanical properties of the SNMs, in applications to tissue engineering. Hollow silica-nanotubes is another type of SNMs, which is attracting a great deal of attention in both fundamental and industrial studies. Silica nanotubes have novel properties, and could be used to confine molecules in their inner and outer spaces. They also have potential applications in fields such as electronics, optics, drug delivery, advanced catalysis, and energy storage/conversion, and could also be designed to mimic biological channels [ The porosity of SNMs affects the degree of mineralization, access to nutrients and growth factors, and spreading or infiltration of bone cells [ In this review article, the important role of mesoporous SNMs for bone tissue engineering applications is critically discussed from two main aspects. Firstly, their capability for rapid and safe delivery of necessary growth factors and medicinal agents to bone cells is comprehensively discussed. Secondly, the use of silica scaffolds composed of SNMs (individual, functionalized, and composite forms) for growth and proliferation of bone cells in tissue engineering to replace missing or damaged bones. Dexamethasone is a corticosteroid that can play an effective stimulant role in bone tissue formation, and can be delivered in a controlled manner using SNMs as scaffolds. The application of dexamethasone combined with FGF-18 in a scaffold could be an improved method of encouraging new bone formation [ Pinacidil is a cyanoguanidine drug that opens ATP-sensitive potassium channels, and has been used to enhance cell adhesion on scaffold networks. This drug enhances the viability of human embryonic stem cells (hESC), and can directly influence cell adhesion. Wang et al. [ Qiu and co-workers [ Because of the prominent role of different growth factors to induce osteogenic programming and differentiation, these biomolecules have attracted much attention in bone tissue engineering. Growth factors trigger signal transduction via causing type I or type II phosphorylation of the receptors. BMP-2 acts as a potent osteogenic transcription factor in osteoblastic cells [ Neumann et al. [ Cui et al. simulated the BMP-2 growth factor by designing the P28 peptide molecule (P28: S[PO The simultaneous delivery of dual combinations of both drugs and growth factors has shown the best results in bone tissue engineering. The simultaneous release of both dexamethasone and BMP-2 requires a special design for scaffold materials. Zhou et al. developed a novel generation of scaffolds with the ability for controlled release of dexamethasone and BMP-2. They prepared aminated mesoporous SNPs with amino groups that could interact with the BMP-2, while the mesopores of the SNPs could be loaded with dexamethasone. Using this strategy, the controlled simultaneous delivery of a drug and a growth factor was possible. The method of synthesis of this material is shown in Yao et al. fabricated gelatin nanofibrous mesoporous silicate-based scaffolds for dual delivery of BMP-2 and deferoxamine. Deferoxamine can activate hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha (HIF-1α) that can trigger angiogenic signaling and help bone regeneration [ Kim et al. designed a scaffold system with the ability for siRNA gene delivery into bone osteoblastic stem cells using mesoporous silica nanoshells (SNSs). Silencing of the Pelkho-1 gene led to up-regulation of the expression of osteoblastic transcription factors (Runx2 and Smad2) as shown in Controlled delivery of small molecules can be useful for different reasons such as encouraging the differentiation of cells, or fighting infections at tissue-scaffold junctions. Vitamin D3 has significant effects on alkaline phosphatase activity and calcium deposition, and therefore plays a key role in bone cell growth. However due to the lipophilic nature of vitamin D3, conventional scaffolds show difficulty in controlling the rate of release. Sumathra et al. reported novel scaffolds for the loading and delivery of vitamin D3 using cellulose/hydroxyapatite/mesoporous silica nanoparticles (C/HAp/mesoporous SNPs). The proliferation and adhesion of bone stem cells (MG63), and the osteoinductive activation of alkaline phosphatase were stimulated, leading them to propose that the vitamin D3-loaded scaffolds could be used for treatment of bone defects [ Bacterial infection is a common complication in bone repair procedures [ Ma et al. [ In In the case of cancer treatment, SNMs have also been widely used as drug release platforms in bone regeneration strategies. On one hand, they can elicit a multifunctional action (inherent bioactivity and local therapeutic action of the drug). On the other hand, anti-cancer medications can be incorporated into the pores of the SNMs and released to the target tissue. The internalization of SNMs could also be enhanced through surface-functionalization with various types of organic and bioorganic ligands. Additionally, SNMs have shown the ability to bind and penetrate into the targeted cancer cells, and are well tolerated, as demonstrated by serological, hematological, and histopathological examinations of blood samples and mouse tissues. Recent reports have shown that SNMs preferentially accumulate in experimental tumors. Finally, the drug delivery capability of MSNs can be demonstrated by monitoring the tumor growth in mice treated with drug‐loaded SNMs. These results suggest that SNMs are biocompatible, preferentially accumulate in tumors, and effectively deliver anti-cancer drugs to tumors and suppress tumor growth [ SNMs can be used as active nanoscale components of the extracellular matrix to stimulate osteoblastic functions. They should be well-distributed onto the surface of different three-dimensional scaffolds in order to ensure positive interactions between the SNMs and the cells [ SNMs can be used in various forms in different polymeric matrices such as PCL, polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) and a mixture of both polymers, to produce an integrated polymeric matrix with high stiffness and flexibility. In fiber-SNP composite scaffolds, interface interactions between the organic and inorganic phases are lower due to greater heterogeneity and particle aggregation onto the surface of the strands. Therefore smoother surfaces cause more positive interactions between mesoporous SNMs and organic fibers. In this regard, one report compared the efficiency of SNPs in a polymeric matrix as SNP-coated fibers (P5S1N) and sol–gel derived silica (P5S1S), prepared by electrospinning and sol–gel methods respectively [ In order to inhibit the aggregation of SNPs and provide more active porous sites, the surface of SNPs can be functionalized with various bio-compatible compounds. Since, SNPs have a high surface energy, they are likely to be agglomerated in the NP form. Therefore, for tissue engineering purposes, the surface of SNPs is often modified before addition to polymeric and fibrous matrices. In this way, the physiochemical properties, such as hydrophilicity, bioactivity, thermal resistance and flexibility can be improved [ Since, pure PCL is a polymeric matrix with poor mechanical properties and low bioactivity, researchers have made efforts to improve its stability. Macroporous SNMs can maintain the structural stability of polymeric and fibrous scaffolds, and promote cell adhesion and proliferation in tissue engineering. In one report, Pickering high internal phase emulsion templates and three-dimensional printing was used to produce silicate porous scaffolds with well-defined pores [ In hydrogel matrices, SNMs have also been used to enhance the scaffold properties and improve bone cell cultivation. The incorporation of cell-adhesion peptide sequences into the porous SNPs can increase the capture of growth factors, and allow sustained cell stimulation properties for tissue engineering purposes [ Surface polymerization of SNPs is also another efficient strategy to prepare hydrogel-based scaffolds for tissue engineering studies. Reportedly, polyamidoamines were covalently attached onto the surface of SNPs to improve the mechanical properties of the hydrogel matrix [ Mesoporous bioactive glass NPs have been used as inorganic scaffolds for tissue engineering applications. The mineralization of bone, gene expression, and cell proliferation can be increased by release of inorganic ions. These bioactive elements such as calcium, cerium, gallium, copper, cobalt, lithium, boron, zinc and manganese have been doped into the SNP pores giving controlled released during the cell culture process. In addition to cell adhesion and proliferation, an antibacterial property is observed with manganese release. Different amounts of manganese were doped into the SNPs, and the effect on bone cells was investigated In this review, the substantial advantages of SNM scaffolds, for bone tissue engineering have been comprehensively discussed. Their advantages include, the ability to contain and release large volumes of water, the presence of a large active surface area for covalent bonding, low toxicity, good biocompatibility, and ability to act as carriers for drugs, growth factors and essential minerals. These nanomaterials have been used as tools in cell culture studies due to their ability to improve the physical, mechanical and chemical properties of the extracellular matrix. Cell proliferation is improved by the use of different matrices containing SNMs in various cell culture protocols. SNMs have also been successfully applied as three-dimensional scaffolds, where they improve the wettability and roughness of the fibrous matrices. Numerous experiments investigating the possible cytotoxicity of SNMs have shown that, not only are they non-toxic for bone cells, but they also are suitable for cell culture studies. Additionally, the nanoscale surface structure of SNMs can effectively enhance osteoblast attachment and proliferation. Moreover, the alkaline phosphatase activity of bone cells growing in SNM-modified matrices is higher than in control matrices. The mechanical strength and resistance to stress is increased in silica-modified matrices, and the polymer strands and fibers are more flexible, with improved resistance against tension. Mechanical pressure is directly transmitted through the SNMs, and is therefore better distributed throughout the whole scaffold. SNMs can enhance the stiffness and strength of fibrous matrices due to the improved distribution of inorganic materials, and a better organic–inorganic interface is achieved in these hybrid structures. Another advantage is the possibility to use silica from natural resources such as diatomite, which is a cheap and abundant source of biogenic silica, and can be easily converted to silica NPs with controlled size and morphology. Recently, many studies have demonstrated that the silica nanomaterials scaffolds have many beneficial properties for bone tissue engineering. Their specific physiochemical properties such as high mechanical strength, low cytotoxicity, good biocompatibility and the ability to simultaneous delivery of small biomolecules and essential minerals lead to encourage bone cell growth during bone tissue engineering and make them appropriate scaffolds. Overall, all the above studies taken together, demonstrate the great potential of silica-modified scaffolds for bone tissue engineering. MRH was supported by MRH declares the following potential conflicts of interest. Scientific Advisory Boards: Transdermal Cap Inc, Cleveland, OH; BeWell Global Inc, Wan Chai, Hong Kong; Hologenix Inc. Santa Monica, CA; LumiThera Inc, Poulsbo, WA; Vielight, Toronto, Canada; Bright Photomedicine, Sao Paulo, Brazil; Quantum Dynamics LLC, Cambridge, MA; Global Photon Inc, Bee Cave, TX; Medical Coherence, Boston MA; NeuroThera, Newark DE; JOOVV Inc, Minneapolis-St. Paul MN; AIRx Medical, Pleasanton CA; FIR Industries, Inc. Ramsey, NJ; UVLRx Therapeutics, Oldsmar, FL; Ultralux UV Inc, Lansing MI; Illumiheal & Petthera, Shoreline, WA; MB Lasertherapy, Houston, TX; ARRC LED, San Clemente, CA; Varuna Biomedical Corp. Incline Village, NV; Niraxx Light Therapeutics, Inc, Boston, MA. Consulting; Lexington Int, Boca Raton, FL; USHIO Corp, Japan; Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany; Philips Electronics Nederland B.V. Eindhoven, Netherlands; Johnson & Johnson Inc, Philadelphia, PA; Sanofi-Aventis Deutschland GmbH, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. Stockholdings: Global Photon Inc, Bee Cave, TX; Mitonix, Newark, DE. The Authors are grateful for financial support from the Immunology Research Center, The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at