Aqueous solution was simulated by ammonium perrhenate and sodium sulfate in sulphuric acid system according to waste water from metallurgy process of copper and molybdenum. Molalities of perrhenate after extraction were measured at ionic strength from 0.2 to 2.0molkg−1 at temperature range 278.15K to 303.15K, using tri-n-octylamine as extractant. Optimization condition of extraction was determined in this sulphuric acid medium. The standard extraction constants K
                     0 at various temperatures were obtained by method of polynomial approximation. Thermodynamic quantities for the extraction process were calculated.Rhenium is one kind of scattered metals without solo mine. In copper and molybdenum mineral exploitation and metallurgy, the rhenium(VII) was separated as ash and immerged into the acid waste aqueous solution. The residual perrhenate in aqueous solution could result in heavy metal pollution, more badly, the Re 187 has radioactivity, which could cause grisliness radiant damage In industry, the waste water from metallurgy was purified by some sewage disposal process, but their emphasis is heavy metals removals which are almost cation status. The perrhenate will still kept in concentrates with moderate concentration. So the removal of perrhenate ion from wastewater and residual becomes of great significant Solvent extraction method is used especially for separation of rhenium from other components, such as arsenic, tungsten ormolybdenum. Most frequently, for rhenium extraction, tri- The hydrometallurgy of copper and molybdenum are usually in sulphuric acid medium. So the separation of perrhenate from these systems became the focus of recent research The residual concentrates of industry was simulated with sulphuric acid, ammonium perrhenate, and sodium sulfate as impurities remained in residual. The water used was doubly deionized with a conductivity of 1.5 The aqueous phase was prepared by dissolving NH A volume (10 It is shown from The extractant has satisfactory extraction effect at various temperatures of the experiment. The extraction efficiency is almost above 99%, which indicated the extraction progress performed completely. Furthermore, molalities of remained ReO In the presence of excessive tri-octyl amine, the extraction reaction is: The equilibrium molalities ( There were six ionic species (H The effective ionic strength The second dissociation of sulphuric acid is  The temperature dependence of ConsequenIny, According to Pitzer’s electrolyte solution theory, the activity coefficients In estimating Then Eq. and Because the molalities of the extraction complex and the extractant in the equilibrium organic phase are small, it can be assumed that In Eq. In using Pitzer’s equations to determine Then, substitution of Eq. Using a least-squares method, regression of the extrapolation function (lg The values of log The values of parameters The standard molar thermodynamic quantities Δ The extractant has satisfactory extraction effect above 99%, which indicated the extraction progress performed completely. In industry, the system should be kept as high acidity and little impurities at low temperature. The negative experimental association Gibbs free energy ΔG This project was financially supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of China NSFC (Nos. 21373005, 21171080, 21471073), Key laboratory program of Liaoning Province (LZ2014001), Program for Liaoning Excellent Talents in University (LR2015026), Liaoning BaiQianWan Talents Program (2014), and Scientific Research Found of Liaoning Provincial Education Department (L2014004).