Plasma nitrocarburizing and post-oxidation treatments were performed on AISI 4135 steel by a pulsed plasma-ion nitriding system. Plasma oxidation process resulted in the formation of a very thin ferritic oxide layer 1–2 μm in thickness on top of a 15- to 25-μm-thick ɛ-Fe2–3(N,C) nitrocarburized layer. The growth rate of the oxide layer increased with increasing treatment temperature and time. However, the oxide layer was easily spalled from the compound layer either for oxidation temperatures above 450 °C, or for oxidation time longer than 2 h at oxidation temperature of 400 °C. It was confirmed that the relative amount of Fe2O3, compared with Fe3O4, increased rapidly as the oxidation temperature increased. The amounts of γ′-Fe4(N,C) and θ-Fe3C phases, generated from dissociation of the ɛ-Fe2–3(N,C) phase during O2 plasma sputtering, also increased with the oxidation temperature. It was demonstrated that the corrosion characteristics of the nitrocarburized compound layer were further improved by post-oxidation treatment.Plasma ion nitriding is employed to improve the surface properties, such as wear resistance, corrosion resistance, and fatigue strength, of various engineering steels which are used for making dies, tools, automobile parts, and machine parts. The advantages of the use of the plasma for nitriding in comparison with conventional gas or salt bath nitriding are as follows: low emission of toxic gases, minimum distortion of work piece due to low processing temperature, low maintenance costs due to reduced consumption of energy and treatment gas, and formation of a single-phase compound layer with a low porosity without mixed γ′ and ɛ phases Plasma nitrocarburizing is a process, which adds a small amount of carbon-containing gases such as CH The material used for this research is AISI 4135 steel which is an alloy steel commercially used for mechanical parts and constructional equipments. The cylindrical samples (ϕ25 mm×h 10 mm) were heated at 850 °C for 1 h, oil quenched, tempered at 650 °C for 30 min, and air cooled. This process led to the homogenization of the microstructures of the samples. The phase of the surface was identified as α-Fe (BCC structure). The surfaces of the samples to be exposed to the plasma were polished and then cleaned. The vacuum chamber was pumped down to 6.6 Pa (50 mTorr) and then Ar and H A nitrocarburized compound layer 15–25 μm in thickness, composed predominantly of ɛ-Fe  According to the microhardness profile of oxynitrocarburized sample by plasma nitrocarburizing at 570 °C for 5 h and then plasma oxidation at 400 °C for 30 min, the surface hardness value reaches about HV  Surface SEM morphologies of the oxide layer on AISI 4135 steel treated for 1 h at various oxidation temperatures are shown in  Surface SEM morphologies of oxide layer on AISI 4135 steel treated at 400 °C for various oxidation times are shown in  It was confirmed that the main phase in the oxide layer on ɛ-Fe This research was financially supported by Grant Number R05-2002-000-00687-0 from the Basic Research Program of the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF). This work was also carried out by partial financial support from the Dongeui University Research Grants in 2004.