In this study, the aqueous two-phase system (ATPS) formed by CuSO4
                     +PEG 4000+H2O, for the partition of the molybdate ion at different pH values (1.5, 2.0 and 2.5) and at five different temperatures, T
                     =(298.15, 308.15, 318.15, 328.15 and 338.15) K was studied. Two different salts, Na2MoO4 and (NH4)6Mo7O24, were used for the experimental partition tests. The extraction percent for the molybdate ion in the ATPS was studied as a function of pH and temperature. The experimental results indicate that the extraction percent increases with increasing temperature. The maximum extraction reached was 93.07% at pH=2.5 and T
                     =338.15K, for the CuSO4
                     +PEG+H2O+Na2MoO4 system, and 92.66% in the CuSO4
                     +PEG+H2O+(NH4)6Mo7O24 system at pH=2.5 and T
                     =318.15K.
                  In addition, the pH effect on the liquid-liquid equilibria of the ATPS CuSO4
                     +PEG+H2O at T
                     =308.15K was studied, where no significant influence was observed in the working pH range (from 1.5 to 2.5). However, if it is compared with the literature data, it has a relevant importance. With decreasing pH, the two-phase area decreases, thus the tie-line slope also varied.
                  Chen-NRTL and Wilson modified models were applied to correlate the liquid-liquid equilibrium. A good agreement between experimental data and correlated results was obtained.The ATPSs are generally formed by combining polymer/polymer, polymer/salt or salt/salt dissolved in water, which separate into two phases above a critical thermodynamic condition. Beijerinck Molybdenum is a mineral that is present in nature associated to sulfide minerals, although it is also presented in oxidized minerals in the form of rock. It can be found in minerals such as molybdenite, MoS Contrary to a regular solvent extraction process, ATPS are environmentally friendly, of low cost, low viscosity and short phase separation Chile is one of the largest world producers of copper and molybdenum concentrates. In the production of these concentrates, the molybdenum is one of the most important products. Therefore, it is interesting to study the probability of partitioning molybdate ion in an ATPS formed by poly(ethylene glycol) and copper sulfate that could constitute an alternative process for the production of molybdate salts. As part of a long-term study, the partitioning of molybdate ion in the ATPS formed by CuSO It is noteworthy that there is no record concerning to the partitioning of molybdate ion on the ATPS CuSO The liquid–liquid equilibrium (LLE) data can be accurate correlated generally with two kinds of models, one based on osmotic virial expansions and the other on lattice theories. Zafarani-Moattar and Sadeghi LLE data at Poly(ethylene glycol) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich with synthesis grade and an average molar mass of 4000 For the partition of molybdate ion in the biphasic CuSO The solutions were prepared in a jacketed vessel of 70 Physical properties of each phase were measured in triplicate. Densities and sound velocities were measured in an Anton Paar DSA 5000 For the study of pH influence on liquid/liquid equilibria, the literature data reported by Claros et al. Sulfuric acid was added to adjust the pH values to 1.5, 2.0 and 2.5. The equilibrium was reached after 1 The partition coefficient is calculated by: Extraction percent ( The tie line slopes ( Tie-line length is an empirical measure of the compositions of both phases defined by: According to Eqs. The Gibbs free energy change (Δ The enthalpic molecular interactions to molybdate anion transference, Δ The entropy changes were calculated by the Gibbs–Helmholtz equation: The excess Gibbs energy, where These contributions, From appropriate differentiation of the Flory-Huggins equation In the above expressions, The In the above equations, The In the above equations the subscripts  The Wilson modified model was also used to calculated the short-range interaction contribution The activity coefficient equations for aqueous polymer-salt system are given by: In the above relations  Two systems were evaluated for the partitioning of molybdate anion, CuSO The difference of properties between both phases is very important, because the phase separation or settling velocity under gravity will depend on phase-density differences or phase-viscosities. These parameters are also related with the settling area. For small density differences, long separation times are required De Lemos et al.   Silva et al. Moreover, this behavior can be related to new species formed in these temperature and pH ranges that interfere with the extraction. For the CuSO To clarify this behavior, the free license software Visual Minteq was used to obtain a speciation of the aqueous solutions. Where data of pH, temperature and concentrations are introduced to the software to generate the possible species formed in the system, and the concentration to which they interact. For the CuSO Table S1 shows that for the CuSO Similar behavior is observed for the CuSO  On the other hand, in the range of pH of 1.5 and 2.0 the Δ Following da Silva et al. Claros et al. As can be seen, the pH has an effect in the tie-line slope, since at pH Moreover, the pH has a significant effect in the liquid-liquid equilibrium. At lower pH values, the biphasic area is reduced at constant temperature ( This implies that a decrease in the aqueous medium acidity improves the exclusion of kosmotropic ions from the solvation shell of the hydrophilic PEG. This occurrence can take place for some of the following reasons: (i) based on the structural hydration Gibbs free energy, the sulfate anion kosmotropicity increases with an increase in aqueous medium pH. Thus, in the basic medium pH, the more extensive structured water “lattice” is formed around the sulfate anions, so that the salt-rich phase becomes more structured. Consequently, the amount of the mobilized water available to perform hydrogen bonding with the PEG decreases in a more extent and thus causing a greater degree of hydrophilic species transfer to the upper phase. In addition, the increased water structuring of the more kosmotropic phase (i.e., the salt-rich phase) causes the water to stay preferably in the salt-rich phase, so the PEG concentration at the PEG-rich phase increases, while the salt-rich phase will be somewhat more diluted. (ii) Since, the sulfate anions have higher valency at basic pH, the repulsive interaction between the PEG, and the sulfate anion increases because of increasing pH, therefore being effective to enhance and promote the mutual exclusion. Additionally, the equilibrium compositions and the physical properties of both phases, i.e., the density, refractive index and sound velocity are reported in To correlate the liquid-liquid equilibrium data, the Chen-NRTL In the local composition Chen-NRTL model, the non-randomness factor, α, has been fixed at 0.25, because in the range of 0.2–0.3, this factor has no significant impact on the behavior of the used segment-based Chen-NRTL model. The parameter C for the Wilson model was set to 10, considering to this parameter as an adjustable parameter a slightly better fit was observed. For all the pH values studied, the modified Wilson model correlates better according to the standard deviations calculated. Nevertheless, the Chen-NRTL model also shows an acceptable accuracy, as can be seen in In the same figure is presented a binodal curve, which was estimated connecting top and bottom points of each tie-line. In addition, the critical point was calculated extrapolating a straight line to the binodal curve. This point is showed in The partition of molybdate ion in the ATPS by CuSO Also, the pH effect was studied in the liquid/liquid equilibrium of CuSO Thermodynamic parameters were calculated for partitioning process, were the partitioning is spontaneous and endothermic at pH Finally, the liquid-liquid equilibrium was correlated with Chen-NRTL and modified Wilson model. The modified Wilson model shows a better quality of fit for the system. The authors thank  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at