Reactive metals including titanium readily oxidise and should be protected from the atmosphere during Additive Manufacturing processes. This work explores the sensitivity of Ti-6Al-4V components to oxidation contamination during out of chamber Wire + Arc Additive Manufacturing when using inert gas trailing shields. Five Ti-6Al-4V components were produced with varying argon trailing shield configurations that range from ideal inert gas shielding (resulting in no surface contamination) through to very poor inert gas shielding that results in substantial surface oxidation. Despite significant changes in the degree of surface oxide contamination between each component, the overall increase in oxygen concentration in the bulk alloys was minimal and had negligible influence on the tensile strength and ductility.Research efforts in developing additive manufacturing (AM) technologies for producing titanium alloy components have grown considerably over recent years. A number of technologies have emerged which are suited to producing complex titanium components for aerospace, medical and other niche applications. Some titanium aerospace components can be of the order of several meters in size and one of the challenges in additive manufacturing is to produce high quality, large components as quickly as possible. A very important consideration when processing titanium during liquid to solid transformations (e.g. casting, welding, additive manufacturing) is to manage the potential for atmospheric contamination, particularly oxygen. Fundamentally, the challenges facing out of chamber AM processes are similar to those for welding. A review of out of chamber welding processes by There is currently limited understanding surrounding the requirements of trailing shields used for out of chamber titanium additive manufacturing processes but there is evidence that trailing shields are effective in minimising contamination during WAAM. The purpose of this research is to investigate the quality of post-deposition inert gas shielding on changes in alloy chemistry (oxygen pickup) and tensile properties of Ti-6Al-4V components produced by Wire + Arc Additive Manufacturing. Several components are produced by the WAAM process with different trailing shield configurations ranging from complete shielding (expected to result in no contamination) through to no trailing shield being used (expected to result in substantial contamination). The effectiveness of using bead blasting techniques as a method to remove contaminated surfaces between layers in an attempt to improve the quality of poorly shielded components produced by WAAM is also explored. The Wire + Arc Additive Manufacturing technique was used for this study (details about the equipment and base experimental set up are available in Each deposit was created by moving the welding torch in a linear direction and feeding wire into the molten pool, which subsequently solidified to make a layer. A subsequent layer was then deposited over the first by increasing the height of the torch. To eliminate heat accumulation as a variable, the parts were permitted to cool between layers until the interpass temperature was room temperature. After this, deposition continued until the approximate dimensions of the final build was approximately 180 mm × 12 mm × 12 mm (not measuring the base plate), which corresponded to four layers. Details of the deposition parameters are given in The temperature and cooling rate of the molten pool at the end of deposition To investigate the effect of the trailing shield on the quality of the Ti-6Al-4V components, five separate trailing shield configurations were tested (labelled here C1–5 and shown graphically in After deposition, all components were photographed ( The as-deposited + stress relieved microstructure contained fine acicular α with intergranular β and there was no apparent differences in the microstructures produced by any of the different test conditions. This microstructure, including the dimensions and morphology of the α-phase is largely determined by the cooling rate and has been discussed by The primary difference between the test conditions was the noticeable states of oxidation that had occurred on the surfaces of the components during the WAAM process. This effect of oxidation is visibly apparent by the naked eye in SEM images of the cross section revealing the top surface and the measured hardness variations with distance from the surface are shown in The chemical analysis as determined by LECO combustion and ICP Atomic Emission Spectroscopy for each of the test conditions ( The result of the tensile tests are summarised in The technique of using abrasive bead blasting between build layers in the attempt to remove oxide contamination did not result in a measurable improvement to the tensile properties or reduction in the bulk oxygen content of the components. Although the brown surface oxide was removed by this process, the technique proved ineffective in removing contaminated material resulting from the solid-state diffusion of oxygen into the titanium metal as it cools. Referring to The results of the bulk chemical analysis, tensile properties and microhardness surface evaluation confirm that limited contamination occurs during the building of Ti-6Al-4V components in out of chamber WAAM using the deposition parameters investigated, even when no trailing shield was used (C5). The C5 condition represents a worst-case scenario and in practice, it is more likely that some degree of trailing shielding would be used during the fabrication of titanium components by WAAM. In such circumstances while it is important to be aware of the risk of oxidation during WAAM, it appears unnecessary to achieve an absolute perfect shiny colour-free surface finish as is generally desired during melting or heating of titanium outside of inert gas or vacuum chambers. In the present study there was practically no measurable difference between C1 (shiny surface with no discolouration) and C2 (blue-green-grey oxide) except for the visual appearance of the oxide surface colour. It is of course essential that adequate shielding be established during the melting and solidification process as any contamination here will almost certainly result in poor outcomes. If contamination occurs during the melting process itself then the trailing shield will be redundant no matter how effective it is in producing oxide free surfaces. Under certain conditions it may even be possible for oxidation to occur during melting and subsequently be reabsorbed if the trailing shield is well configured, giving the surface the appearance of a high quality component but in reality is deeply contaminated. Due to titanium’s ability to dissolve its own oxide, The ability of the molten pool to solidify while under the protective inert atmosphere offered by the welding torch depends on a number of factors some of which include the welding parameters used, the physical size of the shielded zone and alloy specific parameters such as the freezing range. One of the important findings of this study is that the chemical composition of the wire feedstock is critical in producing high quality components by WAAM when solidification occurs under a protected cover gas. There was limited oxygen pickup during processing and the final composition was almost entirely dependent on the wire’s initial oxygen content. Therefore although it is important to correctly configure a trailing shield to minimise possible solid-state contamination in any out of chamber AM process, it is somewhat more important that a high quality low oxygen feedstock material is used if the objective is to minimise the oxygen content of the final component produced. This study investigated the effects of different trailing shield configurations on the chemical and tensile properties of Ti-6Al-4V components produced by out of chamber Wire + Arc Additive Manufacturing. Five trailing configurations were studied and ranged from ideal near perfect trailing shielding through to no trailing shield being used. The main findings are as follows: Despite the different trailing shield configurations producing various external surface finishes from shiny silver through to flaky brown oxide, this was found to be largely cosmetic and the bulk alloy chemistry, tensile strength and ductility was mostly unaffected and statistically not significant. Microhardness testing indicated that the depth of contamination from the external oxidised surface extends no further than 100 μm below the exterior surface in the worst case scenario of not using a trailing shield. In the production of engineering components it is very likely that this layer will be removed during machining of the component to final dimensions. It was found that the oxygen pickup in the bulk alloys was almost negligible and only notably increased when the trailing shield was removed. Nevertheless, the increase was minor at approximately 0.03 wt% (300 ppm) and the bulk oxygen content of the component was well below the maximum required by ASTM Grade 5 and even exceeded the requirements for the higher purity ASTM Grade 23 titanium. Providing that no contamination occurs while the metal is molten (i.e. good argon shielding is provided through the deposition torch), the oxygen content is more sensitive to the quality of the wire feedstock used during Wire + Arc Additive Manufacturing as opposed to the design of the trailing shield configuration. The authors would like to acknowledge to support of the