The present work aims to study the link between mineralogy and process characteristics of North Ras Mohamed ore materials. The chemical nature of the latter was also studied to determine the type of treatment employed from one hand and the preferred lixiviate option from the other hand.
                  For this purpose, three technological samples representing three different deposit types were examined for their potential processing options. These include basal sandstone, aplite dyke and pegmatitic bodies which were found to assay 0.05, 0.04 and 0.06% U, 0.13, 0.10 and 0.07% Th and 0.14, 0.13 and 0.09% REEs respectively, while Nb assays 1.3% and Ta 0.5%, in the pegmatitic ore sample. The corresponding minerals of these elements of interest include thorite and uranothorite in the basal sandstone ore material. On the other hand, the multiple-oxide minerals samarskite, fergusonite and allanite are found in both the aplite and the pegmatite bodies. However, the zircon, fluorite, apatite, titanite and brookite are considered as the main accessory minerals in the three study ore materials
                  Based on the available chemical and mineralogical data on the three different ore material types of Ras Mohamed area, a physical upgrading process would be required as a major recommendation for future prolific metallurgical work.The present work deals with the mineralogical and chemical characteristics of different mineralization in North Ras Mohamed area, South Sinai, Egypt. In addition, the leaching potentialities of the concerned three ore materials, namely, basal sandstone, aplite dyke and pegmatitic bodies of ore breakdown have been determined. The study area is located in the Southernmost part of Sinai Peninsula at North (N) Ras Mohamed area between latitudes 27° 47′–28° 9′ N and longitudes 33° 55′–34° 24′ E ( The Paleozoic sedimentary rocks in the Southern part of Sinai, including the study area, are of great importance especially from the mineralogical and radioactive points of view. It hosts several types of mineral deposits such as manganese-iron deposits ( According to For this purpose, diverse hydrometallurgical techniques have been applied, starting with the conventional process (sulfuric acid agitation leaching), passing through pug leaching and ending with non-conventional process, namely, the bisulfate fusion procedure. Accordingly, a comparative study has been undertaken about the leaching potentialities of these three ore materials. To realize these objectives, three technological samples representing the above mentioned three study ore materials have been collected. Before leaching experiments, these samples have first been subjected to both chemical and mineralogical characterization. The obtained data are used to extrapolate the optimal process that outfits the characteristics of a particular ore. Determining chemical composition of the three different ore material types, as well as the minerals that host the economic and valuable metals is the most important stage in this ores processing study. The collected representative three samples were chemically analyzed for major oxides and trace elements including the REEs, using the inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) technique in the ACME Lab of Vancouver in Canada. On the other hand, during leaching experiments the determination of thorium and total REEs were carried out by using Arsenazo III according to The grinding of rock samples to mesh size was adequate to liberate the accessory minerals. The ground samples were then washed by water and the slimes were removed by repeated decantation. The dry fractions were then sieved into the size intervals: 0.4, 0.315, 0.2 and 0.1 The three technological samples representing the different ore materials, namely, basal sandstone, aplite dyke and pegmatite were further ground to -200 In this leaching method, each agitation leaching experiment was performed by mixing a weighed portion of the ground sample (10 In this leaching method, the working conditions are more severe than dilute acid agitation leaching process. In general, the strong acid pug leaching and curing method includes impregnating the coarsely ground dry ores (10 In the present work, fusion/leaching tests were performed on 10 The nature and mode of occurrence of a mineralization, as well as its associated gangues, control the rate of valuable metals dissolution and recoveries. The following is a brief account on the chemical and mineralogical characteristics of the study three ore materials. The chemical nature of the three ore materials was studied to determine the preferred lixiviant options from one hand and the type of treatment employed on the other hand. The chemical composition of the study three ore materials of South Sinai mineralization is given in With respect to the economic metal values in the study ore materials, it was found that U amounted to 0.05, 0.04 and 0.06% for the basal sandstone, the aplite dyke and the pegmatite bodies, respectively, which reflects the significant low- to moderate-grade type of the study mineralization. On the other hand, from the assay of both Th and REEs in the basal sandstone and aplite dyke, it is noticed that both ores are relatively of high concentration but with no preferential concentration in either, indicating comparable distribution. However, in the pegmatitic bodies it was found that the assay of both Th and REEs are slightly low. This is most probably due to their incorporation within the Nb and Ta minerals and in which their assay amounts to 1.3 and 0.5%, respectively, and would thus represent collectively an economic value. It is worthy to mention herein that, mineralogical investigations are now included in the early stages of exploration programs as the assays confirm the grade of the ore on one hand, and determine whether or not a prospect contains high concentrations of refractory minerals and/or deleterious gangues on the other hand. In addition, the mineralogical data can be used to guide and resolve difficulties in the metallurgical test-work programs. Characteristics such as mineralization phase, grain size distribution and mineral associations make it possible to determine optimal processing conditions and the required costs. In the present work, investigation of the heavy fraction of the three ore materials under the binocular microscope revealed that the average concentration of the heavy minerals fraction, that includes economic minerals, in the basal sandstone ore material amounted about 4% w/w with respect to the total bulk sample, 1% for the aplite dyke and 7% for the pegmatitic ore material. To properly identify the economic minerals, the obtained results revealed that the principal minerals are represented by thorite ( Due to the refractory nature of the study ore materials, the applied leaching methods for dissolving the interesting metal values include both the acidic atmospheric agitation leaching and the strong acid pugging besides the breakdown caustic fusion which has been reported to be suitable for the processing of multiple-oxide minerals. The relevant factors for each of these techniques have properly been studied in a manner to select the optimum conditions for processing the three ore materials. Because of the refractory nature of the three ore material under consideration, it is necessary to study at first the effect of the leaching temperature upon the dissolution efficiencies of U, Th and REEs, besides Nb and Ta, in the pegmatitic ore material. The effect of leaching temperature has been studied in the temperature range from room temperature (about 35 The obtained results indicate that the leaching efficiencies of U, Th and REEs increase as the leaching temperature increases from 35° up to 100 However, the pegmatite ore material is a different case, where leaching efficiencies at 100 To study the effect of sulfuric acid concentration upon the leaching efficiencies of the metal values, namely, U, Th and REEs which are present in quite perceptible assay in the study three ore materials, besides Nb and Ta, in the pegmatite ore body, a series of leaching experiments was performed using different concentrations of sulfuric acid ranging from 100 to 300 The obtained results indicate that the leaching efficiencies of the valuable metals increase with increasing the acid concentration from 100 to 300 The effect of S/L ratio upon the U, Th and REEs leaching efficiencies of the study three ore materials besides Nb and Ta in the pegmatitic ore was studied in the range of 1/2 to 1/5 using 300 The obtained results plotted in The effect of agitation time on the U, Th and REE leaching efficiencies from the study ore materials besides Nb and Ta in the pegmatitic ore was studied at different periods of time ranging from 2 to 10 From the obtained results, it is noticed that leaching efficiencies of all metal values increase with increasing the agitation time ( Due to the obtained unsatisfactory dissolution efficiencies of metal values of the study three ore materials when using H From the obtained data, it is clear that the leaching efficiencies of U, Th and REEs of basal sandstone slightly increased from 67.9, 79.8 and 80.3% in the absence of oxidant to 68.4, 79.9 and 83.7%, respectively, in its presence. Also, in the aplite dyke ore material, the leaching efficiencies of the valuable metals have slightly increased from 75.4, 86.3 and 89.6% in the absence of oxidant to 80.2, 88.4 and 91.5%, respectively, in its presence. On the other hand, it is worthy to mention herein that addition of an oxidizing agent to the pegmatite ore material has resulted in only a slight improvement in the leaching efficiencies of the study metal values. From the foregoing acidic atmospheric agitation leaching study upon the leaching efficiencies of U, Th and REEs besides Nb and Ta of the study three ore materials, it can be concluded that this leaching method is not efficient for dissolving most of the interesting metal values, in spite of using the following optimum leaching conditions: These results indicate the refractory nature of the contained minerals in the study three ore materials which require severe conditions to be broken. So, the breakdown of these minerals may require applying either strong acid pug leaching method or fusion at higher temperature to facilitate the minerals decomposition. The effect of sulfuric acid input amount on the leaching efficiencies of the metal values from the study three ore materials was performed by using acid amounts varying between 450 and 1800 The obtained leaching efficiencies of the metal values of the study three ore materials are plotted in Concerning the leaching efficiencies of the metal values from the refractory minerals of the pegmatitic ore material, it was revealed that by increasing the acid input amount from 450 to 1800 Fixing the sulfuric acid input at amount of 900 The effect of the curing temperature upon the leaching efficiencies of the metal values from the three ore materials under consideration was studied between temperatures ranging from 100 to 300 Summing up the foregoing obtained results of strong acid pug and/or static leaching method, it can be concluded that the optimum leaching conditions of U, Th and REEs, besides Nb and Ta from the study ore materials, are as follows: From these results, it can be stated that the strong acid pug and/or static process has a significant effect on dissolving U, Th and REEs from both basal sandstone and aplite dyke of South Sinai ore materials which achieve to about 90% for the three valuable metals. On the other hand, due to the refractory nature of the multiple-oxides referred to the pegmatite bodies of G. Samma which contains considerable amount of the samarskite and fergusonite minerals, the applied strong acid pug leaching process has a partial effect in dissolving U, Th and REEs, besides Nb and Ta ( In a trial to improve the dissolution efficiency of the valuable metals from the pegmatite ore material of South Sinai especially for Nb and Ta, the bisulfate fusion process was applied. Several works have been reported upon successful bisulfate fusion breakdown procedures for niobium and tantalum ores. These works include: The effect of ore/KHSO From the obtained results, it is clear that the dissolution efficiency of the interesting elements increases with decreasing the ore/KHSO The effect of fusion temperature upon the dissolution efficiencies of U, Th, REEs besides Nb and Ta has been studied in the temperature range from 350 to 750 The obtained data show that, by increasing fusion temperature from 350 to 650 The effect of fusion time upon the dissolution efficiencies of the working metal values from the pegmatite ore material was studied in the range from 1 to 5 From the obtained results, it is noticed that U, Th, REEs, Nb and Ta dissolution efficiencies increase with increasing the fusion time. But by prolonging the fusion time beyond 3 From the foregoing bisulfate fusion study it can be concluded that the recommended optimum leaching conditions of U, Th, REE besides Nb and Ta from G. Samma pegmatitic ore material, are as follows: These determined optimal processing conditions are suitable for preparing the pregnant leach liquor which can be used for the subsequent recovery processes. In the light of the present study, it could be concluded that the present work demonstrates for the first time the preliminary test-work on the mineralogical characteristics and leaching potentialities of the multiple oxides mineralized ore materials from South Sinai area. Identification of refractory minerals together with the determination of the deleterious gangue amounts of the study three ore materials provided information that may assist in each stage of the metallurgical test-work. In this context, it would be recommended to apply a physical upgrading process before chemical processing. The purpose is to concentrate the economic minerals which would require severe conditions for their processing. In this regard, simple tabling would separate apart the light gangue fraction to enrich the economic value of the studied ores. So, the required costs for their processing would be reduced to the least possible minimum level.