Objectives
                  Dental evolution affects the geometry of the tooth, but the adaptive relevance of these changes is related to tooth sharpness, complexity, and relief (topography). On a set of laboratory mice, we assessed how wear related to age and food consistency affected molar geometry and topography.
               
                  Design
                  Three groups of laboratory inbred mice (C57BL/6J strain) were considered: Four week old mice close to weaning, six month old mice fed on regular rodent pellets, and six month old mice fed on rodent pellets that were powdered and served as jelly. Their upper and lower molar rows were imaged in 3D. The geometry of the surfaces was quantified using a template describing the whole surface of the rows. Topographic indices were estimated on the same surfaces.
               
                  Results
                  The geometry of the molar rows was heavily affected by age-related wear. Food consistency affected mostly the upper molar row, which was more worn and less helical in soft food eaters. Tooth sharpness and relief decreased with age-related wear. Tooth relief was lower in soft food eaters, but only on the upper molar row. Tooth complexity was insensitive to wear.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The primary factor affecting tooth geometry and topography is age-related wear, as wear erodes the molar surfaces. Tooth complexity, however, appears to be insensitive to wear, making this index relevant for comparison of tooth morphology among wild mice of unknown age. Soft food eaters displayed more worn teeth, with less helical molar row occlusal surface, possibly because behavior and jaw morphology were disturbed due to this unusual food resource.Efficient food processing is of prime importance for the fitness of an individual and, among the components constituting the feeding apparatus, the dentition plays a key role in achieving the comminution of food particles. Adaptive diversification of tooth geometry into complex multicuspid shapes is thought to be one of the key innovations that led to the mammalian radiation ( Rodents, and specifically murine rodents (Old World rats and mice) constitute a highly variable group. A part of this success is related to the diversification of their dentition ( Thus, we propose a pilot study on the house mouse to assess the effect of wear on tooth geometry and functionality in controlled laboratory conditions. Differences in wear stage related to age were investigated by comparing young and old mice. The potential for specific food material properties to cause differential wear was assessed by comparing mice reared on diets of different consistencies. For these three groups of mice, the geometry of the upper and lower molar rows was quantified using 3D geometric morphometrics ( Female mice from the inbred strain C57BL/6J were ordered from the Charles River Laboratory (Lyon, France). They were three weeks of age when obtained. A cohort of eight mice was sacrificed at four weeks (young group, Y-B6). The other individuals were reared at the PBES (Ecole Normale Supérieure de Lyon, France) until the age of six months. Half were fed a standard hard pellet diet (hard food group, HF). For the other half of the mice, the same pellets were ground to powder and mixed with agar-agar. This mixture was hydrated when given to the mice so that the consistency would correspond to a jelly (soft food group, SF). This resulted in 19 HF and 20 SF. The mice were sacrificed according to the directive 2010/63/UE of the European Parliament on the protection of animals used for scientific purposes. Breeding conditions in the PBES have the agreement B 69 123 0303–17/02/2009 of the French Ministère de l’Agriculture. The first upper molar (UM1) was pictured in 2D, with the occlusal surface manually oriented to the horizontal plane. Then, the outline of the occlusal surface was manually delineated using 64 points at curvilinear equidistance along the outline. This series of points was analysed using a Fourier analysis, which decomposes the outline into successive harmonics that describe the outline in increasing details, after an initial standardisation of the starting point along the long axis of the outline ( For a subset of mice (three Y-B6, four HF, and four SF), skulls were scanned at a cubic voxel resolution of 20 The right upper molar row (UMR) was delimited on each slice using a threshold method in Avizo (v. 7.1–Visualization Science Group, FEI Company). Connections with bone were manually closed and the surface generated. Mouse molars are composed of transverse enamel ridges, the cusps of which align to form longitudinal rows that direct the propalinal (antero-posterior) movement during chewing. The upper molars show central, labial, and lingual rows and the lower molars labial and lingual rows ( The same procedure was applied to the lower molar row (LMR), with a template of 2213 sliding semi-landmarks and 14 fixed landmarks ( The shape variables were first reduced using a principal component analysis (PCA). It was performed on the variance-covariance matrix of the FCs for the 2D analysis and on the variance-covariance matrix of the Procrustes coordinates for the 3D analyses. PCAs allow for a reduction of dimensionality (Sheets et al., 2006), by retaining for subsequent statistical analyses only the axes explaining most of the total observed variance. Three parameters were used to characterize the topographic properties of the molar rows. Dirichlet Normal Energy (DNE) assesses tooth sharpness by measuring curvature and undulation of the surface ( The three parameters were computed from the templates of the upper and lower molar rows used for the geometric morphometric assessment of their shape using the R package molaR ( The surface of each dental row was manually oriented using MeshTools ( The resulting surfaces were simplified to 10,000 polygonal faces ( To circumvent the error in the estimation of the complexity parameters related to inconsistencies in the manual orientation of the molar rows, a four-step semi-automatic procedure was developed. (1) A surface of reference was randomly chosen and manually aligned in space using the Meshtools software, as was done for the manually-oriented datasets. (2) The auto3dgm R package ( Given that this research incorporates inbred laboratory mice of controlled age, intra-group variance was expected to be reduced compared to inter-group differences. Consequently, significant differences might be expected despite the small sample sizes of the 3D sub-samples. Differences in topographic parameters were investigated using Shape differences between groups were tested using multivariate analyses of variance (MANOVA) and an associated pairwise Hotelling’s T-squared test. Variables were the first PCs calculated from (1) the set of Fourier coefficients for the 2D outline analysis of the first upper molar, and (2) the Procrustes coordinates for the 3D analysis of the upper and lower molar rows. General linear models were used to assess the percentage of variance and the associated probability related to the operator (SR vs. RL collecting data), age (young vs old mice) and food nested within age (until weaning, hard food, soft food) on the resulting parameters (DNE, OPC, OPCR, and RFI). The relationships among different parameters were investigated using linear regressions, providing the R Multivariate analyses were performed using the R package ade4 ( Upper molar rows of young mice strongly differed from those of mice aged six months ( The increased abrasion of the old mice is obvious when comparing mean shapes ( A similar pattern was found for the lower molar row ( The PCA of the upper molar row (UMR) Procrustes coordinates resulted in three axes that explain more than 5% of the total variance (71.8%, 8.9%, 5.6% respectively). Differences between groups were significant (MANOVA: P The shape of the lower molar row (LMR) could be summarized by two axes explaining >5% of the total variance (75.4%, 5.6% respectively). The difference among groups was significant (MANOVA: P The first axis of each analysis, which summarizes the geometric variation of the UMR and LMR respectively, appear to be highly related (R Young mice differed from old ones, as in 3D analysis of the molar tooth row, but the difference between young and old mice was less marked ( Four axes explained >5% of variance (57.0%, 16.4%, 6.3%, 5.7%). On these four axes, all groups were significantly different from each other (MANOVA and associated pairwise tests: P General linear models were used to investigate the relative importance of the manual alignment (operator) of the occlusal surface, age, and food on the complexity parameters of the molar rows. The operator effect was never found significant ( General linear models were used to investigate the relative importance of the manual alignment (operator) of the occlusal surface, age, and food on the complexity parameters of the molar rows. The operator effect was never found significant ( Age significantly influences all complexity parameters, except for lower molar OPCR. Food is never a significant factor, except for upper molar RFI. DNE measurements of the upper and lower molar rows were in similar ranges ( OPCR was higher for the upper than for the lower molar row, corresponding to a higher geometric complexity of the upper molar row: the first upper molar has three longitudinal rows of cusps instead of two, as in the lower molar ( RFI was higher for the lower than for the upper molar rows, due to a greater 2D area for the upper molar row but a greater 3D area for the lower molar row. RFI of both upper and lower molar rows were affected by age, leading to a decrease in RFI ( The same trends emerge when comparing the results obtained using the manually oriented surfaces ( Comparing the upper and lower molar rows, DNE and RFI were both positively and significantly related ( The geometry of each molar row is approximated by the scores of the individuals along the first axis of each PCA, as this axis summarizes most of the variance. This estimate of the molar row geometry was compared to the calculated estimates of tooth complexity ( OPCR was not related to shape for either the upper or the lower molar rows. In contrast, DNE and RFI were correlated to the molar row geometry, although more strongly for the lower than for the upper molar row. RFI was the parameter most strongly related to shape. The weak relationship between shape and DNE for the upper molar row may be related to Y-03 being an outlier for DNE but not in shape ( This study demonstrates the impact of wear on the cusp geometry of the two occluding molar rows. The effect related to age is the primary source of variation, corresponding to the abrasion of the cusps with increasing wear. We also observed a weak effect of diet on the cusp geometry of the upper molar row. Mice fed soft food display teeth that are worn more and differently from hard food eaters. Despite the limited sample size for the 3D analysis, this result is supported by complementary results in the 2D analysis, which was based on a more extensive sampling protocol. This result is counter-intuitive as mice fed soft food presumably use their molars less because they have no hard food items to chew. One possible explanation is that chewing behaviour is independent of diet; both HF and SF mice had similar jaw movements and contact between molar rows. The absence of hard items to be processed would have led to increased tooth–tooth attrition in soft food eaters. This contrasts with results obtained from monkeys, where hard diet eaters show more rapid tooth wear than do animals raised on a soft diet ( A second explanation is related to the fact that the lower molars are located on the mandibular jaw, which was shown to respond to food consistency itself ( During mastication in murine rodents, the lower jaw effects a mostly propalinal movement from the distal bottom to the anterior (mesial) top ( The helical shape of the molar rows is a part of the difference between hard and soft food eaters. This suggests that the response of the symphysis, and thus possibly the pressure exerted during chewing, might have varied between the two groups. In some SF specimens, this led to relatively planar occlusal surface, in contrast with the usual helical shape helping to direct the rotational movement of the mandible. The elasticity of the symphysis may be less solicited in soft food eaters, due to less strength exerted during chewing, leading to a reduced rotational component in the masticatory movement. Rather than being more worn, the lower molar row may thus be more variable in soft food eaters, as a consequence of the changed jaw morphology, reduced morphological integration ( The two explanations are not mutually exclusive and, in fact, may have reinforced each other. Our results underline the importance of behaviour in the response of animals confronted with unusual feeding habits. Mastication is a complex behaviour that starts to develop prenatally ( The importance of wear regarding the 3D morphology echoes the fact that cusp abrasion was found to be the first order signal when investigating the diversification of the first upper molar across natural populations of house mice in various continental and insular settings ( The present study was disposed to display such an effect. It included both very young, sub-adult mice just at weaning age, and six month old mice. Although it is difficult to assess the life expectancy of a house mouse in the wild, a generation time of three to four generations per year is considered probable. Thus, six months would be a relatively old age. As wild house mice reproduce all year round when food is available ( Teeth get flatter with wear in all species examined so far ( The decrease in tooth curvature (DNE) with wear observed in the mouse sample is less trivial. It is in agreement with several studies showing that the sharpness of the crown tends to decrease with increasing wear ( A contrasting pattern was provided by the dental complexity, estimated by OPCR. This estimate was the less sensitive to wear, as suggested by its weak relationship with relief index and the geometry of the tooth row. These results are in agreement with former studies on other mammalian models, which suggest that OPCR was only poorly related to the other topographic estimates [e.g. ( An aspect of the present study that makes it unique is that we assess both 3D geometric shape and crown topography for all the teeth in the same molar rows. Geometry was evidenced to be very tightly related to relief in this context, and the first-order signal corresponds to increasing wear. Curvature (DNE) was also correlated with tooth shape, but to a lesser degree. In contrast, complexity (OPCR) was not related to the geometry of the tooth rows. This suggests that the mouse dentition maintains its complexity, despite changes in the shape of the cusps occurring with wear, or at least, the cusps maintain a more or less constant complexity after a sharp decrease around weaning age. Such an effect may also exist for curvature (DNE). One of the young mice (Y-03) displayed an extreme value for the upper molar DNE, while the two other young mice displayed values more similar to the values of older mice. Molar rows may rapidly converge to a sharpness that will thereafter maintain most of their topographic characteristics and hence presumably their functionality throughout the animal’s life. Few studies have assessed characteristics of both upper and lower molar topography and morphometry ( In our mouse sample, the lower molar row tends to display higher relief than its upper counterpart. However, they were abraded at the same rate, as both are correlated with a slope of one. Upper and lower molars tend to have similar indices of curvature (DNE) as well. Our findings of higher relief for the lower molars as compared to the upper molars and a consistency in both DNE and RFI estimates between the upper and lower molar rows are similar to results obtained from studies of primate dentition ( Complexity (OPCR) of the upper molar row is slightly higher than that of its lower counterpart. This makes sense in the light of the fact that the upper molar, which is composed of more cusps, appears more complex from a qualitative point of view. In contrast to what is observed for DNE and RFI, the two occluding molar rows do not share a common pattern of wear-related variation in complexity, which may be explained by one of a few different reasons. First, complexity may converge rapidly after weaning towards a range of values common to all mice. In support of this argument is the observation that complexity is the only topographic parameter not related to wear. The limited range of morphological variation may hinder the detection of any relationship between upper and lower molar complexity. Second, even OPCR appears to be sensitive to the step of manual alignment of the occlusal surface. Therefore, inconsistencies in orientation may further obscure any relationship. Finally, other morphological aspects, such as the shape of the mandibular arch ( Dental topography is associated with dietary specializations across taxa [e.g. ( Dental curvature (DNE) indices seem to rapidly converge on rather constant values, at least for the upper molars. Consequently, DNE may be of higher relevance for inferring possible functional variation among populations. Complexity (OPCR) seems even less directly related to wear, but it is also the least accurate proxy for dietary inferences among closely related species ( Overall, our pilot study suggests that the results that have been obtained thus far, mostly from primates studies, may extrapolate well to other groups, such as murine rodents. Applications across taxa may be rather straightforward, but our results from experiments of known-age mice demonstrate that interpretations about intraspecific variation in tooth shape will have to take into account the relative importance of both wear and variation in the process of chewing in shaping the teeth. No conflict of interest. ANR Bigtooth (ANR-11-BSV7-008), LabEx Sciences Archéologiques de Bordeaux (ANR-10-LABX-52). Breeding of the mice was done at the PBES under the agreement B 69 123 0303–17/02/2009 of the French Ministère de l’Agriculture. We thank Emmanuel Chereul (Voxcan) for his contribution while scanning the animals, and Marie Texeira (PBES Lyon) for her help in organizing the experiments. Doug Boyer greatly helped us in elaborating methodological protocols. We also would like to thank Jessica Joganic for helpful comments on final drafts of the manuscript, as well as the constructive comments of two anonymous reviewers. This study was supported by the