Gypsum scale forms in industrial reactors during neutralization of acidic sulphate streams with calcium-containing compounds, such as limestone. A Population Balance Model was built to describe gypsum precipitation and scale formation kinetics in a CSTR with multiple stages and feed stream. The model was used to simulate several neutralization circuit configurations to optimize gypsum precipitation and thus, minimize scaling. The optimum configuration determined by this study is two-stage neutralization with all neutralizing base added in the first stage. Gypsum seeding is most effective up to a 100% seed recycle. A final polishing stage (reactor) where no base is added should be included at the end of any neutralization configuration to ensure that the outlet stream has a minimum supersaturation and thus minimize downstream gypsum fouling.In hydrometallurgical operations, many different types of scale formation occur. One prime example is the formation of CaSO The largest occurrence of scale-forming calcium sulphate in hydrometallurgical processes is during continuous neutralization and/or iron removal of sulphuric acid leach solutions with calcium-containing bases, such as limestone (CaCO and For these reactions, gypsum (CaSO Work at the University of Toronto ( Follow-up work, ( The PBM was developed as a means of describing particulate or crystallization processes ( For this case, the In term represents the number of particles in the interval The form of the equation to be used is therefore: In order to be able to solve Eq. Solution of Eq. The The macroscopic population balance must be solved along with a mass balance equation for gypsum across the reactor:  Eq. Although the overall reaction is given by Eq. The gypsum mass balance for the neutralization reactor, assuming steady state is: It is known from the literature ( Fortunately these difficulties can be overcome and the equation can be solved by making the following simplifications: For direct neutralization of pure sulphuric acid with no gypsum seed, the first term in Eq. Since the reactor runs at steady state and the steady state pH in the reactor was always found to be > The steady state solids concentration in the reactor was approximately 3% as measured by filtration, drying and weighing of the outlet stream ( Therefore, the equation to be solved is: Eq. Thus, assuming a value for An Arrhenius plot of ln It was recently observed that increasing the residence time lowered the supersaturation (and hence scale growth rate) in the reactor at all temperatures ( As can be seen, the fit is quite good and the trends explain what is seen in the neutralization reactor. As expected, at a fixed value of temperature (or As a further test of the model, experiments were run at different inlet concentrations of sulphuric acid, 10 g/L and 50 g/L, at 70 °C and a residence time of 30 min. The purpose was to see how well the model predicts the steady state saturation ratio outside of the base case neutralization of 30 g/L. The results are shown in For the case of mixed sulphate–sulphuric acid streams, it was found that the growth kinetics were affected by the concentrations of the metal sulphates, but it was not possible to measure the exact kinetic relationship between supersaturation and scale growth rate. The reason was that the conductivity technique that was used to measure the supersaturation in the pure sulphuric acid neutralization case, could not distinguish changes in calcium sulphate levels against a background matrix of the other sulphates in the mixed sulphate solution case. There were also indications that reactor size and even method of agitation could all have significant effects. As can be seen, there is a large difference in scaling rates between the two reactors. This is owing to the much lower hydrodynamic shear in R1, the magnetically stirred reactor. However, conductivity measurements in both reactors for pure sulphuric acid neutralization have shown that the same level of supersaturation exists at equivalent residence times. Also, the trend of lower scale growth at longer residence times is the same. In fact, when the scale growth rates are normalized for each reactor and composition, the trends are very similar. This is shown in Fortunately, it is possible to use the population balance model without measuring saturation ratios by using the approach of It has been observed that adding an artificial gypsum seed (such as gypsum powder from Fisher Scientific) lowered the level of supersaturation in the reactor, and hence the scale growth rate ( Crystallization with seeding requires a special second moment equation. Recall from the model development that the second moment of the population balance function was used to solve the mass balance. It is solved using the zero Note that in the absence of seed, the second moment reduces to 2( In order to obtain the moments of the seed distribution, the particle size distribution was used. To represent it mathematically to be used in the model, a gamma function was used, since gamma functions are easy to parameterize and their moments are easy to calculate and work with, ( The  In an industrial process, the goal of neutralization should be to raise pH, with minimum scale formation, leaving the solution with as low a supersaturation as possible. The high levels of supersaturation under most conditions shown in The following sections present simulations of possible scale reduction techniques. The techniques that will be looked at will be longer mean residence time, multi-stage neutralization, fine seed recycling and multi-stage neutralization with seed recycling. For the sake of comparison, all the multi-stage and seed recycle simulations will be at an equivalent residence time of 120 min, a total initial acidity of 50 g/L and a temperature of 70 °C. The scale growth rates, predicted using the steady state saturation ratios, will be reported in mm/day, as this is a more accepted industrial measure of scaling. It already has been shown that longer mean residence times lead to lower supersaturation and hence lower scale growth. As can be seen, there is an initial steep drop in scale growth rate as the residence time is increased from 15 min, after which it levels out. The optimum residence time would be somewhere between 60 min and 120 min. In fact, this represents the range of residence times employed in industrial neutralization reactors. Multi-stage neutralization distributes the amount of gypsum to be precipitated to many reactors. Gypsum seed is also created in the first reactor. The first simulaton involves a two-stage neutralization with equal residence times in each reactor. The amount of base added was split at different ratios to see the effect on scaling and outlet saturation ratio. In the simulation, this was accomplished by changing The results of the simulation are shown in The second reactor shows a different trend. At 100% base added in the first reactor, the second reactor shows almost no scale formation with the saturation ratio being close to 1. As the base split is raised, scale formation increases very quickly, for example by an order of magnitude when 90% of base is added in the first reactor. The saturation ratio is almost 1.4 at this point. This is quite high for a stream leaving the neutralization reactors because it still has a significant scaling potential. Thus, there is no apparent advantage to multi-staging the neutralization. To further illustrate this point,  Using synthetic seed as was modelled in  The two curves represent two possible methods of seed recycling. The first is a straight recycle, while the second represents the case for which seed crystals with half the average size are recycled. The latter case shows much lower scale growth at the same % seed recycle. This is due to the larger surface area to mass ratio of the smaller crystals. The other interesting feature of this graph is that the curve gradually levels off beyond 100% recycle. The final simulations are multi-stage neutralization with seeding. These are shown in The population balance model developed in this work can explain many of the trends observed in gypsum scale growth. It also has been extended to model several different reactor configurations to minimize scale growth. By establishing the precipitation kinetics first, the neutralization system of interest can be modelled on the basis of Population Balances and optimized accurately to achieve minimum scale growth and outlet saturation ratio. The optimum configuration determined using the kinetics determined in this study is a two-stage continuous neutralization with all of the base added in the first stage. Seeding is most effective up to a 100% seed recycle. A non-base-added final polishing stage (reactor) should be added at the end of any neutralization configuration to ensure that the outlet stream has a minimum supersaturation. This will help prevent gypsum fouling further downstream in the process.  Distribution shape (spread) parameter Nucleation rate (min Distribution mode parameter (m) Nucleation rate constant (min Stoichiometric coefficient Concentration of species Concentration of seed in reactor (kg/m Particle size (m) Crystal growth rate (m/min) Volume fraction of solids in reactor Growth rate constant (m/min) Area shape factor of gypsum crystals Volume shape factor of gypsum crystals Solubility product of gypsum  Volumetric flowrate (m Activity product of gypsum Saturation ratio Reactor volume (m  Particle size distribution gamma function Density (kg/m Mean residence time (min) Particle density function (m The authors wish to acknowledge Inco Ltd., Falconbridge Ltd., Materials and Manufacturing Ontario (MMO), the Centre for Chemical process metallurgy of the University of Toronto, the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), and the Ontario Graduate Scholarship in Science and Technology (OGSST) for partial financial support of this project. The Hydrometallurgy Section of CIM is also acknowledged for the 2002 Graduate Student Award to Jeffrey F. Adams.