China's ionic rare earth ore is of great strategic value because of its abundant medium and heavy rare earth elements (REEs). However, its rare earth reserves have decreased significantly in recent years. It is imperative to improve the utilization rate of existing rare earth mineral resources. In this study, a low-grade ionic rare earth ore was taken as the object of research. The relationships between pH value, concentration, and flow velocity of ammonium sulfate and leaching rate of REEs were studied by the response surface method (RSM) based on the central composite design (CCD) principle. A quadratic polynomial mathematical model for studying the leaching rate was established, and the leaching conditions were optimized.
                  The results showed that the pH value, concentration, and flow velocity had significant influences on the leaching rate and that the interaction between the pH value and concentration and that between the pH value and flow velocity also had significant effects on it. The optimal leaching conditions obtained by RSM optimization were a pH value, concentration, and flow velocity of 4.80, 5%, and 0.73 mL/min, respectively. The leaching rate under the optimal conditions was 97.10%, with a relative error of 0.705% to predicted value of the model, which shows that the obtained model has good predictive performance and has a certain guiding significance for the production practice of the ionic rare earth ore. The research results provide a scientific and stable basis for the production of this type of low-grade ionic rare earth ore by in situ leaching and also help to improve the resource utilization ratio.Rare earths, known as the “industrial aginomoto,” “industrial vitamin,” and “mother of new materials,” are used widely in many fields and >40 industries, and the medium and heavy rare earths are especially important as components of luminescent materials, high-performance magnetic materials, laser materials, optical fibers, ceramic materials, and others [ Although China's rare earth resources are abundant, the reserves of rare earth resources have decreased significantly due to large exports and rampant illegal mining over a long period of time. There has especially been a decline in the reserves of medium and heavy rare earths. In addition, at the early stage of mining, backward mining technology, exploitation of rich resources and abandonment of poor resources, inadequate mining of large mines, and chaotic management [ The RSM is an optimization method that combines experimental design and mathematical modeling [ At present, RSM has been widely used to optimize the leaching processes of copper, zinc, manganese, silver and other valuable metal by many researchers [ This study selected a low-grade ionic rare earth ore from Ganzhou, China, as the object of research, and based on the results of the single-factor test, ammonium sulfate was selected as the leaching agent. The relationships among pH value, concentration, and flow velocity of ammonium sulfate and the leaching rate of REEs were studied by RSM based on CCD, a quadratic polynomial mathematical model for the leaching rate of REEs was established, and the leaching parameters of the ionic rare earth ore were optimized. The results of this research provide a scientific and stable basis for the production practice of this type of low-grade ionic rare earth ore by in situ leaching and also help to improve the resource utilization ratio of ionic rare earth ore. The ionic rare earth ore used in this study was taken from a rare earth mine owned by the Ganzhou Rare Earth Group Company. The rare earth content of the original ore is 0.069% (RE As shown in The ammonium chloride, sodium chloride, magnesium sulfate, potassium chloride, and ammonium sulfate (analytical grade) that were used were purchased from the Sinopharm Chemical Agent Co., Ltd., China. The leaching test of the ionic rare earth ore was conducted using the test equipment shown in The MLA measuring conditions were 20 kV, high vacuum mode, and BSED probe. After drying, the sample was cold inset mounted with epoxy resin (Struers EpoFix) to make a light slice with a diameter of 30 mm, then, after grinding and polishing, MLA measurement of the light slice was conducted. During the leaching process of ionic rare earth ore, rare earth ions adsorbed onto the surface of clay minerals can easily exchange with cations with large exchange potential, such as Mg According to the theoretical basis above, five common leaching agents, ammonium chloride, sodium chloride, magnesium sulfate, potassium chloride, and ammonium sulfate, were selected to investigate their influence on the leaching process of ionic rare earth ore and screen the best leaching agent for the subsequent leaching test. The test conditions were concentration, pH value, flow velocity, and liquid:solid ratio of leaching agent of 2%, 5, 1.3 mL/min, and 1:1, respectively. The results are shown in As shown in During the leaching process of ionic rare earth ore with ammonium sulfate, the pH value of the ammonium sulfate solution directly affects the ability of the NH The concentration of ammonium sulfate also affects the leaching effect of REEs. If the concentration is too low, the exchange of NH In addition, the flow velocity of ammonium sulfate solution has a great influence on the leaching of REEs. A flow velocity that is too slow will lead to longer leaching time and lower leaching efficiency, which is not conducive to practical production and can easily lead to readsorption of rare earth ions. Although an exorbitant flow velocity can shorten the leaching time, because the flow velocity is greater than the ion diffusion velocity, the ions cannot diffuse sufficiently to the interior of the ore and interact with the rare earth ions, which leads to a reduction of the leaching rate of REEs. The effects of pH value, concentration, and flow velocity of the ammonium sulfate solution on the leaching behavior of REEs were investigated, and the results are shown in As shown in On the basis of the value ranges of the pH value (A), concentration (B), and flow velocity (C) of ammonium sulfate solution determined by the single-factor tests, the scheme of the experiment was designed based on CCD. The center point (0, 0) was used to determine the experimental error and reproducibility, and −1, 0, and +1 were used to represent low, zero, and high levels of the variables, respectively. The axial points were (±α, 0, 0), (0, ±α, 0), and (0, 0, ±α), where the value of α is related to the number of factors (K): α = 2 The leaching rate of REEs of ionic rare earth ore was Y. The experimental design and the levels of the variables are shown in Each condition was carried out in three times of parallel tests, and the three results were analyzed by variance to ensure that there was no significant difference between the average values; otherwise, the test was carried out again, and the average value of the three parallel tests was taken as the final result. The experimental design matrix based on CCD and the results are shown in Software was used to do the multiple regression fitting for the test data in The reliability of the response equation was determined by the correlation coefficient ( The residual of the mathematical model was analyzed ( The statistical significance of the response surface quadratic model of the leaching rate of REEs from the lignin pyrolysis was estimated using analysis of variance (ANOVA) ( The three-dimensional (3D) surfaces and the two-dimensional (2D) contour plots of the response surface quadratic model are shown in As shown by the 3D surface plot in As shown by the 3D surface plot in As shown by the 3D surface plot in From the steepness of the 3D surfaces, it is apparent that three variables had a significant influence on the leaching rate of REEs: the influence of concentration was the greatest, that of flow velocity was second, and then the influence of the pH value. The response surface quadratic model was analyzed by software, and the optimal leaching conditions of the ionic rare earth ore by RSM optimization were as follows: pH value, concentration, and flow velocity of ammonium sulfate solution of 4.80, 5%, and 0.73 mL/min, respectively. The predicted leaching rate of REEs was 96.42%. In order to investigate the practicability and accuracy of the optimized result, a leaching test of the ionic rare earth ore was carried out under the optimal conditions. After six parallel tests, the actual leaching rates were 97.38%, 96.76%, 96.59%, 96.95%, 97.83% and 97.09%, respectively, with the average value was 97.10%, and the relative error between the actual value and the predicted value was 0.705%, which shows that the obtained response surface quadratic model has good predictive performance for the leaching rate of REEs and has a certain guiding significance for the production practice of the ionic rare earth ore. In order to improve the resource utilization ratio of ionic rare earth ore, on the basis of the single-factor tests, a study on the optimization of leaching process of a low-grade ionic rare earth ore was carried by RSM based on CCD principle. Main conclusions of this paper are listed as follows. The mathematical model for studying the leaching rate of REEs obtained by RSM is significant and reliable, and has good regression. All of the pH value, concentration, and flow velocity of leaching agent have significant influences on the leaching rate of REEs, which shows that choosing these three conditions to optimize is scientific and meaningful. The test results under the optimum leaching conditions show that the RSM optimization has a significant effect on improving the leaching rate of the ionic rare earth ore. The mathematical model of leaching rate has good prediction effect, which can be used to guide the production practice of this low-grade ionic rare earth ore. The feasibility of this optimization method for other types of ionic rare earth ore needs further verification. This work was financially supported by the Projects of