The quality of cast products can be improved by using high-temperature stable aerogels or xerogels within sand cores that are able to adsorb gases deriving from thermal decomposition of resins used as sand grain binders. We developed pure TEOS (tetraethoxysilane) and pure MTMS (methyltrimethoxysilane) aerogels as well as mixed MTMS/TEOS aerogels to yield high-temperature stable aerogels by pyrolysis that are considered capable to improve the casting process of copper-based alloys.
                  Aerogel samples were synthesized from pure TEOS or MTMS precursors or from different MTMS/TEOS ratios by using NH4Faq as catalyst. Wet gels were dried under ambient pressure and were pyrolyzed to yield SiOC aerogels. After pyrolysis the samples were characterized by density, nitrogen adsorption (BET, BJH), scanning electron microscopy and thermogravimetric analysis. Examinations on sand core behavior and cast surface quality were performed by adding the most promising material in granular form as an additive (inner surface area: 890m2/g) in different volume percentage to the sand grain mixture. For this application we synthesised liters of aerogels.The global demand for high quality casts with challenging geometries and low thicknesses steadily increases and requires the foundry industry to improve production means and products. Cast defects such as blowholes lead to the exclusion of cast material and need to be strongly avoided. For this reason different methods of cast quality optimization and prevention of cast defects are under examination. Every casting is done with specific molds that consist of sand grains kept together by a binder (typically resin-based). Most cast defects originate form undesirable interactions between the material of the molds and the hot liquid metal Pyrolyzed silicon- and carbon-based aerogels are high-temperature stable due to their high glass transition temperature and capable of adsorbing gases, owing to their typical high inner surface area Methyltrimethoxysilane (MTMS), tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) and NH Since for foundry applications aerogels have to be produced in the 10 The dried gels were pyrolyzed under argon atmosphere at 1000 Sand cores (152 Aerogel analyzing instruments: The bulk density was determined by envelope density analyzer The aerogel containing sand cores were also analyzed by thermogravimetry device TG 209 F1 For the analysis of the cast surface roughness laser scanning microscopy (LSM 700 The fast preparation of MTMS and/or TEOS derived gels in ethanol as solvent is made possible by the addition of water soluble ammonium fluoride. The catalyst accelerates the hydrolysis reaction by building a five coordinated transition state with the precursor molecule, which simplifies the substitution of the alkoxy-group by a water molecule ( The syntheses lead to white (sample T) and transparent wet gels (samples M/T After pyrolysis gels appear black due to the formation of free carbon with the exception of sample T. The latter yields a white colored product since no alkyl groups are present within the compound which can be converted into free carbon The high-temperature transformation was followed by thermogravimetric analysis under argon atmosphere up to 1000 Bulk and skeleton density were determined for all five samples before and after pyrolysis at 1000 Specific surface area (SSA) and average pores size distributions have been obtained by N SEM micrographs of all five gels after pyrolysis ( Pyrolyzed aerogel M/T  The thermogravimetric analysis was performed under argon stream up to 1000 Data for thermal conductivity and bending strength of the sand cores as well as surface roughness values of all three different cast series are listed in Sand cores with aerogel additive show higher thermal stabilities (as shown within TGA measurements, Five different pyrolyzed silicon-based aerogels were synthesized using various ratios of MTMS/TEOS as precursors. The hydrolysis rate was promoted by using NH Bulk density increases with larger MTMS content of the starting material while skeletal density decreases. Accordingly, open porosity values fall inversely proportional to the MTMS content (82% for sample T down to 21% for sample M). Typical observations during the pyrolysis process RT – 200 200 – 300 400 – 600 400 – 1000 700 – 1200 >1200 The pyrolyzed gels synthesized within this work (1000 First cast trials revealed, that sand cores with aerogel additive show a higher thermal stability than conventional additives and enhanced gas permeabilities. Both properties favor the elimination of cast defects. The bending strength is not influenced by the substitution of conventional additive by aerogel partciles. The roughness of the casting surface is overall found to be less compared to the conventional additive but not improved as desired. Further investigations with higher contents of aerogel and/ or a variation of types of aerogels, different pyrolysis temperatures are currently in progress as well as the utilization of supercritical dried aerogels, since they would possess a much higher inner surface. This work has been financially supported by the