A number of physical separation techniques for nickel (Ni) laterites have been investigated at laboratory and pilot plant scale and reported in the open literature. These included sink–float (or dense media) separation, gravity separation, magnetic separation, electrostatic separation, (roasting) and flotation. The information located so far and reported in the literature review by Quast et al. (2015) suggests that all these techniques, although providing some degree of upgrading, have not been incorporated into full plant operations as yet. The only successful preconcentration technique incorporated into some commercial operations has been the removal of a coarse product containing lower Ni values than the feed. In this work, the application of a number of physical separation techniques (screening, gravity and magnetic separation with and without roasting) has been investigated in the laboratory for upgrading three Western Australian low-grade Ni laterites (goethitic, siliceous goethitic and saprolitic). Roasting of the goethitic laterite caused a noticeable increase in Ni and Co (and corresponding mass) recovery into the magnetic product with temperature up to a certain point, but this effect was reversed at 650°C. Overall, the application of the selected techniques failed to produce any significant Ni grade enhancement for these three laterite ores. These tests confirm that the complex mineralogy of these three Ni laterite ores compromises any significant upgrading in Ni values by standard physical separation techniques.To date, preconcentration of complex, low grade Ni laterite ores poses considerable challenges. In our previous paper ( The aim of this paper is to provide information on the laboratory testing of various physical separation processes applied to three Western Australian Ni laterite ores as part of an investigation of possible preconcentration techniques for enhanced Ni recovery. The key strategy is to reject a stream with low Ni values, generating a higher Ni head grade feed to the main process for the recovery of Ni (and possibly Co) values. A brief mention of the application of attritioning and the rejection of a coarse fraction lower in Ni and the effect of roasting the goethitic sample ahead of dry, low intensity magnetic separation has been presented at the International Mineral Processing Congress held in Santiago in October, 2014 ( The samples of Ni laterite selected are three ores studied as part of a larger CSIRO Minerals Down Under (MDU) supported Ni laterite beneficiation program of research. The samples were designated “siliceous goethitic”, “goethitic” and “saprolitic” as suggested by their generic mineralogy. These are Western Australian Ni laterites from the same overall deposit, but with different mineralogical characteristics. A summary of their chemical and mineralogical characteristics are given in Since Ni laterites are characterised by the presence of soft materials that break down during handling and processing, attempts were made to generate “clean” Ni laterite surfaces on particles for subsequent test work. For this reason a variety of preparation techniques were used to generate particle size distributions similar to those encountered in industrial processing. These are detailed along with each of the specific procedures used in the test work described below. In order to investigate the possible beneficial effects of the removal of coarse material containing lower Ni values, as discussed in the literature review ( The results plotted in Preliminary tabling tests were conducted on specific size ranges of the attritioned SG sample to investigate the possibility of gravity concentration as a form of preconcentration. Samples were passed over the deck of a laboratory Wilfley shaking table, with photographs of the splitter end and the resulting products resulting from tabling the −75 Since Samples of laterite all passing 300 Roasting tests followed by magnetic separation of the roasted products were conducted on the three size fractions of the goethitic sample. Roasting was conducted at temperatures of 300, 450 and 650 QXRD analyses were conducted on the samples shown in Samples from the three Ni laterite samples were used in this part of the test work. Head samples of 1 Since the goethitic sample had the highest Fe content, testing was performed to investigate the effects of roasting and to determine whether finer grinding (all passing 38    From A more recent article by In summary, examination of previously reported data by  From The results obtained using magnetic separation after roasting the goethitic sample showed that the amount of mass recovery to the magnetic fraction increased after roasting (see As mentioned in Section In summary, low intensity dry magnetic separation of a number of size fractions of the nickeliferous laterites has not proved successful in concentrating Ni into a magnetic (or non-magnetic) product. There is some evidence of concentrating asbolane and/or lithiophorite into magnetic products. Roasting of the goethitic laterite up to 600 From From  Although roasting at higher temperatures increased the Ni percent recovery into the magnetic fraction, it also increased the weight percent recovered meaning that the Ni grade of the magnetic fraction remained at feed grade. Under the current testing conditions, sintering may be occurring particularly at 650 With the high mass percent of material reporting to the magnetic product after roasting and WHIMS, there is the possibility of non-magnetic material being trapped in the separation zone with its egress restricted by the high concentration of magnetic particles there. Even though water freely flowed through the bed of magnetics and iron balls, some non-magnetics may not have passed through causing a much higher mass in the magnetic fraction and hence a similar assay of the initial feed material. It is proposed to optimise this procedure to minimise the entrapment of non-magnetic particles in the separation zone of the WHIMS. The poor selectivity reported here may be an experimental artefact, so some form of magnetic separation should not be dismissed as a possible means of beneficiation. It may also mean that the mineralogy of the goethitic sample may not be amenable to beneficiation by roasting and WHIMS since it is substantially different from that used by From The reactions occurring at 650 This means that at 650 The other factor to consider is that the non-magnetics did show an enhancement in Si distribution compared to mass distribution, especially for the unroasted and product after roasting at 300 A number of physical separation techniques (screening, gravity and magnetic separation with and without roasting) have been investigated in the laboratory on three Western Australian low-grade Ni laterites. These tests confirm that the complex mineralogy of these three Ni laterite samples compromises any significant upgrading in Ni values. The method of screening out the coarse fraction from the siliceous goethitic laterite sample suggests that less Ni is associated with quartz in the coarse size fractions and is consistent with the data reported in industrial processing. This was confirmed by comparing Ni/Fe and Ni/Si ratios based on chemical analysis. These data indicate coarse silicates are lower in Ni compared with fine silicates whereas Ni tends to follow Fe through all size fractions. Removing coarser fractions therefore leads to an increase in the Ni content. It was shown that gravity concentration using a shaking table at the sizes tested here was not effective in concentrating Ni into a concentrate or rejecting a tailing barren in Ni. Low intensity dry magnetic separation of a number of size fractions of the nickeliferous laterites was not successful in concentrating Ni into a magnetic (or non-magnetic) product. There is some evidence of concentrating asbolane and/or lithiophorite into magnetic products. Roasting of the goethitic laterite caused an increase in Ni and Co (and corresponding mass) recovery into the magnetic product with temperature up to a certain point, but this effect was reversed at 650 The WHIMS results were almost identical to the results obtained on coarser fractions of the same materials using low intensity dry magnetic separation. The Ni follows weight percent extremely closely; cobalt and manganese are concentrated in the magnetic product, with Si concentrated in the non-magnetic product. Although roasting the fine goethitic laterite at higher temperatures caused more material to report to the magnetics, the trends shown for the unroasted samples remained the same. There is a possibility that the non-magnetics with their higher Si values could contain lower Ni values compared to the feed. The authors wish to thank CSIRO through their Minerals Down Under National Research Flagship for their in-kind and generous financial support for the Nickel Laterite Cluster Project. Discussions with Dr. John Farrow (CSIRO) and collaboration with researchers at the Norman B. Keevil Institute of Mining Engineering, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada are also gratefully acknowledged.