We present our experience of intramedullary nailing (IM) and external fixation in the treatment of 54 patients with ipsilateral diaphyseal fractures of the femur and tibia. Eight femoral and 24 tibial fractures were open. They were classified into three groups: IM nailing of both fractures (group A, 19 patients); IM nailing of the femoral and external fixation of the tibial fracture (group B, eight patients); and external fixation of both fractures (group C, 27 patients). In group C (which included all but one grade III open fracture), two patients died and four underwent amputation. Femoral fractures treated with external fixation had significantly more complications and reoperations than those treated with IM nailing. In tibial fractures this difference was also present but not statistically significant. We believe that IM nailing is the method of choice for femoral fractures and is preferable for tibial fractures, with the exception probably of grade III B and C open injuries.Ipsilateral fractures of the femur and tibia result in a flail joint described as 'floating knee'. When both fractures are diaphyseal the injury is classified as type 1 The aim here is to present our experience with treatment of this injury, its complications and functional results, and to make suggestions on the best method of fixation. Between 1992 and 1997, 54 patients with simultaneous ipsilateral fractures of the femoral and tibial shaft were admitted to the Orthopaedic Department of the Hellenic Red Cross Hospital in Athens. All the injuries were caused by road traffic accidents; most of the patients had been riding motorcycles. There were 39 men and 15 women, with a mean age of 29 years (range 15–73 years). Forty patients sustained concomitant injuries ( All the patients were operated upon within the first 12 h, as soon as their general condition allowed. According to the method of treatment, they were classified into three groups. Group A comprised 19 patients managed primarily with reamed, closed intramedullary nailing of the femur and unreamed, closed intramedullary nailing of the tibia. The nailing was dynamic or static according to the site and configuration of the fracture. Two femoral and five tibial fractures were open. Their classification according to Gustilo and Anderson The mean hospitalization time was 21 days (range 7–52 days) and was longer for patients in group C. A second-generation cephalosporin was given to patients with closed and grade I open fractures, while in grade II and III, aminoglycoside and metronidazole were added for 4–7 days. Mobilization was begun as soon as the condition of the patient permitted. In group A, partial weight-bearing was allowed immediately, while in the rest weight-bearing was begun when callus was evident radiologically. The follow-up period ranged from 12 to 24 months. All the fractures united within a reasonable time except for one femur and 10 tibias. In group A, femoral fractures healed in an average of 12 weeks and tibial in 14 weeks. There were two cases of delayed union of the tibia, which were treated with fibular osteotomy and dynamization of the intramedullary nail. An excellent functional result (i.e. full range of painless movements of the knee joint) was achieved in 18/19 patients. In group B, femoral fractures healed in 13 weeks on average. We changed external fixation of the tibia to intramedullary nailing in three patients after 4–6 months because of delayed union or, in one case, non-union. The mean healing time was 27 weeks. The final functional result was excellent in 5/8 patients. In group C, two patients died in the first 24 h because of the severity of their injuries. Four patients had a below-knee amputation later because of vascular and neurological complications. One patient developed fat embolism. External fixation of the femur was left in place until healing of the fracture in 14 patients. Eleven others required reoperation for malunion (six cases), non-union (one case) and angulation of the fracture (four cases); nine had intramedullary nailing and two limb lengthening. Of the tibial fractures, five patients underwent reoperation (intramedullary nailing and bone grafting) for delayed union (3) or non-union (2). Skin grafts were needed in six patients. There was one case of osteomyelitis in a grade III C open fracture, which was treated successfully with debridement, antibiotics and bone grafting. In 16 group C patients, external fixation was final treatment. The mean time to union was 24 weeks for the femur and 32 weeks for the tibia. An excellent functional result was achieved in 9/25 cases. Poor results were associated with knee instability, vascular injury or severe soft-tissue trauma. Simultaneous fractures of the femur and tibia are caused by severe trauma. The significant mortality (4%) and amputation risk (8%), the high incidence of concomitant injuries (74%) and open fractures (15% for the femur and 44% for the tibia) reflect the magnitude of the initial high-energy trauma. Particular attention should be paid to simultaneous fractures of the pelvis and patella and to knee ligamentous injuries, which are common and often missed during the initial evaluation, since their symptoms may be masked by those of the femoral and tibial fractures. Van Raay et al. Immediate fixation of the fractures stabilizes the patient's condition and permits early mobilization, reducing the incidence of adult respiratory distress system (ARDS) to one-fifth In the literature, however, there is no unanimity about the method of fixation. Some advocate external fixation of both fractures, especially when they are open In conclusion, in patients suffering from simultaneous ipsilateral diaphyseal fractures of the femur and tibia, early fixation is recommended since it has several advantages with few systemic complications. Although several patients healed with external fixation, femoral reamed intramedullary nailing had fewer complications and reoperations and is safe even for open fractures, as reported earlier by Lhowe and Hansen