A sodium hydroxide pretreatment at ambient temperature was evaluated to increase gold extraction from a high-grade arsenopyrite mineral. A 2k factorial experimental design was established, with the following variables: NaOH concentration (0.1–3M), solid concentration (40–200g/L) and treatment time (6–48h). After applying the pretreatment, standard leaching tests with thiosulfate solution were performed to quantify the effects of these three variables on the gold extraction. While only 23 and 29% gold extraction was achieved in the as received mineral with cyanide and thiosulfate leaching, respectively, up to 81% was obtained with the pretreatments. The lower solid concentration and the higher NaOH concentration gave the best results. This demonstrates that the use of the hydroxyl ion represents an effective treatment for minerals with gold encapsulated in arsenopyrite. Gold extraction was related to that of arsenic removal. Silver leaching was also improved for most pretreatments, but to a lesser extent.The recovery of precious metals from refractory ores has been widely investigated due to depletion of the deposits from which gold can be easily leached ( A variety of methods have been proposed and applied to overcome the barriers imposed by refractoriness in minerals ( Some alkaline pretreatments have been tested for antimonial and arsenical ores and concentrates. Understanding the oxidative and reductive dissolution processes of the host minerals is fundamental for the development of more effective hydrometallurgical processes. Arsenopyrite is stable under reductive conditions ( According to In addition to investigating the refractory nature of minerals, such as gold-containing arsenopyrite, the chemistry of the leach solution also plays an important role in the recovery of precious metals. In the present study, once the solid material was pretreated, thiosulfate lixiviant, an alternative to cyanide ( Compared to cyanide, thiosulfate is less toxic and has similar leaching kinetics. However, the reaction mechanism is more complex and the instability of thiosulfate under oxidative conditions renders it imperative to control the solution chemistry. Various studies have shown that satisfactory extractions can be achieved using thiosulfate, in the presence of ammonia with cupric ion as an oxidizing agent and EDTA as a stabilizer ( The − Initially, a cyanide bottle roll test was performed using 40 The electrochemical behavior of the pure sample was investigated using cyclic voltammetry with arsenopyrite paste electrodes (CPE-Apy); for this purpose, an AUTOLAB potentiostat/galvanostat (model PGSTAT 30) was used. The arsenopyrite carbon paste electrodes were prepared using pure arsenopyrite (0.1 The solution was introduced into the electrochemical cell and nitrogen gas was bubbled into the solution for 30 X-ray diffraction (XRD) was performed to verify the mineralogical composition of the concentrate and to observe any changes in the mineral structure after pretreatment. The pretreatment conditions were: 3 In order to determine the most important variables and the best conditions for the NaOH pretreatment, a 2  Once pretreatment was finalized, solution samples were taken to quantify iron and arsenic released as a result of alteration of the mineral matrix. The slurry was filtered to recover the residue, and later air-dried and weighed before leaching with thiosulfate. To observe the effect of the temperature in the alkaline pretreatment, a test was performed at 50 Gold leaching tests were performed with the conditions and solution formulation described in Gold ores are catalogued as refractory if the extraction by direct cyanidation is less than 80%. With the cyanide bottle roll for the mineral concentrate, the gold recovery was only 23%, clearly indicating the refractoriness of this arsenopyritic gold ore. According to studies by In arsenical ores, gold may be incorporated into the arsenopyrite lattice, either in solid solution or on the crystal faces. The gold concentration in solid solution can be high due to matched atomic spacing and similar formation temperature. Regarding the refractoriness of the gold deposit, despite being stable under cyanidation conditions, arsenopyrite can form arsenates (AsO   According to Alkaline oxidation of arsenopyrite can be represented by the following equation: XRD mineralogical analyses of untreated concentrate and the residues after pretreatment and leaching are shown in The SEM images, shown in Leaching experiments were performed after pretreatment with hydroxyl ion. The results shown in Fire assay was employed to confirm the gold recoveries in the leaching tests (  Significant increases in gold extraction were also achieved in tests 4 and 6, although it is not clear which of the variables is the most important. For that reason, an analysis of the results of the factorial design was performed using the Statgraphics software. This evaluates the functionality of the response variable relative to the input variables and the respective experimental effects. For this purpose, Pareto charts ( The Pareto chart ( The thiosulfate consumption was not determined in the present study; however, in previous studies on the same concentrate ( After finding the conditions for the alkaline pretreatment, with which the best gold extraction was obtained in the subsequent leaching stage, a new pretreatment at 50 On the other hand, the results for cyanide bottle roll tests of the pretreated sample show an increase in gold extraction demonstrated the advantage of applying the pretreatment ( By fire assay of the leach residues, the silver extractions were also obtained. The analysis of the results for the extraction of silver shows a different behavior compared to that of gold. As may be observed in In the present study, the beneficial effect on gold extraction of a hydroxyl ion pretreatment for ores with a high arsenopyritic content was demonstrated. It was observed that when the ore structure was altered by the complexation of arsenic with hydroxyl ions, the gold is liberated from the arsenopyrite matrix and subsequently can be more easily leached. The gold extraction improved significantly as a function of the arsenic removal. As for the variables studied in the proposed experimental design, the NaOH concentration proved to be the most influential in the process, and combined with the longer contact time and lower solid concentration, up to 81% gold extraction was achieved. The temperature did not have significant effect in the pretreatment process. With respect to silver extraction, although improvements were observed with most of the pretreatments, further study is necessary due to the difference in leaching mechanisms for the mineralogical phases of gold and silver present in the ore. Sandra-L Mesa wishes to thank the CONACyT México for the PhD scholarship (266026).