Air-assisted solvent extraction (AASX) which is based on the coating of organic extractants on the air bubbles was developed to recover valuable metals from dilute Cu solutions. The effect of the chemical composition of aqueous and organic phases was investigated on the interfacial tension of aqueous/organic/air phases and related thermodynamic coefficients. Results were used to analyze the behaviour of phases and process efficiency in a continuous-mode AASX pilot plant. Interfacial data indicated that a suitable organic coating occurred in the presence of Flomin-F742, Nasfroth-240, and pine oil frothers with positive spreading coefficients. It was found that organic phase recycling in the AASX column was decreased from 86% to 13% by reducing the bubble size from 659 μm to 366 μm, respectively. By the addition of silicone oil dosage from 0 to 75 mg/L to the organic phase, Cu recovery was enhanced from 44% to 85% mainly as a consequence of decreasing the A/O phase ratio and increasing the coating degree of air bubbles by the organic extractant. An intense drop of organic phase recycling (from 70 to 30%) was observed at the silicone oil dosage beyond the critical micelle concentration of the organic phase, which was accompanied by producing a wide size range of air bubbles. It can be concluded that spreading the organic phase on the air bubbles and having a narrow size range of bubbles to overcome the upward velocity of bubbles to the downward velocity of the aqueous phase are the main issues for achieving a good efficiency in the AASX process. Results indicated that AASX method could widen the application of solvent extraction for the recovery of valuable metals from aqueous solutions.Extraction of valuable metals from dilute metal bearing wastewaters is important from economical and environmental point of views. Solvent extraction (SX) is an efficient and reliable process for selective recovery of valuable metals from complex pregnant leach solutions obtained from the leaching of ores, concentrates and secondary resources ( Air-Assisted Solvent Extraction (AASX) has been introduced as a high potential solvent extraction method to purify and concentrate the dilute solutions such as those obtained from the leaching of low-grade ores and Acid Mine Drainage (AMD) ( Chen et al. ( Considering the critical role of surface phenomena in the efficiency of subsystems of AASX method and lack of a comprehensive research to express the relationship between surface phenomena of fluid phases and the efficiency of AASX process, this research was conducted to investigate the effect of some additives and parameters including pH, Cu concentration, organic extractant concentration on the surface and interfacial tension of aqueous and organic phases. In this regard, five frothers and silicon oil were chosen as the additive for aqueous and organic phases, respectively. Moreover, a novel continuous-mode AASX column system was used to investigate the effect of frother type and silicone oil dosage on the metal recovery, A/O phase ratio, bubble size distribution and organic phase recycling, and finally the results of the AASX process were explained by surface phenomena data. The industrial grades of Dowfax-2A1 (Alkyldiphenyloxide disulfonate, DOW chemical company), PEB-70 (alkanol poly alkyl ether, Isfahan Copolymer Company), pine oil (Isfahan Copolymer Company), Nasfoth-240 (Polyethylene glycol alkyl ether, Nasaco company), and Flomin-F742 (Polypropylene glycol, SNF-Flomin company) were used as the frothers in the aqueous phase. Sulfuric acid (1.87 mol/L) was used for adjusting solution pH. The organic phase contained Chemorex CP-150 as Cu extractant which was a blend of 5-nonylsalicylaldoxime, a branched chain diisobutyrate modifier, and a high flash point diluent together (Longlight International Company) and kerosene (Isfahan Oil Refinery Company) as a diluent of the organic phase. The silicone oil (industrial grade) was used as an additive to the organic phase. Distilled and tap waters were used during the surface tension and AASX experiments, respectively. The surface tension can be measured by several methods such as maximum bubble pressure, drop weight, Wilhelmy plate, and Du Noüy ring ( The surface tension of the aqueous phase was measured in different conditions. The effect of several chemical parameters including, the amount and type of frothers, the concentration of Cu, and the pH of the solution were investigated on the surface tension of the aqueous phase. To evaluate the surface tension of the organic phase, the silicone oil dosage was studied in variable extractant concentration. The dosage of silicone oil in surface tension experiments was between 0 (without any additives) to 2500 mg/L. Moreover, the interfacial tension of the two phases was also measured in various conditions. Effects of Cu concentration at different levels of extractant and additives were investigated. The surface or interfacial tension experiments were repeated three times, and the average values were reported. For investigating the relationship between the surface phenomena and the efficiency of the AASX process, some experiments were conducted at the pilot scale of AASX in a continuous mode ( Also, The effect of silicone oil dosage ranging from 0 to 75 mg/L in the organic phase on the AASX column efficiency (generated bubbles, metal recovery and organic phase recycling) was investigated at 30% (v/v) of extractant concentration in the organic phase as well as 150 mg/L of Cu and 50 mg/L of pine oil in the aqueous phase. AASX experiments were conducted at 13.5 L/min aqueous phase flowrate in the column, which contained 50 mg/L of pine oil (as a frother) and 150 mg/L of Cu. In addition, the effect of the frothers type on AASX column efficiency was evaluated at the dosage of 50 mg/L for liquid additive (silicone oil in the organic phase and frother in the aqueous phase). The taken photos of the bubbles in the AASX column were processed using TSview software, and the bubble size distribution was determined.  In order to investigate the effect of pH on the surface tension of the aqueous solutions in the presence of the investigated frothers, some experiments were carried out at the pH range of 1.5 to 5, Cu concentration of 300 mg/L and the frother dosage of 200 mg/L. As can be seen in The surface tension of the organic phase in different levels of Chemorex CP-150 extractant in Kerosene diluent in the presence of silicone oil ranging from 0 to 2500 mg/L was investigated. As Effects of the amount of extractant in the organic phase and the Cu concentration on the interfacial tension of aqueous/organic phases are shown in The interfacial tensions of the two phases were measured after adding frother and other reagents. The effect of the silicone oil dosage on the interfacial tension is shown in The surface tensions of the aqueous and organic phases and the interfacial tension between them can affect the stability of the coated bubbles, bubbles size, and prevent the collapse of the bubble bed ( Where γ The various status of the organic phase and air bubble in the aqueous media was shown in Producing coated bubbles causes to increase the contact area of aqueous and organic phases which led to enhance the extraction rate of desirable ions from the aqueous phase with a high aqueous to organic phase ratio (v/v). The efficiency of AASX process was increased by increasing the organic coating degree of air bubbles, so positive values of S coefficient is necessary to optimize the process. As can be seen in In this study, surface tensions of organic phase were less than surface tensions of the aqueous phase, so, E and B coefficients are always positive for all of the investigated conditions and it means that organic drops can transfer to the interface of the aqueous phase and bubbles (positive value of E) and the bridge of organic drops will be unstable which means that the organic drops would divide among the air bubbles adhered to it. As aforementioned, by attachment of an organic drop to an air bubble, the drop can either spread on its surface or not which depends on the value of S coefficient. Although in both positions, the organic phase adheres to bubbles, for producing coated bubble (which is desirable in the AASX method), the value of S coefficient needs to be positive. If the surface tension of the aqueous phase is greater than the total surface and interfacial tension of the organic phase, the S will be positive and otherwise, will be negative. S coefficient calculated from the obtained data and the diagrams of S coefficients in various conditions at the frother dosage of 50 mg/L are shown in In order to investigate the relationship between surface phenomena and the efficiency of the AASX process, some extraction experiments were conducted in the AASX apparatus, and the effects of silicone oil addition (added to the organic phase) and frother type (added to the aqueous phase) were evaluated at the Cu concentration of 150 mg/L, the aqueous phase flowrate of 13.5 L/min and the frother dosage of 50 mg/L as well as the organic extractant concentration of 30% (v/v). The silicone oil dosage in the organic phase was changed from 0 to 75 mg/L in the presence of pine oil, as frother of the aqueous phase. The results of changing this additive on the responses parameters of AASX column were shown in The organic phase recycling, i.e. a fraction of input organic phase which transfers to the column upstream, was decreased from 67% to 32% by increasing the concentration of silicone oil from 50 to 75 mg/L. The reason for this decline is that by increasing the silicone oil addition, bubbles produced at 75 mg/L silicone oil was in the wide range of sizes, the density of the small and big bubbles was more than 50 mg/L (marked area in In order to investigate the effect of the type of frothers on the bubble size, metal recovery and organic phase recycling some air-assisted solvent extraction experiments were carried out in the AASX column at the silicone oil dosage of 50 mg/L. As can be seen in Metal recovery in the presence of various frothers was in the range of 39% (for PEB-70) to 61% (for pine oil). It needs to be pointed out that S values were positive for Flomin F742, Nasfoth 240 and pine oil which means that in the presence of these frothers the organic coating of bubbles could occur. Among these frothers, pine oil caused the smallest bubble production (min = 517 μm, S.D. = 151 μm). By decreasing the size of bubbles, their raising velocity reduces, as a consequence, the retention time of coated organic phase in the AASX column increases. In addition, the special surface area of the bubbles increases by decreasing bubble size, leading to enhance the fraction of coated organic phase. Furthermore, the needed gas velocity for heterogeneous regime reduces by reducing the solution surface tension (the fluid turbulence in the heterogeneous regime is more than homogeneous regime). So, the increasing of metal recovery could be attributed to the more spreading of the organic phase on the bubbles, changing the hydrodynamics regimes of bubbles from homogeneous to heterogeneous, increasing both the retention time of coated bubbles and bubble surface area. However, in the presence of PEB-70 and Dowfax-2A1, S values were negative which means that the organic phase could adhere to the bubble (E and B coefficients were positive) without spreading on the bubble surface, i.e. organic coating did not occur (see In this research, the relationship between the surface tension of the liquid phases and the efficiency of the AASX process in a continuous mode was investigated, and the following results were found as the concluding remarks: Increasing the dosage of silicone oil in organic phase from 0 to 75 mg/L increased Cu recovery from 44 to 85% and decreased the A/O phase ratio from 190 to 100. Reducing the A/O ratio, mainly as a result of the reduction of the surface tension and viscosity of the organic phase, was supposed to be the main reason for increasing metal recovery. The organic phase recycling was almost constant (around 70%) from 0 to 50 mg/L silicone oil (corresponded to its CMC) and reduced to 32% at the further dosage (75 mg/L). Moreover, the bubble diameter was increased from 260 to 520 μm by increasing the silicone oil dosage from 0 to 50 mg/L (the standard deviation ~ 151 μm). By increasing the silicone oil dosage from 50 to 75 mg/L, the standard division of bubble size was increased two times (the average of bubble diameter was not changed). Based on the analysis of surface and interfacial tensions data, it can be concluded that among the five investigated frothers, Flomin-F742, Nasfroth-240, and pine oil could render the system for a suitable spreading of the organic phase on air bubbles. - By increasing the surface tension of the aqueous phase, the bubble diameter was increased from 366 μm (in the presence of Dowfax-2A1) to 659 μm (in the presence of Flomin-F742). The organic phase recycling value was also changed in the range of 86% (in the presence of Flomin-F742) to 13% (in the presence of Dowfax-2A1) which was decreased by decreasing bubble size. Moreover, Cu recovery was changed in the range of 39% (in the presence of PEB-70) to 61% (in the presence of pine oil). It can be concluded that good organic bubble coating and producing air bubbles in a specific narrow size range are the main issues to conduct an efficient AASX process to recover valuable metals from dilute solutions. Authors express their thanks to National Iranian Copper Industries Company (NICICO) especially management and personals of