Cyanogenic Chromobacterium violaceum, Pseudomonas fluorescens, and P. plecoglossicida were able to mobilize silver, gold, and platinum when grown in the presence of various metal-containing solids such as gold-containing electronic scrap, silver-containing jewelry waste, or platinum-containing automobile catalytic converters. Five percent of silver was microbially mobilized from powdered jewelry waste as dicyanoargentate after one day, although complete dissolution was obtained when non-biological cyanide leaching was applied. Dicyanoargentate inhibited growth at concentrations of >20 mg/L. Gold was bacterially solubilized from shredded printed circuit boards. Maximum dicyanoaurate concentration corresponded to 68.5% dissolution of the total gold added. Additionally, cyanide-complexed copper was detected during treatment of electronic scrap due to its high copper content of approximately 100 g/kg scrap. However, only small amounts of platinum (0.2%) were mobilized from spent automobile catalytic converter after 10 days probably due to passivation of the surface by an oxide film. In summary, all findings demonstrate the potential of microbial mobilization of metals as cyanide complex from solid materials and represent a novel type of microbial metal mobilization (termed “biocyanidation”) which might find industrial application.In the presence of cyanide, many metals and metalloids (such as Ti, V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, Ge, Mo, Tc Ru, Rh, Pd, Ag, Cd, W, Re, Os, Ir, Pt, Au, Hg, Tl, Po, and U) form well-defined cyanide complexes which show often very good water solubility and exhibit high chemical stability ( Regarding biological cyanide formation, cyanide is formed by a variety of bacteria as secondary metabolite, e.g. However, until today a combination of chemical knowledge (interaction of metals and cyanide) with microbiological principles (biological cyanide formation) regarding metal solubilization from metal-containing solids and the formation of water-soluble cyanide complexes has been considered marginally. Only very few reports can be found in the literature describing the biological solubilization of gold by The objective of this study was to evaluate the potential of cyanogenic microorganisms such as  Luria–Bertani (LB) broth containing tryptone (10.0), yeast extract (5.0), sodium chloride (10.0) was used for growth experiments. The pH was adjusted to 7.2. Glycine and metal-containing solids were additionally supplied in different amounts according to the experimental setup. Duplicate cultures were grown in 250 ml baffled Erlenmeyer flasks in 100 ml of medium and incubated at 30 °C on a rotary shaker at 150 rpm. Optical density and pH was recorded routinely. For metal mobilization experiments, different amounts (up to 75 g/l) of solid materials (e.g. powdered metal-containing materials, shredded electronic scrap) were added to the medium. Free cyanide was quantitatively analyzed applying the picric acid colorimetric method ( Bacterial oxygen consumption was monitored using the Degramat® system ( Cyanide formation by Gold was mobilized from shredded electronic scrap by both  Fast mobilization of silver was observed when In spite of the toxicity of dicyanoargentate, mobilization of silver by cyanogenic microorganisms proved to be promising. However, the process has to be optimized by reducing inhibitory effects, e.g. by trapping the dicyanoargentate formed or by applying a sequential two-step process where biological cyanide formation is separated from metal mobilization. In analogy, this has already been proposed to reduce the toxicity of arsenic during the biological treatment of gold-containing arsenopyrite by From an industrial point of view it might be of importance to note that  In order to improve bacterial growth as well as cyanide generation and subsequent formation of cyanide-complexed metals, a process was applied for the cultivation of In summary, our results demonstrate the potential of microbial mobilization of metals (in our case silver, gold, and platinum) as cyanide complex from solid materials applying Our findings represent a novel type of microbial metal mobilization (termed “biocyanidation”) which might find industrial application provided that mobilization efficiencies (especially for Pt) can be improved ( 