Halloysite nanotubes (HNTs) can serve as high aspect ratio templates for the deposition of functional nanoparticles to form novel nanocomposites. We reported here on the synthesis of carbon-coated HNTs (CCH) via the carbonization of sucrose-coated HNTs in the presence of sulfuric acid. Metal oxide (MO) nanoparticles (ZnO, TiO2) were subsequently deposited on the surface of the CCH to produce MO/CCH nanocomposites. The samples were characterized using transmission electron microscopy (TEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), Raman spectroscopy, and N2 adsorption–desorption analysis. The results indicated that graphitic carbon could improve the conductivity of HNTs, and electron transfer across the interfaces between MO and graphitic carbon led to a significant change in photocatalytic properties. MO/CCH showed good photocatalytic performance for photodegradation of methylene blue dye. The nanocomposites had two excellent advantages as a result of the unique properties of carbon, and increased adsorption of pollutants and easy charge transportation. The as-synthesized nanocomposites could have potential application in the field of wastewater treatment.In recent years, there has been progress in the development and characterization of new materials based on clay mineral nanotubes ( Halloysite 7 The poor conductivity of HNTs should be addressed. The outer surface of HNTs is net negatively charged and the adsorbed positive ion cannot move freely, while carbon coating could effectively improve conductivity on the surface. Carbon coating has been usually realized by vapor-phase growth ( In this work, HNTs were used as support materials. We reported the synthesis of carbon-coated halloysite (CCH) from sucrose-coated halloysite (SCH), and the sucrose was dehydrated by concentrated sulfuric acid ( HNTs were obtained from Hunan, China. All chemicals were analytical grade and used without further purification. Raw HNTs were washed with deionized water (pH ZnO/CCH nanocomposites were synthesized as follows ( TiO The crystalline phases were identified by XRD analysis using a RIGAKU D/max-2550VB The photocatalytic activities of MO/CCH were investigated using the photodegradation of MB. The photodegradation experiments were carried out in a closed box. In each experiment, 100 The white HNTs were short cylindrical hollow tubes with an average length of 0.70–1.50 The Raman spectrum shows two major broad peaks centered at around 1590 Carbon coating could improve the electric conductivity of HNTs. We control the proportion of sucrose to adjust the carbon-coated area of CCH, which could build relationships with its adsorptive capacity (Fig. S2).  The band at 1710 A large amount of ZnO nanoparticles are irregularly dispersed on the CCH surface (  According to the above analysis, a possible mechanism for enhanced photocatalytic property is proposed in In UV light, MO nanoparticles undergo charge separation to yield electrons ( Microstructure insight and property enhancement of functionalized HNTs were investigated in detail. Carbon coating can improve the electron conductivity of the substrate HNTs and charge–carrier separation in MO semiconductors for photocatalytic applications. As a result of their electronic properties, MO and CCH can readily undergo charge–transfer interactions with electron acceptors or donors. MO acts as an electron donor, and functional groups on the CCH surface act as electron acceptors. Electron transfer across the interface between MO and graphitic carbon leads to a significant change in photocatalytic properties, providing an ideal platform for studying the multifunctionalities of clay mineral nanomaterials. Thus, our method could offer a more benign approach to the general production of functional mineral materials for diverse applications. This work was supported by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at