Calcific aortic valve disease (CAVD) is a disorder characterized by an abnormal mineralization, which may have intricate links with inflammation. Interleukin-6 (IL-6) and its cognate cytokines are widely expressed and exert pleiotropic effects on different tissues. In this study, we examined the expression of the IL-6 family of cytokines in human CAVD by using a transcriptomic approach and we performed in-depth functional assays with valve interstitial cells (VICs) to unravel the process regulating IL-6 expression and its role during the mineralization of the aortic valve. We documented by both microarray and q-PCR analyses an elevated expression of IL-6 in human CAVD, which was correlated with the remodeling process. IL-6 was highly expressed by VICs. We found that following treatment with a phosphate-containing medium the level of IL-6 expressed by VICs increased by several-fold. Phosphate-induced expression of IL-6 relied on reduced PI3K/Akt signaling downstream of the P2Y2 receptor (P2Y2R). In this regard, we found by using transfection experiments that Akt-1 is a negative regulator of the NF-κB pathway. In addition, by using a siRNA targeting IL-6 we found that phosphate-induced mineralization was largely dependent on IL-6 expression. A transfection of Akt-1 rescued the hypermineralizing phenotype of P2Y2R−/− mouse VICS (MVICs). Hence, we documented a novel mechanism whereby P2Y2R and Akt modulate the NF-κB pathway and its downstream target IL-6, which is a strong promoter of the mineralization of VICs.Calcific aortic valve disease (CAVD) is the most common heart valve disorder Mineralization of the aortic valve is, at least in part, under the control of the ectonucleotidase enzyme and purinergic signaling. By modulating the levels of nucleotides/nucleosides the ectonucleotidases exert an important control over the stimulation of purinergic receptors We examined 46 stenotic aortic valves (CAVD) that were explanted from patients at the time of aortic valve replacement. Control non-calcified aortic valves (n Each valve excised at the time of surgery was placed in a container filled with HEPES. One cusp was also placed in RNA later (Ambion Inc., Austin, USA) for ulterior mRNA quantification by microarray or quantitative real-time PCR. One cusp was decalcified in Cal-Ex (Fisher Scientific, Nepean, ON, Canada) for 24 A total of five CAVD valves and five normal aortic valves were selected for microarray analysis. The description of the population as well as the detailed methodology of the microarray has been previously published Human and mouse (WT and P2Y2R Total RNA was isolated with RNeasy microkit from Qiagen (Qiagen, Mississauga, ON, Canada). The RNA extraction protocol was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions. The quality of total RNA was monitored by capillary electrophoresis (Experion, BioRad, Mississauga, ON, Canada). One μg of RNA was reverse transcribed using the Quantitec Reverse Transcription Kit from Qiagen. Quantitative real-time PCR (q-PCR) was performed with a Quantitec SYBR Green PCR kit from Qiagen using the Rotor-Gene 6000 system (Corbett Robotics Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA). Human IL-6, Akt-1, Runx2, osteopontin, osteonectin, BMP2, ENPP1, TGF-β1, COL1A1 and mouse Akt-1, Akt-2 and Akt-3 (Qiagen, Mississauga, ON, Canada) were quantified by q-PCR at the following conditions: an initial 15 Calcium content was determined by the Arsenazo III method (Synermed, Monterey Park, CA, USA), which relies on the specific reaction of Arsenazo III with calcium to produce a blue complex. Results are measured at 650 VICs were seeded in 6-well plates (1 VICs were cultured into 12-well plates, at a density of 6 VICs were collected (1 VICs were collected (1 VICs were collected (1 IL-6 was measured in supernatants of HVICS exposed to control or mineralizing medium for 7 Cells were fixed in 3.7% formaldehyde for 30 For Western analysis, proteins were loaded onto 12% SDS-polyacrylamide gels followed by electrophoresis and blotting onto nitrocellulose membranes. Membranes were blocked with TBS-tween containing 5% non-fat dry milk, incubated with primary antibodies directed against Akt, IL-6 and Calnexin followed by an HRP-labeled secondary antibody (Amersham, Piscataway, NJ, USA). Detection was done with Supersignal West Pico chemiluminescent substrate (Pierce Lab, Rockford, Il, USA). Images were acquired and quantification analyses were performed using a ChemiDoc MP system (BioRad, ON, Canada). Cells were transfected with pCMV ENPP1 for 24 For A tissue-based microarray experiment was first conducted to explore the expression pattern of IL-6 gene family. The microarray results are presented in We next hypothesized that human VICs (HVICs) could produce IL-6 and affect mineralization. To address this issue, we documented the expression of IL-6 by HVICs upon exposition to mineralizing medium. We documented a 16-fold increase in mRNA expression of IL-6 in HVICs exposed to a mineralizing medium ( We next tested the signaling cascade that could mediate the effect of P2Y2R on the expression of IL-6. In HVICs, inhibition of the PI3K/Akt pathway with Ly294002 negated, at least partially, the protective effect of 2-thioUTP on IL-6 expression following exposition to mineralizing medium, whereas inhibition of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) (U0126) pathway or phospholipase C (PLC) (U73122) did not alter this response ( In HVICs we found that inhibition of the NF-κB pathway with BAY11-7085 (an inhibitor of IκB phosphorylation) blunted the rise of the IL-6 transcript induced by phosphate ( Considering that P2Y2R In this work we found that IL-6, a cytokine widely expressed in CAVD, is secreted by VICs in response to phosphate and mediates the mineralization of cell culture. Moreover, we identified that the phosphate-induced expression of IL-6 is mediated by a loss of P2Y2R signaling. To this effect, our data indicate that P2Y2R-mediated signaling through PI3K/Akt represses the NF-κB pathway, whereby the expression of IL-6 is controlled. In addition, we documented that phosphate-mediated mineralization of VIC cultures is largely dependent on the secretion of IL-6. In turn, the production of IL-6 by VICs promotes the osteogenic transition and mineralization of cells through the production of BMP2. Taken together, these findings highlight that P2Y2R exerts an important control over inflammation and the mineralization of the aortic valve ( Il-6 is a cytokine with pleiotropic effects and expressed by a wide variety of cells We previously identified that phosphate-induced mineralization of VICs is accompanied by a decreased level of Akt-1 mRNA To our knowledge, this is the first study to document that IL-6 exerts an important control over the mineralization of VICs. In this regard, inhibition of IL-6 with siRNA reduced significantly the mineralization of VICs, whereas the addition of IL-6 to the growth medium promoted the mineralization of cell cultures. Worthy of note, the hypermineralizing phenotype of P2Y2R The present findings may have some clinical implications. Considering that there is no medical treatment for CAVD, future pre-clinical studies should examine the role of IL-6 in animal models of CAVD. To this effect, it is possible that targeting IL-6 with monoclonal antibodies may help reduce the mineralization of the aortic valve. Blockade of IL-6 is already used for patients with rheumatoid arthritis. However, such a therapy can be associated with different side-effects including the alteration of the blood lipid profile The present findings were not corroborated in an animal model in order to establish the importance of IL-6 to the development of CAVD. Nonetheless, by using surgically explanted human aortic valves we have found that IL-6 is highly expressed in CAVD and correlates with indices of tissue remodeling and disease activity. Moreover in-depth functional assays using human and mouse VICs have highlighted the molecular processes by which IL-6 is expressed by VICs and how it controls the mineralization. We have documented in this work that a high expression of IL-6 in the aortic valve promotes the mineralization process. In addition, we found that decreased signaling through P2Y2R, which is promoted by a high level of ectonucleotidase activity, promoted the expression of IL-6 with pro-mineralizing activities. Furthermore, we found that downstream to P2Y2R Akt-1 negatively regulates NF-κB. Hence, the present study contributed to unravel a novel mechanism whereby P2Y2R controls the calcification of the aortic valve. D.E.H., M.C.B., and P.M. conceived and designed experiments. P.M. wrote the manuscript. Y.B. designed the transcriptomic experiment and performed the bioinformatics analyses of the microarray data. D.E.H. and M.C.B. optimized and performed experiments with siRNAs and pCMV. D.E.H. A.M. and R.B. performed q-PCR analyses. D.E.H., D.F. and M.H.L. performed ELISA studies. P.P. critically reviewed the manuscript. The microarray dataset can be found in the National Center for Biotechnology Information's Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) repository ( P.M. has patent applications for the use of ectonucleotidase inhibitors and purinergic agonists in the treatment of CAVD. This work was supported by an