The subgrade provides support to the pavement system and assures an effective distribution of traffic loads in depth. Therefore, a failure in the subgrade will have consequences on the entire pavement behaviour.
                  This work presents an integrated approach for the analysis of the road subgrade condition by combining different Non-Destructive Testing (NDT) techniques. Different Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) systems, both antennas configuration and frequencies, were tested in order to achieve the best methodology for subgrade cracking detection. Additionally, NDT load tests were performed with two deflectometers, Falling Weight Deflectometer (FWD) and Light Weight Deflectometer (LWD), aiming to determine the elastic modulus of the subgrade and consequently detect damaged areas.
                  The tests were conducted at a real scale test section built to simulate pavement foundation layers consisting of clay soil subgrade, frequently used in African countries. The main tests performed are presented and analysed in this paper. Troubleshooting’s are referred mainly related with GPR wave propagation on clayey materials, due to high absorption. Recommendations are made regarding the use of GPR antennas as air-coupled antennas lead to a better identification of pavement layer interfaces while ground-coupled antennas were preferable to detect anomalous areas, namely cracking and debonding. The results showed good agreement between both NDT methods (GPR and load tests) in the identification of the anomalous areas and were validated with some in-situ cores extracted.The road transportation system has an important role in today’s society with a direct influence in its economic development. The effect of vehicle loads is the lead cause of pavement deterioration over time, followed by the influence of the weather conditions and errors in design or construction that can intensify those effects resulting in a quicker decrease of the pavement condition Road inspections normally imply visual inspection, to evaluate cracks and delamination and also functional evaluation of pavements, by assessing the surface parameters such as roughness and skid resistance The subgrade provides support to the entire pavement system and assures an effective distribution of traffic loads in depth. Thus, proper pavement behaviour is directly related to the subgrade integrity. In the case of low-volume traffic pavements (with thinner asphalt layers), the subgrade is particularly relevant, as the stress magnitude from the traffic loads can be significant at subgrade level. In addition, the subgrade is more sensitive to environmental conditions variations. Non-destructive testing (NDT) methods are preferable over time-consuming, unsafe and costly traditional destructive methods. Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) is one of the most efficient NDT for subsurface monitoring Additionally, Falling Weight Deflectometer (FWD) is considered to be the most effective NDT device for pavement deflection measurements worldwide, realistically simulating the pavement responses under traffic loading This work presents an integrated approach by combining different NDT techniques focused on the analysis of the road subgrade condition. Different GPR systems and Load test equipment were used in order to define the best methodology. Thus, the GPR data allowed for cracking detection, while the deflectometers provided the elastic modulus of the subgrade. Apart from other structural deficiencies such as moisture and delamination, the existence of subsurface cracking decreases the elastic modulus of the layer. The tests were performed on an experimental test section, built to simulate pavement subgrade layers consisting of clay soil materials, generally used in African countries for low-volume roads foundations. This paper covers the construction period and intents to characterize the pavement before the beginning of the service life. Nevertheless, this methodology combining NDT techniques can be used to access in service pavements over climate changes, time and traffic. An experimental test section was constructed in order to simulate a pavement subgrade and evaluate the feasibly of the use of different NDT methods to analyse its behaviour. The physical model was built in a concrete pit section with a maximum depth of 1.97 The test section structure comprises the foundation of the pavement constituted by a 0.15 The soil used in the subgrade layers is classified by the Unified Soil Classification System (USCS) as clay of low plasticity, lean clay and by the AASHTO Soil Classification System as A-7-6, clay material with general rating as a subgrade fair to poor. Physical properties were evaluated such as grading, Atterberg limits, linear shrinkage and optimum water content, correspondent maximum dry density, as well as mechanical properties like Californian Bearing Ratio. The properties of the soil obtained are presented in From the properties of the soil used in the subgrade layers ( As previously referred, the foundation of the pavement was constructed in layers. For construction quality control, different tests were performed immediately after compaction on the top of each layer (  During the construction, several metal sheets were installed at selected locations, to be used as references for GPR data interpretation. As shown in Different GPR systems were employed using both ground- and air-coupled antennas ( The tests were performed on the top of the subgrade layers along three longitudinal lines: through the middle and on both sides of the track ( The GPR data from the ground-coupled antennas was collected by time, whereas for the air-coupled antennas the acquisition was carried out by distance. The surveys were performed at a constant speed and marks were taken at the beginning and at the end of each section in order to allow for the correlation of the data gathered by both systems. Prior to the tests, for the air-coupled antennas, a calibration file was collected using a metal plate ( Before the interpretation of the GPR images, some processing was applied. The data from the ground-coupled antennas was processed with ReflexW v6.1 software The air-coupled system data was processed in Road Doctor Pro 2.5  Deflections were measured, using both Falling Weigh Deflectometer (FWD) and Light Weight Deflectometer (LWD) ( The FWD used was the PRI 2100 from Carl Bro Pavement Consultants ( The spacing between FWD test points was 1.5 During the FWD load tests, small variations of the peak value of the applied force can occur. These variations may be related to deformability characteristics of the pavement, to the existence of friction in the guiding system of the falling mass and to the stiffness variation of dampers with temperature. To compensate these variations, a normalization of the deflection measurements was performed. The LWD used was a Prima 100 system designed by Carl Bro Pavement Consultants ( The LWD tests were done along all survey alignments where GPR tests were performed ( The vertical deformation on the centre of the plate was measured with a geophone and used to determine the Dynamic Elastic Modulus (ELWD), based on the Boussinesq theory The radargrams obtained in the GPR surveys were analysed in order to detect possible damaged areas. The results from the survey line C with the ground-coupled system can be seen in From the analysis of all, ground- and air-coupled, data it was possible to identify the first layer through the reflection of the bottom of the improved subgrade at t The zones marked by (yellow) circles in the radargrams in Observing The comparison of the 1.0 After the identification of the areas that can present anomalies from the GPR data, the next step was to analyse the results from the deflection tests and verify if there is a correlation between the GPR results on these locations and the deflections measured.  Analysing the FWD deflection bowls at 1.5 On the other hand, looking at Comparing the FWD data with the 2.3 However, it is important to note that the information provided by the LWD data did not reach as deep (only around 0.60 Cores were extracted to validate the presence of anomalies detected with GPR, FWD, and LWD and were performed not only in areas that presented anomalies (C1, C2, and C3) but also in areas without any anomaly (C4). The subgrade provides support to the pavement system and assures an effective distribution of traffic loads in depth. Failure of the subgrade will result in deficient pavement behaviour. A combination of different NDT techniques, applied to assess the pavement subgrade, is presented in this study. The joint use of GPR antennas of different frequencies, ground- and air-coupled, and two deflectometers for assessment of subgrade condition is presented herein and the main achievements are referred. The air-coupled GPR system lead to a better identification of the pavement layers interfaces as for the ground-coupled system it showed a better resolution in the identification of the anomalous areas, such as cracking and debonding, located at the surface of the pavement. The radargrams from the air-coupled system presented higher noise levels when compared to the ones from the ground-coupled, which make the interpretation of the signals more difficult. The LWD modulus showed higher sensitivity on the structural condition of the pavement surface, resulting in a greater dispersion of the values due to the superficial cracks due to clay shrinkage. On the other hand, the FWD deflection bowls tests provide more information regarding the behaviour of deeper layers and therefore of the entire subgrade. Combining the deflection methods with the GPR, there was a good correlation between the variations of the deflections and the changes of the GPR reflections. Delamination and severe cracking were identified as the main anomalies leading to inversion of the deflection values D The use of combined NDT techniques proved to be a useful approach to identify anomalous areas in the subgrade. This methodology is recommended for construction quality control of subgrade layers, with special relevance for pavement structures where the subgrade can be a critical layer due to the magnitude of the traffic stresses at this level. The main findings can be summarised as bellow: Air-coupled antennas are more suitable for measuring the continuity of the layers. Therefore, they should be selected when the evaluation of the layer thickness is needed. Ground-coupled antennas provided better signal to noise ratio and better resolution. Thus, they are preferable to detect the superficial cracks and debonding. For soils with a high percentage of clay or high moisture content, the penetration depth of the GPR electromagnetic waves is limited. Thus, it may be useful to use different types of antennas to improve the interpretation of the measured data. The use of LWD is more appropriate for the evaluation of the surface layer and to detect local heterogeneities. The FWD is more appropriate for the structural evaluation of the overall pavement. Thus, it provides information regarding the behaviour of all subgrade. To achieve better results, it is recommended to use a combination of high-frequency antennas GPR systems with the falling weight deflectometers, when available. The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support of the EU COST Action TU1208 “Civil Engineering Applications of Ground Penetrating Radar”, through the STSM “Non-Destructive tests for railway evaluation: Detection of fouling and joint interpretation of GPR and track geometric parameters”. The authors also like to thank the consortium of the R&D project Tropical-PAV