Calcium phosphate cements (CPC) consist of one or more calcium orthophosphate powders, which upon mixing with water or an aqueous solution, form a paste that is able to set and harden after being implanted within the body. Different issues remain still to be improved in CPC, such as their mechanical properties to more closely mimic those of natural bone, or their macroporosity to favour osteointegration of the artificial grafts. To this end, blends of CPC with polymer and ceramic fibres in different forms have been investigated. The present work aims at providing an overview of the different approaches taken and identifying the most significant achievements in the field of fibre-reinforced calcium phosphate cements for clinical applications, with special focus on their mechanical properties.Calcium phosphate cements (CPC) are able to harden A number of CPC formulations are currently available. They consist of mixture of one or several calcium phosphate powders with water or an aqueous solution. Either hydroxyapatite (HA:Ca However, their poor mechanical performance has limited their applicability to non-stress-bearing applications. Their compressive strength, when no pre-compaction is applied, ranges from 10 to 90 MPa ( The development of CPC with enhanced toughness would considerably broaden the field of potential applications, such as the repair of multiple fractures of long bones, fixing of cemented articulation prostheses or substitution of vertebral bodies among others ( However, in cements intended for medical applications such as CPC, specific requirements arise in the selection of the fibres; on one hand, they must be biocompatible. On the other hand, they can be used not only as a reinforcement for the cement matrix but also as pore-generating agents. In this second approach, fibres, in addition to being biocompatible, must also be biodegradable. It is the aim of the present work to provide an overview of the different approaches taken in the development of fibre-reinforced CPC for clinical applications and to identify the kind of fibres used and the most significant achievements. Fibre reinforced cement and concrete composites have long been used in numerous applications in traditional fields such as civil engineering. In such applications, the fibres are often discontinuous and randomly oriented and distributed within the volume of the composite. Natural fibres (such as cellulose, sisal, jute, bamboo, asbestos, rock-wool, etc.) and man-made fibres (such as steel, titanium, glass, carbon, polymers, etc.) ( For the purpose of this work, the distinction between fibres and yarns will be made. A yarn can be defined as a continuous strand of twisted fibres of natural or synthetic material, which is then the basis for woven or knitted fabrics. The blending of fibres with the cement paste or precursor powder can be carried out using different structures of the fibrous materials, as shown in Both the fibre and the matrix are assumed to work together, and provide the synergism needed to make an effective composite ( The incorporation of fibres into a brittle solid, in this case a brittle cement matrix is expected to increase the fracture toughness of the composite, and also the tensile and flexural strengths. For discontinuous fibre composites, simple two phase mixture rules have been employed as the basis for the prediction of cement-composite properties. Equations predicting modulus of elasticity of the composite In the following section, we present an overview of the fibre–CPC composites reported in the literature, focusing specifically on their mechanical properties. They are classified in two groups, (i) CPC composites with non-resorbable fibres, where the function of the fibres is the mechanical reinforcement of the cement, and (ii) CPC composites with resorbable/biodegradable fibres, where the addition of fibres to the cement seeks an initial reinforcement followed by the creation of macroporosity in the cement matrix after fibre degradation. Different types of non-resorbable fibres, both polymeric and ceramic, have been investigated as reinforcing phases of apatitic CPC. The reinforcing efficiency of different short non-resorbable fibres distributed randomly in an apatitic CPC matrix was analysed by Polyamide fibres are chemical fibres formed by a linear macromolecule polymer in which amide groups are a constant part of the chain, where a minimum of 85% are bonded to aliphatic or cycloaliphatic carbons ( Polyamide 6.6 (PA6.6) fibres (  Aramides are a particular class of polyamides in which the amide groups are separated by phenylene groups ( Different studies ( Three mechanisms of fibre reinforcement appeared to be operative in the randomly-distributed fibre-reinforced CPC. First, when the matrix cracked under stress, the fibres bridged the crack to resist its further opening and propagation. The aramide fibres used possessed a high tensile strength (3.7 GPa) and were not cut through by the cracks. Second, crack deflection by the fibres caused multiple cracking in the matrix. In comparison, CPC without fibres failed by a single crack with a flat fracture surface. Multiple cracking produced numerous fractured pieces of the matrix, consuming the applied energy in creating new surfaces, thus contributing to the toughness. Third, the frictional sliding of fibres against the matrix during pullout further consumed the applied energy and further increased the fracture resistance of the composite. Carbon fibres contain at least 90% of carbon and are obtained from pyrolysis of organic precursor fibres ( Incorporation of carbon fibres to CPC ( In the lowest size range of what can be considered a fibre, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have also been studied as reinforcing agents in CPC ( Glass fibres are obtained by fusion spinning of glass of different compositions. E-glass fibres are composed of an alumino-borosilicate glass with less than 1 wt% alkali oxides, mainly used for glass-reinforced plastics, although they have also been tested for reinforcement of CPC. The incorporation of short and long E-glass fibres in CPC slightly increased elastic modulus, work of fracture and flexural strength with respect to the pristine CPC, although they showed lower mechanical properties than comparable carbon or aramide fibre reinforced CPC composites ( To conclude this section, it has to be emphasized that the incorporation of non-resorbable fibres in CPC can be a meaningful strategy only for non-resorbable CPC. The addition of non-resorbable fibres in resorbable cement matrices would result in fibre release in the surrounding tissues, with the subsequent biocompatibility risks. In this sense, fibre dimension is a critical issue, as for big fibre sizes possibly the risk is lower and can be restricted to the formation of fibrous tissue around the fibres. The most critical case would be for carbon nanotubes, due to the implications of their nanometric size towards bioaccumulation. The reinforcement of CPC with resorbable or biodegradable fibres responds to a different strategy. In this case the rationale is to provide temporary reinforcement at the implant site and, subsequently to fibre degradation, to facilitate bone ingrowth into the macropores. In fact, although CPC are intrinsically porous, their inherent porosity is of submicron to a few microns of size, being too small for cell infiltration ( All resorbable polymer fibres used in fibre–CPC composites belong to the family of polyesters. Generally speaking, polyesters are a category of polymers which contain the ester functional group in their main chain. Some natural polyesters (such as polylactide) and a few synthetic ones (i.e. polyglycolide) are biodegradable, but most synthetic polyesters are not. The degradable polymers are insoluble in water but they can degrade by hydrolytic attack of the ester bond. Three different biodegradable polyesters have been evaluated either as fibres, yarns or laminar textiles in CPC composites: polylactide (PLA), polyglycolide (PGA) and poly- Polylactides (PLA) are biodegradable, biocompatible and hydrolyzable aliphatic polyesters, which can be exclusively obtained from renewable resources (i.e. by fermentation of molasses or potato starch or of dextrose from corn). Nature-derived lactides are mostly in L-lactide form (PLLA) ( In biomaterials intended for surgical applications such as fibre-reinforced CPC, the degradation kinetics is an important issue, which depends on different parameters. It has been reported that total resorption in vivo depends on the molecular weight and crystallinity of PLLA and may vary between 1.5 and 5.6 years (  Due to the hydrophobic properties of PLLA, most fibres showed a clear separation from the CPC matrix (as mixed in aqueous conditions, the hydrophobicity of the polymers hampered the miscibility with the hydrophilic CPC before self-setting). This may affect the cohesion of the material and thus, its mechanical properties. Nevertheless, work of fracture progressively increased (from 10 to 250 J/m Polyglycolide or Polyglycolic acid (PGA) ( In the literature of CPC–fibre composites, the terms Vicryl™ or Polyglactin fibres are usually employed indistinctly to refer to fibres mainly composed of polyglycolide which usually correspond to copolymers 90:10 of PGA:PLA. Given their resorbable properties, such fibres have been evaluated as temporary reinforcing agents and pore forming agents after their degradation. PLGA based textile materials have been extensively evaluated as disperse phase in CPC composites as braided fibres in yarns ( As summarized in In vitro studies ( The effect of the hardening of the CPC matrix during the setting reaction on the properties of the fibre-reinforced composite was analysed by The effect of random disposition of short fibres ( Different additives have been incorporated to CPC–PLGA fibre composites to try improving different properties. For instance, chitosan lactate, hydrogels, mannitol, gelling agents such as hydroxypropyl methylcellulose. Moreover, as a different strategy, the feasibility of incorporating stem cells in the composite cements has also been assessed. These approaches are discussed in the present section. CPC–PLGA fibre composites ( In another approach, a bi-layer structure was designed consisting in a porous CPC layer (with Mannitol as porogen and Chitosan as reinforcer), and a strong CPC layer reinforced with 30 vol% of random 8 mm PLGA yarns and chitosan ( A pre-mixed CPC-25% PLGA yarn composite scaffold was developed by Injectability of a CPC paste can be defined as its ability to be extruded through a needle without demixing. The ability to inject the cement in the surgical site is an important property since it can minimize surgical invasion and allow for complex-shaped defects to be filled adequately ( In a step forward, with views on stem cell-based tissue engineering, the incorporation of stem cells into the CPC composites is starting to receive attention. Human Bone Marrow Stem Cells (hBMSCs) (   Polycaprolactone (PCL) is a polyester ( PCL fibre–CPC composites were studied through the introduction of electrospun PCL fibre bundles in CPC made of 61% Total porosity and macroporosity progressively increased with fibre weight fraction in the composite, while fibre diameter had no influence in this parameter, as most electrospun fibres were fused with each other when forming the bundles introduced in the cement, so the width of the bundles determined macroporosity. The work of fracture increased with the addition of the microfibres in the CPC. The improved flexibility was attributed to the flexibility of the polymeric fibres which allowed the set cements to consume more energy due to elongation or distortion of these fibres during frictional pull-out, and also to the frictional sliding of fibres in the matrix during deformation. However, flexural strength and elastic modulus of CPC decreased with the introduction of the fibre bundles (with lower strength than the matrix), which were not well integrated in the cement due to their hydrophobic surface, similarly as their homologues with PLLA bundles ( Calcium phosphate cements are of great interest in the field of biomaterials for bone repair due to their bioactivity, mouldability and capacity of self-setting in vivo, allowing minimally invasive surgical techniques. However, their brittleness has limited their applicability to non-stress-bearing applications. This has been addressed by reinforcing CPC with fibres. The random dispersion of non-resorbable fibres such as polyamides (polyamide 6.6., p-aramide), carbon or glass fibres in the cement matrix resulted in an increased bending strength and work of fracture. Higher reinforcement was associated with longer fibres, although the problems associated with their mixing and wetting with the cement paste, resulted in less homogeneous composites. It is known that a highly porous and interconnected pore structure generally favours bone regeneration. However, a material generally weakens as its porosity increases, which poses a major challenge in developing porous load-bearing CPC for bone tissue engineering. Porous fibre–CPC composites were developed with resorbable polymer fibres and fibre constructs such as yarns, nonwovens, woven and knitted fabrics (meshes). A twofold objective was intended; the temporary reinforcement of CPC prior to fibre degradation, and the subsequent pore formation, upon fibre degradation, to allow for tissue colonization. The degradable polymers evaluated were mainly polyglycolide, polylactide and poly The field of CPC–fibre composites has relevant points still to be tackled, such as improving adhesion between the fibres and the CPC matrix to further improve mechanical properties, improving injectability wherever possible, or evaluating their in vitro and in vivo behaviour, among others. Moreover, although numerous scientific articles have proven the efficiency or fibre reinforcement in CPC, most of those studies are based only in 3 or 4-point bending tests. There is still a lot to be done to reach a better understanding of the mechanical properties and fracture processes of fibre-reinforced CPC. The authors acknowledge the MICINN for the Juan de la Cierva fellowship of CC and the financial support in the MAT 2009-13547 project. The research leading to these results has received funding from the