The composition and microstructure of agglomerated and sintered WC–VC–Co thermal spray powders and of the high pressure/high velocity oxy-fuel (HP/HVOF) coatings produced from the powders were analysed and compared to those of agglomerated and sintered commercial WC–Co thermal spray powders of equal Co mass fraction and of the commercial WC–Co coatings that were deposited under the same conditions as the WC–VC–Co coatings. The results of the analyses helped to explain the abrasion resistance of WC–VC–Co coatings being superior to that of WC–Co coatings.WC–10VC–12Co and WC–10VC–17Co thermal spray HP/HVOF coatings have proved to be more abrasion resistant than WC–Co coatings with the same cobalt mass fraction and deposited under the same conditions. In order to determine the reasons for the improved performance, the starting WC–VC–Co powders and the final coatings have been characterized in detail. This paper reports the results of the abrasive wear tests and of the characterization which provided some quantitative insight into the processes occurring during coating deposition. WC–10VC–12Co and WC–10VC–17Co powders were produced from WC, VC and Co powders and were agglomerated by spray drying and sintered, similarly to commercial WC–12Co and WC–17Co thermal spray powders which were used for comparison purposes. The powders were characterized as follows: size and morphology were determined using a Malvern Mastersizer model MS 1002 and a Jeol 840 scanning electron microscope; phase composition was determined by XRD using a Philips Diffractometer with a Cu carbide grain size and distribution were determined by lineal analysis on scanning electron micrographs in SE and BSE mode as well as X-ray dot mapping using a Leo FESEM; flowability was measured by means of a Hall Flowmeter. The coatings were deposited on AISI 304 stainless steel substrates using a 6-axis robotic HP/HVOF Tafa JP 5000 The coatings were characterized as follows: porosity and microstructure were examined on cross sections by optical and scanning electron microscopy; phase composition, carbide grain size and carbide distribution were determined using the same techniques as for the powders; hardness and wear resistance were measured as reported in References 1 and 2. All the powders (i.e. WC–VC–Co and WC–Co powders) were spherical. Particles with a hollow core were observed in both the experimental (WC–VC–Co) and the commercial powders (WC–Co) XRD analyses showed that the WC–VC–Co powders consisted of WC, (W,  The powders were found to be all “stoichiometric”, i.e. without free carbon or eta phase, in agreement with the analyses carried out by the suppliers The cobalt content of the powders in The WC and (W, From X-ray dot maps it was possible to establish that the (W, The porosity of the coatings was measured on cross sections, by dot counting. The results are given in As has been observed by other researchers  Of the phases not present in the powders but present in the coatings, i.e. W   The characterization of WC–VC–Co and WC–Co thermal spray powders and coatings of equal Co mass fractions has led to new quantitative insight into some of the processes occurring during coating deposition and to an explanation of the difference in abrasion resistance between WC–VC–Co and WC–Co coatings. In both materials, during coating deposition the WC grains acquire a less angular morphology and a finer mean size than in the powders and a significant fraction of WC grains are decarburized, with the formation of W The higher dry abrasion resistance of the WC–VC–Co coatings relative to WC–Co coatings of equal Co mass fraction The authors wish to acknowledge the sponsorship of Vanitec, DAAD, the Department of Science and Technology and the Department of Trade and Industry (as THRIP) and the National Research Foundation of South Africa. The thermal spray powders were supplied by Starck, Germany. XRD and Rietveld analysis on powders and coatings were carried out by Dr M. Herrmann of the Fraunhofer Institute, Dresden, Germany.