Evolution of permeability in deforming porous rocks implicitly depends on both, intrinsic rock properties (porosity, pore connectivity, pore shape, and pore size) and extrinsic environmental conditions (operating stress and strain regimes). Traditionally, permeability evolution is estimated using phenomenological Kozney-Carmann type equation that involves intrinsic and extrinsic attributes. However, in such equations, microstructural changes are grossly approximated by macroscopic features like grain size distribution and rock mineralogy, and moreover, the two-way coupled relationship between intrinsic and extrinsic attributes is ignored.
                  This study aims to address the permeability evolution rationally by employing a thermodynamically stable constitutive model that links the microstructural evolution, including grain crushing and pore collapse under various deformation regimes (elastic regime, localization regime, and post-localization regime). The results indicate that power-law type porosity-permeability relationship works well for different rocks. Finite element analysis performed on laboratory scale samples shows that permeability progressively evolves within a localized zone, although it appears that gross porosity evolution in rock is linearly proportional to the formation of discrete localization zone. In the post-localization regime, a reduction in tortuosity effect due to a reduction in the particle breakage rate is also observed. Outcomes of the study are presented as a permeability map in invariant stress-space (q-p space) that can be utilized for any practical design purpose.A major part of the global energy demand is accomplished by hydrocarbons, mostly found within the porous sedimentary rocks such as sandstone and carbonates ( In the last few decades, extensive laboratory scale experiments were carried out to identify the various modes of deformation in porous rocks and how permeability changes with those deformation patterns ( Laboratory studies under drained triaxial compression with permeability and porosity measurements on sandstones ( Macroscopic permeability measurement and rock microstructural analysis qualitatively explain the underlying physics of fluid transport behavior in porous rocks during strain localization under cataclastic flow. However, assimilation of that physical understanding into a continuum framework is a challenging task in the sense that the model should contain state variables that simultaneously accounts for the mechanical deformation and transport property. For stress-strain analysis in porous rocks, especially to capture the cataclastic flow, several plasticity-based constitutive models are available. The models are often enriched with thermodynamics based formulation for particle breakage estimation ( It has been categorically established in the previous analysis ( The present study deals with the hydro-mechanical response of porous rock under the cataclastic flow regime, the analysis of which demands the micromechanical understanding. In cemented granular materials, like porous sandstones; grain breakage, cement damage, and pore collapse take part in the cataclastic deformation. Several studies have been done on the field of a constitutive model for cemented granular materials using elasto-plastic modelling framework. However, in the majority of the cases, constitutive models are devised based on the macroscopic rock deformation without exploring the underlying physics and grain level mechanics. Therefore, we adopt combined the breakage-damage model ( The physics behind the breakage mechanics theory is the stored energy distribution and scaling within a granular assembly. Once such potential energy function is defined at the grain level, further homogenization is required to scale up the energy at the macroscopic level. The breakage-damage model was developed based on the mixture theory of energy distribution between the grain phase and the cement phase. Therefore the (specific) stored energy in the form of Helmholtz free energy, can be distributed among the grain and cement components based on their volume fractions, While the detailed development of the model can be found elsewhere in The model considers the following nonlinear volumetric stress-strain ( The breakage-damage model considers a coupled energy dissipation among grain breakage, cement damage and plastic deformation in the dissipative stress space. Such dissipation potential is utilized to formulate a dissipative yield function ( The non-associated flow functions for different internal variables are listed below. Some of the model parameters for Bentheim sandstone is adopted from In addition, to the stress-strain response typical evolution of the breakage and damage state variables are plotted in Darcy's flow velocity in porous media requires, consideration of the coefficient of permeability. Traditionally the coefficient of permeability is evaluated by experiments (laboratory and field) on porous media by measuring the discharge rate for applied pressure difference. Macroscopic observation in the aforementioned approach does not reflect explicitly the accountability of porous structure on the coefficient of permeability. Kozeny-Carman (KC) equation is another recourse to estimate permeability as it accounts for porous structure. This analytical equation expresses permeability as a function of matrix porosity, mean grain size, and flow path tortuosity. This dependence is however complex. KC equation proposed originally is as follows; By substituting the value of mean-grain size, KC equation is written as, The model overestimates permeability both during elastic and inelastic phases as depicted in Permeability evolution based on KC equation given in section Compaction bands and shear bands are the localized deformation zones often developed during deformation in highly porous granular rocks. These regions of localized heterogeneous deformation field considerably affect the fluid flow field. Single element FEA simulation performed in section A three-dimensional cylindrical specimen mimicking Bentheim sandstone sample having a length to diameter ratio 2, where diameter is 20 mm, is analyzed in FE code ABAQUS (version 6.14). Discretized sample contains 1920 porous elements of type 20 noded hexahedron ( In laboratory triaxial experiments on sandstones ( The propagation of compaction band can be found from the breakage contours. Due to the presence of a hydraulic gradient between the top and the bottom boundaries of the cylindrical specimen, a steady state flow takes place. The variation in the absolute magnitude of the flow velocity at different confining pressures and at different stages of loading, is plotted in  The stress-strain response given in Permeability reduction in the entire rock sample due to the formation of individual localization bands is plotted in It is important not note that the FE analysis in the present study uses strain rate dependent regularization to avoid mesh dependent solution. Such an approach artificially introduces, though minimal, a strain rate sensitive response. Therefore, unlike experiments where porosity instantaneously reduces inside the band around 14%–15%, in FE simulation the growth of breakage and porosity is gradual. For example, first two bands appear at the top and the bottom of the specimen with maximum porosity reaches up to 16% and breakage is 0.3 at 2.5% axial strain. During the formation of the fifth band, the maximum porosity of the first two bands reaches 12% and breakage becomes 0.6. Subsequently in FE simulation porosity inside the band also reaches to 10%, as observed in the experiments, at higher axial strain level. This can be avoided by introducing other regularization technique such as non-local approach or gradient plasticity. In addition, the porosity and breakage vary across the band. Therefore, analytical prediction of permeability in a rock specimen containing localized deformation zones is a challenging task. Experimental studies ( Permeability ( The single element response and the boundary value solution with FE, suggests around four orders of magnitude reduction in the permeability during cataclastic flow deformation. Both experimental analysis and FE simulation identified that a drastic drop in the permeability beyond the yielding point due to pore collapse and grain crushing. Beyond the state of the localization deformation, such permeability drop is arrested, and a gradual decay is noticed even with further compression and increasing mean stress. Despite the stress-strain-porosity prediction with reasonable accuracy during compaction localization and beyond, FE analysis fails to predict that gradual permeability decay during the post-localized deformation. Interestingly, the analytical formulation of power-law type permeability and porosity relation does not support such gradual decay. For example, with 12% porosity reduction (23%–11%), the power-law suggests 10 Additionally, crushing and creation of finer fragments further reduce permeability. The permeability formulation (Eq. Finally, a permeability evolution map is prepared on the deviatoric stress plane based on the proposed model. The color contours in The present study deals with a numerical analysis using FE modelling to capture the hydro-mechanical response of high porous sandstones. The focus of the study is to understand and model the evolution of permeability during cataclastic deformation that includes discrete localized zone formation and pre- and post-localized deformation. Based on the predictions of the macroscopic hydro-mechanical response the following conclusions can be drawn. Despite the linear increase in the sample porosity with the increasing number of localization bands, the contribution of each localization band towards the permeability evolution of the sample is not identical. In addition, porosity and breakage vary across the band. The present analysis showed that only a fraction (50%–60%) of the peak inelastic deformation should be accounted for the permeability calculation. After analyzing a series of rock data, tortuosity is identified as one of the controlling factors in permeability evolution; and power-law relationship between the porosity and permeability while defining tortuosity is found to be the most suitable one. It appears that in the post-localization regime, the rate of tortuosity growth diminishes due to slow rate cement bond damage and crushing events. Therefore, for permeability evolution in this regime requires particle breakage as one of the functions in tortuosity estimation. Please check the following as appropriate: All authors have participated in (a) conception and design, or analysis and interpretation of the data; (b) drafting the article or revising it critically for important intellectual content; and (c) approval of the final version. This manuscript has not been submitted to, nor is under review at, another journal or other publishing venue. The authors have no affiliation with any organization with a direct or indirect financial interest in the subject matter discussed in the manuscript The authors appreciate the enlightening review comments from P. Baud and editorial handling by J. Hippertt. KN acknowlege