Recycled concrete aggregates (RCA) are composed of two different materials: natural aggregate and attached cement paste. It is generally admitted that finer the RCA greater is the quantity of adhered cement paste. In this study it is shown that for a given granular class, very large disparities may be present in the adhered cement paste content, which could generate dispersion of the results of characterization tests of RCA. The heterogeneity of a narrow granular class of coarse RCA (6.3/10 mm) was investigated by sorting samples according to their densities using a water jig. The water jig sorting was essentially a separation by density and not by size. It was shown that the average water absorption after an immersion in water during 24 h was about 5% for a representative sample of the feed RCA, before sorting tests, while for the homogenous specimens separated by density, the water absorption ranged from 2% to 9%. The distribution of the water absorption in a sample of 120 kg of RCA was well estimated by a log-normal distribution. This intrinsic heterogeneity of RCA implies being able to have representative samples with sufficient accuracy, not only concerning the size but also the mineral composition of grains in the stockpiles of RCA. So, after discussing the results of this study, water jig appeared to be an efficient tool to separate RCA and obtain representative samples for their characterization.Many countries have made great efforts to deal with large quantities of construction and demolition wastes (CDW) in order to reintroduce them into the construction life cycle. However, the reuse of these wastes to produce new concrete has not been widely adopted yet, and landfill is still the main solution for removing these materials More generally, sophisticated characterization (mineral composition, particle size distribution, particle shape, abrasion, density, water absorption and cement mortar content) must be carried out to get a better understanding of the effects of RCA on recycled concrete production and performance Therefore, the heterogeneity of recycled concrete aggregates limits their use due to the uncertainty in their expected behavior It was already demonstrated that the density increases and the adhered cement paste content decreases with the size fraction of the crushed concrete The objective of this paper is to show that even in a given granular class of well controlled industrially manufactured coarse RCA, large disparities may be present in the adhered cement paste content, generating dispersion in the properties of the RCA. A laboratory water jig was used to sort crushed concrete aggregates with different densities in three generations. Homogeneous density samples of RCA were characterized in order to determine water absorption, granular size distribution, densities, porosity and cement paste content, to assess their statistical distribution in the original material. 6.3/10 mm RCA sourced from the “Gonesse Recycling Platform” located in France and composed of 99% recycled concrete and 1% of other inert materials were used in this study. A narrow granular fraction was chosen in order to emphasize the differences in density rather than the differences in particle size. Main physical properties of the RCA employed were determined according to the NF EN 1097-6 standard. The average of the results of 4 tests on 4 samples of 1–2 kg each and the corresponding standard deviation were the following: Water absorption coefficient (WA) 4.88 ± 0.11% Real dried density in water (ρ Absolute density in water (ρ The sorting of RCA was conducted in a batch scale water jig, model Alljig® S 400 from AllMineral with a capacity of approximately 20 kg per batch ( The water absorption coefficient determined after 24 h of immersion in water, noted WA, was measured by the pycnometer method according to the European NF EN 1097-6 standard. It involves immersing a dry sample in a pycnometer filled with water to measure the sample mass increase due to the penetration of water in the pores. The WA was determined using Eq. The drying temperature was fixed to 75 °C instead of 110 °C in order to avoid a loss of chemically bound water from adhered cement paste The particle size distribution of RCA was characterized by an optoelectronic video grader consisting of a single camera video imaging According to the European standard NF EN 1097-6, two densities in water can be identified as following, The real dried density (ρ The absolute density (ρ The porosity and pore size distribution of the recycled aggregates were determined using mercury intrusion porosimetry (MIP). A porosimeter (Micrometrics Autopore IV) with low and high pressure positions was used for accessing pore radius between 1.8 nm and 60 µm. The MIP samples were small, about 10 g of material, representing only a few grains. In order to diminish the errors of sampling, this test was used here only for the less heterogeneous aggregates obtained after jigging. In addition, skeletal and envelope densities were determined in Mercury. These densities have the same definition as in water but the difference is simply due to the fact that the volume of accessible pores is not identical, pores less easily accessible with mercury. For each sorted RCA, representative samples of 8 g ± 0.5 g were dried in the oven at a temperature of 75 °C and crushed (d ≤ 200 µm), then the specific density ρ The chemically bonded water was estimated by determining the mass loss of RCA between 75 °C and 475 °C. This method is used to estimate the adherent cement paste content 100 g of each sample were dried at 75 °C for 24 h and then weighed to obtain the mass M At first, the 120 kg feed RCA was sorted in six batches of jigging, noted JIG 1, JIG 2, JIG 3, JIG 4, JIG 5 and JIG 6, with a mass of 20 kg of RCA each filling the box up to about 15 cm. Each batch was separated in six layers of 2.5 cm called L1 (bottom) to L6 (top) to obtain the “Generation 1” sorted RCA: L1, L2, L3, L4, L5 and L6 like schematized in In the second step of jigging, the layers corresponding to the same level in the six jigs were gathered, mixed, and submitted again to separation. The new six runs of jigging: JIG L1 – JIG L2 – JIG L3 – JIG L4 – JIG L5 and JIG L6, like schematized in In the final step, the most homogenous samples have been chosen from Generation 2 and then placed in new JIG to confirm the heterogeneity of the RCA. Six “Generation 2” sorted RCA (L3L3, L3L4, L3L5, L5L3, L5L4 and L5L5) having closed WA values were therefore mixed together and separated a third time to obtain 6 layers “Generation 3” sorted RCA. The standard test NF EN 1097-6 was used to measure the water absorption and density of these “Generation 3” sorted RCA. Complementary characterization of the feed RCA and some sorted RCA was made: porosity, mass loss proportion between 75 °C and 475 °C (proportional to cement paste content), particle size distribution and pore size distribution (Mercury Intrusion Porosimetry).   For “Generation1” sorted RCA, as shown in For “Generation 2” sorted RCA, as shown in As seen in the literature, the real dried density ρ  Little differences were observed between the grading curves. However, they seem arranged according to the height of the layer and proportional to real dried density, suggesting that separation in the JIG was due both to density and particle size. To confirm this observation, the D  The influence of particle size is negligible compared to that of density owing to the fact that a narrow granular class has been chosen for the study.  This mass loss is proportional to the cement paste content in RCA. The measurement of the chemically bound water is therefore an indirect measure of the cement paste content. These results confirmed that the density variation in a given granular class RCA was mainly due to different paste contents.  In addition, The WA of “Generation 1” sorted RCA varied from 3.1% to 8.3%. And, the WA of “Generation 2” sorted RCA varied from 1.8% to 9.1%. As seen in the results of densities as well, the additional cycle of jig allowed a better separation of the RCA. The lower limit corresponded approximately to the water absorption capacity of natural aggregates and the upper limit to the WA of RCA with large amount of adhered cement paste. These later values of WA were comparable to those of some recycled sand with water absorption capacity varying between 8 and 10% The WA of “Generation 2” sorted RCA produced from L3, L4, and L5 of JIG L3 and JIG L5 varies between 6.2% and 6.8% with an average around 6.5%. These RCA were put together in another JIG to form the Generation 3. The WA of “Generation 3” sorted RCA varied from 4.5% to 8.2% with an average of WA for all layers about 6.42%. So, after 2 stages of s, the RCA still showed a large heterogeneity. The results of WA after all the three cycles of jigging showed a lot of variability in a sample of 120 kg of 6.3/10 mm RCA. It can be concluded that the water jig made the separation of these very heterogeneous aggregates possible and thus offered a real possibility to characterize them very precisely (even if in routine control it cannot be envisaged). According to the literature, RCA are much more porous than natural ones, mainly as a consequence of the amount of old cement paste in the RCA. The packing densities in It was also noted that jigging did not influenced (or very slightly) the weighted average WA before and after the second jigging (5.35% and 5.26% respectively) or the third jigging (6.46% and 6.42% respectively) – see the results in Section 3.4. It is true that a significant deviation was observed before and after the first jigging. Indeed, the WA determined according to NF EN1097-6 and using representative samples of heterogeneous RCA before jigging was, in mean of 4 samples, 4.88%. This error could be explain by the high level of density heterogeneity in the feed material. The standard sampling method, defined for natural aggregates, should probably be better adapted to this particularity of the RCA.  Using these densities, accessible and non-accessible porosities can be calculated for the different fluids used during the porosity tests, in the corresponding protocol used to measure the density. For example, the difference in skeletal volumes determined in mercury and in water is due to the fact that water and mercury will not fill the same volume of pores during the experiment (water being allowed to enter smaller pores than mercury). The proportion of non-accessible porosity in water to the total porosity of the sample is equal to 10.3%, whereas it is 26.4% in Mercury.  Previous studies have investigated the variability of recycled concrete aggregates and showed the influence of the size fraction on the density and mortar content of the crushed concrete particles. It is generally admitted that the finer the recycled concrete aggregates the higher is the quantity of adhered cement paste present in its composition. The results of this study highlight that even a narrow granular class (here 6.3/10 mm) RCA can exhibit very large heterogeneity in terms of density and water absorption coefficient. It is proved that very large disparities (aggregates with almost 100% natural aggregates or grains with large amounts of adhered cement paste) may be present. The distribution of WA of a given RCA granular class is shown to follow a log-normal distribution with a high standard deviation. These disparities are at the origin of the dispersion of the results of characterization tests with RCA. This study also shows that a water jig is very efficient to sort a given granular class RCA. It helps to a better characterization of the RCA (useful for mercury porosimetry for example). The jig could be an excellent tool for separating materials in the laboratory and improving their characterization, but its industrial use would be a source of significant additional cost. Given the results presented here, it is suggested that the standard sampling method, defined for natural aggregates, should be better adapted to the particularity of the recycled concrete aggregates. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.