Lignite, as a low rank coal reserve plays an important role in energy supply. However, fine lignite is difficult to upgrade using the conventional flotation because of its high surface hydrophilicity. This investigation was to enhance the flotation recovery of high-ash lignite combined with wet-screening, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and induction time measurer to reveal the mechanism of simultaneous ultrasonic treatment enhancing the lignite flotation. Flotation results indicate the clean coal yield is greatly increased whereas the clean coal ash content is highly reduced by simultaneous ultrasonic flotation compared with the conventional flotation. SEM and XPS results show coal surface is physically cleaned and hence the clay coating is reduced by simultaneous ultrasonic flotation. The removal of high-ash mineral particles from coal surface benefits the coal-bubble attachment. Furthermore, ultrasonic treatment creates many micro-bubbles that enhance the floatability of lignite through micro-bubble-based coating on coal surface. The micro-bubbles play a bridging role in the coal-bubble attachment. The water film on lignite surface may be also unstable and easy to rupture during bubble-coal attachment under the condition of ultrasonic treatment.Lignite is one type of low rank coals which has a large reserve around the world. In China In general, flotation is an effective method to upgrade fine coal particles based on the difference in the surface hydrophobicity between coal and gangue particles. However, lignite surface is highly hydrophilic because there are many oxygen-containing functional groups (C In the past decades, pretreatments, surface modification and effective collectors have been widely adopted to improve the flotation of lignite. Ozbayoglu et al. Wet-based pretreatments are usually achieved using kinds of surfactant. Zhang and Tang The usage of effective collectors is considered as a simply and quick way to obtain high flotation recovery of lignite. Jia et al. In laboratory, reverse flotation of lignite has also been widely investigated Back to the aim of this investigation, this paper is to find out the mechanism of ultrasonic flotation cleaning of high-ash lignite. As is known, ultrasonic treatment is proved to be effective in mineral surface cleaning, surface cracking, reagent emulsification. The oily collectors can be emulsified with the ultrasonic treatment and the emulsified oil droplets benefit the coal dosage and the adsorption of oily collector on mineral surface In the aspects of surface cleaning and cracking, Feng and Aldrich In this investigation, simultaneous ultrasonic treatment in the pulp zone of flotation cell was used in the flotation dashing of high-ash lignite. The mechanism of simultaneous ultrasonic treatment in lignite flotation will be fully discussed by the combination of advanced characterization technology and the given evidences in published reports. Lignite sample were collected from Inner Mongolia of China. The proximate analysis is listed in   All flotation tests were conducted in a 1.5 L RK/FD flotation cell with the impeller speed of 1900 r/min. The pulp density was 60 g/L and the air flow rate was about 4.2 L/min. The collector is kerosene at a dosage of 3 kg/t coal. The frother was For the conventional flotation tests, coal sample was added in flotation cell with water and pre-wetted for 3 min. Then, the collector was added and the pulp was conditioned for 2 min. After this, the frother was added and the pulp was conditioned for another 30 s. At last, the air flow was given and the flotation concentrate was collected within 3 min. For the ultrasonic flotation tests, the pre-wetting and collector conditioning procedures were the same to those in the conventional flotation. The difference is that, the ultrasound probe was put into the pulp zone of flotation cell as soon as the inletting of air flow. It means the ultrasonic treatment only affected the flotation process not the conditioning processes. In this investigation, the ultrasonic generator is produced by SONICS Company in US with the model of VCX800. The power of ultrasound in this paper was 800 W with the 20 kHz frequency. As shown in In this investigation, six tests for both the conventional and ultrasonic flotation were conducted in order to obtain enough samples of concentrate and tailings for wet-screening analysis. As shown in Quanta 250 SEM (FEI, USA) was used to analyze the surface morphology of lignite particles with/without ultrasonic treatments. Before the SEM tests, coal particle surface was sputter-coated with a layer of gold. As is known, ultrasonic energy can cause surface cleaning and cracking on coal surface. The coal fines may be newly produced by the ultrasonic treatments. In order to clearly indicate the changes in the surface morphology of particles with/without ultrasonic treatments, the >0.125 mm size fraction was selected for SEM tests. The coal samples used in SEM tests were from the wet-screening of concentrates using the conventional or ultrasonic flotation tests. The XPS experiments were carried out at the room temperature in an ultra-high vacuum (UHV) system with the surface analysis system (ESCALAB 250 Xi, America). The data processing (peak fitting) was performed with XPS Peak fit software. The binding energies were corrected by setting the C1s hydrocarbon ( The coal samples used in the XPS tests were prepared as follows. For obtaining the testing samples from the conventional flotation, 90 g coal was conditioned in the flotation cell for 3 min without any reagents. After this, the conventional coal sample was forwarded to XPS test. For obtaining the testing sample from the ultrasonic flotation, 90 g coal was also conditioned in flotation cell for 3 min without any reagents but with ultrasonic treatments. After this, the ultrasonic coal sample was also forwarded to XPS test. The same coal samples used in the SEM tests were forwarded to the attachment time tests. The bubble-particle attachment time measurements were conducted with the Attachment Timer (made by University of Alberta, Canada) First, the coal sample was transferred to a small cell filled with distilled water. A bubble holder was on the top of the coal bed. The bubble of about 1.5 mm in diameter was generated using a micro-syringe, and then hold by the bubble holder. The distance between the bubble and the coal bed was adjusted as a constant in each test using the three-dimensional micro-translation stage. Next, the bubble was kept in contact with the coal bed for the controlled contact time from 10 ms to 5000 ms. The attachment behavior of coal particle to the bubble was visually observed through the lens and CCD camera linked to a monitor. In order to obtain the accurate bubble-coal attachment time, repeated measurements were performed at different positions of the coal bed and the final attachment time was obtained using the arithmetic mean value. In order to observe the status of bubbles with/without ultrasonic treatment, the photos were taken at different conditions. First, the flotation cell was filled up with water. Two photos were taken without/with the ultrasonic treatment. Then, the frother (the same dosage to flotation tests) was added into the cell. Another two photos were taken without/with the ultrasonic treatment. The four pictures can be compared and the effect of ultrasonic treatment on bubbles can be analyzed. As shown in In order to fully understand what happened during the ultrasonic flotation, wet-screening analysis of flotation products of both the conventional and ultrasonic flotation was conducted firstly. As shown in For the size composition of concentrates, it is obviously that the concentrate yield of ultrasonic flotation is much higher than that of conventional flotation, especially for the −0.045 mm size fraction. A higher recovery of −0.045 mm size fraction is obtained using the ultrasonic flotation compared with the conventional flotation. In addition, the ash content of concentrate using the ultrasonic flotation is lower than that using the conventional flotation. It is also found that the ash content of −0.045 mm size fraction is much lower using the ultrasonic flotation compared with the conventional flotation. It seems that the ultrasonic flotation mainly benefits the flotation of small particles, such as −0.045 mm and 0.074–0.045 mm size fractions. However, some findings are concealed if we only analyze the results using  The coal samples used in SEM tests were also forwarded to the attachment time measurements. The results of attachment time measurements show the attachment time of lignite particle without ultrasonic treatment is about 80 ms while that of lignite particle with ultrasonic treatment is about 45 ms. It indicates that the attachment between coal and bubble is significantly improved and speed up. Therefore, the floatability of lignite particle is improved using the ultrasonic flotation, finally resulting in the increase of the flotation recovery.    As is known, the ultrasonic treatment also promotes the emulsification of collectors The concentrate yield of the ultrasonic pretreatment flotation is only 25.87% with the ash content of 21.22%. The ultrasonic pretreatment flotation also produces a higher recovery and better clean coal quality than the conventional flotation, however it cannot overcome the ultrasonic flotation (the ultrasonic treatment simultaneously occurs with the flotation process), whose concentrate yield is 38.95% with the ash content of 21.11%. It means that the cavitation micro-bubbles should act as a significant role in lignite flotation. But there is no denying that, the emulsification of collectors and the surface cleaning/cracking also significantly determines the flotation of lignite because the coal surface should be also changed during the conditioning process with ultrasonic treatment. As mentioned in the above analysis, the ultrasonic energy has the surface cleaning/cracking and cavitation effects on lignite surface. It is also concluded that the ultrasonic treatment may have another promoting role in weakening the water film on coal surface, which will also enhance the attachment of coal-bubble. The introduced energy by the ultrasonic treatment makes the water film on lignite surface not stable. In the conventional flotation, lignite surface can be covered with a thick water film because of hydrophilic properties of lignite surface. Lignite surface have many oxygen-containing functional groups which can be bonded with water through hydrogen bond, resulting a thick water film that prevents the attachment between coal and bubble/oily collector droplets Additionally, the simultaneous ultrasonic treatment may also have significant effects on the bubble surface, such as reducing the clay mineral fines coating on bubbles. In the conventional flotation, high-ash coal fines can also coat the bubble surface and then reduce the attachment of bubble-coal and cause the contamination of high-ash coal fines in the clean coal through the entrainment. The lower concentrate ash content produced by the ultrasonic flotation is a direct proof. However until now, we have no idea about the direct characterization regarding the effects of ultrasonic treatment on bubbles surface and water film. Therefore, the direct characterization should be considered to sufficiently explain the above-mentioned deduction in the future. In this paper, simultaneous ultrasonic treatment was used in lignite flotation and the mechanism of ultrasonic treatment promoting the lignite flotation was discussed. A higher concentrate yield with the lower ash content was obtained using the ultrasonic treatment than using the conventional flotation. The ultrasonic flotation owns a higher flotation selectivity than the conventional flotation. Ultrasonic treatment removes fine clay minerals from lignite surface, but does not make the lignite surface suffer significant chemical reactions on lignite surface. The ultrasonic treatment makes significant physical changes in the surface of lignite particle through the surface cleaning and cracking. Ultrasonic treatment creates many micro-bubbles that can coat the coal surface enhancing the floatability of lignite particle. The micro-bubbles-coated lignite surface is easy to attach onto bubble. The attachment of coal-bubble is speed up using the ultrasonic flotation compared with the conventional flotation. Ultrasonic treatment may also weaken the water film between coal and bubble during the attachment processes that enhances the coal-bubble attachment efficiency. High-ash coal fines may cover bubble surface in the conventional flotation, however bubble surface can be cleaned in the ultrasonic flotation, resulting in a decrease in concentrate ash content. This work was supported by the