Produced water in oil fields is one of the main sources of wastewater generated in the industry. It contains several organic compounds, such as benzene, toluene, ethyl benzene and xylene (BTEX), whose disposal is regulated by law. The aim of this study is to investigate a treatment of produced water integrating two processes, i.e., induced air flotation (IAF) and photo-Fenton. The experiments were conducted in a column flotation and annular lamp reactor for flotation and photodegradation steps, respectively. The first order kinetic constant of IAF for the wastewater studied was determined to be 0.1765min−1 for the surfactant EO 7. Degradation efficiencies of organic loading were assessed using factorial planning. Statistical data analysis shows that H2O2 concentration is a determining factor in process efficiency. Degradations above 90% were reached in all cases after 90min of reaction, attaining 100% mineralization in the optimized concentrations of Fenton reagents. Process integration was adequate with 100% organic load removal in 20min. The results of the integration of the IAF with the photo-Fenton allowed to meet the effluent limits established by Brazilian legislation for disposal.Several wastewaters with environmental-polluting potential are generated along the entire productive oil chain This wastewater is a hydrocarbon subproduct in underground reservoirs and generally contains high salinity, oil, various organic compounds such as benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, xylene (BTEX), naphthalene, phenanthrene, dibenzothiophene (NFD), polyaromatic hydrocarbons (HPA), phenols, gases and heavy metals Oil removal is one of the most important steps in treating this petroleum industry wastewater. Oil in produced water is present in four distinct forms, depending on its drop diameter, as follows: free, dispersed, emulsified and dissolved Flotation is one of the most widely used separation processes for recovering oil present in the dispersed and emulsified phases of oily wastewater The probability of a particle reaching the surface depends on the success of three stages: collision ( The term collision refers to the probability of a collision between a particle and the air bubble. The probability of this stage is proportional to the ratio between particle and air bubble diameters. After the bubble–particle collision, a cluster should form. Surfactant agents act to reduce the contact angle formed during collision by decreasing interfacial tension Eq. The photo-Fenton can be divided into two stages with respect to hydroxyl radical formation ( In the presence of organic matter, the hydroxyl radical reacts with it, giving rise to oxidized products (Eq. A series of authors has pointed out process integration as being the most adequate solution for treating industrial wastewaters EO 7 is a commercial surfactant ethoxylated derived from fatty alcohol supplied by Oxiteno Synthetic wastewater was prepared from a mixture of xylene in distilled water. This organic compound was chosen as model to represent produced water oil field in term of organic loading. This was because of xylene relative high solubility in water and low vapor pressure compared to other hydrocarbons components ( For AIF tests, 10 Wastewater preparation was similar for the photodegradation experiments. A total of 10 An air-induced aeration system with a constant flow rate of 700 Xylene concentration in the samples was determined by UV–visible absorption molecular spectroscopy based on a calibration curve with a volume of 100 It was used a 0.9 Wastewater acidification up to a pH range between 2.5 and 3.0 was conducted within the reactor itself with a concentrated solution of H To study Fenton reagent concentrations in photodegradation, 2 Flotation kinetics was evaluated as a function of reduced xylene concentration in the wastewater (Eq.  The first-order kinetic model is based on the presumption that the bubble–particle collision rate is first order in relation to the number of particles and that bubble concentration remains constant over time Other studies showed first-order kinetics in industrial wastewater treatment   When surfactant in the mixture is below its CMC, it adsorbs on the surface of the xylene drop, partially covering it, enabling system coalescence, and consequently resulting in better contact and the surfactant being dragged by the air bubbles to the top of the column. Because surfactant concentration is above CMC, surfactant monomers adsorbed on the xylene–water surface completely cover it, avoiding coalescence of xylene drops. It was observed an elevated removal of xylene without the presence of surfactant, which is supported by the striping gas effect. During the flotation, xylene is transferred to the gas phase due to the release of bubbles at the surface, dragging the contaminant in a simultaneous form, i.e., flotation and striping Preliminary experiments were conducted to assess the occurrence of xylene evaporative losses during the experiments (  After 20 The response surface for experimental data obtained shows that the highest degradation occurs with maximum peroxide concentration ( The Pareto graph ( The efficiency of integrated IAF and photo-Fenton processes in organic load removal of synthetic oil field wastewater is shown in  As the experiments were performed in a semi-continuous process, it should be underscored that a single dosage of hydrogen peroxide was needed for 15 Therefore, the results obtained indicate that the best option is integrating IAF and photo-Fenton processes for treating the wastewater under study. The results of experiments conducted with real produced water from the state of Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil were also satisfactory ( Next, the clarified wastewater remained was submitted in the lamp reactor for 15 Experimental data obtained from column flotation showed first order kinetic behavior. For surfactant concentrations below CMC, separation efficiency increases with an increase in surfactant concentration. For the concentrations studied, the best condition found was 0.029 As with flotation, the photo-Fenton process proved to be efficient in removing xylene. The advantage of this process over the previous method is pollutant elimination instead of phase transference. Organic load degradation efficiency was 90.5% and 89% using 1 For the synthetic wastewater, integration was the best option for 100% removal of the entire organic load in 20 The results obtained with real wastewater classified it within the allowable legal limits for the parameters analyzed. Oil recovered in the flotation stage can be redirected to the oil treatment stage for refining purposes, without causing distillation problems, given that the degradation temperature of the surfactant is lower than the operation temperature of distillation columns. Brazilian financial support provided by