Silicate is an important rock-forming mineral. In this work, a method called “sulfuric acid curing” was proposed, aiming to extract rare earth element scandium from silicates. Sulfuric acid curing refers to the addition of concentrated sulfuric acid to heated silicates at 60–300°C, and subsequently water leaching of the treated silicates at 30–75°C. The effects of sulfuric acid dosage, curing time, curing temperature, pulp density, leaching temperature and stirring speed on scandium leaching were investigated. Under the condition of sulfuric acid dosage with 0.75 times of the theoretical amount, curing time of 15 h, curing temperature of 200°C, pulp density for L/S ratios of 30:1, leaching temperature of 75°C, stirring speed of 100rpm, Sc(III) concentration of 492μg/L in the solution was achieved. XRD analysis shown that major phases of the samples hardly changed after acid curing. However, SEM-EDS examination of the samples demonstrated that morphology and particle size of minerals were changed obviously after being cured and leached. Leaching kinetics was further calculated, which can be described by the shrinking core model. The apparent activation energy for the dissolution was determined to be 55.49kJ.mol− 1.Silicates are a class of minerals with wide variety and high content in the earth's crust. Currently, there are more than 800 kinds of silicates, accounting for one-third of the all known minerals. Silicates can be classified as the following six groups based on the linkage manner of tetrahedral anionic group Scandium (Sc) is a typical rare earth element and widely distributed in the earth's crust. The presence of Sc minerals is diverse. There are more than 100 Sc-bearing mineral species Sulfuric acid curing is a pretreatment method of minerals, in which concentrated sulfuric acid and crushed ore are mixed to react at a certain temperature. It was classified into low temperature curing (<300 In order to overcome this problem, some methods have been applied, such as quick leaching which is based on a water-starved system and effectually rejected silica from many silicates However, there is a lack of systematical studies on the curing process. Besides, information is not available on the systematic kinetic study on Sc leaching from silicates using sulfuric acid curing. In view of these, this paper aims to research Sc leaching from silicates. Samples were first cured by sulfuric acid in a water-starved system and then leached in water without any other reagents. The effects of curing sulfuric acid dosage, curing temperature and time, also leaching temperature and time, pulp density, and stirring speed on the leaching of Sc were systematically investigated. The kinetic characteristics of silicates were also researched in curing and leaching systems. Silicates were provided from repetitive magnetic beneficiation studies of Yunnan Province of China. The silicates with a particle size less than 0.074 Phase analysis of the raw silicates and leached residue were carried out by X-ray diffractometer (Advance D8/Bruker). Chemical analysis of the elements in raw materials was conducted by X-ray fluorescence spectroscopy (Axios MAX). Solution filtrated with 0.22 The silicates were dried in oven at 50 The theoretical acid consumption refers to the amount of acid required to dissolve all the oxides in minerals. Based on chemical compositions in The effect of curing time on the extraction of Sc(III) was investigated using a sulfuric acid dosage of 0.75 times, a curing temperature of 90 The effect of curing temperature on the extraction of Sc(III) was investigated at 70, 90, 150, 200, and 300 The effect of pulp density on the extraction of Sc(III) was investigated for L/S ratios of 20:1, 30:1, 40:1, 50:1, 60:1, and 70:1. The other parameters were set as follows: the sulfuric acid dosage of 0.75 times, curing time of 15 The effect of leaching temperature on the extraction of Sc(III) was investigated at 30, 45, 60, and 75 The effect of stirring speed in leaching was investigated for stirring speed of 0, 170, 230, 300, and 500 The leaching reaction is the liquid-solid reaction. It can be concluded that a variety of models have been applied in literatures. During the liquid-solid reaction, the most commonly used reaction types are the overall reaction model and shrinking core model. Since mineral contains CaO, insoluble CaSO Similarly, when the diffusion of minerals through product layer diffusion control, the following expression of the shrinking core model can be used Eqs.  The data given in The reaction rate constant K was a function of temperature, and the effect of temperature on it can be expressed by the Arrhenius formula Eq. The result of the amount of sulfuric acid of 0.75 times, the curing time of 15 Sc The mineral contains a high content of silicon, so the formation of silica gel cannot be avoided during the leaching process ( SEM-EDS image of the silicates after H The corrosion effect of sulfuric acid on minerals gradually increased with the extension of the curing time and the increase of the curing temperature at the appropriate sulfuric acid dosage. An increase in temperature would accelerate the chemical reaction kinetics Under a certain amount of sulfuric acid, the concentration of sulfuric acid in solution was changed by the change of liquid-solid mass ratio. When the ratio decreased, the concentration of sulfuric acid in the solution increased, and the diffusion driving force also increased. Thus, the dissolution of the Sc increased. Furthermore, the difference in pulp concentration indicated that the free water content in the solution was different. The more free-water there was in the silicone-containing solution, the easier it was to form silica gel. Therefore, high pulp concentration could inhibit the extraction of scandium. After the minerals were cured, the soluble scandium might mainly adhere to the mineral surface with a relatively weak force. Therefore, when the stirring speed reached 100 Compared to direct sulfuric leaching, advantages of curing with acid were significantly improved the dissolution of Sc. Moreover, sulfuric acid curing had the following advantages over other methods of extracting rare earth elements from silicates. (1) No need for pre-treatment of minerals such as roasting, mechanical activation and the like. (2) No need to add impregnating agent such as fluoride ion, hydrogen peroxide during the leaching process. (3) It was not necessary to add additional sulfuric acid to keep the leaching system acidic. The following conceptual flowsheet on silicates hydrometallurgical processing is developed ( Scandium can be extracted from silicates by hydrometallurgical process at normal pressure and temperature with pretreatment by sulfuric acid curing. Sulfuric acid dosage with 0.75 times of the theoretical amount, curing time of 15 The authors declare no conflict of interest. This work was supported by the