A 52-year-old male presented with an extremely rare fracture of the occipital condyle involving the jugular foramen with marked medial rostrad displacement of the fragments. He had ipsilateral VII through XII nerves palsies and Wallenberg syndrome. Conservative treatment did not improve the cranial nerve palsies. A high-resolution CT-scan is essential to visualize these fractures.Recently, a number of cases of occipital condyle fracture (OCF) have been reported, possibly due to the use of high-resolution computed tomography (CT). Most craniocervical junction injuries including OCF are sustained in high-speed motor vehicle accidents or in fall from a great height; they usually result in nearly instantaneous death. We report an extremely rare case of OCF involving the jugular foramen with ipsilateral palsies of nerves VII through XII and a Wallenberg syndrome by a workplace accident. The mechanism of the unusual OCF in this case is also discussed. A 52-year-old man wearing a helmet was working at a construction site, when the wire of a crane lifting some iron material snapped. A hook weighting 20 kg falling from a height of 5 m hit his head. The helmet was cracked on the right anterior side. On admission within 20 min of the accident, the patient was lethargic. He showed hoarseness, dysarthria and severe neck pain. Neurological examination showed right-sided facial palsy, hearing impairment, and a curtain sign of the uvula. The right trapezius and sternocleidmastoid muscles were obviously weak. The tongue deviated to the right. No motor weakness was noted in the extremities. Sensation was intact. Cervical radiograms showed no abnormality. Ten millimeter thick CT-scans revealed a thick hematoma in the right prepontine cistern, and a small hematoma in the anterior right temporal fossa, and a bone fragment in the posterior fossa ( Since Bell first reported OCF in 1817 With report to the mechanism of OCF In the present case, a violent direct axial load hit the right anterior part of head, forcing the occipital condyle toward the atlas. This produced a triangle-shape comminution fracture with the right occipital condyle at its base and the right jugular foramen at its apex (type I fracture). The upward displacement of the bone fragment and the fracture of the transverse process of the atlas endorse this hypothesis. OCF can cause nerve palsies Surgery for OCF is controversial. Some reports describe improvement of symptoms upon bone fragment removal