Nanoscaled aluminium nitride (AlN) reinforced aluminium matrix composites were fabricated using a novel approach where powder mixtures of Al+Mg+Sn were partially in situ nitrided in flowing nitrogen followed by consolidation through equal channel angular pressing (ECAP). The resulting composites contain up to 23.8vol% of AlN with relative density >98%. The microstructure shows two distinctively different alternate lamellar regions. One is the Al matrix free of AlN and the other is composed of nanoscaled AlN embedded in the Al matrix. The Al–AlN composites fabricated this way exhibited attractive properties, including thermal stability up to 450°C, high compressive strength, high Young's modulus and low coefficient of thermal expansion. The presence of nanoscaled AlN reduced the thermal conductivity of the composites compared to the high thermal conductivity of Al–AlN composites prepared by metal infiltration techniques.Aluminium nitride (AlN) is an attractive reinforcement for aluminium (Al) based metal matrix composites (MMC). It has properties similar to SiC and Al Carbothermal reduction of Al In contrast to ex situ prepared Al–AlN MMCs, in situ fabrication of Al–AlN composite structures based on direct nitridation of an Al powder precursor offers an attractive solution. In this approach, the Al powder precursor is partially nitrided below the powder melting point in flowing nitrogen ECAP has been used to consolidate MMCs via the powder metallurgy route This study focuses on the preparation and characterisation of an in situ formed Al–AlN MMC produced by ECAP of partially nitrided Al powders. The properties of the Al–AlN MMC are assessed in the context of thermal management applications such as heat sinks used in electronic devices. Argon-atomized Al AA6061 powder with the particle size of 10–53 The crushed nitrided powder was consolidated by ECAP featuring a back pressure (BP-ECAP) outlet plunger. The inner walls of the ECAP tool were lubricated with a graphite–water solution. Its channel intersection angle Sample discs (∅6  No distinctive differences in the pressing force were detected during ECAP of nitrided powder feedstock with different AlN contents. Relatively low pressing pressures were confirmed during BP-ECAP compaction which enabled the fabrication of Al–AlN composites containing up to 55.3    The thermal stability of the ECAP-processed composites was assessed for potential applications at elevated temperatures. The thermal expansion behaviour of the composites fabricated over the temperature range of 20–500 AlN has good thermal conductivity (170–200 The use of coarse AlN powder particles is effective in decreasing the Al–AlN interfacial thermal resistance. However, such MMCs will have inferior strength, elastic modulus, ductility and fatigue performance. Furthermore, the use of coarse reinforcing particles may cause increased wear of production and machining tools To summarise, nanoscaled AlN reinforced Al matrix composites have been fabricated by BP-ECAP consolidation of in situ nitrided Al powder. The following conclusions were obtained: Al–AlN composites containing up to 23.8 The nanoscaled AlN particles are dispersed within the original nitrided shell after ECAP. The nitrided shell is composed of nanoscaled AlN embedded in the Al matrix. The fabricated Al–AlN composites showed good thermal stability up to 450 The Al–23.8 The nanoscaled size of the AlN crystallites led to a decrease in the thermal conductivity of the Al–AlN composites fabricated, where the thermal conductivity of the Al–23.8 The in-situ fabrication approach developed is a relatively low-cost approach. The Al–AlN composites fabricated have the potential for selected thermal management applications at elevated temperatures. The visit of Martin Balog to The University of Queensland, School of Mechanical and Mining Engineering was funded by a