Nanolaminate composites consisting of alternate layers of Nanoglasses (NGs) and metallic glasses (MGs) have shown enhanced tensile ductility without great penalty on strength. Recent atomistic simulations on such NG-MG nanolaminate composites have revealed that peak stress attained in these materials do not follow rule of mixture. Also, a transition in deformation behaviour takes place when MG layer thickness is reduced below a threshold level which is correlated with average size of glassy grain in NG layer. However, the mechanistic reasons for this correlation is not well understood. Therefore, continuum simulations of tensile loading on NG-MG laminate composites are performed using thermodynamic consistent non-local plasticity model. Results show that interaction stress associated with flow defects such shear transformation zones (STZs) plays a pivotal role in the deformation response of laminate composites. Also, shear band width in these materials, scales with intrinsic material length associated with the interaction stress. Further, the material length with respect to MG layer thickness governs the transition in deformation behaviour. The present work may provide guidelines in developing highly ductile NG-MG laminate composites for practical engineering applications.Metallic Glasses (MGs), a class of amorphous alloys, are known to exhibit impressive combination of physical and mechanical properties such as very good corrosion and wear resistance, high electrical conductivity, high yield strength and strain and excellent formability This led to development of new class of amorphous alloys known as nanoglasses (NGs) which are comprised of nano-meter sized glassy grains separated by fine glassy interfaces An alternate approach to achieve good tensile ductility of MGs is developing laminate composites Why does peak stress attained in NG-MG laminate composite not follow rule of mixture as reported by MD simulations What is the effect of intrinsic material length scale associated with the interaction stress between flow defects such as STZs on the relationship between peak stress and volume fraction of MG layer? What is role played by interaction stress between the flow defects (STZs) on the deformation response of the laminate composites? Does shear band width in NG-MG laminate composites scale with the intrinsic material length? What is the physical origin of the threshold level of MG layer thickness corresponding to transition in deformation behaviour from localized to super plastic flow as reported by MD simulations In order to address above issues, 2D plane strain finite element simulations of tensile loading on NG-MG laminate composites are performed using a thermodynamically consistent finite strain based non-local plasticity model for MGs. The role played by the interaction stress between flow defects such as STZs on the plastic deformation of composites is investigated. The effect of material length associated with this stress on the deformation behaviour is also analysed. Further, physical origin of threshold MG layer thickness corresponding to transition in laminate composites is determined. The finite element results not only corroborate with recent MD observations, but also provide guidelines to design strong and ductile laminate composites. A thermodynamically consistent, finite strain, non-local plasticity theory for MGs proposed by Thamburaja Here, In this equation, Furthermore, in Eq.  Following Singh et al. The materials in MG layer, grains in NG layer, and all the interfaces (planner as well as within NG layer) are assumed to follow the constitutive theory described in Further, as discussed in the In The volume fraction,  Contrary to the above observations, for A comparison of plastic strain distribution (as shown in In order to get further insights into the strain localization in NG-MG laminate composites, line plots of In order to verify the scaling of shear band width with  What are the mechanistic reasons for the above noted To clearly understand the effect of In this section, tensile response of three multilayer nanolaminate composites having different number of NG and MG layers, referred to S1, S2 and S3 will be analysed. The number of NG layers and the thickness of NG and MG layers of these samples are given in  “What governs the threshold level of In order to substantiate above statement, simulations are performed on another sample ‘S3’ while keeping Why does threshold thickness of MG layer increases with When thickness of MG layer is reduced by increasing the number of NG layers, localization is retarded significantly. This happens because the probability of triggering enough STZs to align for shear localization is less in sample with thinner MG layer An interesting question to pose at this juncture is, “what kind of design insights can be provided from the present continuum analysis to synthesize ductile NG-MG nanolaminate composites? As pointed out earlier, increase in In this study, the deformation behaviour of NG-MG laminate composites subjected to plane strain tensile loading has been investigated through finite element simulations using non-local plasticity model. The results are in good qualitative agreement with recent atomistic simulations, and also provide insights about the underlying deformation mechanism. The important conclusions of this work are as follows. The peak stress, The peak stress The volume fraction of the material in MG layer undergoing plastic deformation Shear band width scales with the intrinsic material length, Spatial distribution of The deformation behaviour of laminate composites transitions from localized to super plastic flow when MG layer thickness, In the view of MD simulations on MGs We would like to acknowledge Prof. P. Mathur, Director Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: 