In India, a major portion of metallurgical coal of desirable ash is produced from the dense medium cyclone (DMC) process. Based on detailed laboratory studies, vorsyl separator (VS), a centrifugal dense medium separator, was established to be a possible alternative to the dense medium cyclone. To establish further at commercial scale, trials were undertaken with 400 and 600-mm vorsyl separators made of mild steel, at the captive washeries of the Tata Iron and Steel. The studies clearly showed that the VS gave about 4% higher combustible recovery compared to a DMC at the same ash rejection level. Generalised E
                     p value of 0.033–0.045 for VS was also found lower compared to 0.043–0.068 for DMC. This clearly established the better sharpness of separation in VS compared to DMC. Vorsyl separator made of suitable wear-resistant material is recommended for regular plant use.Coking coal, apart from iron ore and limestone, is one of the important raw materials for steel production. India has an estimated coking coal reserve of 28 billion tonnes, which is only 0.8% of the total world reserves. Further to the limited resources, Indian coals have difficult washability characteristics mainly due to their very high ash content as well as very intimate association of mineral matters with the coaly substance. Therefore, for Indian coals, fine crushing is essential for liberation of mineral matters At present, the dense medium cyclone is the only processing technique used in India for washing coal of −13+0.5 mm size. Continuous degradation of the feed quality in terms of a high amount of near-gravity material and ash has resulted in problems of controlling the performance of dense medium circuit. Hence, it is essential to look for alternative techniques to improve the efficiency of dense medium separation. In this context, the vorsyl separator, designed by the National Coal Board, UK, had been identified as an alternative centrifugal dense medium separator for treating coal. Laboratory studies conducted with the unit established the superiority of the process over DMC for treating Indian coals This separator unit is vertically installed with a tangential feed inlet as shown in The original unit had a diameter of 610 mm with a capacity of 75 tonnes/h The principle of separation in the vorsyl separator is exactly similar to that of dense media cyclones. The feed material at high pressure enters the top of the separator tangentially. Material with a relative density less than the separation density moves to the centre of the separator and leaves through the vortex finder. The near-gravity material and refuse move to the wall and reach the throat area. At this place, a strong inward flow is generated by the orifice plate, which reduces the centrifugal force and allows an appropriate portion of near-gravity material to reach the vortex finder opening. Thus, the separation in the VS effectively handles the near-gravity material.   While discussing the developments in the VS,  Extensive data are available in the literature on the performance of the DMC and the VS Plant trials with a 400-mm vorsyl separator were undertaken at West Bokaro Washery 1 of The Tata Iron and Steel. Since the unit was only for testing purpose, it was fabricated with mild steel. Vortex finders and vortex tractor nozzles of different diameters were also fabricated for the trials. The unit was installed parallel to a DMC of similar diameter. During the regular production of clean coal from the existing DMC, the 6-in. gate valve fixed in the feed inlet pipeline of the vorsyl separator was kept closed. Whenever a switch over from DMC to VS or vice versa was required, the feed coal belt was stopped temporarily and the corresponding gate valves were opened and closed. The feed belt was again started. The unit was allowed to treat the coal for a sufficiently long time before samples of feed coal from distribution box, clean coal from the vibrating screen and underflow from desliming sieve bend were collected. These coal samples were washed with fresh water to remove the adhering magnetite, if any, and dried. The samples were analysed for ash content. Using the ash content values, the yield of clean coal was determined by ash balance and the values are shown in Similarly, samples were also collected from the existing DMC, set at optimum conditions and the results are also shown in Trials with a 600-mm vorsyl separator were undertaken at West Bokaro Washery 2. Presently, the coal of −13+0.5 mm size is being treated in a 610-mm DMC (four streams each containing two cyclones) at the Washery. Two VS were fabricated of mild steel. Vortex finder and vortex tractor nozzles of different diameters were also fabricated. The units were installed in the place of DMC. In Phase 1 trials, one unit was installed and optimum conditions were determined. Further trials were conducted in second phase by replacing both the cyclones of one stream by vorsyl separators and operated for longer duration. Samples were drawn from VS and DMC, operated parallel, for the comparison of their performances. The vorsyl units were installed horizontally instead of vertical position tried at Washery 1. This was mainly to provide the same inlet pressure applied to other DMC. The vertical installation could reduce the feed inlet pressure quite significantly leading to difficulty in comparing the performance of vorsyl with dense medium cyclone. The units were allowed to treat the coal for a sufficiently long time before samples of feed coal from distribution box, clean coal from the vibrating screen and underflow from desliming sieve bend were collected. These coal samples were washed with fresh water to remove the adhering magnetite, if any, and dried. The samples were analysed for ash content and sink–float analysis. Using the ash content values, the yield of clean coal was determined from ash balance. The results of Phase 1 and Phase 2 trials are shown in The yield and ash values of both clean coal and rejects obtained from the tests carried out on a 400-mm vorsyl separator at West Bokaro Washery 1 are given in The salient features observed from the results are as follow: Higher yield. For the same ash content in clean coal, the yield obtained from VS was generally higher than that of DMC Higher throughput. Vorsyl separator was tested at a feed rate of as high as 40 tonnes/h without any operational problem. The normal feed rate to the DMC maintained in the plant was around 32–35 tonnes/h. Less medium consumption. It was observed that for obtaining nearly the same ash and yield of clean coal, the feed medium specific gravity to be maintained in vorsyl was less than that of DMC. For a typical case, medium specific gravity of 1.41–1.42 was required for as against 1.51 for DMC. Under these conditions, the yield of clean coal from vorsyl was 73.48% with 18.32% ash as against 72.14% yield with 18.65% ash for DMC from the same feed ash of 25.9%. The results of the first phase of trials with one vorsyl separator are shown in The generalised distribution curve obtained from a given gravity concentration method is used for comparison of the different processes. As the generalised distribution curve is independent of the process and design variables, it is being considered as a reliable technique for discrimination between the processes The generalised distribution curve obtained for 600-mm vorsyl separator and 610-mm dense medium cyclone is shown in The Epg value obtained for DMC was 0.043, while that for VS was 0.033. The lower value of Epg clearly showed the higher sharpness of separation in VS over DMC. The results of the second phase of trials with two VS are presented in Separation efficiency Relationship between combustible recovery and ash rejection The calculated values of combustible recovery, ash rejection and separation efficiency for VS and DMC are also shown in For all the samples, separation efficiency values obtained for VS was significantly higher than that of DMC. The average separation efficiency achieved in VS was 32.57% while that of DMC was 21.17%. The highest separation efficiency achieved in VS and DMC were 39.1% and 32.4%, respectively. Unfortunately, the results obtained from vorsyl separators and dense medium cyclones were at different ash rejection levels  The details of the statistical analysis results are shown in The Having met various statistical criteria as discussed, separation between the regression lines was calculated from the difference of intercepts The variance of the difference of the intercepts was calculated. The significance of the mean separation ( A significant The generalised distribution curve obtained for 600-mm vorsyl separator and 610-mm DMC are shown in  The superiority of vorsyl separator over dense medium cyclone for treating coals of very high near-gravity material is established at plant scale. Generalised The authors would like to thank Dr. O.N. Mohanty, Mr. Avinash Prasad and Mr. V.R. Kochhar for the encouragement and guidance for carrying out the trials. The help of Mr. Atanu Dutta, Mr. D.C. D'Souze, Mr. B. Sen Sharma, Mr. Suridra Prasad and Dr. D.S. Chakraborty and Mr. A.K. Mukherjee of Tata Steel and Mr. P. Banerjee and Mr. K. Kosla Rao of RRL Bhopal for carrying out the studies is thankfully acknowledged.