Vascular calcification is a hallmark of type 2 diabetes. Glucose stimulates calcification in culture of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) but the underlying mechanisms remain obscure. We observed that high glucose levels stimulated mouse and human VSMC trans-differentiation into chondrocytes, with increased levels of Sox9, type II collagen, glycosaminoglycan and Runx2 expression, and increased alkaline phosphatase activity and mineralization. These effects were associated with increased expression of IL-1β, which stimulated alkaline phosphatase and calcification, suggesting that glucose induces chondrocyte differentiation of VSMCs, possibly through IL-1β activation.Medial arterial calcification is a feature of diabetic individuals. In 4553 subjects examined in a 20-year longitudinal study, calcification was shown to first appear in the feet and develop proximally Recent studies have demonstrated that vascular calcification is an active and tightly regulated biological process with features of physiological ossification, including trans-differentiation of VSMCs into cells resembling osteoblasts and/or growth plate chondrocytes. Osteoblasts differentiate under the control of the transcription factor Runx2, which stimulates the expression of a type I collagen rich matrix A growing literature of human medial calcification in T2DM and aging is suggesting that the VSMCs that predominate in these lesions lose expression of calcification inhibitors, such as matrix Gla protein (MGP), and begin to express chondrocyte markers such as type II collagen Nowadays, it is acknowledged that T2DM is associated with an inflammatory status with elevated levels of several pro-inflammatory cytokines In this context, the aim of this study was to investigate the effects of glucose on VSMC trans-differentiation and calcification and to explore a possible role of IL-1β during this process. Upon characterizing the MOVAS model of VSMCs MOVAS cells (ATCC, Molsheim, France) were cultured in DMEM medium (25 To determine the effect of IL-1β on TNAP activity, after reaching confluence, human VSMC were treated with IL-1β (RD Systems, 0.1 Total RNA from MOVAS cells was extracted using Trizol reagent. Contaminating DNA was removed in a 20 For the determination of TNAP activity using p-nitrophenyl phosphate as the substrate IL-1β concentration was determined in culture supernatants using Enzo Lifesciences’ ELISA kit. Human VSMC were treated at confluence with DMEM (5.5 or 25 All experiments were performed in triplicates and repeated at least 3 We first analyzed the effects of glucose on calcium deposition in MOVAS cells. As previously reported Since vascular calcification in patients with T2DM seems to proceed through a process similar to endochondral ossification Observing that high glucose levels can stimulate calcification and aware that IL-1β is a highly important cytokine activated by glucose, we hypothesized that IL-1β could relay the effects of glucose on vascular calcification. To address this proposal, we first checked if IL-1β mimics glucose effects in human VSMCs. As shown in The mechanisms underlying the molecular pathogenesis of vascular calcification in T2DM are extremely complex and are influenced by the interactions between inflammatory factors, lipids and oxidative stress. Several studies have suggested that vascular calcification is enhanced by hyperglycaemia but the mechanisms are poorly understood The fact that the mRNA levels of Several important reports indicate that at least part of the glucotoxicity observed in diabetic patients relies on the activation of inflammatory cytokines. TNF-α has been shown to stimulate calcification in culture of VSMCs Glucose stimulates IL-1β secretion through the sequential activation of TXNIP, NLRP3 and caspase-1 Authors declare they have no competing interests.