Coal is the main source of energy in China and contributes to the national economy. However, unsustainable use of coal is accompanied by environmental problems. Coal preparation is the most economical and effective method for efficient cleaning and utilization of coal. This paper aims at resolving the difficulty of upgrading the clay-based thermal coal in China. For resolving the sieve and shallow tank sorting, a retreating sieve 6/3 mm dry depth screening along with the classification of heavy-medium washing process was proposed. In the industrial practice of Lijiahaohao mine of Shenhua Baotou mining industry (China), a multi-parameter control method (based upon location, flow rate and feed quantity) is put forward for the separation of heavy-medium and heavy-medium in shallow tank. When the relative height of the feeding position was 70% and the flow rate was 75%, the coal separation was the best. The high separation efficiency of 100-3 mm wide grain grade coal has also been realized. The yield of clear coal was 83.72%, and the value of E was 0.055 g/cm3. Lastly, the first thermal coal sieving and shallow tank 3 mm flip flow screen technology for heavy media separation system has been proposed in this work.In 2017, the total energy consumption was equivalent to 44.9 billion tons of standard coal ( In this paper, a dynamic process, consisting of coal processing - slime reduction, is put forward in view of the easy-to-agglomerate long flame coal, −3/-6 mm screening and wide grain shallow tank heavy-medium separation. The coal sieving −3/-6 mm flip flow screen and shallow tank heavy-medium separation system can realize 100-3 mm wide grain efficient sorting. As a result, the proportion and yield of raw coal are significantly increased. The depth of the thermal coal screening - slime reduction can reduce a lot in the process of coal slime water and its multifarious processing system. 3 mm/6 mm depth of fine coal screening is a worldwide problem in this field, the technology process cope with the problem of screening area, implement the 3 mm depth and screening efficiency 81.6%. Shallow trough separator separation limit/25 mm–13 mm, the project will sorting floor down to 3/6 mm, put forward and set up to 3 mm depth of fine coal screening and sorting system demonstration, realizing the dynamic coal slime reduction industrial applications. The grading and washing of clay-based coal particles is technological challenge. In this regard, the performance of dry deep screening equipment and shallow tank separation, which are based on the proposed relaxation sieve −6/-3 mm dry deep screening and grading of heavy-medium separation technology, is of great significance. The grading of coal within the size range of 100/3-mm (elastic relaxation sieve) is done using dry deep classification. The material entered the crusher, after which, it passed through the desliming sieve with the medium fraction. The deslimed product entered the shallow tank heavy-medium separator, which produced the light and heavy products. The heavy product was dehydrated in a gangue silo. The scouring sieve was immersed in the dilute solution, after which, the mixing was performed in the dilute tank in The light products were introduced into the double-layer (25/2 mm) clean coal demixing screen through the fixed screen, while the middle layer material was dewatered using the centrifuge. In addition, the upper layer material entered the clean coal collector. Coal from the fixed sieve, the demixing sieve and the medium product producing unit was introduced into the mixing drum. Additionally, the dilute medium and the centrifuge liquid entered the dilute mixing drum. The drum mixture entered the shallow tank, which represented the heavy-medium sorting machine to supplement the medium. The diluting drum material entered the magnetic separator. From here, the magnetic concentrate entered the combined drum, whereas the tailings entered the graded cyclone. The bottom stream of the classifying cyclone entered the coarse slime arc screen and the centrifuge to obtain a coarse slime product. The lower part of the arc sieve, the centrifuge liquid and the overflow of the cyclone were concentrated in two stages. The bottom stream of the thickener entered the coal slurry mixing bucket and overflowed as the circulating water. Based upon the proposed technology, an industry-based pilot test was carried out in coal mine of Baotou mining, Shenhua, China. The selected raw coal was high calorific, non-sticky coal and had long flame. The moisture content was 22.62%, while the grain size range was 100-3 mm and 100-6 mm. The ash content was 18.28% and 17.51%. 6-mm relaxation sieve was used for sieving. The grading size (d When the resolving sieve was of 3 mm mesh, the screening efficiency was found to be the highest. In this case, the amount of tension in the sieve's surface was −3 mm, while the dip angle was determined to be 27°. The frequency was 48 Hz, while the effect of feed rate on the 3-mm size fraction was studied. Based upon the results, the optimum feeding rate range was found to be 375–425 t/h. The results obtained from the 3-mm relaxation sieve showed that the The mechanism of density segregation in the heavy-medium flow field for wide-grained coal was observed. The effects of various parameters, such as the feeding position, the feed flow rate, and the amount of feed for shallow tank heavy media separation were investigated. When the relative height of the feed position to the liner was 70%, the relative distance from the feed port lied within the range of 10–30%. Based on the research on the influence of the operating factors affecting the separation effect of the shallow trough heavy medium separator, the separation experiment of the refractory 13∼3 mm raw coal in the field production process was carried out. The flotation and laboratory analysis of the 13∼6 mm and 6∼3 mm separation products were carried out, and the distribution curves were shown as shown in For the coal of 13∼6 mm (16.84% for raw coal ash), the separation precision is 0.097 g/cm For 6∼3 mm coal (17.51% for raw coal ash), as shown in In this case, the flow rate reduced to 75%. In addition, the coal sorting effect was the best and the separation of 100-3 mm wide-grained coal was highly efficient. The clean coal yield was around 83.72% and the The coal slime reduction technology of 3/6-mm steam coal resolving sieve and shallow tank heavy feed sorting was proposed. When the relative height of the feeding position to the liner was 70%, the relative distance from the feeding port was 10–30%, while the flow rate reduced to 75%. Under these conditions, the coal sorting effect was found to be the best. The results obtained from the relaxation sieve with -3 mm deep screening showed that the screening efficiency was the maximum, when the highest screening surface tension was −3 mm. The efficiency for the relaxation sieve -3 mm grading was found to be 81.67%. The first domestic and international thermal coal relaxation screen 3-mm screening and shallow tank heavy feed sorting technology was proposed and demonstrated. The 100-3 mm wide-grained high-efficiency sorting was achieved, while the clean coal yield and the The authors acknowledge the financial support by the