The ecto-nucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase-1 (NPP1) was recently shown to promote mineralization of the aortic valve, hence, its inhibition represents a significant target. A quinazoline-4-piperidine sulfamide compound (QPS1) has been described as a specific and non-competitive inhibitor of NPP1. We report herein the synthesis and in vitro inhibition studies of novel quinazoline-4-piperidine sulfamide analogues using QPS1 as the lead compound. Of the 26 derivatives prepared, four compounds were found to have K
                     
                        i
                      < 105 nM against human NPP1.Calcific aortic valve disease (CAVD) is the most common heart valve disorder. CAVD is characterized by the ectopic mineralization of aortic valve leaflets [ Recent studies have shown that an increase of expression and enzymatic activity of ecto-nucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase-1 (NPP1) promotes the mineralization process during CAVD [ One of us (PM and coworkers) have previously reported that ARL 67156 (6- In this work, we report the synthesis of novel quinazoline-4-piperidine sulfamide analogues using QPS1 as the lead compound. The quinazoline ring, a well-documented heterocycles in medicinal chemistry, [ The lead compound QPS1 was synthesized using 4-piperidone monohydrate hydrochloride as starting material ( Pharmacomodulation at C-2 position of the quinazoline ring was the first modification explored for QPS compounds. The styryl moiety was chosen in order to evaluate the effect of a bulkier group on NPP1 activity. Following a similar synthetic approach as for QPS1, a number of potential inhibitors were synthesized ( As the extended conjugation on compounds We next explored structural diversification at C-6 position ( To complete this series, we were also interested in synthesizing a QPS1 analogue bearing only one methoxy group at C-6. Hence, the C-6 methoxy derivative Finally, in order to probe the importance of the sulfamide group, we synthesized various sulfamide analogues bearing other hydrogen bond donating (HBD) and hydrogen bond accepting (HBA) groups as shown in As shown in As alternative HBA and HBD groups, alcohol As shown in Finally, the synthesis of nitrile With the compounds in hands, we next evaluated their The The effect of chain length (ethyl, butyl, propyl, and pentafluorosulfanyl allyl chain) at C-6 position was also considered ( We have next investigated the importance of the sulfamide group for the inhibitory activity. The sulfonamide and the amide group were first examined as HBA and HBD group replacing the sulfamide substituent. The data shown in The ecto-nucleotide pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase-1 (NPP1) was shown to promote mineralization of the aortic valve. In that context, NPP1 inhibition represents a major target in drug development. We have reported the synthesis and The following includes general experimental procedures, specific details for representative reactions, and isolation and spectroscopic information for the new compounds prepared. The dry solvents were purified using a Vacuum Atmospheres Inc. Solvent Purification System. All other commercially available compounds were used as received. Thin-layer chromatography (TLC) analysis of reaction mixtures was performed using Silicycle silica gel 60 Å F254 TLC plates, and visualized under UV or by staining with potassium permanganate. Flash column chromatography was carried out on Silicycle silica gel 60 Å, 230–400 mesh. Diethyl (cyanomethyl)phosphonate (4.56 mL, 28.2 mmol) and triethylamine (7.56 mL, 54.2 mmol) were added to a stirred solution of LiBr (2.82 g, 32.5 mmol) in THF (120 mL). Acrylonitrile In a round-bottomed flask, 11.9 mL of HCl in dioxane (4 M) was added on sulfamide The piperidine salt A mixture of 2-amino-4,5-dimethoxybenzoic acid (1.97 g, 9.99 mmol) and acetic anhydride (5.86 mL, 61.9 mmol) was heated at reflux for 2 h, cooled to at 25 °C and filtered. The solid was then rinsed with methanol and dried to give 6,7-dimethoxy-2-methyl-4H-benzo[d] [ 6,7-Dimethoxy-2-methyl-4H-benzo[d] [ A mixture of The piperidine salt A mixture of The piperidine salt A mixture of The piperidine salt A mixture of The piperidine salt A mixture of The piperidine salt A mixture of The piperidine salt A mixture of The piperidine salt A mixture of The piperidine salt A mixture of The piperidine salt A mixture of The piperidine salt A mixture of The piperidine salt A mixture of The piperidine salt A mixture of The piperidine salt A mixture of The piperidine salt To a solution of 4-chloro-6,7-dimethoxyquinazoline (8.00 g, 35.6 mmol) in 72 mL of H To a solution of Under argon, quinazolinone Under argon, Under argon, Under argon, Under argon, Under argon, The piperidine salt The piperidine salt The piperidine salt The piperidine salt 2-Amino-5-hydroxybenzoic acid (2.00 g, 13.1 mmol) and formamide (9.37 mL, 235 mmol) were mixed and stirred for 30 min at 190 °C. At room temperature, the solid was filtered, triturated with H To a solution of Under argon, In a seal tube under argon, The piperidine salt Under argon, primary amine In a round-bottomed flask, 2.6 mL of HCl in dioxane (4 M) was added on sulfonamide Anhydride acetic (0.041 mL, 0.438 mmol) was added to a solution of In a round-bottomed flask, 2.4 mL of HCl in dioxane (4 M) was added on Isonipecotic acid (5.00 g, 38.7 mmol) and K Under argon, In a round-bottomed flask, 2.8 mL of HCl in dioxane (4 M) was added on Isonipecotic acid (129 mg, 1.00 mmol) was dissolved in 5 mL of ethanol under argon. Thionyl chloride (290 μL, 4.00 mmol) was added and the mixture was heated under reflux overnight. The solvent was removed under vacuum to afford The piperidine salt The piperidine salt The piperidine salt The piperidine salt To a solution of In a round-bottomed flask, 13.4 mL of HCl in dioxane (4 M) was added The piperidine salt In a hydrogenation reactor, Cos-7 cells were seeded in 10 cm cell culture dishes. At 80–90% confluence, cells were transected with 10 μg of NPP1 cDNA. ENPP1 ORF clone incorporated into the vector pCMV6-AC-GFP was purchased from Origene (Rockville, MD, USA). The transfection was done using NanoJuice transfection reagent from Novagen (Darmstadt, Germany). After 24 h, cells were harvested for enzymatic activities. For the preparation of protein extracts, transfected cells were washed three times with Tris-saline buffer at 4 Evaluation of the effect of QPS1 on human NPP1 activity was carried out with para-nitrophenyl thymidine 5′-monophosphate (pnp-TMP, Sigma Aldrich, ON, Canada). The reactions were carried out at 37 This work was supported by the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: These date include spectroscopic characterizations of the new compounds prepared. These date include spectroscopic characterizations of the new compounds prepared. Supplementary data related to this article can be found at