A study was performed to assess the effect of clockwise rotational torque onto the fracture configuration in unstable intertrochanteric fractures. The premise is that rotational torque in the sagittal plane imparted during screw insertion can lead to a potentially unstable construct in LEFT-sided DHS fixations when compared to the RIGHT-sided ones. This unstable fixation construct manifests as an anterior spike of the proximal fragment in left-sided fixations due to clockwise torque. Eleven out of 30 unstable left-sided fractures showed an anterior spike compared with none in 26 right-sided fractures (p<0.001). The study concludes that appropriate corrective measures of reducing the torque imparted is probably indicated in unstable left-sided fractures treated with a DHS.DHS fixation is probably one of the most common operations performed in orthopaedic trauma. The vast majority of patients are elderly with various degrees of osteoporosis. The variety of intertrochanteric fractures ranges from crack, undisplaced or stable fractures to grossly comminuted unstable and displaced fractures with the loss of medial butress. The natural history of untreated unstable intertrochanteric fractures is varus malunion with shortening and external rotation of femur due to posteromedial comminution. Surgery for intertrochanteric fractures enables stabilisation of these fractures in a reduced position and aids in nursing of patients who suffer from problems of immobilisation when treated conservatively.The principle of the sliding hip screw is to provide a controlled collapse at the fracture site after adequate and secure fixation in the head and shaft of the femur. The fracture is reduced and maintained on a fracture table under X-ray control and a guide wire is passed into the centre of the head in both AP and lateral planes. After reaming to the appropriate depth, the hip screw is inserted, often without tapping due to the degree of osteoporosis, before the barrel is inserted for fixation to the shaft of the femur. It is during the screw insertion that clockwise rotational torque is imparted to the head and neck fragment, especially in those fractures in which the fracture line lies in the saggital plane or those with posteromedial comminution. In right-sided fractures, the clockwise screw insertion causes the head fragment to rotate into an extended position at the hip joint with apposition or flexed position of the fracture site ( In left-sided fractures, the clockwise rotation leads to the head and neck fragment into flexion at the hip and extension of the fracture site leading to a potentially unstable construct ( A study was performed to assess the effect of this rotational torque on intertrochanteric fractures treated with a sliding hip screw device (DHS, AO — Stratec International). All intertrochanteric fractures treated over a 12-month period were assessed. There were 95 patients treated for intertrochanteric fractures. Nine patients were treated conservatively due to their moribund status, seven died of associated medical conditions before surgery and radiographs of four patients were not available for analysis. This left 75 fractures which were included in the study. The fractures were classified according to Tronzo’s classification Seventy five fractures were available for analysis. There were 13 men and 62 women in this group. The ages ranged from 59 to 103 years with an average of 82.49 years. There were 39 left-sided fractures and 36 right-sided fractures. The distribution pattern of these fractures is shown in Rotational abnormalities were seen in 11 left-sided fractures compared with none on the right side. All the 11 abnormalities were seen in Grades III and IV fractures (two and nine, respectively) ( Union in intertrochanteric fractures is usually not associated with problems due to good cancellous bone which leads to adequate union by secondary intention. The sliding hip screw devices have improved treatment of these fractures by permitting controlled collapse at the fracture site — an improvement on fixed angle monoblock devices. These devices depended on the creation of a stable medial butress prior to their insertion. This, in turn, lead to the development of reduction techniques as described by Dimon and Hughston In stable fractures, the choice of implant is not critical as union is predictable. In unstable fractures with vertical saggital plane fracture lines, the accuracy of reduction often determines the final stability. In these fractures, the rotational torque imparted to the proximal head and neck fragment can cause loss of reduction leading to potential failures of fixation. This appears to be greater in left-sided fractures where the rotational torque causes the anterior spike which when not butressed inferiorly and medially can lead to a state where the implant cannot control the shear forces at the fracture site. This can then lead to failure of fixation. In right-sided fractures ( We have not studied methods of preventing this problem. The results of this study confirm that torsion at the fracture site is a problem in stable fractures but is a significant issue in unstable left-sided fractures, with a greater predisposition for potential failure of fixation. We would like to thank Orthopaedic department at Airedale hospital and Mr ER Norton, Mr DJ Beard, Mr CC Wray, Mr DTS Tang and Mr S Ravindran for permitting us to use the clinical data for this study.