Understanding the densification behaviours and formation mechanisms of defects are essential to fabricate high quality and high strength aluminium components using selective laser melting (SLM) technology. In this work, the effects of laser power and scanning speed on the densification, defects evolution and their formation mechanisms in a SLMed 2024 aluminium (Al) alloy were investigated in consideration of the corresponding laser energy input, melting mode transition and microstructural evolution. The results showed that optimizing the processing parameters effectively reduced the porosity level below 1% by avoiding the lack of fusion and keyhole melting mode, and minimizing the gas pores. However, optimization of the processing parameters could not eliminate the columnar structure associated with the SLMed 2024 Al alloy, which contributed to the hot-tearing cracks in the SLMed parts. It was found that the dependence of porosity formation on SLM processing parameters was contrary to the crack density. Hence, to further improve the SLM-processability of the 2024 Al alloy it is necessary to develop SLM methods in order avoid the hot-cracking within the optimized processing parameter window associated with the minimum porosity formation.Selective laser melting (SLM) is an emerging manufacturing technique for rapid fabrication with a high design freedom for part complexity [ In the past a few years, considerable research efforts have been devoted on investigating the densification behaviours of the near eutectic Al-Si based cast alloys (e.g. Al-7Si, AlSi10Mg and Al-12Si) at various SLM processing parameters [ 2024 Al alloy has long been one of the most widely used metals in aerospace industries, e.g. fuselages, lower wing surface, and engine baffles, due to its high specific strength and fatigue resistance under tension [ The present work aims to comprehensively study the evolutions of the densification behaviour and defect formation in the 2024 Al alloy fabricated in a commercialized SLM125HL system at various processing parameters. Depending on the laser power and scanning speed, the formation mechanisms of different types of defects were also investigated and discussed by considering both laser energy input, microstructural evolution, thermal condition and melt pool dynamics. Gas atomised 2024 Al alloy stock powder was supplied by LPW Technology, with the particle size ranging from ∼20 to ∼72 μm in diameter. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) micrograph ( The SLM processing was conducted in a SLM Solution SLM125HL system, which equipped an ytterbium fibre laser with a wavelength of 1.06 μm, a laser beam diameter of 80 μm and a maximum power of 400 W. The relative density, porosity fraction and crack fraction of each built sample was measured through image processing approach. Samples sectioned along longitudinal planes (YZ-planes) from the SLMed parts were mechanically polished down to 0.04 μm colloidal silica suspension to obtain the appropriate surface finish. For each processing parameter set, four cross-sectional micrographs were captured using a Reichert-Jung POLYVAR MET optical microscope. Then, an image analysis software ImageJ was used to process each micrograph to quantify the defects and independently isolate the fractions of cracks and pores as per the procedure outlined in literature [ A JEOL 7100 F field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) was used to characterize (i) the morphology of the 2024 Al alloy powder, and (ii) the microstructure and defect morphology in the SLMed 2024 Al alloys. The morphology and dimension of melt pools were examined using optical microscopy. Samples were prepared using standard metallographic procedure, followed by etching with the Keller’s reagent (5 mL HNO Electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD), equipped with a JEOL 6610 SEM, was used to document the grain morphology and to investigate the cracking mechanism in the SLMed 2024 Al samples. A step size of 0.4 μm was used for EBSD mapping. A critical misorientation angle of 10° was used to identify grain boundaries. Kernel average misorientation (KAM) maps were retrieved directly from the EBSD data to measure the local misorientation of both alloys. Values above a predefined threshold of 2° were considered as adjacent subgrains and therefore were excluded from the calculation.  The processing parameters defines the laser energy input during SLM fabrication process [ The above results verify that defect formation within the present SLMed 2024 alloy was closely related to the volumetric energy density, Irregular void is one of the most common defects in SLMed alloys and is often referred as process-induced defects due to the lack of fusion [ As shown in Samples fabricated at the scanning speed of 1200 mm/s and laser powers ranging from 225 W to 375 W were selected to further investigate the evolution of the gas pores with processing parameters because either the irregular voids or the large cavities were minimized in these samples. Although the gas pore fraction can be decreased to 0.7 % by optimization of the SLM parameters, it was almost impossible to distinguish the sources of the pores without hot-extraction analysis (HEA) of the content of gases as outlined in [ As presented in The conduction melting mode is normally associated with relatively low to moderate laser energy inputs, with which the heat transfer is predominately mediated through conduction and convection within melt pools [ In SLM, the melting mode can be measured by the aspect ratio that is defined as the ratio of the penetration depth, Previous studies have demonstrated that these large keyhole pores acted as a stress concentrator and deteriorated the mechanical properties [ As shown in   Based on above results it may consider that optimization of the processing parameter can suppress the formation of columnar grains in the SLMed 2024 alloy and therefore reduce hot-cracking during solidification. In general, the grain morphology is associated with the thermal gradient, The present work shows that varying the laser energy input could change the melting mode, thermal condition and dynamics in melt pools and microstructure formation, which synergistically impact the densification behaviour of the present 2024 Al alloy during SLM process. As aforementioned in Section In comparison, refining the columnar grains into equiaxed grains, i.e. factor (iii), is considered as a more feasible approach to substantially eliminate hot-cracking during SLM process. In recent years, a conventional “inoculation” approach has been adopted into metal SLM to eliminate the large columnar grains and therefore to avoid cracking [ In addition to inoculation, previous studies [ Although the abovementioned novel laser melting techniques offer a promising new route to control the microstructures of SLM parts, inoculation is regarded as the most cost-effective and practical approach that suits for most commercial metal AM systems. The densification behaviour and defect evolution in the SLMed 2024 alloy have been investigated with various different processing parameters. Based on the results, following conclusions are achieved: Depending on the processing parameters, four types of defects, i.e. lack-of-fusion pores (irregular voids), gas pores (spherical pores), keyhole pores (large cavities), and intergranular hot-tearing cracks, were found in the SLMed 2024 alloy. The dependence of porosity formation on SLM processing parameters was contrary to the crack density. The processing parameter window for the lowest hot-cracking ( The reduction in the hot-cracking at either At The strategy to improve the SLM-processability of 2024 alloy lies on suppressing the formation of hot-cracks within the optimized processing parameter window associated with the minimum porosity formation. It would be fruitful to apply methods such as (i) using the substrate with low heat conductivity; (ii) increasing the preheating temperature of the substrate; and (iii) inoculating the alloy with proper grain refining particles to fabricate highly dense and crack free Al 2024 alloy through SLM. The authors thank Australian Microscopy & Microanalysis Research Facility at the Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis (CMM), The University of Queensland for the facilities and technical assistance. The authors are very grateful to Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is supplementary data to this article: