In a previous work, the use of drill core texture as a geometallurgical indicator was explored for the Mont-Wright iron ore deposit. At this deposit, the link between texture and mineral performance during comminution and heavy liquid separation was assessed by laboratory tests. Additionally, the micro-texture associated to each macro-texture was characterized by Mineral Liberation Analyzer (MLA). As a result, a classification of drill core textures calibrated to mineral processing performance was established.
                  To integrate the ore mesotexture into predictive block models, a core logging tool for automated textural pattern recognition is being developed. This paper presents the first step in this development: a methodology for the automated recognition of drill core textures. The proposed methodology is based on 2-D digital image analysis of drill cores. Texture information is extracted from digital images using gray level co-occurrence matrix (GLCM) and gray level run length matrix (GLRLM). Based on the information provided by these two methods, images were classified into six texture categories using multivariate discriminant analysis. A high classification success was obtained: 88% of the drill core images were correctly classified into their textural pattern category.Rock texture has long been recognized as an important source of information, from mineral resources exploration to mineral processing prediction. In the former case, textural attributes observed during core logging are very often reported in relation to ore lithology, alteration or structure during geological mapping and logging. While in the latter, texture integration into predictive process models is complicated, mainly due to two reasons: (1) texture influence on processing performances has to be quantified by mineralogical characterization and metallurgical testing at each particular deposit, which is usually time consuming and expensive and (2) the inclusion of rock textures into geometallurgical models needs to be devoid of any subjectivity, which requires automation in rock texture recognition to avoid natural human bias. Recently, as part of the geometallurgical framework of the Mont-Wright iron ore deposit (Québec, Canada), The automated recognition of patterns has been greatly explored, especially for its application to industrial visual inspection for quality control. In the case of rock texture analysis, several authors have addressed this topic for its application to quality evaluation in the natural stone industry ( The approach presented in this paper is intended to be applied to the recognition of drill core textures for which a correlation to mineral processing performances has been previously established. Hence, for any given deposit, establishing a drill core texture library, documenting the impacts of texture variability on processing performances, is a prerequisite to applying the method proposed. In a previous work, Around 1500 m of drill cores were visually inspected to identify recurring textural patterns. Six main textures were identified and named according to spatial distribution of the iron oxides on the drill core surface ( In order to characterize the response of each texture type to size reduction and concentration, a set of twenty-two samples were processed. These samples were selected after a visual examination of six complete holes (≈ 600 m). Each sample was composed of drill core portions belonging to the same textural pattern and chosen from a continuous 6 m long drill core sample. Each portion of each sample was longitudinally cut into two halves. One half was processed for mineralogical characterization and metallurgical testing ( Through mineralogical characterization by Mineral Liberation Analyzer and metallurgical testing (comminution and heavy liquid separation tests), The grindability was characterized by measuring the energy required to crush the samples following the procedure developed by After power measurement, the material was crushed to 100% passing 850 µm in successive stages in a roller crusher, recirculating only the +850 µm fraction to minimize the production of fines. This material was wet-sieved to remove the −106 µm fraction and the +106 µm fraction was processed in two HLS successive stages at 2.96 g/cm Additionally, the micro-texture associated to each drill core textural pattern was characterized using a Mineral Liberation Analyzer (MLA) ( According to the characterization results obtained, the classification shown in Although visual differences are evident between the six textural patterns, according to their response to metallurgical testing and mineralogical characteristics, the initial six texture categories can be grouped into four texture categories. (i) The massive textural pattern presented the lowest crushing energy, the highest concentrate quality and iron oxides liberation as well as the coarsest iron oxides grain size. (ii) Bright banded, dark banded and mottled textural patterns can be grouped into the same category exhibiting intermediate crushing energy, good concentrate quality, good iron oxides liberation (yet lower than massive iron oxides liberation) and finer iron oxides grain size than the massive samples. (iii) The layered textural pattern belongs to the third group, showing higher crushing energy than the precedent groups, lower concentrate quality and iron oxides liberation as well as finer iron oxides grain size. There is a remarkable difference between massive, bright banded, dark banded and mottled patterns compared to layered. For this last category, the layered pattern, iron is concentrated in finer size fractions (−300 µm), while for the other four textural patterns, the concentration of iron is higher in the coarsest fractions (+212 µm). Finally, the amphibolite defines the fourth category with the worst behavior in terms of crushing energy and concentrate quality; the iron-bearing minerals in this category are mainly gangue minerals (micas and hornblende). The developed methodology is based on digital image analysis to identify drill core textures and classify them into the previously established drill core texture categories. In a subsequent step, information provided by textural descriptors was used to build a discriminant model and classify images into textural pattern categories. Finally, the model was assessed by comparison between images classification known Digital images were acquired using a standard RGB digital camera (Opteon, 1MP) coupled with a 12 mm lens. Given the almost binary mineralogical composition of the samples (quartz and iron oxides), a RGB digital image provides enough contrast to perform texture analysis. Indeed, in this work, only the gray level image provided by the green channel (546 nm) was used. The acquisition was carried out placing the camera inside a 55 × 55 × 85 cm chamber, evenly illuminated with four fluorescent tubes located in the corners of the chamber ( From each drill core piece (of around 10 cm in length), a digital image covering a 30 × 40 mm area of the round surface was acquired, with a resolution of 39 µm per pixel. A total number of 245 digital images were acquired, distributed by textural pattern groups as shown in Texture is considered as a feature of the image representing the spatial distribution of pixel brightness in the image ( This method was first proposed by To generate the co-occurrence matrix, the gray level of pixel pairs separated by a distance δ in a given direction θ is evaluated. Each cell of the GLCM contains the number of times that two given gray levels appear in the linear relationship specified by δ and θ. The co-occurrence matrix may be normalized so that every matrix cell Based on the GLCM, Along with these five Haralick parameters, another two textural descriptors were developed to take into account the observed spatial regularity of the iron oxide in the layered textural patterns. These parameters are based on the computation of Haralick contrast descriptor in four different orientations: 0°, 45°, 90° and 135°. Two contrast ratios were computed: CRat1 and CRat2. Following an approach similar to that of On one hand, an image with high local gray level variations will present a short run length for all gray level values. On the other hand, if the image is texturally homogeneous, long run length should predominate for particular gray level values. Based on the normalized matrix, As an example, textural descriptor values for images in Multivariate discriminant analysis (MDA) is the appropriate statistical technique applied to predict object membership to groups categorised by a non-metric variable ( To build the model, discriminant functions are generated as the linear combinations of textural descriptors which best discriminate between textural pattern groups. Discriminant functions define a multidimensional space in which each image has a particular position. This position is defined by the score of each discriminant function computed substituting textural descriptor values. Averaging these scores for each textural pattern group and for each discriminant function, a mean value (called “centroid”) can be calculated. In this multidimensional space, each image is classified into the textural pattern group for which the centroid presents the smallest Mahalanobis distance to its position ( The discriminant model was built following the scheme shown in Based on the information provided by images in the training subsample (TS), a discriminant model was built using the software STATISTICA. Five discriminant functions were generated using the forward step mode. This mode builds discriminant functions including in the model those textural descriptors with the highest discriminant power and discarding those descriptors carrying redundant discriminant information. In this case, the criterion used to determine which textural descriptors to include in the model was the Wilks’ Lambda ( For the correct assessment of the discriminant model, ten different essays were carried out. For each essay, images in both the training and the validation subsample sets were randomly selected while keeping constant the number of images in both subsample sets. As an example,  In To evaluate the contribution of each textural descriptor in the discrimination of textural patterns, the factor structure matrix was computed using STATISTICA ( As shown in The images in the validation subsample were classified into textural pattern categories applying the discriminant model built using the training subsample. The classification criterion applied was the minimum Mahalanobis distance from each image to group centroids. Classification probability was considered equal for all groups (that is to say, the chances for an image to be classified into a particular textural pattern group are independent of the group size). The classification provided by the model was compared to the As observed in The use of textural descriptors to predict the drill core iron grade was explored. As stated previously, samples carrying valuable iron at Mont-Wright present an almost binary mineralogical composition, quartz and iron oxides being the main minerals. In the digital image, the difference in brightness between these two minerals is quite obvious. Since the textural descriptors used in this work are based on the spatial distribution of brightness in the digital image, there may be information regarding iron grade (or silica grade) carried by these textural descriptors. To explore this hypothesis, linear regression was applied in order to find the linear combination of textural descriptors which best predicted the drill core iron grade. The Excel function LINEST was then applied, using the least squares criterion to select those significant textural descriptors entering the linear equation. As shown in The drill core iron grade might well complement the information carried by the drill core texture to establish a classification of the ore to be included into the block model. The aim of geometallurgy is to populate block models with indicators of the expected metallurgical behavior of each mine block. Any parameter that explains how the ore variability may impact on processing performances is suitable to be considered as a geometallurgical indicator. In a previous work, In this work, a methodology for the automated recognition of drill core textures and a classification of drill core samples according to texture types was proposed. The methodology is based on the use of digital image analysis to extract texture information from images of the drill core round surface. A set of textural descriptors was computed from the well-established GLCM method ( With a simple set up, at laboratory scale, the proposed methodology provided a high rate of global classification, with almost 90% of the images correctly classified in their textural group. Only the bright banded texture presented a lower classification rate, with an average hit rate of 57%. Twenty-five percent of the misclassified bright banded images were classified as mottled or dark banded, which is not critical since these three groups of textures present similar processing behavior ( In order to apply this methodology to other deposits, a particular texture library for the specific deposit under evaluation must be defined. In addition, new textural descriptors may be required to adapt the methodology to the deposit specific textural characteristics. The proposed methodology is flexible enough to be case-adapted. The challenge for future work will be the development of a new core logging tool for drill core on-line automated analysis and integration of texture into the geometallurgical model. Ideally, this tool should quantify the composition of drill core samples in terms of texture types and transform this information into usable parameters for metallurgists, such as expected crushing energy consumption, grade-recovery or valuable minerals lost in tailings. As an additional finding, for the particular case of the deposit showcased in this work, the developed methodology was able to predict the drill core iron grade with R In a previous work, The proposed methodology is based on digital image analysis and discriminant analysis. At laboratory scale, the method has proven to be efficient using a simple and inexpensive technology, with almost no sample preparation (except for a clean-up of the core samples surface). The high classification hit rate obtained (88% of samples were correctly classified into their textural pattern category) shows that: (1) a RGB camera provides enough textural information to discriminate between textural patterns; (2) the proposed textural descriptors are good discriminant variables; and (3) multivariate discriminant analysis is an appropriate classification technique. This method may be applied to any deposit for which a relationship between drill core texture and processing performances can be established. For its application, the The authors wish to thank