A model is presented to represent changes in the mechanical and transport characteristics of fractured rock that result from coupled mechanical and chemical effects. The specific influence is the elevation of dissolution rates on contacting asperities, which results in a stress- and temperature-dependent permanent closure. A model representing this pressure-dissolution-like behavior is adapted to define the threshold and resulting response in terms of fundamental thermodynamic properties of a contacting fracture. These relations are incorporated in a stress-stiffening model of fracture closure to define the stress- and temperature-dependency of aperture loss and behavior during stress and temperature cycling. These models compare well with laboratory and field experiments, representing both decoupled isobaric and isothermal responses. The model was applied to explore the impact of these responses on heated structures in rock. The result showed a reduction in ultimate induced stresses over the case where chemical effects were not incorporated, with permanent reduction in final stresses after cooling to ambient conditions. Similarly, permeabilities may be lower than they were in the case where chemical effects were not considered, with a net reduction apparent even after cooling to ambient temperature. These heretofore-neglected effects may have a correspondingly significant impact on the performance of heated structures in rock, such as repositories for the containment of radioactive wastes.The mechanical and hydraulic properties of rock fractures are of great interest in a wide variety of geological applications, including the long-term disposal of radioactive wastes, the recovery of geothermal energy from engineered geothermal systems (EGS), CO The transport and mechanical characteristics of natural fractures evolve constantly and can be considered as dynamic variables As for mechanical mediation, fractures can close or open as a result of mechanical stresses induced by numerous sources including excavation, changes in effective stress and thermal expansion Compared to the mechanisms and models for the mechanically mediated changes, the understanding of chemically mediated changes in permeability is meager. Chemically mediated changes are known to be important even at relatively modest stresses, temperatures and typically for systems pushed far from chemical equilibrium, such as in geothermal or hydrocarbon reservoirs or around waste repositories. Sealing has been suggested in some instances of vapor and fluid transport under stressed conditions Mechanisms of pressure solution may offer an explanation for such a change in permeability under net dissolution, with this effect exacerbated under increased temperatures. Pressure solution occurs under the action of non-zero effective stress, and the driving force for inter-granular pressure solution is the stress-induced gradients in chemical potential, which results in solubility gradients in the solid around individual grains. Pressure solution involves the serial processes of dissolution at highly stressed, mineral contacts, the diffusive transport of dissolved mass along the contact boundaries, and, ultimately, the precipitation of mineral mass on available free faces For example, isobaric laboratory tests on Novaculite Further, chemically mediated change is expected to have impact on the distribution of stress during the full cycle of loading–unloading or heating–cooling due to the additional removal of material by dissolution and is impacted by its irreversibility. This change in aperture and stress after unloading or cooling can have important implications for many applications, including nuclear waste repositories where an understanding of the behavior during thermal cycling is of direct interest for performance assessment. Recently, some models have been developed in studies of the chemo-mechanical effects on transport properties, and these models have been applied to quantify the rates of fracture closure at a given stress condition The goal of this paper is to provide a combined and integrated model for the evolution of fracture apertures for both mechanically and chemically mediated changes to investigate the possible change of permeability and associated stress evolution during the full cycle of heating and cooling and related loading and unloading. In the following, we develop a consistent model to explain the evolution of such stress and chemically mediated changes of aperture in addition to mechanically mediated changes. These models are based on stress-elevated chemical potential, and, from a mechanistic basis, they are able to explain thermal and stress dependencies of observed responses. The developed model is then applied to available laboratory and in situ experiments with isobaric temperature change and isothermal stress change for validation. The proposed model is implemented in a confined, one-dimensional model with fractures subject to a thermal loading–unloading cycle to show the possible range of stress and aperture change. A model was developed to represent changes in fracture aperture mediated by chemical and mechanical processes. The interaction between the various processes that contribute to the response of fracture aperture is illustrated in In the following, we develop representative expressions to combine each of these effects into a coherent response. Various constitutive relationships in linear, hyperbolic, or logarithmic forms are available to represent fracture closure under applied stress, e.g. Superimposed on the effect of applied stresses is the influence of chemically mediated changes in the aperture. This transforms the mechanical aperture From force equilibrium, the contact area ratio can be defined as: The equilibrium contact area at the completion of the compaction process in steady state is defined as: The increase of contact area ratio and the resulting change in the aperture are illustrated schematically in Because we are considering the final reduction of aperture at steady state, Eq. In the above equation, the reference contact area ratio ( Inserting Eq. In the interest of simplicity, the term used to represent the pressure solution type behavior may be simplified as: This relationship embodies the important influence of mechanical effects alone, included in the first exponential term, and those mediated by stress- and thermally activated changes in the chemical response. The equation can be presented in a form where independent parameters are readily recognizable: When there is no difference between mechanical and chemical residual aperture, i.e. In addition to fracture loading, reductions in stresses or temperature also cause changes in the aperture. An important consideration is that, during unloading, the fracture does not recover fully, due to irrecoverable plastic deformation When a fracture is unloaded at a certain stress, the change in the aperture of the unloaded fracture is a function of both stress and temperature: This shows that the degree of recovery is a function of the stress at which the fracture is unloaded, i.e. the higher the initial unloading stress, the smaller the unloaded aperture. Similarly, the aperture is a function of the initial cooling temperature. For a recovery ratio of unity, the deformation is fully recoverable upon unloading, and it follows the original loading path, but in reverse. When the recovery ratio is zero, the fracture retains the same aperture as that reached at maximum closure, and it remains invariant with reductions in either stress or temperature. Combining these loading and unloading effects, the full description of unloading and cooling behavior may be represented by inserting Eq. Incorporation into deformation and hydraulic analyses of a larger scale is also possible to investigate the effect of irreversibility of fracture on deformation and permeability evolution. This prior model, representing the anticipated influence of dissolution mediated by chemical and mechanical effects, is compared with observations from the few controlled laboratory and in situ experiments that reflect this response. The available data are meager, since deconvolution of the response to mechanical and chemical influences is only possible if temperature and stress are independently controlled and applied. Prior experimental data are available for flow—through tests on a natural fracture in novaculite A second validation example is for a block-loading test conducted at the Idaho Springs experimental mine in Colorado, USA The extent to which the data fit Eq. The aperture–temperature relationship under various constant stresses and the aperture–stress relationship under various constant temperatures are shown in Additional anecdotal evidence of the effect of temperature on the reduction of permeability can be observed in other field and laboratory data. These include the response of a heated-block experiment on fractured, welded tuff in the G-tunnel at the Nevada test site In the heated-block experiment (with a block size of 2 Laboratory experiments with Carnmenellis granite also show changes in fracture aperture response during non-isothermal loading Nonetheless, available data are sparse and more experimental evidence under controlled thermal, mechanical, and chemical conditions will be required to corroborate the viability of the proposed model. In addition to the influence on transport properties, the chemo-mechanically induced aperture changes may also modify deformation and stress fields. The influence can be significant due to the irreversible deformation associated with the processes, and this is investigated further in the current section. This anticipated effect was explored in a one-dimensional geometry with fractures using both linear and nonlinear exponential model. The behavior of the fractured system may be represented by an equivalent medium using equivalent thermo- and chemo-mechanical parameters. Boundary conditions and geometry are shown in The strains are defined as follows: The magnitude of an aperture resulting from both mechanically and chemically mediated changes is defined as: The constitutive equation relating elastic stress to strain is defined as:  After complete cooling of the system, the stress decreases below the initial stress, since a portion of strain has been irreversibly removed. Because the aperture cannot recover to the initial value, relaxation is necessary in the intact rock, and this causes a greater reduction of the thermal stress upon cooling. When the mechanical change is reversible and the chemically mediated change is completely irreversible, the final stress reaches about 3 During the heating and after cooling, the permeability of fractured rock, which may be calculated from the aperture with a given fracture geometry, may be reduced over the case in which chemical effects are not considered. An important observation in this study is that the reduction of permanent stress after cooling does not actually result in the increase of aperture. This counter-intuitive phenomenon is explained by the fact that the reduction of the aperture is the actual cause of the stress relaxation in the constrained model. Therefore, the final aperture after cooling cannot be larger than the initial aperture, even with reduced stress. Finally, this reference case is chosen where the compressive initial stress is present to emphasize the significance of the reduction of stress after cooling. In a system with no initial stress, the final stress would likely become zero because of the tension cut-off in the fracture. A similar response can be modeled using the prior nonlinear constitutive equation. As fracture deformation ( From Eqs. The solutions of these coupled equations are found by applying Newton's method in a system of nonlinear equations by applying successively a Jacobian of two algebraic equations until the solutions converge The model in this paper represents changes in the mechanical and transport characteristics of rock masses as a result of both mechanically and chemically mediated changes. Fracture closure is used as the vehicle to define changes in these properties, with stiffness and permeability defined relative to fracture apertures and to changes in these apertures. This response is evaluated for fractures that stiffen with closure, represented by an exponential relationship between fracture closure and applied effective stress. Dissolution at asperity contacts was incorporated in the evaluation of aperture change, with an activation threshold defined through the concept of a local critical stress, defined relative to the material properties of the contacting minerals. This threshold defines when irreversible chemical effects will initiate and when they will be significant. Since the fundamental parameters that control the evolution of the chemical response are difficult to determine at the rock mass scale, these parameters are recast as empirical coefficients that represent the evolving response. Specifically, these parameters enable the decoupling of chemical effects under invariant stress, for incremented temperature, and under invariant temperature for incremental stress. The utility of this approach was compared with the results of laboratory and field experiments and was shown to adequately fit the observed response. The model was able to match the aperture change observed in novaculite in the laboratory as temperature was increased at an isobaric condition. Comparisons with field experimental data show a reasonable agreement in isothermal loading and isobaric temperature changes. Importantly, these matches cannot be achieved with models of mechanically mediated change alone. Further, this model can be used to determine the evolution of the deformation and hydraulic characteristics at a larger scale to investigate the up-scaled effect in fractured rocks. These observed behaviors were explored for a mechanically constrained, one-dimensional model subject to a thermal loading-unloading cycle. The results showed that chemically mediated change tends to reduce thermal stress during the loading stage and, interestingly, a permanent reduction in stress upon cooling. The thermal stress generated is smaller than where chemical effects are absent, because the reduction in the aperture due to temperature increase partially offsets the expansion of the intact rock. The permanent reduction of stress upon cooling was explained by the irreversible change of the aperture. During the heating and after cooling, the permeability of fractured rock may also be reduced over the case in which chemical effects are not considered. This reduction of permeability even with reduced stress was explained by the fact that the reduction of the aperture is the actual cause of the stress relaxation in the constrained model. The implication of these behaviors is important since thermal stresses are reduced over anticipated magnitudes, and a permanent reduction in stress may result in the loss of keying around underground excavations where local failure may be more likely due to the loss of confinement. Furthermore, the observed evolution of permeability may have a significant impact on the performance of heated structures in rock, such as repositories for the containment of radioactive wastes. The support of the Director, Office of Civilian Radioactive Waste Management, Office of Chief Scientist, of the US Department of Energy under Contract DE-AC02-05CH11231 is gratefully acknowledged. The comments of two anonymous reviewers are appreciated.