Alkali roasting of monazite concentrate using potassium hydroxide in place of sodium hydroxide could allow for the coproduction of tripotassium phosphate, which would be of greater economic value than trisodium phosphate. Therefore, this study aims to assess the ability of potassium hydroxide to extract rare earth elements (REEs), uranium (U) and thorium (Th) from monazite concentrate under similar conditions to those that have been established using sodium hydroxide. A process consisting of alkali pug roast followed by a nitric acid leach has been examined with experimental parameters including roasting temperature (150–250 °C), roasting time (1–4 h), and alkali to concentrate (A/C) weight ratio (1:1–4:1). Overall, potassium hydroxide was found to behave similarly to sodium hydroxide under the conditions studied. The use of potassium hydroxide also helped alleviate the problem of overroasting that occurs with sodium hydroxide. Under relatively high temperatures and extended roasting times, REEs extraction decreased less when compared to sodium hydroxide. Oxalic acid was then used to precipitate REEs, U and Th from the nitric acid leach solution. Oxalic acid dosage was examined to determine the minimum amount needed to effectively precipitate the REEs at room temperature. Precipitation time and temperature were also studied for their effects on the overall precipitation. It was found that 6.2 %w/v oxalic acid was able to precipitate more than 90% of yttrium (Y), lanthanum (La), cerium (Ce), neodymium (Nd), and praseodymium (Pr). Thorium precipitation remained nearly complete (>95%) under all oxalic acid concentrations studied.Rare earth elements (REEs) are needed for numerous applications in a variety of newly-developed technologies, ranging from catalysts for applications such as refining petroleum, to permanent magnets used in wind turbines and electronics, to metallurgical alloys and rechargeable batteries [ Before chemical treatment, monazite is usually concentrated through physical processing, which can include flotation, magnetic separation, electrostatic separation, and/or gravity separation techniques [ Alkali roasting is typically conducted using sodium hydroxide at a temperature of around 160 °C for 3 h with a weight ratio of lixiviant to monazite concentrate of 2:1 [ This study focuses on assessing the mechanism of reaction and feasibility of the use of potassium hydroxide in lieu of sodium hydroxide for the purpose of producing a more valuable coproduct, namely tripotassium phosphate. In this regard, the effects of roasting temperature, roasting time, and alkali to concentrate weight ratio on the leaching of REEs, U and Th have been investigated. The current literature does not examine these parameters in detail for this novel potassium hydroxide roasting method for monazite. Additionally, potassium hydroxide has not yet been utilized commercially for REEs extraction from monazite, and there are few reported studies on its ability to extract REEs from monazite [ After REEs, U and Th are leached into solution, they can be precipitated as oxalates through the addition of oxalic acid. These can then be calcined to form oxides or be separated through solvent extraction techniques [ Monazite can be decomposed using potassium hydroxide in a similar fashion to that with sodium hydroxide. The reaction of the REEs and Th present in the monazite concentrate with potassium hydroxide at elevated temperatures can be described by Eqs. 1 and 2, respectively [ Following decomposition, the water-soluble tripotassium phosphate is separated from the REE hydroxides through water leaching. The residue containing the hydroxides can then be treated with either nitric acid or hydrochloric acid to prepare the REEs for separation through processing methods such as solvent extraction or precipitation using oxalic acid [ In this study, oxalic acid was used to precipitate REEs and Th from the acid leach solution as insoluble oxalates. This precipitate can then be calcined using sodium hydroxide to form oxides [  The monazite concentrate was provided by Korea Institute of Geoscience and Mineral Resources (KIGAM). Before beginning the experiments, the concentrate was first milled using a ball mill and ceramic balls for 90 min. After this, a Jones riffler was used to split the sample before it was wet screened on a Rotap screen shaker. Previous studies have shown it to be advantageous to use a small particle size for alkali decomposition of monazite [ Potassium hydroxide pellets of 99% purity were supplied by Fischer Scientific. Nitric acid for the acid leaching was analytical grade and of ∼69% assay and was supplied by Fischer Scientific. Deionized (DI) water was used for all water leaching experiments. Certified ACS ammonium molybdate (82.4% assay) was supplied by Fisher Scientific and was used to determine the phosphorus content in the acid leach solutions. A 10% w/v oxalic acid solution was used for the oxalate precipitation experiments and was supplied by Fischer Scientific. Roasting was carried out using mild steel crucibles with a top diameter, bottom diameter, and height of 45, 25, and 39 mm, respectively. A muffle furnace (Lindberg/Blue Model BF 51732) under a laboratory fume hood was utilized, and the atmosphere was not controlled. About 5.0 g of monazite concentrate was weighed and then placed in the crucible. Potassium hydroxide was then weighed out, stirred with 20 mL DI water, and added to the crucible. Water was added to be consistent with the currently used sodium hydroxide method, which is typically carried out in the form of slurry [ After drying, the water leach residue was subjected to acid leaching using 200 mL of 30 vol.% nitric acid at 70 °C, using a leach time of 30 min and a stirring speed of 500 rpm. This concentration of nitric acid was chosen to be consistent with previous studies using sodium hydroxide to provide a fair comparison between the two methods [ Following ICP-MS analysis, the percent extraction was calculated. The results from ICP-MS were provided in mg/L, and were converted to grams of each REE, Th, or U in the final nitric acid leach solution. Percent extraction was calculated as the mass for each element in the final leach solution (M Tripotassium phosphate can be produced as a valuable byproduct during the water leaching stage. Its removal during this stage is important not only to produce a byproduct that can be sold as a fertilizer, but also to prevent the formation of REE complexes that would hinder REE recovery [ After each alkali roast-acid leach experiment, ∼10 mL of acid leach solution was measured and added to a beaker on the hot plate equipped with a magnetic stir bar. Ideally, the phosphorus content should be removed before the acid leach stage, thereby leaving little in the acid leach solution. Before the addition of ammonium molybdate, the free acid in the solution must be neutralized. To achieve this, ammonium hydroxide was added dropwise while stirring until a small amount of precipitate developed. Next, nitric acid was added dropwise until the precipitate dissolved. The solution was then warmed to ∼40 °C, and ammonium molybdate dissolved in deionized water was added until the formation of a precipitate, ammonium phosphomolybdate, was observed. Stirring and heating were then ceased, and the solution was removed from the hot plate and allowed to settle for one hour. The solution was filtered using a vacuum pump, and the precipitate was washed three times, first with 1 vol.% nitric acid, then with 1 vol.% ammonium nitrate, and finally with deionized water. Then the precipitate was dried in a drying furnace set at ∼90 °C overnight. It was then allowed to cool before being weighed. The mass of the phosphorus in 10 mL of acid leach solution was calculated from the total mass of the precipitate, and this number was used to determine the amount of phosphorus in the entire acid leach solution [ Next, the use of oxalic acid to precipitate REEs and Th from the acid leach solution was examined. For these experiments, it was necessary to scale up the potassium hydroxide pug roast-nitric acid leach procedure to produce ∼1.6 L of acid leach solution, so that the same solution could be used for each oxalate precipitation experiment. The ICP-MS analysis was run on the acid leach solution, and the concentration of REEs, Th, and U in the acid leach solution used for the precipitation experiments is shown in About 45 mL of acid leach solution were used in each experiment. The desired amount of oxalic acid was added dropwise from a burette over the course of ten minutes. Using a pH meter, pH was recorded before oxalic acid addition, immediately following the addition, and at the completion of precipitation time. The experimental parameters and their levels for the precipitation experiments are shown in After the completion of precipitation time, the precipitates were immediately separated from the solution through vacuum filtration and were allowed to dry overnight in a drying oven set at ∼80 °C. The mass of the precipitates was then recorded, and the filtrate was subjected to ICP-MS analysis. Percent precipitated was calculated using Eq. 11, where C Roasting temperature and time were held constant at 210 °C and 4 h, respectively, while A/C was varied at 1:1, 2:1, 3:1, and 4:1 levels. The results of this set of experiments are shown in Thorium extraction increased from ∼75% at the 1:1 ratio to ∼100% at the 2:1 ratio and remained at ∼100% through the 3:1 and 4:1 ratios. Uranium extraction decreased slightly as A/C was increased, going from ∼60% at the 1:1 and 2:1 ratios to ∼53% at the 4:1 ratio. This uranium behavior is consistent with the behavior reported previously [ Based on the experimental results, alkali consumption was calculated, and the results are shown in Phosphorus content in the acid leach solution was also reported in If the monazite concentrate is not fully decomposed during alkali roasting, the REE, U and Th phosphates will not be soluble in the subsequent leaching steps, lowering the final phosphorus value in the acid leach solution. Following this reasoning, it is expected that the phosphorus content may increase as REEs, Th, and U extraction increased, which is what was found to happen between the 1:1 and 2:1 A/C ratios. However, according to Eq. 1, the phosphorus content should be converted to tripotassium phosphate, which is water soluble. Therefore, the increase in phosphorus content is probably caused by incomplete formation of tripotassium phosphate, although the reaction presented in Eq. 1 proceeded to a certain extent to form REE hydroxides. Between the 2:1 and 3:1 ratios, phosphorus content decreased from ∼0.12 g/L to ∼0.041 g/L, although both alkali consumption and REEs extraction increased. This decrease most likely indicates that the phosphorus was more completely removed during the roasting stage as tripotassium phosphate due to the increased amount of potassium hydroxide available with the larger weight ratio. Phosphorus content remained at the relatively low value of ∼0.045 g/L for the 4:1 ratio as well. The roasting temperature was varied in the range of 150–250 °C. The roasting time was 4 h, A/C ratio was 3:1, and the average particle size was 17.9 μm. The effect of roasting temperature on REEs extraction is shown in The decrease in Ce and La extraction between 210 and 250 °C is consistent with the decrease observed when sodium hydroxide was used [  The alkali consumption and phosphorus content in the acid leach solution as a function of roasting temperature are shown in The phosphorus content in the acid leach solution increased between the 150 °C and 180 °C roast temperatures from ∼0.021 g/L to ∼0.044 g/L. This corresponds with the increase in REEs, Th, and U extraction observed between these temperatures, as well as the increase in alkali consumption, and suggests that monazite was most likely not decomposed effectively at the lower temperatures. The phosphate content increased again between 210 °C and 250 °C from ∼0.041 g/L to ∼0.052 g/L, correlating with the decrease in Th and REEs extraction. This data provides insight into whether the decrease in extraction was caused by insoluble complexes or partial dehydration of REE or Th hydroxides. The insoluble complexes between phosphate and Th or REEs would report to the acid leach residue, thereby decreasing the phosphorus content. However, if the REE or Th hydroxides had briefly formed before becoming dehydrated, this would result in an increase in phosphorus content in the acid leach solution. The phosphorus data reveals that phosphorus content increased in the acid leach solution at 250 °C, which means it is unlikely that insoluble phosphate complexes formed at appreciable amounts, if at all. Instead, partial dehydration of the REEs and Th hydroxides could be the reason for a decrease in extraction. The significant decrease in alkali consumption at this higher temperature further supports this hypothesis. The effect of roasting time on REEs extraction is shown in Thorium and uranium extraction as a function of roasting time are shown in The effect of roasting time on the alkali consumption and phosphate content in the acid leach solution are shown in The phosphorus content remained steady at ∼0.064 g/L for the shorter two roast times. However, there was an unexpected increase to ∼0.10 g/L observed at the 3 h roast time. Overall extraction was high at this roast time, so this increase in phosphorus content was not anticipated. At the longest roasting time of 4 h, phosphorus content decreased to ∼0.041 g/L, which most likely indicates that more phosphate was removed during the water leaching process as tripotassium phosphate, thereby decreasing the content in the acid leach solution. In a related study by Berry et al. [ Under more aggressive conditions such as increased temperature and roasting time, potassium hydroxide produced more complete extraction than that achieved using sodium hydroxide [ To understand whether the decrease in REEs and Th extraction with increasing temperature and roasting time was caused by the formation of insoluble phosphate complexes or partial dehydration of the hydroxides, alkali consumption was calculated using titration, and phosphorus content in the acid leach solutions was determined. For the sodium hydroxide experiments, a large decrease in phosphorus content in the acid leach solutions between the 210 °C and 250 °C experiments was observed, which correlates with the decrease in Ce, La, and Th extraction. As temperature was increased and roasting time was kept constant at 4 h, the phosphate content in the acid leach solution obtained from the sodium hydroxide roasting experiments decreased considerably from ∼0.0072 g/L at 210 °C to ∼0.0028 g/L at 250 °C. Formation of insoluble phosphate complexes would result in a decrease in phosphate content in the acid leach solution because the complexes would be expected to report to the leach residue; therefore, this may be a possible explanation for the decrease in REEs and Th extraction. In contrast, when potassium hydroxide was used, phosphorus content increased from ∼0.041 g/L to ∼0.052 g/L between the higher two temperatures, while the alkali consumption decreased from ∼0.71 g/g to ∼0.04 g/g concentrate. The alkali consumption would be expected to decrease if the REE and Th hydroxides become partially dehydrated shortly after forming, so this observation might indicate partial dehydration of the REE and Th hydroxides is the primary reason for the decrease in extraction when using potassium hydroxide, and that insoluble complexes might not be as much of an issue for the potassium hydroxide roast method as they are when using sodium hydroxide. This could explain why the sodium hydroxide experiments showed a more negative response to the higher temperature than what was shown by potassium hydroxide [ An in-depth cost analysis should be completed on a situational basis, as the requirements for the specific plant and ore will vary. To conduct a cost analysis for switching from NaOH to KOH, several relevant variables should be taken into consideration (i.e. cost of electricity, reagents for the more intense extraction conditions, etc.). Although the cost of potassium hydroxide is roughly 1.5 times the cost of sodium hydroxide, tripotassium phosphate is worth roughly 3 times as much as trisodium phosphate [ About 45 mL of acid leach solution were used in each precipitation experiment. There was no adjustment to the initial pH of the solution, although adjustments to pH were attempted. However, a precipitate would develop from the acid leach solution whenever pH was adjusted. Therefore, no pH adjustments were made for the oxalic acid precipitation experiments. Through titration, the concentration of nitric acid in the acid leach solution was found to be ∼6.76 M. For each experiment, oxalic acid was added slowly over the course of ten minutes using a burette while an overhead mixer set at 500 rpm ensured uniformity of the solution. The precipitation time was 1 h, with mixing for the entire hour. The temperature was kept constant at 25 °C. ICP-MS was used to analyze both the initial acid leach solution and the depleted acid leach solution in order to calculate the percent precipitated using Eq. 11. A 10 %w/v solution of oxalic acid was used in various volumes for each experiment to achieve the desired total %w/v when considering the sum of the oxalic acid solution volume and the initial 45 mL of acid leach solution. The REEs, Th, and U precipitation as a function of oxalic acid concentration are shown in The effect of temperature was investigated at the levels 2–6 °C, 25 °C, and 50 °C while precipitation time was 1 h and oxalic acid concentration was 0.59 %w/v. An LW Scientific circulating water bath was used for temperature control, and ice water was used for the lowest temperature. For this experiment, temperature started at 2 °C but rose to 6 °C by the end of the precipitation time. Because temperature was closely monitored for this set of experiments, it was important to quickly filter the precipitate immediately after completion of precipitation time. After the separation and drying of the precipitate, the mass of the precipitate was recorded. ICP-MS analysis could not be used for this set of experiments because the solution had returned to room temperature. Therefore, the precipitation percentages were calculated based on the mass of the precipitate. To simplify this calculation, the entire precipitate content was assumed to be lanthanum oxalate. The mass of the precipitate could then be converted into moles of lanthanum, taking into account that two moles of lanthanum are present in every one mole of lanthanum oxalate. The percent precipitated was calculated by dividing the value for the moles of lanthanum in the precipitate by the initial total moles of REEs in the acid leach solution and multiplying by 100. The results for these experiments are shown in Lowering the temperature was not found to have any significant effect on the overall precipitation, although the precipitation of individual REEs and Th was not determined. Raising the temperature was found to lower the overall precipitation to ∼72%. Liu et al. [ The precipitation time was varied in the range 15 min to 1 h at 15 min intervals. The temperature was kept constant at 25 °C and the oxalic acid concentration was 5.9 %w/v. For similar reasons as with the temperature experiments, ICP-MS was not suitable to analyze these experiments. The precipitate was weighed after separation through vacuum filtration and drying overnight in a drying furnace set at ∼90 °C. The weight of the precipitate was then used to calculate the overall percent precipitated, and the results are shown in The percent precipitated was found to increase from ∼65% within 15 min to ∼95% at 30 min. There was no significant change in precipitation by extending precipitation time past 30 min. Potassium hydroxide pug roast followed by nitric acid leaching of a monazite concentrate was investigated. The effects of roasting temperature, roasting time, and alkali to concentrate (A/C) weight ratio on the extraction of REEs, U, and Th have been reported. For each set of experiments, the alkali consumption and phosphorus content in the acid leach solution were calculated. Particle size was kept constant at an average of 17.9 μm. The REEs and Th extraction increased with increasing A/C ratio, with all five of the REEs examined (La, Ce, Y, Nd, and Pr) reaching >95% extraction at the 3:1 ratio. Thorium extraction also increased with A/C ratio, and reached ∼100% at the 2:1 ratio. Uranium extraction decreased slightly with increasing A/C. As roasting temperature was increased from 150 °C to 210 °C, the REEs and Th extraction increased significantly, with all REEs achieving >95% extraction and Th achieving ∼100% extraction at 210 °C. However, when roasting temperature was raised to 250 °C, REEs extraction dropped about 5–10%, most notably for Ce and La. Also, Th extraction decreased to ∼55%. The alkali consumption and phosphorus data provided some understanding as to why this might be occurring. Phosphorus content in the acid leach solution was found to increase slightly between 210 °C and 250 °C, indicating that the formation of phosphate complexes is unlikely because these should generally report to the acid leach residue rather than remain in the solution. However, the alkali consumption dropped dramatically between the two higher temperatures, leading to the conclusion that the REEs and Th hydroxides may have had problems in forming or in being dehydrated after briefly forming. The roasting time was varied from 1 h to 4 h. The REEs, Th, and U extraction were all found to increase with roasting time for all four levels tested. In precipitation of REEs, U, and Th using oxalic acid, the concentration of oxalic acid was increased from 2.6 to 6.2 %w/v to determine the minimal amount of oxalic acid necessary to effectively precipitate the REEs from solution. With 6.2 %w/v, precipitation was >90% for all five of the REEs considered. For all REEs except La, this value was >95%. 5.9 %w/v oxalic acid was selected to be held constant for the temperature and precipitation time experiments. Lowering the temperature to ∼2 °C was not found to have a significant effect on the overall precipitation. Raising the temperature to 50 °C resulted in decreased precipitation, most likely because stable crystals did not form [ This study was sponsored by