This paper deals with the preparation and characterization of nanocomposites of poly(ether ether ketone) (PEEK) containing nano-aluminum oxide (n-Al2O3) filler up to 30wt% (12vol%) loading. Nanocomposites showed improved thermal stability, crystallization, and coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE). Thermogravimetric analysis showed enhanced thermal stability and char yield on increasing the n-Al2O3 loading in PEEK matrix. The peak crystallization temperature is increased up to 13°C for the nanocomposites as compared to pure PEEK. The CTE is decreased to a value very close to the CTE of copper at 12vol% Al2O3 loading. The CTE values obtained were compared with the theoretical equations in the literature. The X-ray diffraction showed that PEEK crystalline structure is unchanged with addition of n-Al2O3. The distribution of n-Al2O3 in the PEEK matrix was studied by transmission electron microscopy and scanning electron microscopy. The results show that the prepared n-Al2O3/PEEK nanocomposites may have potential applications in electronics.High performance polymer composites such as poly(ether ether ketone) (PEEK), polyethersulphone (PES), polyphenylenesulphide (PPS) and polyimides reinforced with ceramic fillers result in unique combination of thermal, mechanical and electrical properties, which make them useful for various applications. By introducing suitable reinforcing fillers in polymers, composite properties can be tailored to meet specific design requirements such as low density, high strength, high stiffness, high damping, chemical resistance, thermal shock resistance, high thermal conductivity, low coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) and good electrical properties such as dielectric constant. It is well documented that PEEK exhibits excellent thermal, mechanical, electrical properties, good moisture and chemicals resistance There are a several hundred publications on the effect of ceramic fillers on different polymer properties, but there is rare literature on the effect of In view of the above, in present paper a systematic investigation of the effect of electrically insulating and thermally conducting The commercial PEEK, grade 5300PF donated by Gharda Chemicals Ltd. Panoli, Gujarat, India under the trade name GATONE™ PEEK was used as matrix. It has a reported inherent viscosity of 0.87 Nanocomposites of PEEK reinforced with The density of the nanocomposites prepared by taking appropriate amount of PEEK and Experimental density ( The thermal stability of the PEEK nanocomposites was determined on a TGA using Mettler-Toledo TGA/SDTA 851 The melting and non-isothermal crystallization behavior of PEEK nanocomposites was performed on DuPont Instruments 910 DSC. The samples placed in aluminum pan were first heated from 30 XRD pattern of as molded PEEK nanocomposites was recorded on Philips X’Pert PANalytical PW 3040/60. Ni-filtered Cu Kα radiation ( Morphological analysis of the PEEK powder, The out-of-plane (through thickness direction) CTE of the nanocomposites were determined using Perkin–Elmer DMA 7e in thermo mechanical analyzer mode. The detailed procedure of the CTE measurement was described elsewhere PEEK nanocomposites reinforced with varying weight fraction of   It is observed that as the   DSC measurements were carried out to determine the thermal properties such as melting temperature ( It is seen from the curves (a–h) of From The half time (   The Various models such as rule of mixture (ROM), Turner, and Kerner’s models have been discussed in literature for obtaining the CTE of composites. The simplest model for CTE of the composite material is the ROM, which serves as the first order approximation to the overall calculation of the CTE of the composite. This can be expressed as Kerner has developed the following expression for the CTE of composite consisting approximately spherical particles dispersed in matrix and wetted by a uniform layer of matrix. Composites were assumed to be macroscopically isotropic and homogeneous Presently commercial glass/epoxy (FR-4) composite is used as packaging substrates in electronics, which have much higher out-of-plane CTE (>60 The PEEK matrix nanocomposites reinforced with We thank Dr. P.D. Trivedi, Polymer Division, Gharda Chemicals, India for providing PEEK powder for this research work. We also thank Dr. S.L. Kamath, IIT Bombay for performing DSC analysis and Mrs. Anuya Nisal, NCL Pune for making ultra-thin composite section. SAIF, IIT Bombay is acknowledged for the TEM analysis. We are grateful to Dr. T. L. Prakash, Executive Director of C-MET for his interest in this work.