Mechanochemical reaction of pyrite with aluminum and magnesium were carried out for pyrite reduction using a planetary ball mill in an inert atmosphere. Thermodynamic studies indicated that the mechanochemical reactions are mechanically-induced self-propagating reaction (MSR). The XRD patterns of pyrite and magnesium mechanochemical reaction proved the reaction could not be complete after 280 min milling under the test conditions. On the other hand, the mechanochemical reaction between aluminum and pyrite completed after 120 min under similar milling conditions. The results confirm that in the primary MSR reactions troilite (FeS) phase was formed as an evidence for non-stoichiometric mechanochemical reaction. Thus, the mechanochemical reaction primary test of pyrite and aluminum was corrected with addition of more aluminum. The XRD results verified the troilite could be completely eliminated from the final product and the iron and aluminum phases contained main constituents of the obtained powder. The FE-SEM images indicated that the particles are about 100 nm to less than 1 μm in size. Finally, from SEM/EDS and XRF results, the zero-valent iron (ZVI) particles were surrounded by aluminum sulfide phase comparing.In mechanochemistry, mechanical energy was applied for reactivity enhancement, performance of alloying and synthesis processes. The processes have widely used in various fields such as hydrometallurgy and preparation of advanced and nano structured materials Preparation of nano zero-valent Iron (NZVI) is classified in nano scale environmental technology due to appreciable capability of NZVI for removing of various contaminants such as chlorinated organic solvent, organochlorine pesticides, organic dyes, various inorganic compounds and metal ions such as Pb (II), As(III), Cu(II) It should be noted that natural pyrite (FeS Regarding to the facts that the application of pyrite as an initial source for preparation of NZVI is not reported, the present study aimed to investigate mechanochemical reduction of pyrite by reactive metals of aluminum and magnesium metal powders as first step for preparation of NZVI from natural pyrite by using mechanochemical methods. The progress of mentioned MSR reactions are evaluated using X-ray diffraction analysis and an attempt is exerted to complete at least one of them. A high-purity pyrite concentrate was obtained using conventional beneficiation methods. XRD analysis of the pyrite concentrate disclosed that the pyrite reflections solely corresponded with JCPDS No. 1-1295 ( The aluminum (Merck 1.01056.0250) and magnesium (Merck art 5815) metal powders were used for mechanochemical reaction of pyrite as will be described in the following section. Mechanical reactions of pyrite was conducted in a planetary ball mill (Pulverisette 6, FRITSCH, Germany) in a 250 cm The X-ray diffraction patterns of natural pyrite and products were collected with Bruker Axs D8 advance instrument (Germany), applying Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å) at 50 KV and 250 mA in the two theta ranges of 25–70°. The patterns were recorded using a step size of 0.02 and a counting time of 3 s per step. The chemical composition of final product was analyzed using X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectrometry [SPECTRO XEPOS, Germany]. Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) was conducted by MIRA3 FEG-SEM instrument [TESCAN, Czech Republic]. To face disadvantageous impact of high-energy ball milling process such as high energy consumption and low industrial capacity, the milling times were considered less than 5 h in the primary mechanochemical reaction test of pyrite. The XRD patterns of the samples obtained during mechanochemical reaction of pyrite with magnesium are displayed in To obtain the final sample, the milling was performed for 280 min ( For overall view, all recorded patterns related to the mechanochemical reaction of pyrite with Mg were presented in The mechanochemical reaction of pyrite by co-milling with aluminum metal according to Eq. The appearance of peaks of aluminum sulfide (JCODS No. 4-0787) and iron phases and disappearance of initial pyrite peaks after 120 min mechanochemical reaction of pyrite with aluminum prove the mechanochemical reaction advance is much more developed than previously reported reaction of pyrite with magnesium ( The XRD patterns obtained from the mechanochemical reaction of pyrite with aluminum metal powder demonstrated that with increasing milling time, the intensities of peaks related to newly formed phases increased and the intensity of pyrite reflection peaks decreased similar to previous mechanochemical reaction ( The primary mechanochemical reaction of pyrite and the used metal powders verified that although the thermodynamic study proved the ΔH/ΔC As mentioned before, preparation of nano zero-valent iron (NZVI) from natural pyrite requires a complete reaction between natural pyrite and a Reductant metal powder. Regarding to the obtained results and operational preferences such as complete reactions, short milling time and mechanochemical reaction advance, the mechanochemical reaction of pyrite with aluminum metal powder was selected to mechanochemical reduction of pyrite and preparation of ZVI-aluminum sulfide composite. To overcome the problem of unwanted troilite phase formation, the selected mechanochemical The result proved the final product obtained from modified mechanochemical reduction of pyrite with aluminum is consisted of iron and aluminum sulfide phases. The aluminum sulfide can convert to aluminum sulfate in aqueous media used as coagulant for water purification. Regarding the aluminum sulfide and iron coexistence in the compound, the performance of the powder can be improved in potential application areas like environmental subjects. The product comprehensively characterization is far from the study aims. The final product was characterized using SEM/EDS, XRF and FE-SEM analysis. The comparison of XRF and SEM/EDS analysis provide primary information about how the phases are stand with each other ( The FE-SEM images are illustrated in As a main achievement, the ZVI-aluminum sulfide compound was prepared through co-milling of pyrite with aluminum for 120 min during a mechanochemical reaction. In addition, the mechanochemical treatment of natural pyrite with metal reactants of aluminum and magnesium proved: The mechanochemical reaction of pyrite and magnesium could not be complete in short period of milling. The result confirmed the refractory structure of pyrite resisting even in intensive milling conditions in the MSR reaction. The XRD patterns related to the mechanochemical reaction of pyrite with Aluminum metal powder proved that the peaks belonged to pyrite phase were disappeared after 120 min co-milling of pyrite and Al as promising sign for the reaction completion. The troilite phase appearance in the primary mechanochemical reactions implied that mechanochemical reaction of pyrite with aluminum and magnesium is not proceed under stoichiometric conditions. Mechanochemical reduction of pyrite was modified in corrected mechanochemical reaction under non-stoichiometric conditions in which more aluminum powder was co-milled with pyrite. The zero-valent iron and aluminum sulfide composed the final product as major phases wherein no troilite phase was observed in the XRD patterns as major or minor phase. Finally, the FE-SEM images confirm the wide varieties in particles size from 100 nm to 1 μm. The chemical composition of the final product was obtained by using SEM/EDS and XRF analysis. The comparison of results reveals that the aluminum sulfide acts as a cover to protect the iron phase from agglomeration and oxidation.