The Asymmetric DCB test (ADCB) is an alternative configuration to the MMB test (Mixed Mode Bending) to produce a mixed mode load state at the crack tip. In this test, the crack plane is out of the laminate midplane. This test configuration is as simple as pure mode I tests. Nevertheless, the mixed mode load state at the crack tip cannot be controlled by means of the test fixtures and so G
                     I and G
                     II are not easily calculated. In this test configuration, the position of the crack plane controls the percentage of mode I and mode II load at the crack tip.
                  In this paper, unidirectional carbon epoxy ADCB samples have been used to study the mixed mode load state at the crack tip from different points of view: experimental, numerical and analytical procedures.
                  The MBT method has been adapted to allow the calculation of G in ADCB samples. Also, an empirical procedure has been proposed in order to calculate G
                     I and G
                     II.Delamination is a complex process where more than one failure mode is usually present giving rise to a mixed mode mechanism. There are several experimental methods documented in the literature in order to determine the mixed mode fracture toughness in laminated composites. The procedure most widely used is the MMB method (Mixed Mode Bending) ADCB test is an interesting alternative to the MMB test. This test configuration is similar to the DCB (Double Cantilever Beam) tests. Nevertheless, in ADCB samples the crack plane is out of the laminate midplane and so a mixed mode load state is present at the crack tip ( The analytical procedures developed in the ASTM D 5528-01 standard that allows the calculation of There are some analytical expressions developed in the literature to compute In this work, they were carried out ADCB tests on two different unidirectional carbon epoxy laminates: AS4/8552 and AS4/3501. The Hexcel 3501 matrix is an epoxy resin modified to improve toughness. Different approaches were used in order to compute the energy release rate. The specimens were modelled by means of FE analysis. On the other hand, an analytical method (based on the Modified Beam Theory) and an empirical formulation (based on FEM studies) were developed to calculate The ASTM Standard D 5528-01 This theory, for samples with the crack placed on the midplane, is based on the stress analysis of a perfectly built-in double cantilever beam:      Δ: calibration parameter. For the ADCB specimen, in which the crack plane is out of the midplane, the calculation cannot be performed as a perfect built-in beam. Furthermore, the displacement is not symmetrical with respect to the midplane. One possible approach to determine The compliance can be written as: Differentiating and substituting in Eq. FE modelling is a useful tool to analyze fracture mechanisms In this numerical method, the crack path is modelled using pairs of coincident nodes. The forces at the crack tip are calculated in a first step when the load reaches a critical value. The imposed displacement in the sample is then held and the coupled DOFs of the nodes at the crack tip are released in a second step. Displacements are then calculated in this second step. This procedure can be analytically described as follows:  Δ     This method is similar to the VCCT (Virtual Crack Closure Technique) In order to determine an empirical expression, multiple sample configurations with different crack positions From these results, an empirical equation was derived that fits the numerical results and allows the calculation of  From the plot in The function (an ellipse) that fits the numerical results can be written as: The ellipse semi axes are:   Two 6 The mechanical properties of the laminates are shown in Five specimens of each material were tested in a MTS testing machine with a 10      The ADCB specimens were modelled by means of an ANSYS Calibration parameters for the MBT calculation (Δ and (1/ As can be seen in Finally, Comparing results in The ADCB test constitutes an alternative configuration to the MMB test to produce a mixed mode load state at the crack tip. This test configuration is as simple as pure mode I tests. In this paper, two different CFRP laminates were tested: AS4/8552 and AS4/3501. The Hexcel 3501 matrix is an epoxy resin modified to improve toughness properties. Nevertheless, the energy release rate ( In order to calculate