Introduction
                  Reported initial success rates after lateral locked plating (LLP) of distal femur fractures have led to more concerning outcomes with reported nonunion rates now ranging from 0 to 21%. Reported factors associated with nonunion include comorbidities such as obesity, age and diabetes. In this study, our goal was to identify patient comorbidities, injury and construct characteristics that are independent predictors of nonunion risk in LLP of distal femur fractures; and to develop a predictive algorithm of nonunion risk, irrespective of institutional criteria for clinical intervention variability.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  A retrospective review of 283 distal femoral fractures in 278 consecutive patients treated with LLP at three Level1 academic trauma centers. Nonunion was liberally defined as need for secondary procedure to manage poor healing based on unrestricted surgeon criteria. Patient demographics (age, gender), comorbidities (obesity, smoking, diabetes, chronic steroid use, dialysis), injury characteristics (AO type, periprosthetic fracture, open fracture, infection), and management factors (institution, reason for intervention, time to intervention, plate length, screw density, and plate material) were obtained for all participants. Multivariable analysis was performed using logistic regression to control for confounding in order to identify independent risk factors for nonunion.
               
                  Results
                  28 of the 283 fractures were treated for nonunion, 13 were referred to us from other institutions. Obesity (BMI>30), open fracture, occurrence of infection, and use of stainless steel plate were significant independent risk factors (P
                     <0.01). A predictive algorithm demonstrates that when none of these variables are present (titanium instead of stainless steel) the risk of nonunion requiring intervention is 4%, but increases to 96% with all factors present. When a stainless plate is used, obesity alone carries a risk of 44% while infection alone a risk of 66%. While Chi-square testing suggested no institutional differences in nonunion rates, the time to intervention for nonunion varied inversely with nonunion rates between institutions, indicating varying trends in management approach.
               
                  Discussion
                  Obesity, open fracture, occurrence of infection, and the use of stainless steel are prognostic risk factors of nonunion in distal femoral fractures treated with LLP independent of differing trends in how surgeons intervene in the management of nonunion.Distal femur fractures are a common orthopedic problem over a range of ages with an overall incidence in the order of 37 per 100,000 person-years The primary objective of the present study was to identify patient comorbidities, injury, and construct characteristics that are independent predictors of increased risk of nonunion when LLP is used in the fixation of distal femoral fractures. Our main goal was to use these independent predictors to develop a predictive algorithm of nonunion risk to be used in a clinical setting to counsel patients at risk. A secondary objective was to examine the variation among institutional nonunion rates at our three affiliated Level 1 trauma centers to determine whether reported nonunion rates may also be associated to overall management approach. Our hypothesis was that despite potential variability between institutional criteria for the diagnosis of nonunion and for intervention, there would still be identifiable patient comorbidities, injury, and construct characteristics predictive of nonunion risk that are independent of management approach. Identifying these factors will allow a treating surgeon to identify high-risk cases preoperatively so that measures to promote healing such as more comprehensive metabolic workups, medical intervention, early bone grafting, use of osteoinductive agents, and bone stimulators may be implemented. Further, these findings will be useful to help surgeons counsel patients with these injuries about anticipated outcomes. A retrospective case-control study was conducted of all acute supracondylar femoral fractures treated with LLP by the orthopedic trauma services at our three affiliated Level 1 trauma centers between August 2004 and December 2010. Minimum age for inclusion in the study was 18 years with a minimum follow up of three months. Patients who were not fully healed at three months but had no follow-up at or after six months were excluded, as their healing was not able to be determined. Supracondylar fractures were defined as AO/OTA types 33 A and 33 C occurring within 15 All fractures were treated with a LLP system. Due, however, to hospital contracting, our devices included primarily LISS plates (Synthes, USA) and condylar locking plates (Synthes, USA) of either stainless or titanium manufacture. Surgeons used constructs with variable numbers of locking screws as they deemed necessary, applied and spread in any pattern they felt to be appropriate. All LISS constructs involved only locking screws with either unicortical or bicortical purchase on both sides of the fracture. Condylar locking plates (non LISS) involved in the proximal aspect of the fracture a combination of cortical screws (bicortical purchase) supplemented with one or more locking screws of bicortical purchase. At least one cortical screw was first used to bring the plate closer to the bone and for buttressing effect as needed. Distal to the fracture, locking screws alone were predominantly used. Post-op follow up and weight bearing restrictions were also at the discretion of the treating surgeon. Given the retrospective nature of the study and the intent to assess whether management criteria affected an institution's nonunion rates, nonunion was liberally and unconventionally defined as the need for a secondary surgical procedure to improve healing (i.e., bone grafting, hardware exchange, other) or to otherwise resolve a problem associated with poor healing (i.e., hardware failure, revision fixation, conversion to arthroplasty, amputation, etc.). The criteria for intervention were not pre-defined, which meant that each surgeon treated a distal femoral fracture that exhibited poor healing progression based on his or her own experience and preference. Reason for intervention could be conservative (i.e., revising a nonunion only at the time of mechanical failure) or proactive (i.e., proceeding with bone grafting based on patient symptoms or radiographic findings at any time in the post-operative course). Each patient record was reviewed for: Patient factors and comorbidities sex BMI/obesity history of diabetes smoking history chronic steroid use receives dialysis, Injury related factors open vs. closed fracture AO classification periprosthetic fracture development of infection, Management factors institution where treatment was rendered (A, B, or C) the time to intervention from initial repair the reason for intervention (hardware failure vs. other) construct characteristics including material of the implant, plate length, and screw density (number of screws placed/total screw holes in plate). A subgroup of 13 patients who had their primary surgery done at a different institution but had their nonunion treated at one of ours were included in our analysis of patient and fracture factors but excluded from our calculations of institutional nonunion rates. IRB approval was obtained from all institutions prior to data collection. Patient and fracture characteristics were compared between two groups (patients who underwent surgical revision for nonunion and those who did not require intervention) using the following statistical tests: Student A total of 283 acute supracondylar femur fractures in 278 patients met inclusion criteria between August 2004 and December 2010. Of these, 41 fractures were surgically treated for nonunion; 13 of these fractures had been referred from an outside institution. A total of 28 nonunions occurred after treatment was rendered by our staff for a combined institutional nonunion rate of 10%. Median follow-up for all 283 fractures was 12 months (interquartile range: 9–24 months). Among the patients who underwent a secondary surgical procedure, the median time for intervention for nonunion from their original fixation with LLP was 12 months (interquartile range: 6–15 months)  Using open fracture, infection, obesity, and stainless steel, as our four statistically significant independent variables, a predictive algorithm for nonunion was developed using maximum likelihood estimation in logistic regression ( Excluding the 13 patients with nonunions whose initial surgeries were done at referring institutions, nonunion rates and times to intervention were calculated for our three affiliated institutions ( Optimistic early reports on the success of LLP and the LISS system in the management of distal femur fractures with low reported rates of delayed healing have contributed to a proliferation in the use of this technique for trauma and geriatric care Many of the published studies of LLP treatment of distal femur fractures have reported small numbers of patients. Only a few of these studies have had the power or intent to seek predictors of nonunion such as patient comorbidities, injury factors, and technical or instrumentation related factors The majority of the studies assessing predictors of nonunion have had two common limitations: they were mostly retrospective, and they all had different ways of defining nonunion. While the present study suffers from similar limitations, we propose that by adopting a liberal definition of nonunion and not delineating any strict management protocols, any statistically significant nonunion predictors that are then identified may be of higher clinical relevance. We recognize that a retrospective multicenter and multi-surgeon study can never have a truly consistent definition of nonunion to determine when intervention is required. In any retrospective study there will surely be many participating surgeons each defining and treating nonunion in a somewhat different way. However, this variability also happens to be the reality and nature of clinical practice. It would be difficult to argue with the statement that the treatment of nonunion is likely one of the least standardized practices in orthopedic traumatology. It can also be argued that even if a large prospective study were to be designed, there are presently no quantitative methods to measure the extent of a nonunion that could then be used to clearly define consistent criteria for intervention. Most radiographic measures, including CT, show high inter-observer variability when classifying a fracture and assessing healing with clinical exam findings even more inconsistent When comparing management factors between our participating institutions, a longer time to intervention appeared to correlate with a lower nonunion rate and a preferred indication for intervention consisting of hardware failure. This may simply reflect the fact that by waiting longer some patients that appear at first to have a nonunion may actually proceed to healing. Alternatively, even if a fracture is not fully healed, stress shielding of the hardware secondary to some partial healing may shift the fatigue profile of a plate significantly later in time. Thus, some implants may not fail within the lifetime of a frail geriatric patient or before another intervention is performed such as arthroplasty for subsequent arthrosis. Unfortunately, mortality in geriatric fractures of the distal femur approaches that observed for hip fractures We conclude that despite varying trends between our three affiliated institutions in terms of nonunion rates, times to intervention, and indications for intervention, statistically significant and independent predictors of nonunion risk can still be identified. In our study, these are a history of obesity, the occurrence of an open fracture, the occurrence of an infection, and the use of stainless steel plates. We used these variables to develop a predictive algorithm that we hope will serve clinicians in counseling and caring for patients at risk. We propose that a more liberal definition of nonunion consistent with the realities of clinical practice does not limit the value of a well-planned retrospective study. While we do agree it is difficult to compare nonunion rates between different surgeons, institutions, or published studies when nonunion and criteria for intervention are different, we believe that when a large series of retrospective data are pooled, predictive factors will still be identifiable given a proper statistical model that accounts for any possible biases or confounding, despite differences in management. For future results to be truly comparable between studies, it would be worthwhile for the trauma community to first develop and agree on a strict quantitative and reproducible measure of nonunion that could be used to define strict intervention criteria. Future work should be directed towards this objective but it may ultimately prove an unrealistic goal. Until then, we should not dismiss what can be learned from studies where nonunion is not so rigidly defined. The authors did not receive any outside finding or grants in support of their research for preparation of this work. Neither they nor a member of their immediate families received any payments or other benefits or a commitment or agreement to provide such benefits from a commercial entity. The authors did not receive any outside finding or grants in support of their research for preparation of this work. Neither they nor a member of their immediate families received any payments or other benefits or a commitment or agreement to provide such benefits from a commercial entity.