Pulsed laser fragmentation in liquids is an effective method to fabricate organic, metal or semiconductor nanoparticles by ablation of suspended particles. However, modelling and up-scaling of this process lacks quantification of the laser energy required for a specific product property like particle diameter of the colloid or bandgap energy of the fabricated nanoparticles. A novel set-up for defined laser energy dose in a free liquid jet enables mass-specific energy balancing and exact threshold determination for pulsed laser fragmentation. By this technique laser energy and material responses can be precisely correlated. Linear decrease of the particle diameter and linear increase of the bandgap energy with mass-specific laser energy input has been observed for the examples of ZnO and B4C particles. Trends are analysed by density gradient centrifugation, electron microscopy, UV–vis and X-ray diffraction analysis of the crystal structure. The study contributes to quantitative model parameters for up-scaling and provides insight into the mechanisms occurring when suspended particles are irradiated with pulsed laser sources.In the last two decades after nanoparticle formation by pulsed laser ablation in liquids (PLAL) was reported by Fojtik et al. This particle comminution method of pulsed laser fragmentation in liquids (PLFL) could potentially further enhance nanoparticle productivity Wavelength-dependent investigations of interaction mechanism from nanoparticles with pulsed laser sources were reviewed by Pyatenko et al. in 2013 Unfortunately, because of the fluence gradients along the beam path it is hard to control the fluence by this technique and balance the input of laser energy. Yan et al. reported structures resulting from sintering (melting) and fragmentation occurring by post-irradiation subsequent to material ablation from a solid target This work investigates the thresholds for laser fragmentation and mass-specific laser energy input to gradually change particle properties of crystalline zinc oxide sub-micro educt particles. As a semiconductor with a direct band gap around 3.3 Additionally the laser fragmentation of boron carbide microparticles was addressed under optimized fragmentation conditions to show that the findings for zinc oxide microparticles can easily be transferred to other materials. We examine how to determine fragmentation thresholds in a free liquid jet, characterized the energy input and correlated this to energy-specific change of particle properties, demonstrated for the particle size and change of bandgap energy. For the experiments a purpose-designed reactor was used, as illustrated in UV–vis spectra of the prepared colloids were taken by an evolution 201 spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) in a quartz glass cuvette. Hydrodynamic particle size distributions were detected in an analytical disc centrifuge (CPS Instruments), giving high resolution in a wide particle size range from micro- to nanoparticles. X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) pattern were detected with a Bruker D8 Advance instrument with Cu Kα radiation. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) pictures were taken with a FEI Quantana 400 ESEM in high vacuum after droplet deposition on carbon thin films. Zinc oxide particles and sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) were purchased from Sigma–Aldrich and the deionised water was derived from a Millipore installation. Boron carbide (B The results address three regimes occurring for laser irradiation illustrated in Finally pulsed laser fragmentation under optimized conditions is investigated for boron carbide particles in order to validate transferability of experimental procedure. From the UV–vis spectra we defined a primary particle index (PPI) If the picosecond laser fluence on the surface of the liquid jet exceeds 0.9 Typical extinction spectra for the particle responses to 532 If the laser fluence is raised above 6 Due to the sintered morphology of the educt we believe that this is an effective comminution process that may be difficult to achieve by conventional dispersing methods. We compared the PLFL results with strong ultra-sonication with an ultra-sonic finger and results are shown in the supporting information Figure S3. PLFL is 5 times more effective regarding the primary particle index and with ultra-sonication it was impossible to decrease the hydrodynamic diameter, even at a factor of around 250 times higher mass-specific energy applied for dispersing (PLFL up to 67.5 The white educt powder is converted into product particles that have an intense yellow color as dry powder ( Measured energy input enables balancing and quantification of mass specific energy consumed during the particle comminution, an approach typically used in modelling conventional milling processes. Extrapolation from the experimental data to the total mass of 1  The presence of two fractions is of particular interest as this indicates two different mechanisms forming the product particles. In literature it has been supposed that (for silicon dioxide particles) short laser pulses induce shock waves passing the particle and at the same time ablating and vaporizing particles The fragmentation efficiency decreases drastically when the fluence exceeds 40 To study if laser fragmentation under optimized conditions is transferrable to other particle materials we investigated the picosecond laser fragmentation of boron carbide microparticles in the same way. The black B Treatment of particle suspensions by pulsed lasers allows a surfactant-free and wear-free synthesis of submicron spheres and nanoparticle colloids by melting and fragmentation of the educt. However, modelling and scale-up of this laser method requires a robust process design, continuous liquid handling and defined irradiation conditions regarding the fluence regime and energy dose. Sequential laser irradiation of microparticle suspensions in a passage reactor is a versatile method to fabricate submicron spheres or nanoparticles generated from pulsed laser melting or pulsed laser fragmentation, respectively. Accordingly, this liquid jet technique allows precise energy balancing and threshold determination for pulsed laser fragmentation in liquids. Varying the laser fluence applied to the liquid jet enables to distinguish between different material response regimes. The threshold for pulsed laser melting of zinc oxide particles was determined to be 0.9 For pulsed laser fragmentation of zinc oxide particles we received highly defect-rich des-aggregated particles and spherical nanoparticles, forming two particle fractions. This indicates that two mechanisms are involved forming these particles possibly divided into mechanical and vaporization pathway. Beside the change of particle size laser fragmentation allows the bandgap engineering of the semiconductor. Hereby the measured bandgap energy of the colloidal suspension can be controlled by the specific energy input and correlates linearly with the number of passages. After laser energy input of 67.5 Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 