A numerical study is carried out concerning natural and mixed convection heat transfer of nanofluid (Al2O3–water) in a laterally-heated square cavity. Two-dimensional continuity, Navier–Stokes, energy and volume fraction equations are solved using finite volume method. The effects of various design parameters such as Rayleigh number (102
                     ≤
                     Ra
                     ≤107), volume fraction (0≤
                     φ
                     ≤0.05), size of nanoparticles (25 nm≤
                     d
                     
                        p
                     
                     ≤145 nm), Richardson number (0.01≤
                     Ri
                     ≤1000) and Grashof number (102
                     ≤
                     Gr
                     ≤104) on the heat transfer rate and distribution of nanoparticles for both natural and mixed convection cases are investigated. The simulation results indicate that there is an optimal volume fraction of the nanoparticles at each Rayleigh and Richardson number for which the maximum heat transfer rate can be obtained. It is also observed that at low Rayleigh numbers and high Richardson numbers, the particle distribution is fairly non-uniform while at high Ra and low Ri values particle distribution remains almost uniform for free and mixed convection cases, respectively.specific heat, J kg Brownian coefficient, kg m diameter of the base fluid molecule, m diameter of the nanoparticle, m thermophoresis coefficient, kg m gravitational acceleration, m s Grashof number (= enclosure height, m particle flux vector, kg m thermal conductivity, W m Boltzmann's constant = 1.38066 average Nusselt number normalized Nusselt number pressure, N m dimensionless pressure Prandtl number (= Rayleigh number (= Brownian-motion Reynolds number Reynolds number (= Richardson number (= temperature, K freezing point of the base fluid, K velocity components, m s Brownian velocity of the nanoparticle, m s dimensionless velocity components Cartesian coordinates, m dimensionless Cartesian coordinates thermal diffusivity, m thermal expansion coefficient, K dimensionless temperature dynamic viscosity, kg m kinematic viscosity, m density, kg m volume fraction of the nanoparticles (vol. nanoparticles/total vol.) stream function cold wall fluid hot wall nanofluid solid nanoparticles Buoyancy-induced convection heat transfer is very important for many industrial heating or cooling equipment. Indoor ventilation with radiators, cooling of electrical components, cooling of reactors and heat exchangers are just a few examples of such systems. From energy-saving point of view, improvement of heat transfer in any application of natural and mixed convection is a primary and crucial topic. Several investigations have been carried out on natural convection The heat transfer can be greatly improved when nanofluid is used instead of base fluid (e.g. water, oil, ethylene glycol). Nanofluids are the mixture of nano-sized solid particles (usually smaller than 150 In general, numerical simulation of the velocity field, the temperature distribution and the heat transfer rate of the nanofluids can be performed by using two main approaches; single-phase and two-phase methods. The former assumes that the continuous phase and the nanoparticles are in thermal equilibrium and move with the same velocity; the method is used for both natural convection Kalteh et al. On the other hand, experimental studies, such as those of Ref. This research intends to explore the rate of heat transfer of natural and mixed convection in a DHC using Buongiorno's model. The effects of Rayleigh number (10 A schematic diagram of the considered enclosure in the present study is shown in Two-dimensional continuity, momentum, energy and volume fraction equations are as follows In this study, the proposed model of Corcione The non-dimensional parameters for natural convection (NC) and mixed convection (MC) are defined based on properties of pure fluid: By considering no-slip condition and zero flux of nanoparticles The average Nusselt number is calculated by integrating the local Nusselt number along the hot vertical wall of the cavity. In order to present the effect of nanoparticles on the average Nusselt number, the following Nusselt number ratio, called normalized Nusselt number ( Following Patankar In order to validate the proposed numerical scheme, two different cases are considered. The first benchmark case is natural convection heat transfer inside a square cavity filled with Al In order to find the proper grid size, a square cavity filled with Al Natural and mixed convection heat transfers of the nanofluid in a DHC are investigated. The key parameters are the volume fraction (0 The volume fraction is changed from According to Nanoparticle distribution in case 1 for Using the least squares method to curve-fit numerical simulation results, similar to Hooman and Merrikh These correlations can estimate In this section, a square cavity filled with Al Values of To better understand the effect of volume fraction of the nanoparticles on the heat transfer rate, the normalized Nusselt number ( Similar to the previous section, an estimate for The above correlation can estimate As a sample of our results, This study investigates the natural and mixed convection of Al  By increasing There is an optimum volume fraction of nanoparticles, where the maximum heat transfer occurs. In addition, the optimal particle loading is enhanced by decreasing At  By increasing For all At The results show that due to thermophoretic effects the particle concentration around the cold walls is higher than the hot wall.