R.M. Rees, B.C. Ball, C.D. Campbell and C.A. Watson (Eds.). CAB International, Wallingford, 2001, 440 pp. Price: $120, ISBN 08519 465 2. This book examines the role that organic matter plays in soils and aims at understanding the ways in which this contributes to the various functions of the soil. The information presented is combined in more traditional sections such as “Organic matter and sustainability”, “Modelling soil organic matter dynamics”, and “The role of soil organic matter and manures in sustainable nutrient cycling”. Other sections address newer and less researched topics such as “Soil organic matter: the roles of residue quality in C sequestration and N supply”, “Implications of soil biodiversity for sustainable organic matter management”, and “Soil teeming with life: new frontiers for soil science”. Although a division into different sections usually helps to understand the logic and relationships between the different topics covered, the book lacks a concept or framework as a basis for assembling different chapters. This is readily apparent from the often unclear allocation of certain chapters to specific sections. For example, the section on residue quality contains at least two papers specifically dealing with modelling. One may also wonder whether papers on the Anthrosols in Amazonia or the organic matter dynamics in former Lake Texcoco are really relevant to the overall goal addressed in the book. Notwithstanding these shortcomings, the book covers a wide range of soil functions associated to a greater or lesser extent with the soil organic matter pool, ranging from the classic decomposition and nitrogen mineralization processes to the more recent potential to reduce pollution and carbon mitigation options. The section on soil biodiversity in particular contains new and exciting information and explores ways forward for soil science. The book is strongly biased towards European agriculture, which is not surprising as it is based upon papers presented at the annual meeting of the British Society of Soil Science. Only about 20% of the information presented was obtained under tropical conditions. The general papers are rather short, contain usually only a limited amount of information and vary a lot in quality. However, this is outweighed by the excellent keynote papers, written by authors known to be at the forefront in the topics covered by the various sections. While the general papers cover a wide range of topics related to the soil organic matter pool, some topics are less rigorously dealt with. For instance, a thorough evaluation of soil organic matter fractionation procedures and their relation with crop production and soil fertility status is lacking. In conclusion, as a typical proceedings of a meeting, the book may lack a certain level of focus to make it a classic in soil organic matter research, but it contains a lot of relevant and often cutting-edge information. As such, it is an essential addition to any soil science library. Whether it should fit on the book shelf of individual scientists will depend on the proportion of the chapters which overlap with their domain of interest.