LiCoO2 thin film cathode, which has attracted considerable attention in the past decades due to its promising application in micro-batteries, is commonly produced by magnetron sputtering combined with post-annealing treatment. However, the high temperature treatment hinders its compatibility toward a majority of substrates, while the moderate temperature post-annealing constrains its crystallinity. In this study, LiCoO2 film cathode is sputtered onto the 500 °C substrate. The in-situ annealed LiCoO2 thin film cathode is highly crystallized as hexagonal structure without cubic impurities, exhibiting a capacity retention of 75% at 1 C after 200 cycles and excellent rate performance with 55% of initial capacity at 70 C in liquid electrolyte-based cell. All solid-state thin film Li battery exhibits excellent cycle stability. The excellent electrochemical performance is ascribed to highly crystallized LiCoO2 thin film, which is trigged by high kinetic energy of the sputtered species. On the contrary, the LiCoO2 film fabricated by post-annealing at 500 °C shows much poorer electrochemical performance due to its lower crystallinity, indicating that the annealing mode is crucial for the sputtering. This work provides a new option to deposite high quality LiCoO2 thin film via in situ annealing at a relatively low temperature.All solid-state thin film lithium battery, the sequentially stacked layers of cathode film, electrolyte film and anode film, has aroused a wide range of interests in the past decades due to its low volume, high energy density and good integration with micro-devices and micro-systems such as micro-sensors, smart cards and micro-electromechanical system (MEMS). LiCoO The LiCoO The latter mode, by contrast, has drawn minor attention in recent years. Prachařová et al. found that the element ratio of the LiCoO In the present work, LiCoO For LiCoO X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku Mini Flex 600) and Raman spectroscope (532 nm laser) were utilized for the structure characterization. Field emission scanning electron microscope (SEM, FEI Inspect F50) was employed to analyze the surface morphology of the deposited thin films. Inductively coupled plasma optical emission Spectrometry (ICP-OES) tests (ICP-OES730, Agilent) were performed to verify molar ratio of Li element to Co element in the prepared thin films, in which the LiCoO To build LiCoO As for the electrochemical characterization, the charge/discharge test was carried out in the voltage range of 3.0–4.2 V by applying a Neware (Shenzhen Neware Co. Ltd) electrochemical measurement system. Cyclic voltampere (CV) tests were performed by using an Arbin electrochemical workstation (Arbin BT 2000). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) curves were measured by electrochemical system (Princeton applied research, PARSTAT 2263) in the frequency range from 100 KHz to 0.001 Hz with a perturbation amplitude of 10 mV. The structure of the as-prepared LiCoO Raman spectra further confirm the formation of layered LiCoO The SEM images give a direct visualization of the morphology of the LiCoO The LiCoO To get an understanding of the redox behavior in the LiCoO AC impedance measurements before cycling and at charged 4.16 V were carried out in order to deeply understand the kinetics properties of the prepared LiCoO The galvanostatic charge/discharge profiles at the 2nd and the 50th cycle were shown in The cycle performances of the two types of thin film cathodes at a current rate of 1 C are shown in The rate performance of the It is clear that the annealing mode plays an important role on the properties of LiCoO All solid-state thin film Li batteries were assembled to further check the electrochemical performance of LiCoO The charge/discharge profiles of the 130th cycle further illustrate the better cycle stability of all solid-state thin film battery. As shown in In this work, LiCoO The authors declare no competing financial interest.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work is partly supported by the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at