Introduction
                  Distal tibial or pilon fractures are usually the result of combined compressive and shear forces, and may result in instability of the metaphysis, with or without articular depression, and injury to the soft tissue. The complexity of injury, lack of muscle cover and poor vascularity make these fractures difficult to treat. Surgical treatment of distal tibial fractures includes several options: external fixation, IM nailing, ORIF and minimally-invasive plate osteosynthesis (MIPO). Management of distal tibial fractures with MIPO enables preservation of soft tissue and remaining blood supply. This is a report of a series of prospectively studied closed distal tibial and pilon fractures treated with MIPO.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  A total of 21 patients with closed distal tibial or pilon fractures were enrolled in the study between March 2008 and November 2013 and completed follow-up. Demographic characteristics, mechanism of injury, time required for union, ankle range of motion and complications were recorded. Fractures were classified according to the AO/OTA classification. Nineteen patients were initially managed with an ankle-spanning external fixator. When the status of the soft tissue had improved and swelling had subsided enough, a definitive internal fixation with MIPO was performed. Patients were invited for follow-up examinations at 3 and 6 weeks and then at intervals of 6 to 8 weeks until 12 months.
               
                  Results
                  Mean age of the patients was 40.1 years (range 19-67 years). Eighteen cases were the result of high-energy trauma and three were the result of low-energy trauma. According to the AO/OTA classification there were extraarticular and intraarticular fractures, but only simple articular patterns without depression or comminution. The average time for fracture union was 19.7 weeks (range 12–38 weeks). Mean range of motion was 10° of dorsiflexion (range 5–15°) and 28.3° of plantar flexion (range 20–35°). Three cases were metalwork-related complications. Two patients underwent plate removal at 24 weeks because of plate impingement. There was one case of wound breakdown at 11 weeks. One patient had fracture union with tibial recurvatum of approximately 10°, without functional impairment. Two patients had delayed union.
               
                  Conclusion
                  MIPO is a reliable method of treatment for distal tibial fractures; it provides a high union rate and good functional outcome with minimal soft tissue complications. Skin impingement remains a common complication with MIPO, but this can be solved by timely plate removal.Distal tibial or pilon fractures are usually the result of combined compressive and shear forces, and may result in instability of the metaphysis, with or without articular depression, and injury to the soft tissue A total of 24 patients with closed distal tibial or pilon fractures were enrolled in the study between March 2008 and November 2013. Demographic characteristics, mechanism of injury, time required for union, range of motion of ankle and complications were recorded. Fractures were classified according to the AO/OTA classification and were analysed preoperatively using radiographs and CT scans if there was articular involvement ( A total of 21 enrolled patients completed follow-up and were included in the study; there were 16 males and 5 females. Mean age of the patients was 40.1 years (range 19–67 years). Eighteen cases were the result of high-energy trauma and three were the result of low-energy trauma. According to the AO/OTA classification there were extraarticular and intraarticular fractures, but only simple articular patterns without depression or comminution. There were two patients with 43 A1 fracture, one with 43 A2, 10 with 43 A3, one with 43 B1, five with 43 C1 and two with C2 fractures. Nineteen patients were treated with a temporary ankle-spanning external fixator because they had traumatised soft tissue. The average time to conversion was 10.4 days (range 7–14 days). In 10 patients (47.6%), the fibula was plated to restore ankle stability. Mean range of motion was 10° of dorsiflexion (range 5–15°) and 28.3° of plantar flexion (range 20–35°) at 12 months. The average time for fracture union was 19.7 weeks (range 12–38 weeks). The overall complication rate was 23.8%. Three cases were metalwork-related complications. Two patients had plate removal at 24 weeks because of plate impingement. There was one case of wound breakdown at 11 weeks. The plate was removed, the wound was debrided and treated with absorbent polyurethane-hydrocolloid dressings until complete epithelisation. Two patients had delayed union. One patient had fracture union with tibial recurvatum of 10°, without functional impairment. Surgical treatment of distal tibial fractures with or without articular extension remains a topical issue and opinion varies on the most appropriate management. The potential advantages of IM nails are preservation of the soft tissue, remaining blood supply and load-sharing characteristics of the implant. Nevertheless, previous studies have reported a high incidence of complications, such as instability, malunion and implant failure. There is a mismatch between nail diameter and the medullary canal of the distal metaphysis, so nailing of the tibia with short distal fragment can be associated with significant malalignment and malunion, with an effect on tibiotalar contact pressures ORIF with different types of plates has been associated with increased rates of infection and soft tissue complications In conclusion, MIPO is a reliable method of treatment for distal tibial fractures; it provides a high union rate and good functional outcome with minimal soft tissue complications. Skin impingement remains a common complication with MIPO, but this can be solved by timely plate removal. Further research is required to ascertain the optimal management of distal tibial fractures, including the role of MIPO in the treatment of simple fracture patterns. None.