A novel “herbal scaffold” (Alg/O-CMC/CQ-E scaffold) was fabricated by incorporating medicinal plant Cissus quadrangularis (CQ) extract with natural biopolymers alginate (Alg) and O-carboxymethyl chitosan (O-CMC) by lyophilization technique The prepared composite scaffolds were characterized using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD). Preliminary cytocompatibility studies with human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) supports the biocompatible nature of the composite scaffolds. There was a significant difference in initial cell attachment and proliferation on the herbal scaffolds compared to scaffolds fabricated without extract. Moreover, the hybrid scaffold favoured a substantially enhanced differentiation of hMSCs to osteoblasts, even without osteogenic media supplements, followed by increased calcified mineral deposition within two weeks of incubation. Hence, our primary investigation of physico-chemical and biological properties of the herbal scaffolds suggests that this osteoinductive scaffold could serve as a potential candidate for bone tissue engineering therapeutics.Tissue engineering is considered to be the most innovative biomedical methodology in the restoration and repair of defective and damaged tissues, by focusing on the regeneration of neotissues from cells with the support of biomaterials and growth factors. For bone regeneration, different biomaterials are currently being used which not only serves as a substrate for seeded cells but also supports the formation of new matrix deposition ( The osteogenic cells derived from mesenchymal or stromal stem cells uniquely elaborate the matrix of bone. These cells differentiate into mature osteoblasts, which then actively synthesize and mineralize bone matrix ( From this viewpoint, we report here for the first time an herbal scaffolding approach for bone tissue engineering applications where the extract of CQ was blended successfully with alginate and The The plant stem was cut into small pieces and shade dried. 10 The morphology of the scaffold, cell attachment and mineral production by osteoblast were investigated by scanning electron microscopy (JEOLJSM-6490LA). For cell attachment studies, cells were fixed using 2.5% gluteraldehyde for 1 FTIR spectrum of Alg/ The mineral components of the plant extract was analysed using the XRD spectrum (PANalytical X’Pert-Pro). The extract was made into a thin film and analysed. Mineralization of the scaffold by the osteoblasts was also confirmed by the XRD spectral analysis. A thin layer of the scaffold after the mineralization process was taken for the analysis. Thermal decomposition temperature measurement was carried out in simultaneous TGA–DTA instrument (SII TG/DTA6200) under nitrogen atmosphere using about 4 The medium uptake ability of the scaffold was studied in order to understand the diffusion of medium and nutrients into the scaffold. Previously weighed scaffolds were immersed in PBS at 37 The porosity of the scaffolds was measured using the liquid displacement technique ( Protein adsorptions on the Alg/ In order to determine the degradation of the Alg/ The adhesion and spreading of hMSCs on the scaffolds were analysed by SEM. The scaffolds were sterilized using ethylene oxide. The cells were seeded on the scaffold surface and cultured for 24 The viability of hMSCs on the scaffold was tested using Alamar blue assay. The scaffolds for the cell culture were sterilized using ethylene oxide gas in a standard ethylene oxide sterilization apparatus. hMSCs were seeded (10,000 The cell proliferation assay was carried out using Alamar blue test. The hMSC seeded scaffolds were incubated for 6 and 72 The differentiation of hMSCs to ostoeblasts was assessed by measuring its ALP activity expression from 7 to 21 days. This assay relies on the ALP hydrolysis of p-nitrophenyl phosphate (Sigma) into a yellow product p-nitrophenol, the intensity of which was measured at 405 For the in vitro biomineralization studies, hMSCs were seeded onto the control as well as herbal scaffolds for a time period of two weeks in mesencult stem cell growth medium and the in vitro bio-mineralization by the cells were analysed using SEM, FTIR and XRD. In an attempt to prepare an osteoinductive scaffold, the extract of the CQ was used. The loading amount was calculated as 10 The morphology of the prepared scaffolds was analysed using the scanning electron microscopy. FTIR spectral analysis of the samples was done to confirm the cross-linking mechanism. Alginate, The thermal stability of the Alg/ The medium uptake ability was performed to assess the absorbing capacity of the scaffold. The uptake of the medium was found out by calculating the swelling ratio of the scaffolds in the PBS. Swelling facilitates the filtration of cells into the scaffold. The swelling ratio was shown in Porosity is of particular importance in bone tissue engineering because high rate of mass transfer is expected due to the metabolic characteristic of bone. The porosity of the scaffolds was measured by the liquid displacement method. From the analysis In tissue engineering approach, the scaffold should ideally degrade as new tissue formation takes place ( The protein adsorption property of the scaffolds was estimated by BCA assay. Protein adsorption is known to influence the cell adhesion by adsorption of key adhesion molecules like fibronectin or vitronectin ( Cell attachment and distribution on the scaffolds were investigated by SEM. The cell viability studies show that ( Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is an early marker for osteoblast differentiation. The ALP activity of hMSCs seeded on to the Alg/ The final stage of hMSC differentiation to osteoblast is characterized by the formation of calcium phosphate nodules. The mineral deposition by the osteoblast cells were analysed by scanning electron microscopy. The osteogenic effect of In the present study, we have developed an osteoinductive ‘herbal scaffold’ with desirable properties requisite for a scaffold for bone tissue engineering applications. The active constituents of CQ extract, such as phytosteroids, enhanced the hMSC proliferation and promoted osteogenic differentiation and biomineralization process. Based on the above results it could be concluded that the Alg/ The authors are thankful to Department of Science and Technology (DST), India for providing the financial support under the scheme of central grant of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology Initiative program monitored by Prof. C.N.R Rao. The authors are also grateful to Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham University for providing substantial infrastructure support for basic research in nanobiomedical sciences. Also we appreciate the help of Mr. Sajin P. Ravi and Sreeja V. Nair for the technical support in SEM and XRD analysis.