Concrete-filled double-skin tubes (CFDST) have been increasingly popular in the field of engineering in recent years. A lot of research has been carried out to investigate the behaviour of CFDST members under a variety of loading conditions. This paper presents an experimental investigation on ultra-high performance concrete infilled double-skin tube columns subjected to close-in blast loading. Two types of CFDST columns were investigated in the experiments – one with both inner and outer tubes circular and the other one with both square. The main test parameters included the explosive charge weight and the magnitude of axial load. After the blast tests, there was no visible buckling nor ruptures found on the steel tubes and only minor cracks, of no more than 1mm width, were observed in the core concrete when the outer steel tube was removed. Based on the findings of the experiments, it is evident that CFDST column has excellent blast resistance. This feature has the potential to be used in high-value structures which may be the targets of terrorist attacks, such as embassies, government buildings and critical infrastructures.In the past decades, thousands of lives have been lost all over the world due to terrorist activities. Much research has been carried out, aiming to improve the reliability of vulnerable structures so as to reduce the number of human casualties. A number of studies have discussed retrofitting techniques to protect existing structures A CFDST member is simply made from two concentrically placed steel skins filled with concrete in between and it utilises the advantages of both steel and concrete. Under axial compression, due to the different Poisson's ratio of steel and concrete, the concrete of a CFDST column is normally in a tri-axially confined state and consequently the confining pressures can effectively enhance the strength and the ductility of the concrete which is known as the confinement effect. Wei et al. On the other hand, studies have also been carried out to examine the performance of CFDST members under transverse cyclic load All of the previously mentioned studies indicate that CFDST members inherit the advantages of both steel and concrete and that they exhibit very ductile behaviour under axial compressive as well as transverse loading. However, most existing studies are strictly limited to static loading only, thus the analytical models developed cannot be applied to evaluate situations where impact and blast loads are introduced. Therefore, there is a need to evaluate the performance of CFDST members subjected to impact and blast loads. Furthermore, as CFDST members has been more and more commonly adopted in the field of civil engineering applications, where large axial bearing capacity is required. Therefore, by replacing normal strength concrete by UHPC in CFDST members, the cross-section area as well as the self-weight of the structural members can be further reduced, owing to its much higher strength and ductility. In addition, for UHPC mixed with fibres, crushing and spalling damage of the concrete can be well restrained thus can further delay the buckling of the steel tubes. Three types of how blast loading could be applied to a structure in terms of the distance from the explosives to the surface of the structure, i.e. near-field blast (e.g. Ten CFDST specimens, including 5 specimens with SHS outer and SHS inner and 5 circular specimens with CHS outer and CHS inner were tested. In addition, one square and one circular concrete-filled steel tube (CFST) specimens were also investigated to check the dissimilarities, in terms of their structural response when subjected to blast loading, when compared with their double-skinned counterparts. All specimens had a span of 2500 mm. The tubes had outer-diameter/width The mechanical properties of the steel tubes were determined from two tensile coupons taken from the outer steel tube of a square CFDST specimen. The loading increment was 10 MPa/s before steel yielding and the pulling chuck pulled at a rate less than 0.5 L/min (L represents the total length of the specimen) after steel yielding. The average yield strength and ultimate strength of the steel tubes test are 360 MPa and 515 MPa, respectively with an elongation of 22%. Steel fibre reinforced self-consolidating concrete with nanoparticles was used as the concrete in all CFDST specimens. The nanoparticle, namely CaCO Twenty-nine The blast tests on CFDST columns were carried out by PLA University of Science and Technology in Nanjing, China. As shown in As shown in To capture the pressure-time history of each blast event acting on a specimen, a pressure transducer was also used, considering the chances of the pressure transducer malfunctioning due to an excessive amount of blast pressure if directly placed under the explosive. Therefore, the pressure transducer was positioned 760 mm away from the centre of the specimen, as shown in All data cables from the measurement devices were buried beneath the ground. The data-acquisition systems as well as the command console were placed inside a protected concrete bunker nearby. Three different test setups were used during the blast tests as depicted in In summary, setup (a) was used for square CFDST columns with and without axial load: the specimen was put into the test pit with its top surface level with the ground surface to ensure that the blast wave could not travel into the pit. Setup (b) was used for circular CFDST columns with axial load: almost the entire specimen was placed beneath the ground with steel angles also being used to reduce the blast wave that travels into the pit. Setup (c) was used for circular CFDST columns without axial load: half of the specimen was above the ground surface. Emulsion explosive was used in the blast test program. Simoens Since the explosive charge weight used in the blast experiment was large, the diameter of the emulsion explosive could be up to half a meter if made spherical, which would cause inconvenience for transportation and storage. As a result, several smaller cylindrical explosives of identical mass and dimension were used as shown in In this study, CONWEP predictions of spherical explosive was used as benchmarks for calculation of the peak reflected pressure and impulse for TNT   The effect of axial load was investigated by applying two different axial loads, namely 0 kN and 1000 kN, on several identical specimens and then comparing their displacement-time histories under the same blast loads. In both cases shown in Another possible reason is the membrane effect. In the present study, axial loads application provides lateral restrain to the column, and compressive membrane action may occur. Early age deflection may cause a migration of the neutral axis which is accompanied by in-plane expansion of the column at its boundaries. If this expansion is restrained, in this case by the axial load application, the development of arching action enhances the strength of the column. The compressive membrane effects can be accounted for the different column deflections under the same blast loading condition. As mentioned previously, two different test setups were used on the circular CFDST specimens due to limitations of the pneumatic jack. If the test specimen was to be axially loaded, then setup (b) had to be used since the entire pneumatic jack was buried beneath the ground surface and it could not be moved up or down; otherwise, setup (c) was adopted.   By having a hollow core in the current study, the cross-sectional area and self-weight of the specimens (both the circular and square ones) was reduced by 23% relative to fully concrete-filled tubes. In prior research, not much effort has been put into investigating the difference caused by a hollow core versus a fully filled section. Han However, during the blast test, it was found that both CFDST and CFST column specimens behaved in a very similar manner, regardless of the cross-sectional geometry. Despite of the difference in the maximum deflection, as shown in For a CFDST specimen filled with normal strength concrete, its failure under flexural load is mainly due to the crushing of the concrete associated with local buckling of the steel tube, or even rupture, as shown in In the current study, the CFDST specimen is filled with steel-fibre reinforced UHPC; therefore its structural response is very different from those filled with normal strength concrete. This paper has presented an experimental study on the performance of concrete-filled double-skin steel tube (CFDST) columns under blast loading. The following conclusions can be drawn based on the test results and observations: CFDST columns filled with UHPC can effectively withstand severe blast load without failure. Compared to normal strength concrete filled CFDST, the UHPC filled CFDST can better delay/prevent concrete crushing and steel buckling, and thus have an overall of global flexural response as opposed to localised structural failure. The peak reflected pressures and impulses measured by the pressure transducer yield 18% and 20% error respectively compared to the CONWEP-predictions. The increase in explosive charge weight caused a larger mid-span deflection, with this effect being more noticeable on axial-load-free specimens rather than axially-loaded specimens. The presence of an axial compressive load, corresponding to approximately 20% of the squash load, led to a slight reduction in the peak deflection in two comparative cases. In the current study, both CFDST and CFST specimens showed similar behaviours. The hollow area inside seems to have little effect on the overall structural responses as both types had similar period of oscillation, maximum and residual deflection. The financial support of the