We report the case of a sportsman who fell injuring his left non-dominant wrist. He suffered an unusual injury, a fracture dislocation of the pisotriquetral joint which left him with a painful restriction of wrist movement. We describe his presentation and treatment with a novel ‘joystick’ technique following failed manipulation.Isolated dislocation of the pisiform is a rarely reported wrist injury. This injury may also occur in combination with fractures to the distal radius, triquetrum or hamate and patients are commonly misdiagnosed or the dislocation is initially missed entirely. At least in the short term, it is not clear that all cases of pisiform dislocation or subluxation require treatment. We describe a case of pisiform dislocation secondary to a triquetral fracture where the diagnosis was initially missed. Percutaneous reduction using a Kirschner wire ‘joystick’ technique and stabilisation of the pisiform resulted in a successful patient outcome. The patient described in this case report was informed that this case would be submitted for publication and has given their consent. A 22-year-old male injured his left non-dominant wrist while playing football. He fell awkwardly, having jumped to attempt a ‘dynamic’ bicycle kick, landing on his left, outstretched hand. He complained of pain and was unable to complete the football match. He attended the emergency department where he underwent clinical examination and plain radiographs but no fracture or dislocation was detected. He was treated with a wrist splint and analgesia. He attended the hand clinic 8 days after the injury complaining of persisting hand and wrist pain over the hypothenar eminence and the ulnocarpal joint. On examination, there was point tenderness over the pisiform which was easily identified subcutaneously and a global reduction in wrist range of movement was noted. The patient reported that global wrist movement was limited by pain. Ulnar deviation and palmar flexion were worst affected. Review of the initial radiographs confirmed that a fracture of the triquetrum and associated dislocation of the pisiform had been missed ( The options were discussed with the patient and surgery was advised on the basis of considerable persisting pain, a reduction in wrist range of movement and the locked articulation of the pisiform and triquetrum which corresponded to the site of maximal pain and tenderness. The patient agreed to proceed with surgery. An examination under anaesthetic and closed manipulation under image intensification was attempted under general anaesthetic but this was not successful. It was not possible to unlock the pisotriquetral articulation or to milk the pisiform back into position. The pisiform was palpated subcutaneously and confirmed using image intensifier control. A 1.4mm Kirschner wire was placed into the pisiform under image intensification control and the wire was used to ‘joystick’ the pisiform into a reduced position before the Kirschner wire was advanced across the pisohamate joint to temporarily stabilise it ( Fractures of the triquetrum and pisiform can be easily missed on plain radiographs as the bones overly each other on standard PA radiographs and can be misinterpreted by inexperienced clinicians. Clear separation of the pisiform and triquetrum on these views should alert the clinician to the possibility of a dislocation. In this case, the injury to the joint can be seen on the initial radiographs but the diagnosis was not made for another 8 days. Most triquetral fractures are treated non-operatively with early movement and analgesia or a short period of casting for pain relief. Most of these injures relate to fractures of the body of the triquetrum or dorsal ‘chip’ or avulsion fractures. Fractures of the articular surface are less common. Splinting and surgical fracture fixation have both been suggested for these injuries. In this case, treatment was advocated because of the persisting pain and weakness and the evidence of a locked pisiform on the volar surface of the triquetrum. The comminution of the triquetral fracture evident on the CT images raised the question as to whether the fracture fragments were suitable for screw fixation and so closed surgery was preferred. There are 2 similar cases reported in the literature. Suzuki et al. reported a case of pisiform dislocation with an undisplaced osteochondral fracture of the triquetrum. Where a closed reduction cannot be easily achieved through simple manipulation, k-wire ‘joysticking’ provides another option for treatment. Our experience suggests that reduction can be maintained following a short period of k-wire stabilisation and splintage even where the triquetral fracture is too small or comminuted to be fixed. This avoids the potential risks of open surgery via a surgical approach that is not used commonly and means that fragment or pisiform excision may be reserved for those patients who develop late problems with pisotriquetral pain or instability.  We confirm that all authors have stated that they have no conflict of interest or competing interest.