Laboratory batch experiments were conducted on heavily contaminated groundwater and chromium ore processing residue (COPR) samples to determine the rate and extent of hexavalent chromium [Cr(VI)] reduction and immobilization by nanoscale iron particles. Laboratory synthesized nanoscale iron particles (<100nm, specific surface area 35m2/g) were used for this work. Groundwater ([Cr(VI)]=42.83±0.52mg/L, pH 11.0±0.5) and COPR samples ([Cr(VI)]=3280±90mg/kg) were collected from an industrial site in New Jersey. Cr(VI) in the water and COPR samples was quickly reduced and precipitated out of the aqueous solution. The surface area normalized reaction rate constant of Cr(VI) reduction by nanoscale iron particles was 0.157±0.018mgm−2
                     min−1, about 25 times greater than that by iron powders (100mesh). One gram of nanoparticles can reduce 84.4–109.3mg Cr(VI) in the groundwater and 69.3–72.7mg Cr(VI) in the COPR. This reduction capacity is 50–70 times greater than that of iron powders under the same experimental conditions.Chromium is a vital industrial material for which there is no ready substitute. It is estimated that U.S. has a chromium stockpile over 5 million metric tons Chromium in natural waters exists primarily in +3 and +6 valence states Remediation of chromium-contaminated soil and groundwater has largely followed the pathway of reduction and precipitation/immobilization. For example, biologically induced Cr(VI) reduction and remediation has been frequently reported Zero valent iron (ZVI) is increasingly being utilized for in situ application to remediate soil and groundwater containing metals, such as Cr, Pb, U, Mo, Hg, V, and other metal ions In this work, we report the use of nanoscale iron particles for the treatment of chromium contaminated groundwater and soil. Previously, we have reported the use of nanoscale iron and palladium/iron bimetallic particles as remedial reagents for reductive dechlorination of various chlorinated hydrocarbons, such as chlorinated ethenes, aromatics, and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) A conceptual model of reduction and immobilization of Cr(VI) by the nanoscale iron particles is illustrated in In this work, heavily contaminated water and COPR samples were used to determine the efficacy of the nanoiron technology for chromium treatment. Primary objectives of the laboratory studies described herein include: (1) evaluation of the effectiveness of the nanoscale iron particles for reduction and immobilization of Cr(VI) in groundwater and COPR; (2) determination of the stoichiometry and kinetics of Cr(VI) reduction; and (3) assessment of the stability of the reduced chromium. The following reagents were used in this work: ferric chloride anhydrous (ACS grade, Alfa Aesar), sodium borohydride (98%, Finnish Chemicals, Finland), hydrogen peroxide (ACS grade, Aldrich), iron (II) sulfate heptahydrate (ACS grade, Aldrich), potassium dichromate (99%, ACS grade, Aldrich). Synthesis of nanoscale iron particles was achieved by adding 1:1 volume ratio of sodium borohydride (0.25 Commercially available iron powders (Fisher, 100 A UV–vis Spectrophotometer (Agilent 8453) was used for determination of the aqueous Cr(VI) concentrations. Experimental procedures specified in the USGS method I-1230-85 for wastewater (1.5-diphenylcarbohydrazide method) were followed. Distilled water was used as blank. The average value of Cr(III) was calculated from three identical sample analyses. Groundwater and COPR samples were collected from a heavily contaminated site located in eastern New Jersey, and the samples were not aerated. The site had been used as a chromium ore processing facility for many years. Large amounts of COPR remained at the site. COPR was typically treated with excessive amounts of lime to neutralize the acids used in the chromium extraction/leaching. The pH of the groundwater of the site was typically between 10 and 11. High chromium concentrations have been found both in COPR and groundwater at the site. The average Cr(VI) concentration in the aqueous phase was 42.83 This section describes the experimental setups and objectives of four batch experiments. Removal efficiency: the objective of this test was to determine the optimal nanoparticle dose for complete reduction and precipitation of Cr(VI). Variable quantity of nanoscale iron particles (0–10 Removal rate: the purpose of this test was to determine the rate of Cr(VI) reduction and precipitation by the nanoscale iron particles and microscale iron powders. Eight parallel batch experiments were conducted with groundwater and nanoparticles (or microscale iron powders) at varied concentrations. Residual Cr(VI) in the aqueous phase was analyzed at pre-determined time intervals. 1 Reductive capacity: in this experiment, the stoichiometry of Cr(VI) reduction was determined. A batch reactor was spiked repeatedly with Cr(VI) containing groundwater or groundwater/COPR slurry. The solution was continuously agitated until the reduction capacity of the nanoparticles or iron powders was exhausted. The reductive capacity of nanoparticles or microscale iron powders was then calculated from the change of Cr(VI) concentration and mass. Residue in solution: Fenton's reagent was used to re-oxidize any residual aqueous Cr(III) to Cr(VI) in the aqueous phase and to determine the total aqueous chromium. The total efficiency of reduction and immobilization is then determined from the difference of Cr(VI) concentrations before and after re-oxidization. The COPR samples were collected from a spoils of chromium ore processing residue at the site while the groundwater samples (pH 10–11) was obtained from a shallow monitoring well at the depth of approximately 6 Results with the nanoscale iron particles are shown in A potential advantage of the nanoiron technology is the enhanced availability of the nanoiron particles to penetrate the microporous COPR matrix, and hereby increase the contact with Cr(VI). A portion of the air-dried COPR was pulverized to reduce the size to less than 2  To further determine the reductive capacity of the nanoparticles, several more batch tests were conducted with varied doses of nanoparticles. The total Cr(VI) reduction was measured after 60 days and the reductive capacities were calculated accordingly. The results are summarized in The total capacity of the iron nanoparticle for the reduction of Cr(VI) in the groundwater or COPR samples is approximately about 50–70 times greater than that of the Aldrich microscale iron. We noted that the reductive capacity of the microscale iron (1.53–1.75 The reductive capacities of the nanoscale iron particles for the treatment of hexavalent chromium may vary under different conditions. For example, tests of reduction of Cr(VI) by the nanoparticles in solutions with different pH showed that the reduction rate and capacity were slightly higher at low pH. More experiments are needed to determine the optimal environmental conditions, such as pH and alkalinity. It is generally accepted that the reductive reactions by zero valent iron are a surface-mediated process. The oxidant (e.g., chlorinated hydrocarbons or Cr(VI)) is adsorbed onto the surface of iron and subsequently reduced. The initial reaction can be treated as a pseudo first order reaction where the rate constant in normalized to the total surface area of iron. An example is given in The above tests, as well as another recent report In the three tests shown in Groundwater and COPR samples from an industrial site showed high levels of hexavalent chromium. Laboratory experiments were conducted to determine the rate and efficiency of Cr(VI) reduction and immobilization with nanoscale iron particles. Specific conclusions from the bench scale tests include: Nanoparticles can reduce and immobilize Cr(VI) in both groundwater and COPR. Under similar conditions, the reduction capacity of the nanoparticles is 50–70 times greater than that of iron powder. The rate of reduction produced by the nanoparticles is approximately 25 times higher than the rate of reduction by microscale iron powder. Reduced Cr(VI) can be effectively removed from the aqueous phase and remains stable in solid forms. Results obtained from this study suggest that immobilization of hexavalent chromium from groundwater and COPR with the nanoscale particles is feasible. The high reactivity and diminutive size of the iron nanoparticles make them promising cargo for groundwater treatment, such as subsurface injection. Methods for field applications of the nanoparticle technology are available and have been tested under comparable environmental conditions Funding supports from U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) through a CAREER award to WZ, and from U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) through the STAR program (R829624 and GR832225) are gratefully acknowledged. The authors appreciated the valuable comments provided by two anonymous reviewers.