Background
                  Surgical treatment of proximal humeral fractures in the elderly pose challenges in decision making. Reverse total shoulder arthroplasty (RTSA) has been established as a reliable option for salvage of failed hemiarthroplasty, although few studies have analyzed RTSA after failed open reduction with internal fixation (ORIF). This study evaluated the outcomes of patients with failed osteosynthesis who undergo salvage RTSA compared with patients undergoing primary RTSA for proximal humeral fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  We retrospectively reviewed 18 patients who underwent primary RTSA for acute proximal humeral fractures and 26 patients who underwent arthroplasty after failed ORIF at our institution between 2003 and 2013. Minimum follow-up was 2 years, with a mean follow-up 3 years (range, 2.0-6.0 years).
               
                  Results
                  There are no statistically significant differences in clinical outcomes between the two cohorts in the American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons scores and in the most recent forward flexion or external rotation. The salvage RTSA cohort experienced a higher complication rate (8%), including dislocation and aseptic loosening. The primary RTSA cohort had a 5% complication rate, with 1 late prosthetic joint infection requiring reoperation.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Although RTSA after failed ORIF has a higher rate of complications compared with acute RTSA, the revision and reoperation rate as well as clinical outcomes and shoulder function remained comparable. When a surgeon approaches these complex fractures in patients with poor underlying bone stock, this study supports acute arthroplasty or ORIF with the knowledge that salvage RTSA still has the potential to achieve good outcomes if osteosynthesis fails.Proximal humeral fractures account for 5% of all fractures, often occurring in elderly individuals in the eighth to ninth decades of life. Locking plate technology was perceived as a major improvement in fracture fixation; however, a relatively high complication rate has been reported after internal fixation in patients with fracture comminution and osteoporosis. Although RTSA has been reported to provide reasonable outcomes for the salvage of failed hemiarthroplasty after fracture, few studies have analyzed the outcome of RTSA after failed proximal humeral ORIF. This was a retrospective case-control study of patients with failed osteosynthesis treated with RTSA compared with patients undergoing primary RTSA for proximal humeral fractures. We used our institution's total joint registry database to identify all patients who sustained a proximal humeral fracture treated with RTSA after failed ORIF or RTSA as the primary intervention between the years 2003 and 2013. Polytrauma patients were excluded. During this 10-year period, 18 patients underwent a primary RTSA acutely ( The 44 patients included in this study were a mean age of 75 years (range, 60-88 years; Various implants were used through the course of the study. In the acute RTSA group, reverse arthroplasty was performed using the Delta III or Delta Xtend (DePuy Orthopaedics, Warsaw, IN, USA) prosthesis in 10 shoulders (55%), the Comprehensive (Biomet, Warsaw, IN, USA) prosthesis in 4 shoulders, and the Tornier (Bloomington, MN, USA) prosthesis in 3 shoulders. In the salvage group, implants used included Comprehensive in 13 shoulders (50%) and Delta III or Xtend in 13 (42%). With the numbers available, there were no differences in terms of glenosphere size or offset. Primary outcome measures included the American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons (ASES) shoulder score, revision surgery (subsequent removal or exchange of any components), need for any ipsilateral shoulder reoperation, postoperative infection, shoulder range of motion, and patient satisfaction. All outcomes were compared between the 2 groups. Radiographic analysis included anterior-posterior and axillary shoulder radiographs taken at the time of the index proximal humeral fractures and radiographs obtained at the most recent follow-up after ORIF and after RTSA. The Neer Classification system was used to classify the initial fracture pattern. Continuous variables were compared using unpaired, 2-tailed Student When the salvage RTSA cohort was compared with the primary RTSA cohort, clinical outcomes were quite similar, with no significant difference between postoperative ASES scores in the primary RTSA group (71 points) compared with the salvage RTSA cohort of (65 points, For the patients with failed ORIF salvaged with a RTSA, clinical outcomes were noted to improve greatly. ASES shoulder scores improved from 25 before salvage RTSA to 63 postoperatively ( When stratified for 3-part and 4-part fractures, primary RTSA provided better ASES scores for both fracture types, although with the numbers available, the differences were not statistically significant ( There was only 1 complication (5%) in the patients undergoing primary RTSA for fracture: 1 patient developed a methicillin-sensitive Complications in the salvage group included dislocation (1 shoulder) and aseptic loosening (1 shoulder), for an overall complication rate of 8%. In addition, substantial postoperative heterotopic ossification was noted on radiographs in 3 shoulders. Although postoperative complications were slightly higher in the prior ORIF cohort than in the primary RTSA cohort, with the numbers available this difference this difference did not reach statistical significance ( Displaced proximal humeral fractures in the osteoporotic, elderly population pose a significant challenge for the treating surgeon. Many currently consider locking plate fixation the standard of care when ORIF is selected as a treatment option, reserving salvage to an arthroplasty when failure occurs. More recently, RTSA has gained increased popularity as a primary procedure for the treatment of acute proximal humeral fractures. Currently, there is a paucity of information regarding the outcome of RTSA as a salvage option after a failed ORIF. Whether attempted ORIF will compromise the outcome of salvage RTSA in the future is unknown; thus, this study compared the early outcomes associated with primary RTSA vs. salvage RTSA after a prior failed ORIF. The results of our study seem to indicate that patients who undergo RTSA after a proximal humeral fracture acutely or after failed osteosynthesis have good overall early clinical outcomes, with good shoulder motion, ASES scores, and overall satisfaction. Comparing the groups, outcomes were similar, including relatively equal ASES scores, motion, and satisfaction. Subgroup analysis also revealed similar clinical outcomes in those patients with a prior 3-part or 4-part fractures for the acute RTSA and also the salvage RTSA after failed osteosynthesis. Acute arthroplasty for proximal humeral fractures has been associated with good early outcomes. Comparing the incidence of early complications, patients who underwent salvage RTSA after a prior ORIF had a higher rate of complications, including heterotopic ossification, instability, and component loosening. Despite this increase in complications in the salvage RTSA cohort, there were no reoperations. The patient in the primary RTSA cohort who required reoperation experienced a prosthetic joint infection 1.5 years out from surgery requiring irrigation and débridement after becoming ill from pneumonia. Other studies have reported reoperation rates of up to 4%, with most of these being for early postoperative infection, whereas rates of reoperation for recurrent instability and early loosening requiring revision remained low. If we include heterotopic ossification as a complication, the complication rate in the primary RTSA patients (17%) was slightly higher but comparable to other studies (9%-10%). This study has limitations, mostly due to its retrospective design. This study was performed at a single institution and involved several surgeons using a deltopectoral surgical approach, but there was no standardized algorithm for the treatment of the initial proximal humeral fracture, and not all patients were treated initially at our institution. In addition, the follow-up time for these patients is relatively short, and more definitive conclusions regarding the optimal treatment algorithms necessitate future studies with larger groups of patients and longer-term follow-up. The results of our study demonstrate attempted internal fixation does not appear to compromise patient outcomes if it fails and a salvage RTSA is necessary. Although patient outcomes demonstrated no significant difference, the patients who underwent salvage RTSA experienced higher complication rates than those patients treated primarily with acute RTSA. Although RTSA after failed ORIF did have a slightly higher rate of complications than primary RTSA, the revision and reoperation rates as well as clinical outcomes and shoulder function remained comparable in the early follow-up period. When a surgeon approaches these complex fractures in patients with poor underlying bone stock, this study supports acute or salvage arthroplasty with successful outcomes in both. Furthermore, this series provides evidence that if ORIF is unsuccessful, salvage RTSA still has the potential to achieve good outcomes. Further comparative series are necessary to better delineate a treatment algorithm for patients with comminuted, displaced proximal humeral fractures. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundation with which they are affiliated did not receive any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.