The cost of lime/limestone for neutralisation is the second largest operating cost in bioleaching. Therefore, these studies have been conducted with the aim to investigate the possibilities for use of by-products such as mesalime and electric arc furnace (EAF) dust for neutralisation during biooxidation of a refractory gold concentrate. Experiments were carried out using a retention time of 57h in a one-stage reactor and the influence of two industrial by-products on the biooxidation performance was evaluated. The neutralising capacity of EAF dust was lower, while the mesalime was similar to the Ca(OH)2 reference. The arsenopyrite oxidation in experiments ranged from 85% to 90%, whereas the pyrite oxidation was 63–74%. In subsequent cyanidation, final gold recoveries of 90% were achieved in bioresidues from mesalime and Ca(OH)2, while the EAF dust bioresidue had a recovery of 85%. A comparatively high elemental sulphur content in EAF dust probably encapsulates part of the gold, which explains the lower recovery for the EAF dust bioresidue despite a longer residence time. Cyanide consumption was relatively high and ranged from 8.1 to 9.2kg/ton feed after 24h of cyanidation. Overall, the by-products tested here have proved to be feasible options as neutralising agents in bioleaching operations.Biooxidation of refractory gold in continuous stirred-tank reactors and bioleaching of copper and nickel via heap leaching are some of the established and commercialised technologies currently available. Bioprocessing of ores and concentrates provides economical, environmental and technical advantages over the conventionally used processing route of roasting and pressure oxidation ( Pre-treatment of refractory gold concentrates first started with tank biooxidation processes using high-grade concentrates and later extended to the processing of low-grade and lower value ores via heap bioleaching. The commercial applications of biohydrometallurgy today and in the near future will likely remain focused on recoveries of copper, gold and nickel. Recent advances in research especially on the technical front have revealed routes for bioleaching of chalcopyrite, where copper can be recovered by both heap and stirred-tank reactors. In order for biohydrometallurgy to commercially advance, the microbiologist must work cooperatively with the practitioners of the technology for mutual understanding of operational limitations and practical constraints affecting the microbiological component ( Increasing demand for gold motivates the mineral exploration from economical deposits and cheaper processing for their efficient extraction. Different chemical and physical extraction methods have been established for the recovery of gold from different types and grades of ores and concentrates. Generally, high-grade oxidic ores are ground and processed via cyanide leaching, while refractory ores containing carbon are transformed into oxides by roasting at 500 Bioprocessing of refractory sulphide ores and concentrates as pre-treatment for gold extraction requires neutralisation at two different stages. The first stage takes place in the stirred bioreactors where the working pH in the reactors ranges between pH 1.0 and 2.0. The refractory gold concentrates comprises of arsenopyrite and pyrite as major sulphidic minerals, where the gold is locked as sub-microscopic particles. The biooxidation of these sulphidic minerals liberates the gold, which can be subsequently recovered by a further cyanide leaching step. The biooxidation of pyrite and arsenopyrite is an acid producing process as shown in Eqs. The acid produced during biooxidation of refractory gold concentrates is generally neutralised using limestone to maintain the optimal pH level for the microorganisms and also to fulfil the carbon requirement of the microorganisms. However, in certain cases, where the ores/concentrates contain high amounts of acid consuming gangue minerals, the pH is adjusted with sulphuric acid ( Operation of the bioreactor in controlled pH conditions increases the efficiency of the process, whereas the use of cheaper neutralising agents like dolomite, ankerite or calcrete (a low-grade limestone) could enhance the cost efficiency of stirred tank biomining ( When choosing a suitable alternative neutralising agent some important criteria need to be fulfilled. First, the neutralising capacity must be sufficient; second, the agent should be non-toxic to the microorganisms; third, the overall net cost for delivery and handling of the alternative neutralising agent should be economically sustainable. In a study of industrial oxidic by-products, it was found that their neutralising capacity was high at pH 1.5 indicating their feasibility in controlling pH in the bioleaching process ( The annual European Union (EU) consumption of iron and steel is ∼120 By-products generated in the paper and pulp industry such as lime sludge are generally recycled for the production of quicklime and hydrated lime via calcination at 1000–1300 Residues from biooxidation of refractory gold concentrates consume large amounts of cyanide during the subsequent cyanidation step. This is due to formation of elemental sulphur or other reduced inorganic sulphur compounds, which react with cyanide to form thiocyanate (SCN  The present investigation is a comparative study of mesalime and EAF dust, generated from Swedish industries, as neutralising agents in the biooxidation of a refractory gold concentrate. One-stage continuous biooxidation studies were conducted using mesalime and EAF dust as a neutralising agent and compared with slaked lime as reference. Eventual toxic effects of mesalime and EAF dust on the microorganisms and their neutralising capacities followed by precious metal recovery by cyanidation were also studied. A refractory gold concentrate from the Boliden Mineral AB owned mine named Petiknäs North was used in this study. About 20 Electric arc furnace (EAF) dust from scrap based steel production and lime sludge (mesalime) from paper and pulp industry were compared with chemical grade slaked lime (Ca(OH) The microorganisms used in experiments were obtained from a continuous culture operating at 37 Fe, As and Zn contents in leach liquors were determined by atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS). Redox potential was measured with a platinum electrode against the Ag, AgCl reference electrode, while a Lange LDOTM/sc100 was used to measure the dissolved oxygen. Elemental analysis of the refractory gold concentrate, neutralising agents and bioleaching residues were conducted using Inductively Coupled Plasma-Atomic Emission Spectrometry (ICP-AES)/Quadrupole Mass Spectrometry (ICP-QMS)/Sector Field Mass Spectrometry (ICP-SFMS). Mineralogical analysis of the concentrate, neutralising agents and bioresidues was done by X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) using a Siemens D5000 automatic diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation of 40 The bench scale equipment consisted of a 10 Dried biooxidised residues obtained from the three experiments were ground using a mortar and pestle and approximately 100 The pH in the biooxidation tank varied from 1.3 to 1.5 as pH decreased over night. The pH was adjusted by addition of neutralising agents (slaked lime, mesalime or EAF dust) as manual additions twice daily. The chemistry underlying the neutralisation of the acid produced during biooxidation of the refractory gold concentrate by the mesalime and EAF dust together with the reference Ca(OH) Slaked lime used as a reference material Mesalime EAF dust In the case of EAF dust neutralisation is exemplified by ZnO but this material contains other compounds as well with neutralising capacity like e.g. Ca(OH) The neutralising potential was determined based on the amount of the neutralising agent required to maintain the pH at 1.5 during steady state operation. The EAF dust had the lowest neutralising capacity which required 296 Zinc was associated with sphalerite in the concentrate and the leaching yield of zinc in experiments with mesalime and slaked lime were 69% and 58%, respectively ( During leaching of sulphidic concentrates containing two or more sulphides e.g. arsenopyrite and pyrite results in galvanic interaction between them. The lower electrochemical potential of arsenopyrite compared to pyrite, accelerates the leaching of arsenopyrite by anodic dissolution keeping the pyrite cathodically protected. Therefore, arsenopyrite oxidation was higher than the pyrite oxidation which is essential for the pre-treatment of this concentrate since the major part of the gold is locked within its matrix. The arsenopyrite oxidation was efficient in all experiments (85–90%), considering that experiments were carried out in a single stage reactor. Some gold and silver was also locked within the pyrite matrix, which had an oxidation degree that varied between 63% and 74% with the lowest oxidation occurring when EAF dust was used and the highest when mesalime was used for neutralisation ( The bioresidues obtained after each experiment were characterised regarding chemical and mineralogical content ( The cyanide leaching results are summarised in The residues after neutralisation with mesalime and Ca(OH) The sodium cyanide consumption of 8.1–9.2 It has been demonstrated that oxidic by-products such as electric arc furnace (EAF) dust, from the steel industry, and mesalime, from the paper and pulp industry, effectively can replace limestone as neutralising agent during biooxidation. The by-products were used to neutralise the acid produced during bacterial oxidation of a refractory gold concentrate and the results were compared with a reference experiment where slaked lime was used. No negative effect from by-products on the biooxidation efficiency of gold containing pyrite and arsenopyrite minerals in the concentrate were observed. The EAF dust had the lowest neutralisation capacity and required three times higher additions to control the pH at the desired level of 1.5. However, since the EAF dust contained soluble oxides such as ZnO the amount of bioresidue obtained in all experiments were similar. The ZnO leaching from EAF dust also resulted in a high zinc tenor in solution, which would be beneficial in bioleaching for zinc recovery from zinc concentrates. If EAF dust is to be used as neutralising agent the best option would be to mix the dust with limestone in such proportions that the microbial carbon dioxide requirements for growth is fulfilled. Mesalime is of course an excellent substitute for limestone since it essentially consists of calcite. In the subsequent cyanide leaching of biooxidised residues obtained from experiments with different by-products along with the standard slaked lime, the recovery of gold and silver ranged between 85–91% and 67–86%, respectively. An elemental sulphur content of 3.3% in the bioresidue obtained from the EAF dust experiment was higher than the bioresidues obtained from the experiments with mesalime and slaked lime ( The cost for chloride removal from the EAF dust prior to its use is also an important factor to consider. However, the potential increase in revenue from extracted zinc is also a factor in deciding the overall process economy. It can thus be concluded that both EAF dust and mesalime can be used as limestone substitutes for neutralisation during bioleaching without any major negative impact on either the biooxidation or subsequent cyanide leaching. The authors wish to express their gratitude for financial support from the EU-funded integrated project BioMinE, contract No. 500329-1. Funding from Carl Bennet AB is also gratefully acknowledged as well as Kempe-stiftelsen and Boliden Mineral AB for their timely financial support of the work.