Purpose
                  The purpose was to prospectively compare the outcomes of anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) reconstruction using bone-tendon Achilles allograft with those of free tendon Achilles allograft in 2 groups of active young men.
               
                  Methods
                  We enrolled 72 subjects in the study. Of these, 33 subjects who had ACL reconstruction with Achilles allograft with calcaneal bone block on its end (group I) and 34 who had ACL reconstruction with free tendon Achilles allograft (group II) were followed up for a minimum of 2 years. The Lachman test, pivot-shift test, and 1-leg hop test were evaluated at the last follow-up. The International Knee Documentation Committee classification, Lysholm score, and side-to-side difference were assessed preoperatively and at the last follow-up. The Tegner activity scale was evaluated before injury and at the last follow-up.
               
                  Results
                  The mean follow-up period was 30.9 months (range, 26 to 38 months). At the last follow-up, there were no statistically significant differences between the 2 groups for the Lachman test, pivot-shift test, 1-leg hop test, International Knee Documentation Committee classification, Lysholm score, and side-to-side difference (P > .05). Three subjects in group I and three in group II showed an activity level 2 steps below the preinjury activity level. The rest of the subjects returned to the preinjury activity level or showed a level 1 step below the preinjury activity level.
               
                  Conclusions
                  There were no significant differences in clinical outcomes of ACL reconstructions using Achilles allograft between the bone-tendon group and the free tendon group in active young men. Free tendon Achilles allograft may be considered an option for ACL reconstruction.
               
                  Level of Evidence
                  Level II, therapeutic study, randomized controlled trial.Various grafts have been used for anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) reconstructive surgery. Although autografts may be considered a better option than allografts in terms of healing time of the graft, the allografts provide some advantages such as no donor-site morbidity and short operation time. Many authors agree that the outcomes of ACL reconstruction with allograft are comparable to those with autografts. The purpose of this study was to prospectively compare the outcomes of ACL reconstruction using bone-tendon Achilles allograft versus free tendon Achilles allograft in 2 groups of active young men. The null hypothesis was that the clinical outcomes of ACL reconstruction using free tendon Achilles allograft would be comparable to those using bone-tendon Achilles allograft. This prospective, randomized, comparative study was performed with the approval of the ethics committee of our institution and is registered with All reconstructive operations were performed by a single surgeon. The fresh-frozen Achilles tendon allograft was thawed at room temperature. In group I calcaneal bone block was preserved, with its diameter set to be 10 mm, and the tendinous portion was trimmed along the tendon fibers. Two small drill holes were made on the bone block to pass the leading suture. About 3 cm of the graft was whipstitched with No. 2 FiberWire (Arthrex, Naples, FL) 4 cm apart from the bone block for post-tie fixation ( The subjects who could not cooperate, especially because of acute injury, were examined under anesthesia. However, we did not routinely examine the subjects under anesthesia. The subject was positioned supine with the surgical leg in an arthroscopic leg holder and the nonsurgical leg in a well-padded low lithotomy stirrup. After the tourniquet was inflated, ACL rupture was verified by arthroscopy. The tibial side of the ACL remnant was preserved as much as possible, and the femoral side was debrided for better vision and prevention of tangling with the graft during insertion of the graft into the femoral tunnel. The diameter of the tibial and femoral tunnels was 10 mm in group I and 9 mm in group II. The tip of the tibial tunnel guide was placed at the footprint or at 7 mm anterior to the posterior cruciate ligament and just lateral to the medial tibial spine. The tibial tunnel was made at an angle of 45° to the tibial shaft. The femoral tunnel was made through an anteromedial portal with knee flexion at a minimum of 120°. A femoral offset guide was not used, and we determined the drilling point considering the footprint and the margin of articular cartilage. The length of the femoral socket in which the graft was seated was 25 to 30 mm. In group I graft was inserted into the femoral and tibial tunnels through the anteromedial portal. After the femoral end was fixed with an 8 × 25–mm metal interference screw (Arthrex), pre-tensioning of the graft was performed under maximal manual load with cyclic range of motion 20 times. The tibial end was fixed with a 10 × 28–mm Bio-interference screw (Arthrex) and post-tied to the 4.5-mm bicortical washer screw with knee flexion of 20° and maximal manual load. In group II graft was inserted into the femoral tunnel through the tibial tunnel. The femoral end was fixed with an EndoButton CL. After pre-tensioning, the tibial end was fixed with an 8 × 28–mm Bio-interference screw and post-tied to the 4.5-mm bicortical washer screw. All subjects received the same rehabilitation program. Quadriceps strengthening exercise was performed on the first day. Partial weight bearing was allowed from the third day, and full weight bearing was allowed as tolerated. Continuous passive motion exercise was begun on the second postoperative day, and up to 90° of flexion was allowed by the second week, 135° by the sixth week, and full range of motion afterward. After 12 weeks after the operation, jogging and stationary bicycling were allowed. After 6 months, subjects were allowed to participate in competitive sports except for those that might involve strong physical contact with others, such as football or soccer, or those that might impose strong external forces on the subjects' knee, such as skiing or snowboarding. All kinds of exercises were allowed after 9 months. All subjects were evaluated by 2 orthopaedic surgeons, who were blind to the study allocation and were not involved in the operations, before surgery and at a minimum of 2 years after the operation. As a clinical evaluation, the Lachman test was graded as negative (side-to-side difference [SSD] <3 mm), 1+ (SSD of 3 to 5 mm), 2+ (SSD of 5 to 10 mm), or 3+ (SSD >10 mm). The pivot-shift test was graded as negative (normal), 1+ (glide), or 2+ (clearly positive with clunk). Range of motion of the knee, the International Knee Documentation Committee (IKDC) classification, and the Lysholm score were evaluated before the operation and at the last follow-up. The Tegner activity scale was evaluated before injury and at the last follow-up. Stress views were taken under 150 N by use of the Telos stress device (Austin & Associates, Fallston, MD) to measure SSD on the Picture Archiving and Communication System (PACS; GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL) preoperatively and at the last follow-up. The 1-leg hop test was performed at the last follow-up, in which the maximal distance out of 3 trials was adopted and presented as a percentage of the distance of the uninjured leg. Post hoc analysis showed that a total of 67 reconstructions provided 98% power at a .05 significance level to detect a difference of 5 points in the Lysholm score. There is no definite clear-cut point of difference in the Lysholm score to detect a statistically significant difference in outcomes between 2 groups. Halinen et al. Of the 72 subjects, 67 could be followed up for at least 2 years. The mean follow-up period was 30.9 months (range, 26 to 38 months). Three subjects were lost to follow-up, one subject had an ankle fracture due to inversion injury, and one subject had to remove the washer screw because of an infection. The demographic characteristics of the subjects are presented in The interobserver intraclass correlation coefficients for the Lachman test, pivot-shift test, and SSD were over 0.8. In all subjects the preoperative Lachman test was grade 2+ or 3+. At the last follow-up, 2 subjects (6.1%) in group I and none in group II had a grade 2+ or 3+ Lachman test ( This study showed that the outcomes of ACL reconstruction with free tendon Achilles allograft were comparable to those of bone-tendon Achilles allograft. Thus we accept the null hypothesis. The use of allograft tissue for ACL reconstruction has increased steadily in the past decade because of increased availability and the elimination of donor-site morbidity. There have been many reports about the comparison of outcomes of ACL reconstruction between allografts and autografts. Chehab et al. There may be some potential concerns regarding the traditional technique using bone-tendon Achilles allograft. First, the calcaneal bone block can crack during preparation, insertion into the tunnels, fixation in the bone tunnel, or pre-tensioning after fixation at 1 side, which may lead to difficulty in achieving secure fixation and cause residual laxity. Berg Second, the diameter of the tunnel for the bone block end is relatively large compared with the cross-sectional area of the attached tendon, which is not desirable when revision surgery is required. In the free tendon group, the diameter of the tunnel was 9 mm, which could allow preservation of more host bone than in the bone-tendon group. Third, careful consideration is needed in ACL reconstruction with the anteromedial portal technique using bone-tendon graft, especially when the bone-to-bone fixation is to be performed in the femoral tunnel. Unlike the transtibial technique, the pulling direction of the graft with the leading suture is not in the same direction as that of the tibial tunnel. Thus, if the bone-tendon graft is inserted into the femoral tunnel through the tibial tunnel, there may be a sudden angulation at the intra-articular aperture of the tibial tunnel, causing breakage of the bone block. To avoid such a problem, the bone-tendon graft was inserted into the femoral tunnel through the anteromedial portal in this study. We may also have some issues with this technique: first, a larger incision of the anteromedial portal is needed for insertion of the graft through the anteromedial portal in group I because room for both the femoral end and the tibial end of the graft is needed. Second, more debridement of the tibial remnant may be needed in group I because there may be tangling of the tibial remnant with the graft as the graft is inserted into the tibial tunnel through the anteromedial portal. Third, the leading sutures on the tibial end can be scratched by the edge of the intra-articular aperture of the tibial tunnel during insertion of the graft into the tibial tunnel through the anteromedial portal, which may cause failure of post-tie fixation. Most ACL injuries happen during active sports; therefore most of the ACL-injured patients are active and young, and men predominate over women in terms of prevalence. It is still debatable whether autografts are recommended in highly active subjects regarding the time of incorporation and time until return to full activity. Lephart et al. This study has some limitations. First, the follow-up period was short (27.3 ± 3.8 months). Second, the diameters of the tunnels were different between the 2 groups, although the difference was only 1 mm. However, the volume of 9-mm-thick free tendon graft was comparable to that of the tendinous portion of 10-mm-thick bone-tendon graft, and it is desirable to preserve the host bone as much as possible. There were no significant differences in clinical outcomes of ACL reconstructions using Achilles tendon allograft between the bone-tendon group and the free tendon group in active young men. Free tendon Achilles allograft may be considered an option for ACL reconstruction.