The recent proposal of using Zn-based alloys for biodegradable implants was not supported with sufficient toxicity data. This work, for the first time, presents a thorough cytotoxicity evaluation of Zn–3Mg alloy for biodegradable bone implants. Normal human osteoblast cells were exposed to the alloy's extract and three main cell–material interaction parameters: cell health, functionality and inflammatory response, were evaluated. Results showed that at the concentration of 0.75mg/ml alloy extract, cell viability was reduced by ~50% through an induction of apoptosis at day 1; however, cells were able to recover at days 3 and 7. Cytoskeletal changes were observed but without any significant DNA damage. The downregulation of alkaline phosphatase protein levels did not significantly affect the mineralization process of the cells. Significant differences of cyclooxygenase-2 and prostaglandin E2 inflammatory biomarkers were noticed, but not interleukin 1-beta, indicating that the cells underwent a healing process after exposure to the alloy. Detailed analysis on the cell–material interaction is further discussed in this paper.Biodegradable metals have been viewed as ideal materials for temporary implants due to their excellent combination of strength and ductility, and the ability to degrade Zinc is an essential trace element and has an important role for cell development and growth, immune and nervous system. Numerous enzymes including alkaline phosphatase (ALP) require Zn as a cofactor for their catalytic function Despite the recent proposals of Zn-based alloys as new biodegradable metals, they were not supported with enough toxicity or other biological compatibility data specific for medical implant purposes. To this point, it is therefore imperative to comprehensively study the local cytotoxicity of Zn-based alloys and to set a reference for further use as biodegradable bone implant materials. In this study, normal human osteoblast (NHOst) cells were exposed to extract of Zn–3Mg alloy. The alloy represents the previously studied Zn–(1–3 A Zn–3Mg alloy (97 NHOst primary cells (CC-2538, Lonza, US) were cultured in osteoblast basal medium (OBM, Lonza, US), supplemented with OGM Bullet kit containing 0.1% ascorbic acid, 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 0.1% gentamycin, and incubated at 37 The pH value of extraction media was measured repeatedly at 25 An indirect cell viability test was carried out using methylthiazoltetrazolium salt (MTS) assay (Promega, US). 1.5 Annexin V-FITC stain was used to investigate phosphatidylserine (PS) externalization in apoptosis and propidium iodide (PI) stain to detect necrotic cells. 2.5 Alexa Flour® 635 Phalloidin (Invitrogen, US), anti-α-tubulin conjugated-FITC (Invitrogen, US) and 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI, Sigma, Germany) dyes were used to visualize actin microfilament, microtubules and nuclei, respectively. 1.0 DNA damage was estimated using a Comet assay as described elsewhere ALP extracellular enzyme activity was measured by dephosphorylation of p-nitrophenyl phosphate (pNPP). 1.0 The presence of calcium phosphate deposits on the NHOst cells was detected by Alizarin red staining solution and the uptake by the cells was quantified spectrophotometrically using osteogenesis quantification kit (Millipore, Austria). 1.0 200 Human COX-2 polyclonal antibody (Antibodies, US) was pre-coated onto a 96-well plate. 200 150 All data were expressed as means   The flowcytometry Annexin V/PI apoptosis analysis on Zn–3Mg of day 7 (     The 72 The cell viability results showed that the Zn–3Mg extract from this incubation caused an approximately 50% inhibitory effect on the NHOst cells at day 1, but then recovered at days 3 and 7 ( Flowcytometry analysis with Annexin V and PI stains was able to distinguish between viable, apoptotic (early and late) and necrotic cells. The flowcytometry results showed that after exposure to all samples, the NHOst cells underwent early apoptosis ( Cytoskeleton is a network of linked protein filaments that play an important role in a variety of cell functions, including proliferation, migration and differentiation The comet assay result exhibited at day 7 showed a significant damage level for Zn-exposed group compared to the control. The Zn–3Mg-treated group showed high yet insignificant OTM; meanwhile the Mg-exposed group showed the lowest OTM level ( The expression of ALP enzyme activity in bone cells prior to the activation of osteoblast mineralization engages in the preparation of extracellular matrix for calcium and phosphate depositions as well as co-expression of other genes (i.e. osteopontin, osteonectin and osteocalcin) For bone system, overproduction of pro-inflammatory mediators (i.e. cytokines, prostaglandins, nitric oxide, etc.) due to acute or chronic inflammation may lead to bone formation inhibition, bone resorption and osteoporosis Finally, in this study we have assessed a single concentration of Zn–3Mg alloy extract at 0.75 A thorough in vitro cytotoxicity evaluation of biodegradable Zn–3Mg alloy toward normal human osteoblast cells was carried out in view of the alloy's application for bone implants. Results showed that at the concentration of 0.75 The authors acknowledge the Malaysian Ministry of Education for the Fundamental Research Grant Scheme and Laval University and CHU de Québec Research Center for the fonds de démarrage. Heartfelt thanks to Ms. Norita Salim, Ms. Shahida Abdul Rahman and Mr. Shahidee Zainal Abidin of the Institute of Medical Molecular Biotechnology for their valuable technical supports.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at