The effect of dissolved gases in natural water on the flotation behavior of coal was investigated by a combination of flotation tests, dynamic froth stability measurements, pulp rheology measurements, settling tests and induction time measurements. Better flotation performance with a lower dynamic froth stability (DFS) value was achieved in natural water compared to degassed water. Both pulp rheology and settling results showed that the gases dissolved in natural water enhance the formation of bubble-included aggregates. In addition, dissolved gases reduce the induction time between coal particles and bubbles, resulting in the easier capture of coal particles by the bubbles. All these variables are responsible for the improved flotation performance observed in natural water.Froth flotation is widely used to treat fine coal particles Dissolved gases in water have been shown to have a significant effect on the hydrophobic attractive forces between hydrophobic macrobodies All the above mentioned studies were carried out under mild conditions. In real flotation processes, however, the particles are subjected to rather high intensity hydrodynamic conditions, for example, the agitation used for the dispersion of particles and the oily collector. It is unclear whether nanobubbles and/or nanopancakes can bear these conditions and remain stable on a hydrophobic surface. On the other hand, coal and minerals exhibit surfaces with intrinsic roughness. It thus cannot be unequivocally concluded whether dissolved gases or the so-called nanobubbles operate in the same manner in those rough surfaces that on model smooth surfaces. In this study, we evaluated the effect of dissolved gases in water on the performance of coal flotation processes based on the interactions between coal particles and between particles and bubbles. The rheology behavior was measured in both natural and degassed water to explore the effect of dissolved gases on the apparent size distribution of coal. The induction time was determined to study the potential effect of said gases on the attachment of coal to bubbles. Based on the above results, flotation tests were carried out. The results of this research are expected to provide basic understanding of the improved flotation performance induced by dissolved gases and a new direction to intensify flotation processes. Coal chunks were collected from a coking coal preparation plant in Hebei province. The low-ash coal was prepared as follows: first, the coal chunks were broken to a size <3 mm with a hammer mill. Next, the 3–0.5 mm size fraction from the crushed coal samples was subjected to float–sink separation in a ZnCl To explore the role of dissolved gases in natural de-ionized water on the flotation of coal, all tests conducted with degassed water were also carried out in parallel with natural water. To prepare the degassed water, de-ionized water was boiled at 100 °C for 90 min and then cooled and stored in a sealed bottle for future use. This method was able to remove most pre-existing gas nuclei from the water Flotation tests with natural and degassed water were conducted on a XFD-III 1.0 dm Dynamic froth stability measurement tests were carried out in a self-made laboratory counter-current flotation column with 400 mm in height and 50 mm in diameter. The air inlet of the column was connected to an air compressor via an air rotameter. A graduation ruler was glued at the top of the column to measure the froth height at all times. A sketch of the apparatus is shown in To understand the potential role of gases dissolved in natural water on the interaction between coal particles, the pulp rheology was evaluated with a rotational viscometer (VT550, HAAKE). The viscometer consisted of a concentric cylinder geometry with a rotating inner cylinder and a stationary outer cylinder, the gap between which was filled with coal slurry. During operation, the inner cylinder was driven by a motor, the movement of which was followed by the adjacent slurry. The torque caused by the internal friction in the slurry (which is directly related to the slurry viscosity) was recorded and translated into shear stress. For each test, 6 mL of the slurry, in line with the set flotation feed, was transferred to the gap between the two cylinders. The shear rate was set manually in the range of 0–400 s The properties of particles in a slurry, such as the density and size, can be directly estimated from their settling behavior. In the present paper, settling tests of coal particles in natural and degassed water were conducted to investigate the effect of dissolved gases in natural water on the interaction between coal particles. Coal and natural water or degassed water were mixed in a magnetic stirrer for 2 min. The concentration of slurry used was consistent with the set flotation feed. Then, the slurry was transferred into a 500-mL settling cylinder and inverted for five times for adequate mixing. To avoid the entrapment of air during inversion, the cylinder was filled completely with coal slurry and sealed with Parafilm. After the cylinder rested for a given length of time, a constant volume (350 mL) of the supernatant was taken from the settling cylinder by siphoning, whose solid mass was weighed after filtration and drying. A settling efficiency parameter, It can be seen from Eq. An induction time instrument (2015EZ, Oil Sands Environmental Development & Services Inc, Canada) was employed to measure the induction time between coal particles and bubbles in natural and degassed water. About 1 g of the 0.074–0.125 mm size fraction of coal was used to make a flat coal bed of a given height in a sample vessel. The attachment process between coal particles and bubbles is shown in  To investigate the possible effects of dissolved gases on the interactions between coal particles, the slurry rheology behavior was evaluated in both natural and degassed water. It can be concluded from As described in The induction time between coal particles and bubbles was measured in natural and degassed water, as shown in The effect of gases dissolved in natural water on the flotation behavior of coal was investigated by flotation tests, dynamic froth stability measurements, pulp rheology measurements, settling tests and induction time measurements. The results showed that the flotation performance in natural water was improved over that in degassed water, consistent with a lower DFS value. The gases dissolved in natural water enhance the formation of coal–bubble aggregates, affording a greater apparent size distribution than that in degassed water. It was also found that the induction time in natural water was lower than in degassed water, indicating the easier attachment of coal particles to the bubbles. Both the increased apparent size distribution and decreased induction time are responsible for the improved flotation performance in natural water. However, it could not be unambiguously concluded which one dominates during the flotation process. Nevertheless, all the test results have demonstrated that the gases dissolved in natural water have a remarkable effect on the surface properties of hydrophobic solids, which may be related to the adsorption behavior of said gases on solid surfaces. More investigations on this topic are needed in the future. This work was financially supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for personnel training from the