A new environmentally friendly design for low-grade diasporic-bauxite processing which is different from the Bayer and sintering processes was proposed in this paper. In the redesign of alumina production technology, a mixture of bauxite ore and sodium hydroxide solution was heated at a higher temperature for the purpose of complete decomposition of bauxite. The products were then extracted by water; the resulting sodium aluminate solution was further purified and used for the gibbsite precipitation, the residue being reacted with a caustic liquor to recover sodium oxide and alumina. The experimental results show that during the new process bauxite decomposition rates approach 100% and the residues can be easily recovered. When diasporic ores with mass ratio of alumina to silica of approximately 5:1 are treated, total alumina recovery efficiency of 86% and a sodium oxide presence below 1.5% in the final red mud will be achieved. This new design surpasses previous approaches in terms of high resource efficiency and low environmental impact.Aluminum is one of most commonly used metallic elements in civilization. Due to its high corrosion resistance and mechanical strength to mass ratio, aluminum alloys are used as a major structural material in aircrafts, buildings, machinery parts, beverage cans and food wraps ( In order to bridge the gap between the natural shortage of and the high industrial demand for high quality bauxite, a new technology named ore-dressing Bayer process was developed ( Over the past several decades environmentally friendly design has been applied to an increasingly diverse range of technologies and innovative solutions for the management of resources ( At present, China’s alumina industry has a very limited supply of high-grade bauxite resources to draw upon and suffers from high energy consumption and serious environmental impacts. The processes currently available for low-grade bauxite processing, such as sintering process and flotation-Bayer process, cannot adequately address the related problems of resource efficiency, environmental impacts and energy consumption. However, there is room within China’s alumina industry for positive application of green design principles. This paper endeavors to make just such an application by describing a novel method for low-grade diasporic-bauxite treatment. In order to compare and contrast with the new process, the traditional Bayer process is first briefly described (  The resulting sodium aluminate is extracted by water and separated from the residues. The residues may contain varying amounts of sodium aluminosilicate, hydrated ferric oxide produced during dissolution, sodium titanate and other impurities in the bauxite resources, as shown in Reactions The spent liquor from gibbsite precipitation is condensed in order to crystallize sodium aluminate. The produced sodium aluminate crystal is dissolved in water and incorporated into the former green sodium aluminate liquor before seed precipitation. The second spent liquor is sent to recover soda and alumina in the solid impurities, as is illustrated by Reactions The bauxite ores in this study supplied by Zhejiang Jinjiang Group in China were firstly ground to 74 Above analysis showed that about 70% of the bauxite ore is diaspore. Other phases include ∼12% silicon dioxide in the form of kaolinite and less than 10% quartz, titanium and iron impurities. At 4.88, A/S is relatively low clearly identifying it as low-grade diasporic-bauxite. It also indicated that the ores can almost completely react with alkaline during the digestion, as can be concluded by almost amorphous structure of the solid residues. As a result of it, A/S of the residues drops to 1.10, which is close to the theory proportion of 1. The reagent sodium hydroxide and calcium oxide employed in this work were of analytical grade and made by Beijing Chemical Plant. Distilled water was used throughout the experiments whenever needed. This new reaction path was designed for low-grade diasporic-bauxite. It differs from the Bayer process in two key aspects. Firstly, no solid additives are needed during the digestion of ores. The ores can almost completely react with alkaline under proper conditions despite the absence of additives, remarkably reducing the amount of waste residue left after leaching. Alumina losses caused by synthesis of calcium aluminate, which often occurs during Bayer leaching, can be avoided. Secondly, the spent liquor produced by sodium aluminate crystallization can be reused to recover sodium oxide and alumina from the waste, thereby eliminating the need for other extra solvents. In the absence of these solvents, the risk of system contamination due to their use is removed. Furthermore, benign reactant sodium hydroxide is employed as the reaction medium. It not only creates a necessary condition for complete reaction between ores and alkaline but also thereby minimizes possible pollution sources and alumina losses. Additionally, most of the reaction medium can be recycled to recover valuable elements after refining, with only a small amount of sodium oxide remaining in the solid waste and thereby needed to be supplemented subsequently. Lastly, high quality sandy alumina can be obtained via the seed precipitation process. The resource efficiency is always a major concern. In new design, priority is given to developing new technologies to increase resource efficiency. In the traditional Bayer process, the diaspore with A/S of 5 is usually digested by adding a large amount of calcium oxide ( In the new design the total recovery of alumina in the bauxite is 86% after waste reprocessing, 16% higher than the Bayer process rates. During digestion of bauxite with alkaline, almost all contents in the ores react with sodium hydroxide left with little non-decomposed diaspore in the red mud. Although sodium aluminosilicate forms in the following dissolution process due to reaction of a small amount of alumina with sodium silicate, the loss of alumina can be partly remedied through the subsequent recovery operation. Because of higher recovery efficiency, the average consumption of bauxite per ton alumina product in this new process is 1.98 tons which is 19% less compared to the Bayer process’ 2.45 tons. The contents of the final red mud can support this result. A/S in the residues has significantly reduced from 1.5 in the traditional Bayer process to 0.7 in the new process. In the Bayer process, losses of alumina come from several components, such as remainder diaspore (Al Moreover, it is well-documented that 6–10% sodium oxide remains in the red mud in the Bayer process, whereas the presence of sodium oxide drops to 1.5% in the new process for the same reason as above. The reduction of sodium oxide content in the red mud greatly alleviates the environmental problems caused by its caustic nature ( Next, sodium aluminate crystal produced by the process of evaporation and crystallization, after dissolving with water, is recycled and mixed with the pregnant liquor for gibbsite precipitation. Thereby a big loop of remaining alumina in the spent liquor is avoided, which occurs in the Bayer process. Although other components in the bauxite, such as silicon oxide (SiO As mentioned above, almost all components in the bauxite can react with alkaline during digestion, making it possible for sodium oxide and alumina in red mud to be recovered effectively. Because ferric oxide transforms from hematite or magnetite to ferrite in the digestion process, and further to hydrated ferric oxide in the subsequent leaching, it becomes active enough to react with sodium aluminosilicate and calcium oxide to form andradites with low A/S. Therefore, low sodium oxide and alumina content of the final red mud can be obtained by improvement of recovery efficiency of sodium and alumina. In addition, complete reaction of alumina in bauxite with recycled alkaline also results in an obvious decrease of the residue amount. According to test results, the solid waste output is only 1.09 The other advantage of this new design is that the final-stage residues can be used as feedstock in the cement industry due to its low sodium content ( In an alumina plant, fresh water is often employed to wash aluminum hydroxide and the final red mud. Reductions in red mud output are naturally followed by reductions in the amount of washing water. Total water consumption is about 7.39 Energy conservation plays an important role in the new process design. In this new one for low-grade bauxite processing energy consumption analysis cannot quantified properly as necessary thermodynamic data are not available till now. But a rough estimation on energy consumption of this process has been made. Firstly, the whole process is operated at atmospheric (units of digestion, evaporation and crystallization, precipitation) or near atmospheric pressure (recovery of sodium oxide and alumina unit), instead of a leaching operation at high pressure ranging from 4 to 6 One challenge of green design is the creation of new living products capable of supporting the demands of human society. This new process generates gibbsite and sodium aluminate. Gibbsite is the ideal raw material for producing sandy alumina, and sodium aluminate is often utilized as an adjunct in treatment of potable and industrial water and also an additive in paper processing. A summary of the differences between the Bayer process and the introduced greener design for low-grade diasporic-bauxite is shown in A novel and environmentally friendly design for low-grade diasporic-bauxite processing has been developed. It applies the theory of green design to a fundamental redesign of alumina industry technology, rather than a simple revision of the traditional method. The new design focuses not only on higher resource efficiency and more efficient products, but also on maximum reduction of environmental impacts. The detailed characteristics analysis shows that, when compared with the traditional Bayer process, this new project remarkably increases the efficiency of resources and decreases water consumption. Moreover, it creates fewer environmental impacts because of the lower sodium content of red mud and minimal solid waste produced. At the same time, this process can provide us with a desirable product – sandy alumina. At present, this bauxite digestion process is in the early stages of development. Energy consumption is till higher than that of Bayer process. So the process’ optimization on this new process is needed. Moreover, deeper exploration of recovery of sodium and alumina from the red mud is necessary, since it may be of help to address the Bayer process pollution. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial supports from the Key Project Program of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 50234040).