The management of patients with severe extremity injuries involves focused efforts at limb salvage and mitigation of potential infectious complications. An in-depth understanding of the proper approach to initial management is essential, as it may impact eventual outcome. The use of established scoring systems may predict those at greater risk and enable expeditious utilization of appropriate consultation services. This case-based review highlights critical aspects of patient care and provides a framework for the role of the Emergency Physician.A 44-year-old man was brought in by Emergency Medical Services after sustaining a single gunshot wound to the left leg. The patient reported significant pain with diminished sensation distal to the injury. He denied other injury or symptoms. The patient did not see the weapon used and heard one shot fired. On arrival to the hospital, initial vital signs were: blood pressure 126/79 mm Hg, pulse 113 beats/min, respirations 20 breaths/min, and pulse oximetry 98% on room air. He was immediately placed on a cardiac monitor, which showed a sinus tachycardia. Fluid resuscitation was initiated with normal saline via two large-bore peripheral intravenous lines while he was placed on high-flow oxygen. On primary survey, the patient was anxious and uncomfortable. His airway was patent and he had normal breath sounds bilaterally. He was grossly intoxicated but able to follow commands, with a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 15. Other than a large wound to his left leg, no other injuries were obvious. Subsequent secondary survey revealed no evidence of external trauma to the rest of the body. The rest of the physical examination was fully unremarkable except for the left leg. A 25 × 15 cm wound was noted along the medial aspect of the left tibia with an obvious open fracture and significant tissue avulsion. The dorsalis pedis pulse was palpable. There was diminished range of motion, with an inability to plantar flex, dorsiflex, invert, and evert the left foot. In addition, the patient was unable to initiate contraction of the extensor hallucis longus and flexor hallucis longus muscles. Portable chest, lateral cervical spine, and pelvis radiographs were obtained with no abnormalities noted. Radiographic evaluation of the left lower extremity revealed comminuted fractures of the distal tibia and fibula with embedded multiple bullet fragments visible ( The patient was given a tetanus vaccination booster as well as intravenous cefazolin and gentamicin. The wound was covered with a sterile dressing and splinted with emergent orthopedic consultation. Upon their evaluation, the patient was taken to the operating room (OR) for planned irrigation, debridement, compartment pressure monitoring, and external fixation.  Extremity injuries resulting from high-energy forces are relatively common in today's modern, industrialized world ( The majority of high-energy extremity injuries are caused by blunt trauma from motor-vehicle collisions, falls, or industrial accidents ( Patients who present to the Emergency Department (ED) with a high-energy extremity injury (also known as “mangled extremity”) may have other injuries that take priority. Forty to seventy percent will have injuries elsewhere, including intracranial lesions, cardiothoracic or abdominal disruptions, and other fractures or ligamentous damage ( Prehospital personnel often cover open wounds with sterile dressings and splint obvious fractures. If a deformed extremity has not already been aligned, reduced, and splinted, this should be performed as soon as it is feasible ( Dressings and splints placed by prehospital providers must be fully removed to enable adequate assessment of soft tissue damage and neuromuscular function, but this should not occur repeatedly as the process of undressing and redressing wounds can increase the infection rate three- to fourfold ( Radiographic evaluation is critical to identify the extent of skeletal injury. If the patient has other injuries, standard trauma films (chest, pelvis, and lateral cervical spine) should be obtained before any extremity radiographs. Liberal use of subsequent extremity radiographs is recommended based on observed injury patterns and localized bony pain ( After radiographs have been obtained, many orthopedic surgeons advocate taking Polaroid© or digital photographs of the mangled limb, to document both the extent of the initial injury, and to serve as a record for postoperative progress toward (or away from) a viable extremity. These images can also be used to communicate the injury pattern, potentially obviating the need for repeated inspection ( After primary survey and initial resuscitation, the mangled extremity should be thoroughly examined for vascular injury. Injury patterns that are highly associated with vascular disruption include supracondylar fractures in children, posterior knee dislocations, fractures of the distal femur and proximal tibia, and penetrating injuries of the medial or posterior thigh ( “Soft signs” of vascular injury including non-pulsatile hematoma, a history of “possible” arterial hemorrhage (i.e., a report of pulsatile bleeding by initial providers when no such bleeding is visible at the time of ED examination), delayed capillary filling, paresthesias, or a temperature gradient between limbs have also been proposed, but are less likely to be of importance in the truly mangled extremity. For less severe injuries, however, these findings should prompt close observation, a precise and well-documented physical examination, and interval reassessment of extremity perfusion ( Emergency Physicians should be prepared to recognize and describe the fracture pattern to orthopedic consultants. A systematic approach using the acronym NOLARD may be useful for this purpose. NOLARD stands for the following: neurovascular status of the extremity (N), open vs. closed (O), location (L), angulation/alignment/articular involvement (A), rotation (R), and displacement (D). Other components that should be addressed for accurate description include mechanism of injury, muscle crush or loss, and degree of contamination. The Gustilo classification of open fractures ( When managing a severely deformed extremity injury, stabilization is a critical component. Although definitive management is ultimately achieved through the use of internal or external orthopedic fixation, splinting may be a life- or limb-saving temporizing measure. A reduced and splinted fracture can ease patient transportation and provide a measure of comfort. Early realignment may improve apparent neurovascular compromise, reducing further ischemia and diminishing the potential for development of compartment syndrome. Additionally, when optimal blood flow is available to a mangled limb, the rate of infection is decreased and wound healing is enhanced ( Mangled extremity wounds are considered to be highly tetanus prone, and prophylaxis with tetanus toxoid should be administered to those patients with uncertain or deficient immunization status. Tetanus immunoglobulin should also be considered for those with no history of prior immunization. In addition, these injuries are at high risk for bacterial contamination, with reported rates of close to 65% ( The beneficial role of antibiotics for open fractures has been clearly demonstrated in prospective randomized trials, and parenteral administration should be initiated as soon as possible after arrival at the ED (optimal time < 3 h from onset of injury) ( Despite demonstration of clinical effectiveness, there is a paucity of evidence regarding the optimal antibiotic regimen for treatment of mangled extremity injuries. Current recommendations advocate monotherapy with a first-generation cephalosporin that provides adequate Gram-positive coverage (i.e., cefazolin) for all Gustilo type I (and some Gustilo type II) open fractures and closed fractures with significant soft tissue destruction ( The Mangled Extremity Severity Score (MESS) was developed to be a clinically applicable scoring system to predict limb salvage in the mangled lower extremity ( In addition to infection, malunion, and limb loss, other potential complications of long bone fractures may need to be addressed after immediate resuscitation. These include fat embolism, deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary embolism, bleeding disorders (i.e., disseminated intravascular coagulopathy), Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome, myositis ossificans, post-traumatic osteoarthritis, and reflex sympathetic dystrophy ( The revascularization or reimplantation of a mangled extremity is now the preferred alternative to amputation in patients with a moderate or better chance of limb salvation ( A clean wound is the ultimate goal, and this is best achieved through aggressive irrigation and debridement in the OR ( An open fracture should always be considered a surgical emergency. Any delay at the scene of injury or in the ED may jeopardize limb survival. Simultaneous execution of multiple tasks is thus essential to the rapid achievement of definitive treatment ( In the OR, the patient underwent irrigation, debridement, and placement of external fixator with insertion of antibiotic beads. Compartment pressures were within normal limits (diastolic blood pressure − compartment pressure > 20 mm Hg) and fasciotomy was avoided. Numerous operative revisions were ultimately required with skin grafting and latissimus dorsi free flap placement. To promote bone regeneration and lengthening, an Ilizarov external-fixation device with distractors was applied (