First Quantum’s Kevitsa Mine is located in northern Finland and mines a large, low grade, polymetallic ore body. The processing rate is currently 6.7million tonnes per annum (mtpa) up from the design rate of 5.5mtpa. Payable metals include nickel, copper, gold and PGM group metals. Profitability, at high volume, low grade operations like Kevitsa, is highly geared to metal prices and process improvements. Unusually, for a high tonnage low grade operation, metal losses at Kevitsa are primarily in the finer fractions.
                  Since the operation commenced there has been a focus on maximising the separation process so as to improve the Cu–Ni process profitability. This has included:
                  
                     
                        
                           1.
                           Optimising the flowsheet
                        
                        
                           2.
                           Installing column cells
                        
                        
                           3.
                           Improving fines recovery
                        
                     
                  
                  This paper will outline these process improvements, their introduction and efficacy.Optimising the flowsheet Installing column cells Improving fines recovery Kevitsa Mining Oy is a Ni–Cu–PGE project in Finland and is owned by First Quantum Minerals. The deposit was acquired from Scandinavian Minerals Limited in 2008 and a decision to develop was made in November 2009. Construction of the mine facilities including the processing plant began in 2010 and was completed in May 2012. Commissioning of the processing plant began in earnest in June of the same year leading to production of the first concentrate. Commercial production status was achieved well ahead of schedule and by August the project had moved from commissioning to commercial production status. Currently the operation is processing 6.7 The Kevitsa Ni–Cu–PGE deposit is disseminated in style while having some minor sulphide veins. Pyrrhotite is the main sulphide mineral followed by chalcopyrite and pentlandite. The sulphide grain size is fine to medium. In near surface parts of the mineralisation, pyrrhotite is partly replaced by pyrite and pentlandite by millerite and heazlewoodite ( Being a low grade deposit, gangue minerals dominate the ore treated, with the pyroxene group (including altered forms) being the major non sulphide gangue (NSG). Sulphides contribute less than 5% of the total mineralogy with chalcopyrite and cubanite being the main Cu minerals and pentlandite and to a lesser extent millerite the main Ni sulphide minerals. Sulphide gangue minerals in the ore are pyrrhotite (which exists in both hexagonal and monoclinic forms, with varying proportions). As much as 20% of the nickel in the plant feed is contained in non-sulphide minerals. Similarly, up to 10% of the copper in feed can be in non-sulphide copper minerals. Variability in feed grades, gangue and sulphide minerals presents challenges to the concentrator operations. Low metal feed grades result in a commercially unforgiving ore, with little room to maneuver to manage the substantial variability and still maintain profitability. This is unlike more commercially forgiving copper–nickel ores from other sites where the nickel and copper content in the ore can be 5–10 times the grades at Kevitsa ( A recently published review of different nickel processing operations worldwide highlighted ore variability characteristics ( Nickel and copper in a pyrrhotite bearing sulphide deposit. Nickel and copper in a pyrrhotite bearing sulphide deposit with moderate to high pyrrhotite to pentlandite ratios. Low grade nickel and copper in a high grade pyrrhotite deposit that are uneconomic. Low grade nickel and copper in a low grade sulphide that can be economically processed. The Kevitsa ore would be categorised as type ‘4’ with average sulphur in feed of about 1–1.5%, and pyrrhotite in plant feed of around 2%. The comminution circuit includes a crushing and autogenous grinding (AG) circuit as shown in Crushing consists of 2 stages; primary crushing using a Sandvik CG820 gyratory crusher. The secondary and tertiary crushing is done in two MP800 Metso cone crushers fitted with different bowl and mantle liners in line with their duties. Primary crusher product is screened on a double deck vibrating screen having a 100 Primary milling is 100% autogenous and is carried out in 2 primary 7 The Kevitsa concentrator employs a copper–nickel sequential flotation circuit see Cu is floated first with a Cu selective collector and a high pH (>12) is employed to reduce Ni flotation to copper concentrate. The circuit has a roughing and scavenging stage with the concentrates from these banks reporting to the cleaning circuit. There are 4 stages of cleaning in total with the column cell as the final cleaning stage. The depressant, carboxy methyl cellulose (CMC) is added to both the roughing and cleaning circuits to reduce flotation of NSG. The cleaner tails are open to final copper tails and combine with copper rougher scavenger tails to feed the Ni circuit. Plant copper recovery to copper concentrate and copper concentrate grade are as expected for an ore with low feed grades, but copper recovery is constrained by the necessity to maximise copper–nickel selectivity in the copper circuit. Selectivity against nickel is good with on average less than 4% of nickel sulphide reporting to the copper concentrate. The feed to Ni flotation is at a high pH (10.8) and requires adjustment to pH 10 by sulphuric acid to improve Ni flotation kinetics. A selective xanthate is used as collector to minimise pyrrhotite recovery, with CMC as the NSG depressant. The circuit has 4 cleaning stages treating mainly rougher scavenger concentrates and Ni column tail. The Ni column is fed with rougher concentrate producing a final concentrate grade in one cleaning stage. Like the copper circuit, the Ni cleaner circuit tail is open to the final tail. In the nickel circuit the main mineral separation challenge is the pentlandite–pyrrhotite separation, and to a lesser extent the pentlandite–gangue separation. The average sulphide nickel in feed is around 0.22% at Kevitsa, which is less than the tail grade at most nickel flotation operations. Because of the complexity of the cleaner circuits for both copper and nickel, but especially for nickel, there are large recirculating loads and long residence times in the cleaner circuit. Moreover, there is active depression of gangue and pyrrhotite with flotation at high pH and multiple dosing of chemical depressants. Ni tails are subjected to an unselective bulk float for sulphides to generate a high sulphur tail which is impounded in a lined pond for environmental reasons. The final tails, low in sulphur are deposited in the bigger, unlined pond from where process water is reclaimed for reuse in the process. The circuit employs a stronger xanthate and frother. The PGMs are strongly associated with the Ni minerals with gold reporting predominantly to the Cu concentrate The PGMs and Au are payable in both the copper and nickel concentrate. The performance of the Kevitsa plant has steadily improved since commissioning with the plant results summarised in The Kevitsa concentrator flotation flowsheet as designed is illustrated in The original flotation flowsheet is a typical, conventional flowsheet but was designed without detailed information about mineralogical characteristics of the ore body and the extent of its variability ( Failure by the 2 (Cu and Ni) circuits to meet the targeted recovery and concentrate grades then necessitated the need to evaluate the original flowsheet to identify process improvement opportunities. The initial step was to establish the base case performance of the concentrator as a benchmark through a survey. For this survey the established, Statistical Benchmark Survey, as described by Further to this the survey samples were submitted for mineralogical analysis with QEMSCAN and sample streams mass balances by BILMAT. The findings of this survey are summarised below: Cu sulphide minerals recovery size range is wider than for Ni sulphide minerals whose recovery falls off on both ends of the fines and coarse (<15 Liberated Cu and Ni sulphide minerals in the fine size range are lost to tailings. Some mineral losses were as binary composites between the sulphide minerals and gangue in the finer size fractions (<15 Ni sulphides reporting to the Cu concentrate were liberated (true flotation or entrainment) or as binary composites with Cu sulphides or floatable NSG. High levels of floatable NSG in both concentrate more so in Ni final concentrate. High levels of pyrrhotite in Ni final concentrate (41%). Results of the mass balancing by BILMAT with all the intermediate streams gave an insight into the mass flows and contained metal recycling with the numerous recycle streams as show in The mineral assays and distributions (Cp is chalcopyrite, Po is pyrrhotite, Pn is pentlandite) are also shown in Armed with this and other data from prior QEMSCAN and MLA reports a circuit reconfiguration was embarked on at Kevitsa with the following changes being made. For the copper circuit: Cu rougher concentrate redirected to feed Cu cleaner 2. Cu Cleaner 1 tail opened to Cu tails. For the nickel circuit: 7 of the 14 Ni rougher/scavenger cells were bypassed (1 line bypassed). Ni rougher concentrates redirected to feed Ni cleaner 3. Ni scavenger concentrate redirected to feed Ni cleaner 1. Ni cleaner 3 tails redirected to Ni cleaner 2 feed. Ni cleaner 1 tails opened to Ni final tails. Ni regrind thickener bypassed and dewatering cyclones installed in its place. Ni cleaning circuit shortened to 4 cleaning stages. The changes targeted reduction of the cleaner recycle that recycled both valuable minerals and gangue leading to an increased chance of losing the valuable minerals to tail and the entrainment/entrapment of gangue into the concentrate streams. Another target was to direct the concentrate streams to feed nodes in the circuit of similar metal grades, to prevent pollution of high grade streams and keeping such streams from nodes close to the exit point of the circuit. The Kevitsa mills are operated to achieve a product p80 of between 75 A column flotation cell has a reduced surface area to cell volume ratio to promote froth stability, a froth washing system to minimise the entrainment of impurities, quiescent flotation conditions to promote selectivity and an air sparging system to generate a supply of uniform bubbles. Column flotation has become widely accepted throughout the mineral industry ( These characteristics of the column cell lent themselves to the cleaner challenges at Kevitsa; improving the Cu–Ni and Cu–NSG separation in the copper circuit and the Ni–Po and Ni–NSG separation in the nickel circuit. The relatively poor recovery of <20 Magnetic conditioning has been shown to selectively increase the flotation recovery of <20 The Kevitsa flotation feed size is not particularly fine for a complex sulphide separation process, but the nickel sulphide losses are overwhelmingly fine, with more than 80% of nickel in tail <25 The nickel sulphide in plant feed reports to either the copper concentrate, nickel concentrate or nickel tail. Generally, the proportion reporting to these streams was <5% to copper concentrate, around 60% to nickel concentrate and the remaining 35% to tail. The strategy in installing the magnetic conditioning units was to reduce the misplacing of pentlandite to the copper concentrate and to the final tails. Some of the pentlandite recovered to the copper concentrate was there by entrainment, therefore, it was decided to magnetically condition the copper cleaner feed to homogeneously aggregate the chalcopyrite to improve its flotation, and to homogeneously aggregate the pentlandite to reduce its recovery by entrainment to the copper concentrate. Magnetic conditioning was also installed in the nickel rougher and first nickel cleaner to aggregate and reduce nickel sulphide losses to the nickel tail. Changes to the flowsheet have been ongoing for the duration the concentrator has been in operation. Therefore, a second statistical benchmarking survey to measure the impact of the reconfiguration changes has been deferred. To this effect operational performance data was analysed statistically, comparing plant results before and after the flowsheet changes to evaluate the impact of the changes on recovery and concentrate grades for Cu and Ni. The flowsheet changes outlined in the introduction were implemented and the data for both the copper and nickel circuit were collected so that the relative performance of the plant before and after these changes were made could be analysed.  The upgrade ratio (concentrate grade/feed grade) was used so as to normalise the data for variations in feed grade. There was a substantial increase in the upgrade ratio with no change in recovery for the period after the circuit was reconfigured. Subjecting the data to a For the Ni circuit Pn:Po selectivity is the major challenge. The impact of shortening residence time to limit pyrrhotite recovery is illustrated in To minimise the recovery of Po relative to Pn, the flotation time had to be shortened to the time where about 70% Pn recovery occurs. This avoids the longer flotation times where high recovery of Po occurs for marginal gain in the Pn recovery. For this reason and because re-routing of the recycling streams reduced Ni rougher feed flow, the plant rougher–scavenger residence time was cut by half (one line taken off line). Design residence time was 90 Data was collected for the nickel circuit before and after the circuit reconfiguration and A similar analysis of the Ni circuit data was not so distinct, with a marginal drop in recovery and an increase in upgrade ratio of −0.6% and 1.8 respectively. For each of these changes the level of confidence was low and thus the circuit reconfiguration produced no change in nickel circuit performance. However, it was noted that a similar performance was achieved before and after the change, but with 50% less residence time (lower operating cost). With improving Po/Pn selectivity on the rougher and scavengers being one of the objectives of the changes to the flowsheet, through the reduction of the flotation time, data on the Po/Pn ratio in the feed to flotation versus Po content in the Ni final concentrate was compared before and after circuit reconfiguration. In the absence of XRD analysis to quantify the Po content in the final concentrate the contained minerals in the samples were calculated using metal assays obtained by making the following assumptions ( The sulphide minerals contained in the ore are chalcopyrite, pentlandite and pyrrhotite and all other sulphide minerals occur in such low quantities as to be deemed negligible and thus are ignored. All the copper is contained in chalcopyrite whilst the nickel mineral is solely pentlandite. The total sulphur is distributed between the 3 major sulphide minerals. Using minerals compositions for the minerals the minerals content including pyrrhotite are calculated.  Subjecting the data to the With reduced recycle of material from the cleaning circuit to the rougher scavenger circuit the volume of gangue being carried into the cleaning circuit was reduced, allowing for the required cleaning capacity to be reduced, and thus the 5th nickel cleaning stage was bypassed. Bypassing of the Ni regrind feed thickener and replacing it with dewatering cyclones was done to minimise concentrate hold up in the thickener which exposed the pentlandite mineral to possible oxidation which would in turn reduce its floatability. With the dewatering cyclones the targeted mill feed densities were met with no concentrate hold up. Four months of plant data was collected, 2  The results for the nickel circuit are shown in  A statistical ON/OFF paired ‘ However, early in the testing it became apparent that not only was there a reduction in nickel lost to copper concentrate but also there was an increase in copper recovery to copper concentrate. The copper results for the 44 pairs of ON/OFF results for the first 3 This is showing an improved copper grade recovery response-higher copper recovery at a similar copper concentrate grade. Moreover, there is improved copper-nickel sulphide selectivity, with higher copper recovery at a lower nickel sulphide recovery to the copper concentrate. This is consistent with homogeneous aggregation of the paramagnetic minerals, also found by Using a financial model for the Kevitsa plant and the method of The financial benefit with magnetic conditioning in the copper cleaner is USD 0.73 per tonne of plant feed with a level of confidence of 99%. After several months of testwork in the nickel circuit it was observed that the change in nickel circuit performance took 24 From a statistical perspective, the disadvantage of allowing an equilibrium period is that it halves the number of pairs of data. The number of pairs is important when carrying out paired The improvement in nickel and copper is to a high 91% level of confidence. However, combining the total circuit improvement in the combined recovery of the two payable metals copper and nickel, which is the true total difference in circuit performance due to magnetic conditioning results in a 2.3% increase in total metal recovery to a 98% level of confidence. This higher confidence is due to the lower relative standard deviation for the combined metal recovery paired difference, compared to the relative standard deviation of the individual metal recoveries and also the combined recovery difference is larger. However, combining the two recoveries may give a better metallurgical measure of the benefit to the circuit due to magnetic conditioning, but does not take into account the true economic benefit to the circuit. The value of nickel in the nickel feed is substantially higher than the copper because it is higher grade and higher value. Using the methodology of Kevitsa concentrator flowsheet was a generic design and on commissioning, it failed to address the ore mineralogical factors and substantial ore variability. This created opportunities for process performance evaluation and investigation into flowsheet suitability through sampling surveys and laboratory flotation tests. The subsequent analysis of samples by a combination of QEMSCAN and MLA’s identified process improvement opportunities. The result of all this work was the reconfiguration of the circuit to eliminate recycling streams, inappropriate equipment and adjusting Ni rougher flotation residence time for better selectivity between the main sulphide gangue and the Ni sulphide mineral. The overall result was an improved upgrade ratio in the copper circuit and less metal sulphide gangue recovery to the nickel concentrate. Additionally, extra roughing/scavenger and cleaner capacity are now available for the expansion that Kevitsa has planned (10 Installation of a column cell in the Cu circuit has improved copper recovery to copper concentrate by 1.5% at 99% level of confidence. The concentrate grade has increased even with varying feed grades. Ni recovery in Ni circuit has improved by 1.83% at 99% confidence level, however, the concentrate grade has not benefited as much due to improved flotation of pyrrhotite with the introduction of the column. The magnetic aggregation has increased copper recovery to copper concentrate and copper and nickel recovery to nickel concentrate to high levels of confidence. This improvement has had a good effect on the financial returns to the operation. Testwork is now completed. Overall, since commissioning step changes have been made in the Cu–Ni processing at Kevitsa. These have substantially increased the financial returns of the project. This process improvement is ongoing and is driven by the need to maintain profitability in a low grade deposit at a time of reduced metal prices. The authors would very much like to thank Kevitsa Mining Oy and First Quantum Minerals for their support to research and present this paper. Also thank you to all the Kevitsa employees who have contributed to this work.