In recent years, a large number of studies have been carried out to investigate behaviours of concrete filled double skin steel tube (CFDST) members due to its increasing popularity in the construction industry. This paper firstly presents an experimental study on ultra-high performance concrete filled double-skin tubes subjected to close-range blast loading with cross section being square for both inner and outer steel tubes. It is evident that the proposed CFDST column was able to withstand a large blast load without failure so that it has the potential to be used in high-value buildings as well as critical infrastructures. Then, to further investigate the behaviours of the proposed CFDST column, a number of parametric studies were carried out by using a numerical model which was developed and calibrated based on the data acquired from the blast test along with some laboratory tests. Parameters that affect the behaviours of concrete filled double skin steel tube (CFDST) members against blasts are characterised.As a result of the ever increasing threat of terrorist activity, countless effort has been made to mitigate blast effect on structures so that they can withstand more severe explosion accidents without catastrophic failure, thus to reduce the number of human casualties. Indirect means such as using blast barrier to protect vulnerable infrastructures and people inside them are widely used. However, several recent terrorist attacks suggested that such indirect methods cannot effectively prevent attacks initiated by suicide bombers or suitcase bombs. Therefore, there is an urgent need to directly enhance the blast-resistance of important structures through using new structural types or new materials. Recently, concrete-filled steel tubes, as a relatively new steel-concrete composite structure, have attracted tremendous amount of attention in the civil engineering filed due to their high strength and excellent durability. A concrete filled double-skin steel tube (CFDST) is normally constructed by filling concrete in-between two concentrically placed steel tubes. The main advantage of this structural type is its passive confining pressure on the concrete filler resulted from the steel tubes. Due to the confining pressure, the strength and ductility of the concrete filler can be significantly enhanced whilst the buckling of steel tubes can be delayed, if not completely prevented, by the concrete filler. It was found that under axial compression, axial load-carrying capacity of a CFDST column was usually 10–30% larger than the simply superposed axial load-carrying capacity of the steel tubes and the concrete filler when acting alone The majority of the existing studies on CFDST columns only use normal strength concrete filler. However, the recent trends of constructing high-rises and long-span bridges mandate the use of ultra-high performance concrete (UHPC) more and more due to the outstanding safety, serviceability, durability, and economical advantages. UHPC is known for its superior strength which can reach up to 200 This paper firstly presents an experimental investigation on UHPC filled double-skin tubes subjected to close-range blast loading. In total, six CFDST column specimens, with SHS (square hollow section) outer and SHS inner were investigated. All specimens were filled with UHPC of compressive and flexural tensile strength averaging 170 All specimens were 2500 The mechanical properties of the steel tubes were determined from tensile coupons. The average yield and ultimate strength of the steel were 360 Steel-fibre reinforced self-consolidating concrete with nanoparticles was used as the concrete in all CFDST specimens. The nanoparticle, i.e. CaCO Twenty-nine 100 A 3 As shown in The results of this experiment has been reported in the authors’ previous work Emulsion explosive was used in the current blast test program. Simoens et al. In this study, CONWEP predictions of spherical explosive was used as benchmarks for the peak reflected pressure and impulse  Since the CFDST specimen is filled with steel-fibre reinforced UHPC in this paper; therefore its structural response is very different from those filled with normal strength concrete. It is evident from In this paper, finite element models were developed by 8-node solid elements with single point integration algorithm in LS-DYNA Material model 24, namely MAT_PIECEWISE_LINEAR_PLASTICITY, is used to model the behaviours of the steel tube. The actual stress-strain relationship obtained from tensile coupon test was used which is shown in As for concrete filler, there are several material models in LS-DYNA that can be used In order to extend the K&C model to accommodate the behaviour of the proposed UHPC material, a number of laboratory tests were conducted for model calibration purpose, the material properties require calibration were: As depicted in  Static test was carried out to study the behaviours of UHPC filled CFDST specimens when subjected to quasi-static lateral load combined with constant axial load. As shown in   These aforementioned results evidently confirmed the practicability and fidelity of numerically modelling UHPC filled CFDST specimens under static loads. Therefore, in the following section, the behaviours of UHPC filled CFDST specimens under blast loads were also numerically investigated in a similar manner. It is well known that under high strain rate impact, the strength of normal concrete increases significantly, by more than 100% for concrete in compression and by more than 600% for concrete in tension and the dynamic increase factor (DIF) for normal strength concrete can be calculated by the CEB Code The strain rate effect on the steel tube was incorporated by the Cowper and Symonds law which multiplies the yield stress by a factor given as: In the current research, C The numerical setup for the aforementioned blast tests are shown in A total of 33 numerical specimens were designed to investigate the effect of the cross-sectional dimensions and material properties on the behaviours of CFDST columns. The specimens were divided into six groups and each group represents one parameter. The first group, namely AR, investigated the effect of axial load ratio under blast loads of three different magnitudes. The second group, namely HR, consisted of five specimens having inner diameter ranging from 0 Structural columns are under constantly changing live load therefore it is of great interest to see their behaviours under blast loading with different axial load ratios. Axial load ratio is the ratio between the actual applied axial load and the axial load-carrying capacity of the column. In the current research, three blast load levels were used in conjunction with four axial load ratios ranging from 0.016 up to 0.5. It is evident from In this section, five hollow section ratios  It can be seen in In this section, four different cross-section combinations were examined. It is evident from This paper has presented an experimental as well as a numerical study on the behaviours of concrete-filled double-skin steel tube columns under blast loading. The experimental results indicated that the proposed CFDST columns can withstand severe blast load without failure, whilst no signs of steel buckling or concrete crushing were found on the test specimens after the tests. The increase in explosive charge weight caused a larger mid-span deflection, with this effect being more noticeable on axial-load-free specimens rather than axially-loaded specimens. The presence of an axial compressive load, corresponding to 25% of the squash load, led to a slight reduction in the maximum mid-span deflection in two comparative cases. The numerical model of the proposed CFDST column was carefully calibrated by a series of laboratory test and when validated against the blast tests, good agreement was achieved. A number of parametric studies were then carried out numerically to further investigate the behaviours of the CFDST column under blast loading. The following conclusions can be drawn based on the results obtained from this paper: Within a certain limit, the increase in the axial load ratio can slightly reduce the mid-span deflection. However, if it increases beyond the limit, a significant increase in the mid-span deflection or even structural instability can be caused. For hollow section ratio up to 0.5, there were no notable differences in the behaviours of the CFDST specimens. Nevertheless, for hollow section ratio greater than 0.5, a significant increase in the deflection was observed along with a notable change in the period of oscillation. Compared to normal strength concrete filler, the use of UHPC filler in the CFDST specimen remarkably reduced the residual deflection whereas the reduction in the maximum deflection was much less in percentage. The increment in the inner and outer steel tube thickness both resulted in smaller mid-span deflections, however, with this effect being more noticeable on outer steel tube than inner. The behaviours of CFDST specimens under blast loading were mainly dominated by the shape of the outer steel tube whereas the inner steel tube geometry did not have a notable impact The financial support of the