A methodology to characterize the mineral feed to the flotation process by liberation and particle size was proposed. This methodology considers a modification of the classical Gaudin liberation model, incorporating a grain size distribution for the mineral in the ore deposit. The results from a previous study were analyzed to test and validate the new methodology. The characterization of the mineral was successfully reproduced by liberation and particle size.
                  At an industrial scale, a mineral in the rougher circuit feed of a copper flotation concentrator was characterized by liberation and particle size, applying the proposed methodology. From the above results, along with the overall recovery and top of froth (TOF) grade profiles, the characterization of the collection rate along the rougher circuit was performed. The rate constants and maximum recoveries were estimated by liberation and particle size. The results allowed the estimation of the mineral recovery profiles along the rougher flotation bank both by liberation and particle size classes.The mineral liberation is a critical factor that drives the particle-bubble aggregate formation and mineral collection during the flotation process. The degree of liberation, as defined by To estimate the degree of mineral liberation, The standard size classes used to characterize the particle size distribution (e.g., Taylor mesh) allow a wide range of particle sizes per size class, where the upper particle volume can be 2.8 times larger than the lower particle volume ( Another relevant aspect is the link between the flotation feed liberation after grinding and the ore properties, particularly the grain size of the valuable mineral from different geological units in the ore. In this paper, to relate the ore characteristics and the flotation feed after grinding, in terms of size-by-liberation, a modified (generalized) Gaudin’s model that considers an expected grain size distribution of valuable mineral in the ore will be considered, which is a simple and more realistic representation. It is also important to notice that the particle-bubble aggregate formation does not require that particles be fully liberated. In a practical sense, a large number of particles consisting of associated minerals, where even a small fraction of the surface belongs to a floatable mineral, can be recovered by flotation. In this case, the fraction of the particle surface with exposed floatable minerals represents the percentage of mineral liberation (e.g., in two dimensions) for each particle size class. It has been reported in the literature that coarse and multiphase particles (850 × 500 µm) with more than a 1.5% exposed grain surface area were collected by true flotation in a fluidized bed flotation with low energy dissipation without the presence of strong turbulence caused by a rotor ( Note that despite the lower grade of the collected particles the collection process is still highly efficient in terms of selectivity. For example, the average feed grade to the last cell was 0.06% Cu, while the enrichment ratio was higher than 30, which is similar to the first cell. Currently, various techniques are available for the mineral feed characterization by size class and liberation, particularly by two-dimensional analysis (exposed surface area grade). These methods include the quantitative electron mineralogical scanner, QEMSCAN, and the mineral liberation analyzer, MLA ( A methodology to characterize the minerals fed to the flotation process by liberation and particle size is proposed. This methodology allows the calculation of the mineral mass distribution in the feed to the flotation row. Then, from this approach, it is possible to characterize the collection recovery by particle size and liberation in flotation cells. In this section, a new methodology for the mineral characterization of the flotation process feed based on particle size and liberation is proposed. The procedure consists of a modification of Gaudin’s liberation model ( When a uniform grain size and a constant mineral grade are considered for the original ore, the application of Gaudin’s liberation model allows the identification of a single average liberation per particle size class. Otherwise, the mineral characterization by size class and liberation is not possible. However, assuming a grain size distribution and a constant mineral grade (overall) in the original ore, this characterization can be achieved. This new approach represents a better (more general) description than the assumption in Gaudin’s model for the actual distribution that mineral grains exhibit in the ore. Another assumption stated by Gaudin’s model is that the mineral fracture occurs in parallel planes and always generates a uniform cubic particle size after grinding ( To apply the proposed methodology, the following additional assumptions are also required: The valuable mineral consists of grains of different sizes, which are homogeneously distributed in the original ore, as shown in The average mineral grade in the original ore considers all the grain sizes. The mineral grains are grouped by size classes inside the mineral aggregate (ore), thus forming sub-aggregates. The mineral aggregate is composed of a finite amount of sub-aggregates, equivalent to the amount of grain size classes in the original ore. This arrangement can be observed in During the comminution process, each sub-aggregate is reduced until it reaches the same particle size distribution of the flotation feed, which is known data. This assumption considers that the minerals of each sub-aggregate has the same grinding properties (e.g., hardness). In the ore, the matrix is arranged in such a way that the grade of each sub-aggregate is equal to the overall aggregate grade. Finally, the same grade is obtained in all particle size classes, which is also equivalent to the overall grade in the mineral aggregate. Application of the modified Gaudin’s liberation model assumes that the sub-aggregates can be analyzed as independent units for calculation purposes. Gaudin’s liberation model has been typically used for the calculation of the The DL, as defined by Gaudin, does not consider the grade enhancement of those valuable mineral particles that after grinding, a fully liberated condition was not attained, but remain as associated particles. The significant grade enhancement of the associated valuable minerals is mainly due to the fast increase in the According the definition of the From the analysis of each sub-aggregate, a Note that the grain size and particle size distributions are both related to the overall mineral (gangue and valuable). Thus, in order to calculate the floatable mineral distribution per size class and liberation, the mass fraction of associated particles must be evaluated. For this purpose, the mass fraction of liberated gangue particles can be calculated using Gaudin’s liberation model, and then subtracted from the total mass to calculate the mass fraction of the floatable mineral ( The total recovery in a single flotation cell ( In Eq. The collection recovery ( In Eq. In the case of rougher flotation circuits, the TOF grade represents the grade of the collected mineral by true flotation, considering that the froth in each cell is non-selective (shallow froth) ( In Eq. The superscript (N−1) indicates the cell before cell N. Thus, To validate the new approach and evaluate its potential for industrial application, two experimental data sets were used in the present study. The first one corresponds to flotation data reported by  Now, by applying the MGL model, it was possible to reproduce the matrix products by size and liberation, as they originated from a grinding process starting from an ore with a distributed grain size. In this analysis, different types of grain size distributions were evaluated, but the best fit was obtained using a Gamma distribution. Therefore, the probability density function shown in Eq. From Eq.  The MGL model fitting exhibited a grain size distribution for the ore deposit ( Note that the liberation data reported by Data from two rougher flotation feeds (Feed 1 and Feed 2), belonging to a copper mineral concentrator, was characterized by using the MGL model. For this purpose, the results of the feed liberation analysis by QEMSCAN technology and the feed particle size distribution were used. From the QEMSCAN analysis, the mineral was only classified by liberation. Thus, a matrix of size-by-liberation data (as shown in From By fitting an original grain size distribution (Gamma function) in the ore deposit using the MGL model, the results for both feeds reported in  From From the mineral feed characterization, by size and liberation classes, it was possible to adjust the data on the flotation rate for rougher industrial operation. For this objective, the simultaneous fit of the copper recovery and the TOF copper grade per size classes along the flotation row was developed for Feed 2 ( The Cu recovery profile was calculated by using Eqs. The results of  In agreement with the previous flotation rate analysis, From the above results, the flotation kinetics increases as liberation increases and particle size decreases. Then, it is possible to deduce that fine and liberated particles will be collected in first cells of the flotation row. Therefore, it is expected that particle size in TOF sample increases along the row. From the results shown in In From The mineral recovery was evaluated along the flotation bank, not only by particle size classes but also by liberation classes, with a good fitting of the actual recovery evolution along the row and a good fitting of the TOF grades (true flotation process). All of these results were obtained by using simple and reliable measurements in industrial flotation cells. In this paper, a link between the ore characteristics and the flotation feed characterization by particle size and liberation classes using a modified Gaudin-type liberation model was presented. The new approach allowed the identification of a virtual grain size distribution of the valuable mineral in an ore deposit. This new approach allowed a good estimation of the flotation feed mineral distribution by particle size and liberation of a lead sulphide mineral (pilot flotation study). Suitable agreement between the experimental and predictive data was achieved by using a grain size Gamma distribution. Then, the same approach was successfully applied for characterizing industrial flotation data from a copper mineral concentrator. Using the size-by-liberation information of the flotation feed together with measurements of TOF mineral grades along the rougher flotation banks and the overall mass balance, the flotation rate of the true flotation process in the collection zone was identified. The adjustment of the flotation rates per size-by-liberation was carried out using both the mineral recovery along the flotation row and the TOF grades (per size classes), which is a more robust approach for rate constant identification. From this fit, a reasonable agreement between the experimental and modeled data was observed. The results showed that flotation kinetic increases as liberation increases and particle size decreases. From the above, the Cu recovery profiles by particle size and liberation were estimated. A greater effect of the liberation in Cu recovery was observed. The knowledge of the flotation rate by mineral liberation allows the analysis and correlation between the original ore properties (original grain size distribution) with both the grinding product (size class distribution) and the flotation performance (grade/recovery by true flotation). The information is relevant for evaluating the impact that conditioning (e.g., P The authors are grateful to