Ambient acid leach extraction of Ni-laterites is being heralded as a breakthrough in environmentally conscious mining, however to be successfully exploited they require comprehensive characterisation of their mineralogy and chemistry. This industry-academia collaborative research uses XRD, EPMA and ICPAES techniques to examine the acid leaching characteristics of Turkish Çaldağ ore. Mineral scale and small column scale leach experiments were carried out with material examined over various lengths of time at ambient conditions. The characterised residues and solution leach inter-relationships and selectivities are compared to bottle roll and heap leach results, demonstrating where true correlations exist and where differences exist as a result of the experimental scale limitations.Ambient acid leach extraction of Ni-laterites is being heralded as a breakthrough in environmentally conscious mining. Of the total land-based global Ni resources more than 70% are lateritic in nature ( Compared to other heap leaching technologies (notably copper and gold) ambient acid leaching of Ni-laterites is in its infancy, and as such there is little published literature specifically examining the reactions occurring during leaching. To date much of the industry knowledge and know-how is contained within confidential internal reports, derived from demonstration-scale test facilities, nevertheless The Çaldağ Ni-laterite deposit in western Anatolia (Turkey) has a JORC proven resource of 33.2 million tonnes with an average grade of 1.14% Ni and 0.07% Co and was an early demonstration scale example ( This study examines the ambient-temperature dilute sulphuric acid leaching characteristics of Çaldağ’s nickeliferous limonite at a variety of scales, with a view to identifying correlated leaching relationships within the extracted elements. Fresh ore samples, representative of the average Çaldağ ore composition, were fully characterised before ambient acid leaching was undertaken. Leaching was performed at a variety of scales with a view to examining the element leaching relationships ( Mineral grain scale: 1.0 Bottle-roll scale: 150 Small column scale: Seven 1 4 Unless stated otherwise all the characterisation was performed on instruments at the Natural History Museum, London. X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) data were collected using a Nonius PDS120 Powder Diffraction System with an INEL curved position sensitive detector (PSD). Copper Kα Inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry (ICPAES) analyses were collected on a Varian VISTA PRO ICP-AES instrument. The unfiltered leach liquors were appropriately diluted, with the data calibrated and interpreted using the Varian ICP Expert software, version 4.1.0. Trace element analysis was performed on a Varian ICP-MS instrument. The fresh raw ore results were obtained by means of a lithium metaborate fusion and hydrofluoric/perchloric acid dissolution prior to analysis. Analysis of the 4 Polished resin-mounted blocks were prepared for the fresh ore and selected acid-leached residues. The samples were examined by electron probe microanalysis (EPMA) using either a Cameca SX-50 or a Cameca SX100 instrument, operating at 20 The Çaldağ Ni-laterite ore consists of particles or grains which are all composite in nature. Goethite and quartz are the dominant mineral phases identified by XRD in the bulk powder, however they do not convey the real complexity of the mineralogy contained within the Çaldağ ore. To this end individual mineral grains were also hand-picked and examined by XRD. They show that a range of silicates are present including (pale) green lizardite, Fe-rich clinochlore, muscovite (mica), talc and some intensely blue–green coloured kaolinite–smectite (clay) minerals, The chemical composition of the Çaldağ ore has been determined a number of times, such that a compositional range has been identified, Examining the orange-brown goethite particles in detail illustrates how this Ni-hosting mineral responds to ambient leaching with dilute H Initial leaching of the limonitic ore for 2 Extending the mineral grain scale leach time to 35 After 72 Although goethite and quartz dominate the mineralogy of the Çaldağ ore a number of the other more minor minerals play important roles in the overall metallurgical extraction story. On occasion very Ni-rich grains are present in the fresh ore, Often a silicified rim around and/or a siliceous matrix throughout the goethite particles is identified, both of which are possible evidence for later silicification of the Çaldağ laterite profile. Interestingly this silicification is likely to be beneficial to the application of atmospheric heap leaching since it is acid resistant and therefore serves to maintain the integrity of the heap, assisting percolation by preserving porosity and preventing slumping. Furthermore a number of layered silicates are identified, all of which are able to accommodate Ni and other elements within their structures, and which respond to acid attack in various ways. Lizardite, the serpentine mineral, clinochlore and saponite degrade to varying extents to yield poorly crystalline silica residues with much depleted Mg (or Ni) totals. Other clay minerals (particularly smectite and kaolinite- or lizardite–smectite mixed layer species; where smectite clays in this sense are typified by montmorillonite, saponite and nontronite expandable silicate minerals) may remain in the small column residues even after the acid leaching cycle is complete. Similarly the layered silicates talc, muscovite and palygorskite (micas) and clinochlore appear to survive the low pH conditions (pH Occasional dark blue-green particle fragments are identified in the Çaldağ ore which contain very little, if any, nickel, Spinel group minerals, particularly chromite and maghemite, in addition to hematite grains are present in minor/trace amounts throughout the ore, and are characteristically acid resistant when compared to goethite. These Fe hosts are able to take up minor/trace amounts of other elements (including Ni, Mn and Cr) releasing them gradually, presumably as a function of their surface area. The fresh ore contains discrete fragments of calcite CaCO The minerals identified in the fresh Çaldağ ore and leached residues are summarised in  Of first note are the high Fe and S values as compared to all the other elements. Obviously the S level (presumably all as SO Examining the elements at lower concentrations shows a number of interesting trends. It appears that much of the Mg quickly leaches into solution, yet plateaus soon after at ∼6500 Al and Ni, however, have an initial concentration spike at ∼8 Mn and Cr, however, appear to leach at the same rate, though the Cr values are lower throughout. After 127 In contrast to the above Ca and Si exhibit exponentially negative extraction behaviours over time. Calcium has its highest concentration, Ca Examining trigonal plots for the small column underflows over the primary and secondary leach stages (15–127 More constrained leach patterns emerge as the 4 Considering the leached solution element ratios in terms of their relationship to the corresponding fresh ore ratio gives an indication of the selectivity of the process. Thus a coefficient of selectivity, K The selectivity of Ni over Fe in the leach liquors is indicative of the process efficiency and has an important bearing on the economics of the atmospheric heap leach model for any deposit. The Çaldağ limonite exhibits good Fe/Ni selectivity during the initial days (neutralisation stage) of leaching across all scales. Bearing in mind the suppressed Fe values between 10 and 30 Interestingly after neutralisation no selectivity for the extraction of Mn versus Ni is shown (Mn/Ni The Mg/Ni and Mg/Al plots, meanwhile, demonstrate decreasing selectivity (exponential decay) with time such that initially more Mg, than Ni or Al, is in solution yet over time these ratios tend towards that of the bulk ore (Mg/Ni Chromium, in relation to manganese, does not readily leach into solution such that the observed selectivities range from Cr/Mn The Ca plots (Ca/Ni, Ca/Mg and Ca/Mn) also exhibit low selectivities, as all plot with ratios of K When cobalt is considered the selectivity plots across the different scales are revealing. Essentially the low concentration of Co present in the ore gives rise to unrealistic selectivity values at the mineral grain scale, being a reflection of the small amount (1 Clearly these results relate solely to the ambient dilute sulphuric acid leaching of nickeliferous limonite from the Çaldağ deposit in Turkey. Nevertheless a number of findings are widely applicable to other Ni-laterites, notably the rapid extraction of Mg This study has identified where true correlations exist between the different scales and where differences exist as a result of the testing at different scales. Given the intrinsic mineral heterogeneity of any Ni-laterite the role of sampling prior to experimental testing should not be underestimated and has a significant bearing upon the final leach results. Thus the mineral grain scale is inappropriate for determining Co selectivity and the small column scale gives limited Fe selectivity, as compared to bulk ore characteristics or the higher 4 A full and comprehensive mineralogical characterisation of any fresh Ni-laterite is a necessity, especially at the mineral grain scale, in order to understand the overall leach behaviour. Within the Çaldağ ore this is highlighted by the clear dissolution of calcite, CaCO Further academic study using synchrotron methods is required to ascertain the coordination chemistry of key elements within both the fresh ores and leached residues, and to hypothesise upon the associated mineral formation and leaching mechanisms ( Finally it must be recognised that examining other correlations across these different scales (mineral grain scale to demonstration plant scale) is necessary before a true and complete predictive model can be developed. Such correlations would need to include acid consumption, elemental extraction, leaching cycle stage (neutralisation, primary leach, secondary leach, washing etc.), leaching cycle duration, amongst others. This work was partly funded by the EU FP7 IAPP program under the auspices of the