This study aims to understand the fundamental mechanism underpinning the different behaviour of ionic dispersants in fresh water and saline water observed in coal and mineral flotation and many other disciplines dealing with particles. Lignosulfonate D748 (LS), an anionic dispersant was used in this study to mitigate the clay slime coating in coal flotation using deionised water, and saline water of high ionic strength. In deionised water, the addition of a small amount of lignosulfonate enhanced coal flotation in the presence of clay minerals, but this beneficial effect was not observed in saline water. The addition of a large amount of lignosulfonate depressed coal flotation in both deionised water and saline water. The underlying mechanism was investigated by a range of techniques including flotation of pure coal, adsorption tests, and atomic force measurements (AFM). It was found that the enhanced electrostatic repulsion induced by a small amount of lignosulfonate in deionised water was responsible for the mitigation of clay coatings on the coal surface, resulting in improved coal flotation. In saline water, a low amount of lignosulfonate could not disperse clay minerals from the coal surface due to insufficient steric repulsion, and flotation improvement was therefore unable to achieve. The depression of coal flotation at a high lignosulfonate concentration in deionised water and saline water was attributed to the high adsorption on the coal surface, rendering it strongly hydrophilic regardless of the removal of clay coatings.The Australian coal industry is facing the challenge of processing clayey coals as a result of the depletion of high quality coal deposits. Clay particles, usually less than 2 To mitigate the adverse effect of clay minerals on mineral flotation, dispersants have been introduced to modify the colloidal interactions by creating electrostatic and/or steric repulsion. Seaman et al. On the other hand, it is interesting to find that lignosulfonate displayed a different behaviour in coal flotation in the presence of clay minerals when saline water was used. As demonstrated by Liu and Peng, lignosulfonate depressed coal flotation in saline water in comparison to its beneficial effect in deionised water According to Vincent In this study, the dispersion effect of lignosulfonate on clay minerals was investigated in coal flotation and correlated with interfacial studies to establish the underlying dispersion mechanisms in deionised water and saline water. This study will help provide a new insight into understanding the role of anionic polymeric dispersants in dispersing clay minerals in the flotation process. A problematic coal sample was obtained from a mine in the Bowen Basin in the state of Queensland, Australia. This is typically a low quality coal sample which is high in ash due to it being in a thinner section of the seam. The combustible feed grade of the coal is 82.9%. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis of the coal showed 3.9% kaolinite, 2.8% muscovite and 3.4% smectite as the main clay minerals Kaolinite was selected to represent the main clay mineral for the adsorption tests. It was purchased from Sibelco, Australia Limited Company, South Australia. Quantitative XRD analysis shows that this kaolinite sample contains 85 Deionised water and process water with a high salt content from the mine site were used in flotation tests. The composition of process water assayed by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (ICP-MS) was listed in MIBC (Methyl Isobutyl Carbinol), 100% laboratory grade, and fresh Caltex diesel were used as frother and collector, respectively. Commercial lignosulfonate D748 was supplied by Borregaard–Lignotech USA and used in this study. The chemical properties of the lignosulfonate was well characterized by Ma and Pawlik After screening, the coal slurry was transferred to a 2.5 Pure coal sample and kaolinite were used for the determination of adsorption isotherms. One gram sample was firstly conditioned for 15 Interaction force measurements were performed using a MFP-3D Atomic Force Microscope (Asylum Research, Santa Barbara, CA) at room temperature. Since it is difficult to pick up the right sized spherical clay particle to perform surface force measurements, hydrophilic silicon nitride probe which is negatively charged at pH 8.5 The effect of lignosulfonate on the flotation of the problematic coal was studied. Results would suggest whether lignosulfonate could be used to solve the industry problem.  The problematic coal was then floated in process water. Results are shown in However, when lignosulfonate was added in the flotation in process water, its beneficial effect was not observed. As shown in In general, a small amount of lignosulfonate improved the flotation of the problematic coal containing clay minerals in deionised water but not in process water. It seems that a small amount of lignosulfonate was able to mitigate clay slime coatings from coal surface in deionised water but was not in process water. Meanwhile, a great amount of lignosulfonate depressed coal flotation in both deionised and process water. It seems that a great amount of lignosulfonate made coal surfaces hydrophilic regardless of the water quality used. The mechanism underpinning the different behaviour of lignosulfonate in coal flotation in deionised water and saline water was investigated below by using simpler mineral systems with well-defined conditions. The flotation of the pure coal was conducted in both deionised and synthetic saline water to understand how lignosulfonate affected coal flotation in the absence of clay minerals as a result of the alteration of coal surface properties. A similar trend was found in the flotation of the pure coal with lignosulfonate using synthetic saline water. As shown in The adsorption isotherms of lignosulfonate on kaolinite and coal were determined to explain whether the different behaviour of lignosulfonate in the flotation of the problematic coal using deionised water and process water was related to surface adsorption. Results are shown in   In this study, the adsorption isotherms were further fitted to the Langmuir and Freundlich models. The Langmuir equation can be written in a linear form, i.e. Based on the above equations, the fittings were calculated and listed in It is worth mentioning that when polymer concentration is lower than 5 The interaction between kaolinite and coal in deionised water and saline water in the absence and presence of lignosulfonate was studied. AFM enables the direct measurement of interaction forces experienced between a tip and graphite, and may be used to demonstrate the effect of lignosulfonate on modifying the clay-coal particle interaction forces. Initially, the interaction forces between the silicon nitride tip and graphite were analysed without the addition of lignosulfonate. In In In saline water, however, a strong attractive force at a separation of 2.5 When lignosulfonate concentration was further increased to as high as 15 Lignosulfonate improved the flotation of the problematic coal containing clay minerals in deionised water at a low concentration but depressed the flotation in saline water. The different roles of lignosulfonate were explored by conducting flotation of pure coal in the absence of clay minerals, adsorption measurements and AFM tests. It was identified that different dispersion mechanisms of lignosulfonate applied in water of different ionic strength, leading to various flotation results. In deionised water, electrostatic repulsion was enhanced by a small amount of lignosulfonate between coal and clay minerals, which mitigated clay slime coatings from coal surfaces and improved coal flotation. With increasing the lignosulfonate concentration, more lignosulfonate was adsorbed on coal surfaces and rendered them hydrophilic resulting in the depression of coal flotation. In saline water, a low amount of lignosulfonate could not generate enough steric repulsion to separate clay particles from coal surfaces. Meanwhile, the adsorbed lignosulfonate made coal surfaces more hydrophilic, exacerbating the depression of coal flotation. Although a large amount of lignosulfonate may produce strong repulsion between coal and clay surfaces, the reduced coal surface hydrophobicity depressed coal flotation even when clay coatings were removed from coal surfaces. The authors are thankful for the financial support of the Australian Coal Industry’s Research Program (