Aqueous-phase reforming (APR) is a quite new technology for the production of hydrogen and light hydrocarbons from aqueous-organic mixtures in a single-stage process. This manuscript analyzes the APR of representative model compounds of bio-oil aqueous fraction, including acetic acid, ethanol, 1-hydroxypropan-2-one (acetol) and benzene-1,2-diol (catechol), as well as a mixture of all of them. The APR experiments were conducted at 230 °C and 3.2 MPa over three different Ni-based catalysts, including spinel NiAl2O4, and supported Ni/CeO2-γAl2O3 and Ni/La2O3-αAl2O3. The reactivity of the model compounds varied largely in the order: acetol > ethanol > catechol > acetic acid, whereas the H2 production decreased in the following order: ethanol ≫> acetol > acetic acid > catechol. Based on the product distribution obtained, the reaction pathways in the APR of each model compound have been proposed. In the APR of the mixture, the Ni/La2O3-αAl2O3 led to the highest H2 yield but was affected by Ni leaching, whereas spinel NiAl2O4 showed a much higher stability. Therefore, the Ni-spinel catalyst showed a good potential for H2 production by APR of bio-oil aqueous fraction.Biomass is playing a key role in the technological and ideological transition from non-renewable towards renewable resources for fuels, chemicals and energy production Bio-oil can be separated into two phases, organic and aqueous, by the addition of water An effective catalyst for hydrogen production by APR must exhibit high activity for C Nevertheless, some publications have shown the high activity and selectivity towards H APR technology has been mainly used in the conversion of alcohols and polyols, such as methanol, glycerol or sorbitol It spite of its potential interest for APR, studies concerning the APR of BAF or of oxygenates representative of the component families in BAF has been scarcely approached in literature up to present. In order to fill this gap, the objective of this study is to assess the potential of using the aqueous fraction of bio-oil in APR for hydrogen production. For that purpose, we have analyzed the aqueous phase reforming of four BAF model compounds representative of the main component families in BAF, including ethanol, acetic acid, 1-hydroxypropan-2-one (acetol) and benzene-1,2-diol (catechol), and the mixture of all of them has been also studied. The reactivity of the model compounds was tested over three Ni-based catalysts, i.e., supported Ni Nickel-based catalysts were prepared with different supports and promoters. Nickel, cerium and lanthanum nitrates (Ni(NO The Ni/La Due to the temperature limitation of the reactor furnace (maximum of 600 °C), the NiAl The calcined and spent catalysts were characterized to determine the metal content, the surface area, pore volume and average pore size, and the crystalline phases. Atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) was applied to analyze the Ni loading of catalysts samples in a Varian AA240 equipment applying air-acetylene flame. An inductively coupled plasma - Optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) was utilized to analyze the Ce and La content with a Perkin Elmer 7100 ICP-OES. For the AAS and ICP analyses, 200 mg of each sample were dissolved in aqua regia at 120 °C and diluted with Milli-Q water. X-ray diffraction (XRD) was conducted in a PANalytical X-pert PRO MPD Alpha-1 with Cu Kα1 radiation (45 kV and 40 mA) with continuous scanning from 10° to 90° 2θ with step size of 0.0131°. The Scherrer equation (Eq. Solutions of acetic acid, ethanol, acetol, catechol or the mixture of them, with concentrations as specified in Section The results presented in this work have been obtained from the analyses of gaseous and liquid products after 3 h time-on-stream (TOS), that is, after an initial period where the yields of products increase with time on stream until reaching a stable composition. The parameters used to evaluate the behaviour of the catalysts include H Ni, La or Ce content in the catalysts determined by AAS are shown in Leaching in highly acidic solutions also affected the content of La and Ce, especially the latter, which decreased to a greater extent than La. This fact may be due to the difference in the calcination temperature used after the first impregnation step, this is 600 °C for Ce and 900 °C for La, which directly affects the strength in the promoter-support interactions  The NiAl In the calcined sample of Ni/LaAl ( The diffractogram of calcined Ni/CeAl ( The crystallite size of NiO or NiAl The performance of catalysts in the APR of bio-oil model compounds was studied under the operating conditions indicated in Section  H The results suggest that the reaction pathways of APR are diverse and complex depending on the model compound. The following sections analyze in more detail the reactivity of each model compound in APR conditions, in order to elucidate their possible reaction pathways. The yields of H Acetic acid exhibited a low reactivity under APR conditions with the catalysts and operating conditions studied, according to the low conversion and product yields obtained ( The APR of acetic acid takes place according to the following reaction (Eq. According to the results in Under working conditions, the acetic acid can lead to acetyl species CH The presence of CH According to the discussion, a reaction scheme for the APR of acetic acid is proposed and depicted in The product yields and conversion in the aqueous phase reforming of ethanol are shown in The mechanism that prevails in the aqueous phase reforming of ethanol has been studied and discussed in literature The absence of acetic acid in the liquid stream show that the studied catalysts are not active in the hydration of acetaldehyde to form the acid The present results are in agreement with those recently published by Coronado et al. The yields of gaseous products and conversion in the APR of acetol for the three catalysts studied are depicted in The overall acetol reforming reaction, considering the WGS reaction, is given by Eq. The product distribution, with considerably higher amounts of CO The reaction routes discussed in the previous paragraphs are summarized in The absence of condensation reactions in our study with acetol was proved with the analysis of the liquid products, in which oxygenated compounds heavier than acetol were not identified. In a recent study, Koichumanova et al. It is noteworthy to comment that over the Ni/LaAl catalyst, the yield of CO The APR of catechol resulted in H The mixture simulating a bio-oil aqueous fraction contained 2.5 wt% of each previously studied model compound in an aqueous solution. The results obtained with each model compound allowed determining the reactions pathways prevailing during the catalytic conversion of the mixture in APR conditions. It should be pointed out the stability of the model compounds within the organic mixture, since no additional compounds (apart from those obtained in the individual study in sections The conversion of the mixture was similar over the different catalysts (6%–7.4%). The yield of the main gaseous products, H The individual conversion of the model compounds was notably lower than when they were processed in the mixture due to the higher competition in their adsorption on the catalyst surface. This conversion decrease was particularly significant for ethanol and catechol, whose conversions were 50% lower in the mixture than when they were fed individually. Particularly outstanding is the catalytic behaviour of Ni/CeAl regarding the conversion of acetol, which decreased from 28 to 14.5% when the ketone was mixed with other model compounds. Differently, with NiAl The catalytic APR of four oxygenated compounds representative of the BAF was conducted over three Ni-based catalysts in order to assess the potential of using the aqueous fraction of bio-oil in APR for hydrogen production. The activity of the catalysts under APR conditions depended on the type of oxygenated compound, whose reactivity followed the order acetol > ethanol > catechol > acetic acid. Ni/CeAl catalyst was the most active in the conversion of ethanol, acetol and catechol, but it showed the lower activity in the APR of acetic acid. The NiAl Reaction pathways have been proposed for each oxygenated compound, which are similar over the three studied catalysts. In the conversion of ethanol and acetol, the decarbonylation of acetaldehyde to CO and CH In the APR of the mixture of the four model compounds, the conversion of each oxygenate notably decreased with respect to the results achieved in the APR of each individual oxygenate. H The results of this study improve the understanding of the APR of BAF for hydrogen production over non-expensive Ni-based catalysts. Furthermore, this work proposes the routes that potentially prevail in the APR of model compounds of BAF. The spinel NiAl This work was carried out with the financial support of the