This paper presents a new vertical type of dynamic eddy-current separator, intended to be used for separating small conductive non-ferrous particles, having dimensions of about 2–8 mm. This separator, the so-called vertical drum eddy-current separator (VDECS) consists of a vertical spinning drum covered with permanent magnets, alternatively N–S and S–N orientated, directly fixed on the axis of an electric engine. The particles to be separated are brought into the field on an oblique trajectory, hit a shield which surrounds the drum and achieve a supplementary deflection. To increase the separation efficiency, high values of the drum revolution are not needed, but an appropriate arrangement of the separation parameters is. The results of grade and recovery for some types of wastes consisting of mixtures of different small conductive non-ferrous and conductive–non-conductive particles are given. Comparative to these results, the values of grade and recovery obtained for the same types of wastes using a horizontal drum eddy-current separator (HDECS), designed to separate millimetric particles, are given. The advantages of the VDECS lie in fact that the efficiency is close to the one of the HDECS, and the cost of the equipment is lower. The disadvantages are that the intermediate product must be passed again through a separation process.Eddy-current separation methods are used for the recovery of non-ferrous metals (Cu, Al, Pb, Zn) from solid wastes, and also for separating various non-ferrous metals one from each other. These methods rely on the fact that eddy currents are induced in the conductive non-ferrous particles due to the changing of the magnetic field in such a separator. Interaction between eddy currents and the magnetic field results in electrodynamic forces upon the conductive particles, and hence different trajectories for these particles and the non-conductive ones. Eddy-current dynamic separators with permanent magnets represent a class of separators substantially improved in the last 10 years, where the magnetic field is generated by machinery with moving permanent magnets. Modern eddy-current separators used at present for recovery of non-ferrous metals This paper describes a new vertical type of eddy-current dynamic separator, namely the vertical drum eddy-current separator (VDECS) which consists of a vertical spinning drum covered with NdFeB permanent magnets, alternatively N–S and S–N orientated The purpose was to realize an eddy-current separator with a higher efficiency, in order to reduce the cost of the separation equipment, able to separate small non-ferrous particles (dimensions of about 2–8 mm) from non-conductive or from other conductive non-ferrous particles. Unlike the HDECS, where the length of the magnets is about tens of centimeters, equal to the active width of the conveyor belt, in case of the VDECS, the magnets are only a few centimeters long, this being possible by the vertical positioning of the drum. The particles to be separated are brought into the field with a certain velocity on an oblique trajectory in the horizontal plane, as well as in the vertical one. They hit the plastic surface which surrounds the drum, and thus a supplementary deflection is realized. The dielectric particles are reflected and fell. The metallic particles suffer the combined effect of the deflection caused by the collision, and the one resulting from the interaction between the eddy currents and the field. Consequently, they fell at a larger distance as the dielectric particles do. As in the case of all dynamic eddy-current separators, for the VDECS, the fluctuating field of the spinning drum induces eddy currents in conductive non-ferrous particles moving close to the drum. Eddy currents in conductive non-ferrous particles moving through the inhomogeneous magnetic field are caused by Faraday's induction law, and are induced in a particle as a response to a magnetic field which changes rapidly in time While a particle moves through the magnetic field, it experiences changes of size and orientation of the field due to its translational and rotational motion. The changes of the magnetic field acting on a particle moving close to the VDECS rotary drum are caused by two different motions: rotation of the drum and translational and rotational motion of the particle in the active zone of the magnetic field Upon a conductive particle acts the Lorentz force, i.e. the electrodynamic force of the magnetic field on eddy currents inside the particle. The Lorentz force on a small volume d If the particle is sufficiently small, it can be treated as a magnetic dipole and the variations of the applied field within the particle are small. In this case, both the force The electrodynamic separation forces, i.e. the radial and tangential components of force In One can observe that the separation process depends strongly on the separation factor With respect to the tangential component The deviation of a particle depends on the tangential component So, in order to assure a separation which is as good as possible, the values and orientation of the particles' velocities must be correlated with the drum revolution. For a better understanding of the separation process, the optimal distribution of the magnetic field around the drum was computed using the finite element programme The principal outline of the vertical drum eddy-current separator is given in The material to be separated is brought from feeder 5 through feeding pipe 3. The pipe is inclined with the angle The horizontal incident angle The angles As it has been found out experimentally, the angle In the active zone of the field, due to the electrodynamic forces The distances In the following, the obtained experimental values of grade (A) A mixture containing PVC material particles with an irregular shape and dimensions between 4 and 6 mm, and copper wires with a diameter of 4 mm and lengths between 2 and 6 mm. Both plastic and copper are in the same proportion, i.e. 50% Cu and 50% PVC. The geometry of the system has been adjusted in order to gather the plastic material in compartment I and copper in compartment II, which was designed for the concentrate product. The values of grade and recovery for Cu collected in compartment II are given in (B) Cu–Pb mixture containing Cu wires with diameters between 1 and 2 mm and lengths between 2 and 6 mm, and Pb particles of irregular shapes and dimensions between 2 and 6 mm. The proportions are 60% Cu to 40% Pb. The values of grade and recovery for Cu collected in compartment III are given in (C) Cu–Al mixture containing Cu wires with diameters of 2 mm and lengths between 6 and 8 mm, and Al particles of irregular shapes and dimensions between 2 and 8 mm. The proportions are 20% Cu to 80% Al. The values of grade and recovery for Cu collected in compartment I are given in In cases (B) and (C), the intermediate product collected in compartment II, consisting in mixtures of particles in a proportion close to the one of the feed material, was passed again through a new separation process. The experimental results show that for a given value of the incident angle The advantages of the VDECS compared to the HDECS are of economical and technical nature. The existence of a single electric engine, shorter magnets and the absence of the conveyor belt ensure a lower cost of the separation equipment of the VDECS. In the meantime, the efficiency of the VDECS is close to the one obtained with a HDECS designed for the separation of millimetric particles. A comparison between the best results obtained with both types of separators is given in Those values ( The disadvantages of the VDECS are referring to the intermediate product collected in compartment II, which must be passed again through a separation process. The authors wish to acknowledge helpfull discussions with Dr. P.C. Rem from the TU Delft, the Netherlands and Dr. I. Hrianca, from the Department of Physics, West University Timişoara, Romania.