Objectives
                  Humeral head sacrificing procedures are more favored in elderly patients with complex proximal humerus fractures because of high incidence of failures and complications with osteosynthesis. The purpose of this study is to assess the outcome of second generation locked plating techniques in 3 and 4 part fractures in active elderly patients >70years with an emphasis on function and complications.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  29 patients with displaced 3 and 4 part proximal humerus fractures were treated using the principles of second-generation proximal humerus locked plating. Fixed angle locked plating (PHILOS) using the anterolateral deltoid spilt approach augmented with traction cuff sutures was performed. Minimum of 7 locking head screws including 2 calcar screws were used. In cases with a comminuted medial calcar, an endosteal fibular strut was used. Subchondral metaphyseal bone voids were filled with injectable calcium phosphate cement. Radiological outcome (union, head – shaft angle, tuberosity reduction), functional outcome assessment (Constant and ASES scores) and complications (loss of reduction, nonunion and osteonecrosis) were assessed.
               
                  Results
                  The fracture united in 24 of the 26 patients available for follow up at a mean of 27 months (12–40 months). 3 patients developed complications that required arthroplasty (fixation failure in 2 patients and osteonecrosis in 1 patient). Follow up age adjusted Constant (63.1±11.9) and ASES scores (62.58±7.5) showed the extent of functional improvement post surgery. Patients with fractures having a non-comminuted medial calcar and valgus displacement of the humeral head had better functional scores and fewer complications.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Osteosynthesis with second generation locked plating techniques provide satisfactory outcome in very elderly patients with complex proximal humerus fractures with minimal complications.Proximal humerus fractures have a bimodal distribution. The fractures in the elderly are usually osteoporotic low velocity fractures. Majority of these osteoporotic fractures can be treated conservatively with emphasis on early mobilization Records of 29 elderly patients operated for a displaced 3 and 4 part proximal humerus fractures with locked plating between 2012 (Feb) – 2014 (Nov) were prospectively collected and assessed. Our institutional review board approved the study and informed consent was obtained from all patients. Patients >70 A single surgeon through an anterolateral deltoid split operated all patients. Four non-absorbable sutures (no. 2 fiberwire: Arthrex – India) were placed in the cuff – tuberosity junction to help reduction of the head and tuberosity fragments. After securing the tuberosities, the articular fragment was gently manipulated using Schantz pins as joysticks or disimpacted with blunt elevators. The reduced head fragment was fixed provisionally using 1.8 In varus-displaced fractures with a comminuted medial column, an autologous fibular graft was used as an endosteal strut for stabilization of the osteoporotic humeral head. Metaphyseal bone voids if present after reduction were filled with injectable calcium phosphate in cases with a supportive medial column to provide subchondral support to the humeral head and maintain the head tuberosity relationship. A 6–9 Passive range of motion exercises was started from day 1. A graduated supervised home physiotherapy was instituted for a period of 6 weeks followed by strengthening exercises. Patients were seen at the outpatient clinic every 3 weeks till union then at 6 and 12 months and at the final follow up. Immediate postoperative and final follow up radiographs were assessed to measure head shaft angle, loss of head height (as described by Hettrich et al. Internal subgroup analysis was performed using The mean age was 79 24 (92%) of the 26 fractures united at follow up ( The mean active elevation was 111° Major complications requiring surgical intervention were seen in 3 patients (11.5%). 2 patients experienced loss of fixation with varus collapse (>20°) of the articular fragment and secondary intra-articular screw penetration ( The technique of proximal humerus locked plating has improved over the last decade with the advancement of trans-deltoid surgical approach, suture fixation and biological augmentation to resist failures. Our purpose was to study the effectiveness of second-generation proximal humerus locked plating techniques in elderly patients who are often osteoporotic. Major observations from our results include (i) satisfactory results with second generation techniques in 3 and 4 part fractures in very elderly patients, (ii) use of endosteal fibula and injectable substitutes help minimise varus and axial collapse and maintains head-tuberosity relationship, (iii) minimal rates of humeral head osteonecrosis with the deltoid split approach and (iv) higher rate of failures in patients with varus displacements and comminuted medial column. These findings suggest a low rate of complications and better results compared to published results of first generation locked plating Few studies have shown good results with ORIF by locked plates in elderly patients with 3 and 4 part fractures Solberg et al. The second-generation concepts in proximal humerus locked plating advocate the use of anterolateral deltoid split approach to avoid possible interference with humeral head blood supply The status of medial column and its restoration play a key role in successful results following locked plate fixation Both techniques have been described to be effective in providing endosteal support The limitations of the study include a small sample size and lack of a control group, so the interpretation of data is subject to bias. Use of an autograft fibula can also add to donor site morbidity. We used an autograft fibula since we did not have access to allografts. The strengths include prospective collection of all data, blinded analysis of results and inclusion of homogenous fracture patterns in a select cohort of patients. Second generation locked plating concepts achieves excellent short term radiographic and functional results in complex 3 and 4 part fractures with valgus displacement and a non-comminuted medial column. Varus displacement and a comminuted medial column are associated with a higher incidence of loss of fracture reduction and inferior shoulder function but the results are better compared to previously published reports. Our study provides a standardized protocol to follow when performing locked plating of complex 3 and 4 part fractures in very elderly patients. However, control based multi-center randomized control trials are required in future to validate and establish the efficacy, reproducibility and potential advantages of the technique over conventional locked plating and arthroplasty None. Authors declare no conflict of interest; no financial biases and no external funding were received. The institutional review board (Parvathy hospital) approved the study.