A process is developed in this study to recover tungsten and vanadium from a sodium tungstate solution containing 95 g/l WO3, 0.175 g/l V and some impurities. The solution is produced by roasting a tungsten alloy scrap and subsequently dissolving it in an alkali solution. The process to recover tungsten and vanadium involves three steps: purification and separation of vanadium from tungsten, recovery of vanadium, recovery of tungsten. For the recovery of vanadium, MgCl2 and ammonia solution are used in the purification step to precipitate the impurities and the vanadate. A small amount of acetic acid solution is then used to selectively dissolve the vanadium from the mixed residue and leave the impurities in the residue. Finally, NH4VO3 is precipitated by adding NH4OH to the solution, to achieve a vanadium recovery of 88.28%. For the recovery of tungsten, the sodium salt is converted to calcium salt after purification of the sodium tungstate solution. The CaWO4 is then converted to H2WO4 using a HCl solution, followed by dissolving in NH4OH solution and crystallization of APT. A tungsten recovery of over 85% is obtained. The purity of both the final tungsten and vanadium products has met the standard specifications.Tungsten has unique properties and is widely used in various industrial high strength and high temperature applications. It occurs coarsely aggregated in low grade ores. Most tungsten ores contain less than 1 wt.% WO Because of economic considerations, the tungsten in cemented carbide scrap is not the only value of interest. The value of the other constituents, such as V, Co, Ni, Cu, Ta, Nb, Ti, Re and Ag are also important. It has been reported ( Vanadium and tungsten exhibit very similar chemical properties and are produced commercially by relatively similar procedures (  In this study, a novel process has been developed for the separation of tungsten and vanadium from a leach solution of tungsten alloy scraps. Specifically, a magnesium salt combined with an ammonium solution is employed to precipitate vanadium and impurities, such as Si, Al, P, etc., in the purification of the leach solution. This separates the vanadium from the tungsten by rejecting the tungsten in the aqueous solution. Finally, tungsten is recovered in the form of ammonium para-tungstate (APT), which today is the most common, highly pure intermediate for most tungsten products. Vanadium is recovered in the form of ammonium meta-vanadate. The sodium tungstate solution was prepared in the Japan New Metal Co. production plant in Akita, Japan. This was achieved by roasting the tungsten scraps, followed by caustic soda dissolution in an autoclave. Roasting temperature ranged between 500 and 700 °C. Leaching was carried out under the following operating conditions: 200 °C temperature, 8 Analysis of the solution by SPS3000 ICP is shown in In the initial purification step, the leach solution was acidified by HCl solution to a pH of 8.0–8.5 and heated to 75–80 °C. MgCl Vanadium in the mixed residue was then selectively dissolved by a small amount of acetic acid solution at a pH of 6.0, while the impurities, such as Si, Al, P, As, etc. remained in the residue. After filtration, the vanadium pregnant solution was neutralized to a pH range of 8.0–9.0 by ammonia solution. NH After removal of the vanadium and impurities, the filtrated solution was further acidified to a pH of 4.0. A mixed residue comprising CaCO All tests were carried out in a 500 cm The solutions were assayed by ICP and the solid samples are dissolved in aqueous solution, followed by ICP measurement. The process of recovering tungsten and vanadium from a sodium tungstate solution is shown in It has been reported (   The precipitation reactions can be simply described by the following equations. It is assumed that vanadium can be precipitated as NH Vanadium is recoverable with very low amounts of impurities, such as Si, Al and P. Acetic acid is chosen to effectively dissolve vanadium from the mixed precipitate, leaving impurities in the precipitate. Effects of leaching time and the amount of acetic acid on the dissolution of vanadium are shown in The vanadium precipitate was obtained by adjusting the pH of the vanadium bearing solution to 8.0–8.5 with NH The oxidation state of vanadium in an aqueous system may be +2, +3, +4 and +5. However, only the pentavalent vanadium is stable in the presence of air. The variables which determine the oxidation state of vanadium are pH, solution potential ( The Chinese standard values of ammonium meta-vanadate, and the assay of ammonium meta-vanadate product obtained in this study, are listed in Na The precipitation reactions are simply expressed by the following equations: The separation of chromates from molybdates, vanadates, tungstates, and carbonates is feasible because the solubility of CaCrO When the mixed calcium salts are contacted with an HCl solution of 80 °C for 4 h, at a pH of about 4 and sparged with O H The crystallization is not only to recover the tungsten in solid APT form but is also the last step of purification, as all impurities have much higher solubilities than APT. Only 85–90% tungsten is usually recovered during the crystallization process, in order to ensure the purity of APT. The chemical reactions of APT crystallization can be described by the following equations: The chemical analysis of the final APT product is listed in The XRD scan shown in Recycling of tungsten scraps is becoming increasingly attractive. A flowsheet for a three stage process has been developed in this investigation to recovery both tungsten and vanadium from a leach solution of tungsten alloy scrap. The three steps are: initial purification and separation vanadium from the Na The authors would like to thank Japan New Metal Co. Ltd. for the precious contribution to the experimental work.