Objective
                  To study the effects of maternal passive smoking on the morphology and mineralization of dental hard tissue in offspring rats.
               
                  Design
                  We have established a maternal passive smoking model. Offspring rats were sacrificed on the 20th day of gestation (E20) or the 3rd (D3) or 10th day (D10) after birth. We observed hard tissue morphology using Haematoxylin–Eosin (H&E) staining sections, used micro computer tomography (Micro-CT) to measure hard tissue thickness and volume on the mandibular first molars of the offspring rats, and used Micro-CT and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy with scanning electron microscopy (SEM/EDS) to determine the hard tissue mineral density and the ratio of calcium atom number/calcium atom+phosphorus atom number (Ca2+/P3−
                     +Ca2+).
               
                  Results
                  Overall, the development of dental hard tissue was delayed in the offspring of passive smoking rats. The thickness and volume of hard tissue were lower in the offspring of the maternal passive smoking group than in the offspring of the control group. Mineral density of the hard tissue and the ratio of (Ca2+/P3−
                     +Ca2+) were also reduced in the offspring of the maternal passive smoking group.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Maternal passive smoking inhibits the morphological development and mineralization level of hard tissue on the mandibular first molars of offspring rats.Tobacco contains more than 4000 ingredients, and the fumes produced by its combustion contain a large number of toxic substances, including nicotine, tar, carbon monoxide, cyanide and radioactive substances. Both active and passive smokers inhale tobacco smoke; when inhaled by a pregnant woman, tobacco toxins can cross the placental barrier and poison many organs and tissues of the foetus. The overall teratogenic effect of tobacco smoke is uncertain, but a positive association with maternal smoking has been reported for congenital heart defects, Since the 1980s, some epidemiologists have expressed concern about the relationship between maternal passive smoking and offspring tooth development. Heikkinen et al. collected the data on primary tooth crown dimensions of 5–12 years-old children and found 2–3% reductions mesio-distally and labio-lingually in the teeth of offspring of smoking mothers. In addition reduced crown dimensions were found also in permanent first molars and incisors, which were “thin” in labio-lingual crown dimension. A number of laboratory studies have also examined this issue. Khan et al. cultured mandibular first molars extirpated from 18-day-old mouse foetuses. Two-day cultures were treated with 78, 117, 156, or 312 Recently, many scholars have examined the relationship between maternal smoking and the rate of offspring dental caries. Aligne et al. collected cross-sectional data from the Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey of 3531 children between the ages of 4 and 11 years; the children underwent both dental examinations and the measurement of serum cotinine levels. The study found an association between environmental tobacco smoke and the risk of dental caries amongst children. In summary, most previous studies have either examined epidemiological data or have been laboratory studies focused on the effects of nicotine injection rather than the effects of inhaled cigarette smoke, which contains a variety of compounds in addition to nicotine. A simulative passive smoking animal model measuring the effects of smoke on offspring tooth development has not been established. Previous experiments were also more concerned about changes in tooth germ cells than in hard tissue, and they lack quantitative hard tissue measurements. More importantly, no study has investigated how the degree of mineralization of hard tissue is affected by maternal passive smoking. Tooth development is a continuous process of mineralization, and few studies have paid attention to the total stage of hard tissue formation. Our study hopes to renew these research endeavours and to fill those gaps. The aim of the current study was to establish a passive model simulating maternal smoking and to examine differences in dental hard tissue morphology and mineralization between the offspring of passive smoking and non-passive smoking rats at several time points. 80 healthy adult SD rats (60 female and 20 male from the Experimental Animal Centre of Sichuan University, Chengdu) were maintained in a virus and parasite-free barrier facility and fed a standard diet. Females had no reproductive history. The rats were mated in accordance with the sex ratio of 3:1 and vaginal suppository was checked the morning after mating. Successfully mated pregnant rats were randomly divided into two groups: 30 in the control group and 30 in the passive smoking group. Rats in the passive smoking group were placed in a passive smoking device (an airtight glass box measuring 80 Mandibles on one side in the offspring rats were dissected and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 24 The tooth germs were removed from the mandible on the other side with the stereomicroscope and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 24 A SEM/EDS system (HITACHIS3400) was used in the study. The samples used with Micro-CT were cycled through distilled water, 70%, 90%, 100% alcohol, and xylenes; they were then embedded in methylmethacrylate. After being embedded, the treated specimens were washed in running water and rinsed again several times in distilled water, air-dried at room temperature, and then mounted on SEM stubs. The examination surface was sputter-coated with gold–palladium and viewed on a SEM with an accelerating voltage 15 This study established that Micro-CT is useful in the examination of dental hard tissue development. It can display the original three-dimensional morphology of dental hard tissue. We combined HE staining with Micro-CT to observe the morphology of dental hard tissue. In the rats sacrificed on the 20th day of gestation (E20), HE staining showed very thin hard tissue (predentin) in the control group. Odontoblasts and ameloblasts were columnar cells and the ameloblast nucleus was far away from the basement membrane; ( In the rats sacrificed on the 3rd day after birth (D3), HE staining showed that the hard tissue in the control group had gradually thickened ( In the rats sacrificed on the 10th day after birth (D10), HE staining showed that the stellate reticulum had almost disappeared in the control group and that the total crown shape had basically formed ( Micro-CT images revealed no significant difference in the thickness of dental hard tissue on D3 between the two groups. However, differences had appeared on D10, when the thickness of dental hard tissue was significantly lower in the passive smoking group than the control group ( We used Micro-CT and SEM/EDS to examine the mineralization of dental hard tissue. The mineral density of the hard tissue was significantly different on D3 and D10 between the two groups. The mineral density of the dental hard tissue of the passive smoking group was significantly lower than that of the control group ( With SEM/EDS, we found a difference in the average value of Ca Molar tooth bud formation, enamel organ proliferation, and histo-differentiation of dentine- and enamel-forming cells in rat molars are similar to those in humans, although the developmental schedule is characteristics of rats. On E20, the tooth germ in the control group was in the late bell stage, whilst 54% of the tooth germ in the passive smoking group was still in the early bell stage; a relative delay also appeared on D3 and D10 in the passive smoking group. This finding is consistent with those of previous studies. Saad et al. exposed 4-day-old albino mice to 0.1% nicotine sulphate on gestational days 6–20, and pregnant mice were given intraperitoneal injections of nicotine at a dose of 1.67 The developing dental hard tissue is quite different from fully developed teeth; it is smaller, more irregular, more tightly connected with soft tissue and embedded in the mandible. HE staining can display the shape of dental hard tissue but cannot accurately measure the morphological data. An undetermined amount of error exists with HE staining, and this method can also not measure the degree of mineralization due to decalcification in the process of producing sections. However, the emergence of Micro-CT has solved these problems. This is the first study to use Micro-CT as a quantitative outcome measure to investigate the microstructure of developing dental hard tissue. Micro-CT images facilitate the 3-dimensional measurement of morphological parameters such as mineral volume, a measure of the level of hard tissue maturation. Micro-CT and the image analysis system associated with it can also obtain mineral density values, an indirect measure of the level of mineralization. By measuring the thickness and size of the hard tissue we further confirmed the different quantity of hard tissue development. On D3, the earlier time point of the hard tissue development, no difference in the hard tissue thickness was observed, but there was a statistically significant difference in the total volume of hard tissue. Offspring of the passive smoking rats were in an earlier developmental stage. Hard tissue thickness and volume were reduced in the passive smoking group on D10, the day of basic crown shape formation. We can conclude that cigarette smoke interfered with the mineralization process and was a key factor affecting the quantity of hard tissue accumulation. This interference began with the earliest stage of hard tissue formation and extended to the stage of basic crown shape formation. This conclusion is consistent with the results of previous epidemiological research and the accurate quantitative data confirmed the existence of this phenomenon of hypoevolutism. The two methods produced similar results when examining the dental mineralization in the offspring of passive smoking rats: on E20, D3 and D10, the two indicators (hard tissue mineral density and the ratio of Ca In conclusion, we found that passive smoking can affect both the quantity and quality of dental hard tissue development in offspring rats. The mechanisms through which maternal passive smoking affects the morphology of dental hard tissue have not yet been reported. Other research gives some indication of possible mechanisms, however. Nicotine, a major toxic component of tobacco, can affect cell differentiation and proliferation This work was supported by The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. This study was approved by the institutional review board and the Animal Care and Use Committee of the State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, Sichuan University (Chengdu, China). Dong Qianqian served as guarantor of integrity of the entire study and conducted literature research, experimental studies, statistical analysis and manuscript editing. Wu Hongkun participated in the design of the study and drafted the manuscript. Dong Guanyan participated in data acquisition, data analysis and statistical analysis. Lou Beiyan conducted Clinical studies. Yang Lijie and Zhang Li helped to experimental studies and statistical analysis. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. This work was supported by State Key Laboratory of Oral Disease (Sichuan University, China).