This paper examines the applicability of several engineering models to the case of nickel loading onto an iminodiacetic chelating resin, under infinite solution volume conditions. Results showed that the Vermeulen model for intraparticle diffusion and the second order reaction model were best able to predict the shape of individual test runs. However, none of the models examined was able to fit data over the entire test range of 50–5000ppm nickel, using a single fit parameter. A two-parameter hybrid correlation was developed which was able to provide a good fit to the data over this concentration range at two different resin bead size fractions. This hybrid correlation was fit to nickel loading onto a second iminodiacetic resin, as well as to copper and cobalt loading onto the first resin tested. The correlation showed versatility in being able to provide adequate fits to all data sets, and the order of magnitude of the empirical diffusivities is similar to self-diffusion coefficients reported in the literature. Preliminary results suggest that the second fit parameter, α, is an indicator of how sharp a boundary exists between the reacted and unreacted portions of the ion exchange bead.diameter of unreacted resin core [m] resin bead diameter [m] Apparent diffusivity coefficient for hybrid correlation [m film diffusivity coefficient [m intraparticle diffusivity [m intraparticle diffusivity through equilibrated shell [m fractional attainment of equilibrium loading [1] summation counter [1] shrinking core model rate constant [1/s] film diffusion model rate constant [1/s] fit parameter to forward reaction in pseudo-second order model [L/mol Gluckauf model rate constant [1/s] hybrid correlation rate constant [1/s] general rate constant for linear approach to equilibrium [1/s] mass transfer coefficient [m/s] fit parameter to reverse reaction in pseudo-second order rate model [L/mol Vermeulen model rate constant [1/s] mass action law selectivity coefficient metal ion concentration in solution [mol metal ion loaded onto resin bead [mol metal ion loaded onto resin bead at equilibrium [mol maximum loading capacity of resin [mol time [s] hybrid correlation fit parameter [1] boundary layer thickness [1/m] Gluckauf shape factor [1] The purpose of this study is to develop an engineering model to describe the rate of loading of nickel onto an iminodiacetic ion exchange resin. In Part I of this work, an experimental procedure was developed and experimental results were presented. Analysis of these results indicated that film diffusion is only rate-limiting at the very beginning of the experiments and can essentially be ignored when fitting models to the entire data set. This paper examines the limitations of four well-known engineering models used in the design of ion exchange systems: the linear approach to equilibrium, Vermeulen's intraparticle diffusion model, the shrinking core model, and the pseudo-second order rate model. It then proposes a new hybrid model in an attempt to develop a single equation that is able to be used over a large range of test conditions. It is important to reiterate the difference between an engineering model and a fundamental mechanistic model. The goal of a fundamental model is to describe the ion exchange loading as scientifically accurately as possible. Engineering models are usually much simpler, are often empirical or semi-empirical, and their goal is to adequately describe system performance in order to aid in system design and optimization. While fundamental models often perform better than empirical models when extrapolated to conditions beyond those tested, their use in ion exchange system design tends to be limited due to their complexity. Helfferich and Hwang acknowledge this limitation by stating, “In the design of ion exchange equipment – e.g. columns – there are usually so many other factors introducing uncertainties or calling for approximations that the simplest rate law seems the best choice” ( As demonstrated in Part I, a fundamental model to capture the range of conditions being tested would need to describe a complex intraparticle diffusion mechanism as well as the fundamental exchange kinetics for the forward and reverse reactions for each metal at different pH values. To capture each of these mechanisms in turn, several series of additional experiments would be required, including isotopic experiments to determine the intraparticle diffusivities for each component in both the resin bead micropores and the gel phase. While the development of a fundamental model for this particularly complex system would be fascinating, it is reasonable to expect that the equations generated would be complicated and unwieldy for use in design. Consequently, there is a need to evaluate the applicability of the various engineering models for use in design applications. This work focuses on the evaluation of engineering models. The additional research required to develop a fundamental model is well beyond the scope of this work. Four engineering models that are commonly applied to ion exchange systems will be reviewed: the linear approach to equilibrium, the quadratic approach to equilibrium, the shrinking core model, and the pseudo-second order reaction. These models will each be fit to the data for the loading of nickel onto Lewatit MonoPlus TP207 (TP207MP), presented in Part I of this work. Note that the particle resin bead diameter used in all models corresponds to the estimated typical values reported in Table 1 of Part I. The linear approach to equilibrium is a simple ion exchange model, and it is frequently selected over more accurate models due to ease of application. Some authors have presented their results for nickel loading onto an iminodiacetic acid resin assuming a linear approach to equilibrium based on a co-current loading test ( Film diffusion is typically described using the linear approach to equilibrium, as was done in Part I of this work. Gluckauf proposed approximating intraparticle diffusion by a linear approach to equilibrium as well ( The linear approach to equilibrium is described by Eq.  Particularly in the case of gel-type exchangers, it is possible that the rate of diffusion within the actual resin bead is the rate-limiting step. This intraparticle diffusion limitation was modeled by Boyd, Adamson, and Myers and the exact solution to the differential equations for the case of infinite solution volume and constant diffusivities is the infinite series of Eq. In order to simplify the application of this result, Vermeulen developed an approximate fit to the infinite series of Boyd et al., commonly referred to as Vermeulen's quadratic approach to equilibrium (  The concept of an outer layer of loaded resin surrounding an unreacted core was first proposed for ion exchange systems accompanied by reactions by Helfferich, based on theoretical considerations. It is reasonable that such a mechanism would take place when the ion exchange reaction is fast and irreversible. The equation for this model, and its solution, assuming infinite solution volume and constant diffusivities are described in Eqs. Experimental observations confirming the presence of a sharp boundary between the reacted and unreacted zones have been reported for the case of acid elution of a cupric amine complex from a strong acid resin (  Early attempts to model ion exchange loading often involved representing the system as a chemical reaction. A list of several of these early models is available in the literature ( The Thomas model was used to try and fit the data presented in this work. The ion exchange reaction is described by Eq.  While it is possible to debate ad infinitum the best analogous chemical reaction model for ion exchange systems, it is doubtful that any model with integer coefficients would be able to fit the range of solution concentrations in this work. As was seen by the Vermeulen model, if the rate of loading is independent of nickel concentration (i.e. rate proportional to [Ni] The approach taken to address the fact that the dependence of this system on solution concentration lies somewhere between [Ni] Mathematically, the two models appear to be quite different, but both appear to fit the data quite well for the first portion of the loading curve. Therefore, an attempt was made to see whether or not a correlation between the two rate constants, k  To combine the Vermeulen model and the Vermeulen approximation to the Shrinking Core model into a single hybrid correlation, a second fit parameter (α) was introduced. The various constants in the expression were combined in such a way so that as α   Ideally, even in the case of empirical correlations, the various fit parameters should trend with experimental observations, in order to allow one to estimate coefficients for similar systems. The second empirical fit parameter, α, can be considered a measure of how sharp a boundary exists between the loaded and unloaded portion of the ion exchanger. As α approaches 1, it is reasonable to expect that a much sharper boundary exists within the resin beads (i.e. resin loads in more of a shrinking core fashion). To test this hypothesis, loading of the TP207MP beads to approximately 1 Several engineering models were fit to observed loading data for nickel loading onto an iminodiacetic chelating resin in the hydrogen form. While many of these models were shown to provide excellent fits to individual data sets, all models were unable to successfully predict the observed behavior over the range of 50–5000