This paper investigates the mechanical behavior of AA 7075-B4C -Rice Husk Ash (RHA) hybrid composite. The samples AA 7075 and 5 wt% of B4C along with 3, 5 wt % of RHA are prepared by using the Stir Casting technique. The Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS) analysis are used to characterize the prepared AA7075 hybrid composite. The mechanical behaviors hardness tensile and compression are tested using their ASM standards. The fractured samples are studied using SEM. The data obtained from various test are quantitative. The hardness is higher for AA 7075-5 B4C-5RHA. The highest hardness is 121 HV at 5 wt% of B4C and 5 wt% of RHA. The highest tensile strength is 260 MPa at 5 wt% of B4C. The highest compression strength is 563 MPa at 5 wt% of B4C and 5 wt% of RHA in hybrid composite. The obtained data are analyzed on Design Expert version V.10 using two levels factorial design. The regression equations obtained from the software is validated using diagnosis plots and the optimized values of reinforcements are obtained using the desirability analysis.Aluminium Alloy (AA) 7075 is a light material. It is used in an automotive and aircraft applications. The current demand in industry is light weight with high strength. AA is lightweight but not suitable for lower compression strength and hardness [ AA 7075 is the primary material of aircraft industry due to their well established design methods [ Baradeshwaram and Perumal [ Narasaraju and Lingaraju [ Baradeswaran et al. [ Suresh et al. [ Literature confirms that no work has been reported with the addition of B The hybrid MMC consists of matrix and reinforcement material. The AA 7075 is used as matrix material. The B The AA 7075 was purchased from Ozair Tradelink, Gujrat, India with 99.7% purity. The purchased material was in the form of rods. The Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS) test was performed on the received material to confirm the various elements in the purchased material. The detail of received AA 7075 is shown in The B RH is one of agricultural waste. Almost 1.2 × 10 The wettability between AA 7075 matrix and reinforcements (B AA 7075, AA 7075-5 B The casting was done in the presence of argon gas to avoid the oxide formation as explained in Ref. [ The SEM and EDS characterization of specimens were examined directly by SEM with EDS attachment (Model JEOL JSM-IT 100). SEM was used to observe the surfaces and the proper dispersion of reinforcement material in composite. EDS was used to do elemental analysis of casted AA 7075, AA 7075-B  Hardness is the resistance to indentation, scratching and cutting of material. Vicker's hardness tester (Mitutoyo: HM 100) was used to check the hardness of the specimen. Load of 0.50 Kgf for 15 s was applied as per ASTM E-384 standard. The diamond indenter is used to take the indentation on each sample. Each sample was checked three times at different location and the average of three hardness values were recorded as explained in Refs. [ The tensile testing is most common test. It is used to determine the tensile behavior (yield point, ultimate point and break point) of material. The specimens were clamped in tensile testing machine and pull until the failure. During the test, the crosshead was moved with a head speed of 8.33 × 10 Compression test is conducted in similar manner as tensile test, except the force is compressive. The specimen contracts along the direction of stress. During the test, crosshead was move downward with constant rate, meanwhile the specimen reduction and applied load was measured. The compression test was done according to ASTM standard E9-09. The cylindrical specimen is used for compression test. The length was 2 times as compare to the diameter. The diameter of specimen is 19.3 mm and length is 38.6 mm as shown in The design and analysis of result was done by two level factorial design technique using Design Expert V.10.  There is no transformation used in the model. The value of λ = 1 and y’ = y. Linear model is selected for hardness analysis. The regression equation for hardness in actual form is shown in eqn. From The formed equation The tensile properties of AA7075, AA7075-5B The SEM of the fractured tensile test specimens of AA 7075, AA7075-5B The data obtained from the computerized UTM during the tensile test is given in The analysis of tensile strength is done without using any transformation in model. The value of λ = 1 and y’ = y. The tensile strength analysis is done by linear model. The regression equation for tensile strength in actual form is shown in eqn. From The validation of formed regression eqn. From the main effect plot of Tensile Strength as shown in The compressive strength was observed from the various graphs like load-displacement, stress-displacement and stress-strain Diagram of pure AA 7075, AA7075-5 B  The fractured compressed tested specimen of AA 7075, AA7075-B The test results obtained from compressive test of the AA7075, AA7075-5B The analysis of compression strength is done by inverse transformation in model so value of λ = -1 and y’ = 1/(1 + K). The compression strength analysis is done by linear model. The regression equation for compression strength in actual form is shown in eqn. From The validation of formed regression equation was done by tests. The errors between predicted and actual values are identified. The deviation is less than 5%. The formed equation was also plotted as diagnostic plot between actual and predicted values of responses. The diagnostic plot for Compression Strength is shown in The optimization was done to obtain the optimum value of reinforcements for the desired values of hardness, tensile and compression strength. The desirability analysis was done by setting the criteria of wt% of B  The AA7075-B The hardness increases with increase in wt% of reinforcement. It is higher for AA 7075-5 B The highest tensile strength recorded was 260 MPa at 5 wt% of B The highest compression strength recorded was 563 MPa at 5 wt% of B SEM analysis of fabricated samples confirmed the proper dispersion of reinforcements in AA7075/5B The EDS analysis confirmed the various alloying elements in the fabricated AA7075, AA7075/5B The presence of B The developed model has good agreement with experimental and predicted values. The hybrid composite has greater hardness and compression strength as compared to AA 7075. The authors thank