In this paper, a systematic study was conducted to investigate the influence of calcination conditions including grinding time of raw material, temperature, holding time and heating rate on the pozzolanic activity of calcined coal gangue (abbreviated as CCG hereinafter). Furthermore, the changes of mineral composition, chemical structure and morphology of coal gangue during calcination were characterized by means of thermogravimetric-differential scanning calorimeter (TG-DSC), X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and scanning electron microscope (SEM) analyses. The results show that heating temperature affects directly the mineralogy and crystallinity of CCG. Kaolinite in coal gangue transforms into metakaolin which is an irregular and amorphous phase as calcined at 600°C–800°C because of the dehydroxylation of Al–(O,OH) octahedrons together with the depolymerization of Si–O tetrahedrons. The amorphous metakaolin is of high pozzolanic activity; however, it will lose its activity due to the recrystallization into mullite when heating temperature is over 1000°C. The pozzolanic activity of CCG is mainly dependent on the non-crystallizing degree of kaolinite after calcination.Coal gangue is a complex industrial solid waste discharged when coal is excavated and washed in the production course of coal mine. Its major chemical compositions are SiO Presently, two major methods are applied for the reuse of coal gangue: combustion for power generation ( The main reaction that happened in the activation of coal gangue is dehydroxylation of clay minerals such as kaolin and the formation of metakaolin, which is an amorphous mineral with high pozzolanic activity ( In this paper, we systematically investigated the influence of calcination conditions including fineness of raw material, temperature, holding time and heating rate on the pozzolanic activity of CCG. Furthermore, the mineral composition, chemical structure and morphology of CCG under different temperatures were characterized comparatively by means of XRD, FTIR and SEM analyses. Coal gangue used in this study was obtained from JingYang Coal Washing Plant, which is located in Baotou City of China. The mineralogical phase was characterized by XRD as shown in The raw samples were wet ground with a stainless steel rod mill at a rotation speed of 400 rpm for 10 The chemical compositions of samples were performed on a PANalytical X-ray fluorescence analyzer. Thermogravimetric and differential thermal analysis (TG-DSC) were obtained simultaneously using a Mettler Toledo 851 instrument. In order to separately analyze the combustion reaction of carbon and dehydroxylation of kaolin during the thermal treatment of coal gangue, two ground raw samples were heated from ambient temperature to 1200 The mineralogical phase and crystal structure were characterized by X-ray diffraction using a Rigaku D/max-RB powder diffractometer, with Cu Kα radiation (40 The chemical structures of CCG under different roasting temperatures were analyzed by Fourier transform infrared spectra using a Spectrum-One, Perkin Elmer FTIR spectrometer in absorbance mode with KBr pellet technique (1–2 SEM test was carried out on a Hitachi SC-2500 scanning electron microscope for observing the morphology and microstructure of CCG. The pozzolanic activity was determined according to the Chapelle test. A gram of CCG was mixed with 1 g of Ca(OH)  The endothermic peak presented at 500 The exothermic peak at 600 XRD patterns of calcined coal gangues under different temperatures are presented in As temperature rises, the intense peaks at 12.4° and 24.9° in the CCG gradually disappear, which is caused by the breakages of Al–OH bonds and the deterioration of lamellar structure of kaolinite. As show in  According to H. In the calcined products, the bands related to Si–O–Si and Si–O vibrations at 1050 The SEM images in The durability of cement can be improved by mixing metakaolin, due to the reaction between metakaolin and the excess Ca(OH)   From the analyses above, we confirm that coal gangue can be thermal activated to a high reactive pozzolan under appropriate conditions, which has a promising application prospect in high performance concrete. Lots of investigations have demonstrated that this pozzolan can improve the strength, durability and workability of the blended mortar and concrete ( From the above studies, the following conclusions can be drawn: Kaolinite, quartz and unburned carbon are the main mineral compositions in the coal gangue. TG-DSC analysis indicates that kaolinite starts its amorphization at 500 XRD analysis shows that the kaolinite peaks in coal gangue begin to weaken at 500 Morphology observation proves that the lamellar structure of kaolinite is destroyed into an irregular and porous phase heated at 600–800 Heating temperature has a substantial impact on the mineralogy and crystallinity of calcined coal gangue. Whereas heating rate and holding time affect the dehydroxylation degree of kaolinite and the removal rate of impurities such as carbon and carbonates. All the calcination conditions could be optimized to get a highly reactive pozzolan with low heat consumption, which will make it possible to reuse coal gangue as a building material industrially. This work was funded by the