Current study investigates the possibility of obtaining the removal of iron from bauxite ores, by exploiting the metabolism of iron reducing microorganisms. The experiments were carried out using the microorganism Desulfuromonas palmitatis. The effectiveness of the treatment was evaluated on six different bauxite samples, containing the alumina oxide in the form of diaspore or boehmite. The Fe2O3 content of the samples varied between 16.3% and 22.3% and occurred mainly in the form of goethite or hematite, with one sample containing also chamosite. For comparison reasons the same treatment was also applied on three samples of synthetic Fe(III)-oxides, namely ferrihydrite, goethite and hematite. The removal of iron from the six bauxite samples was found to vary between 7% and 29% and the highest extraction corresponded to the sample containing the Fe(II) rich compound, chamosite. The bioavailability of Fe in the three synthetic oxides was highly dependant on their crystallinity. The amorphous ferrihydrite was almost completely dissolved, up to 95%, whereas dissolution of crystalline goethite and hematite did not exceed 9% and 1.2% respectively.Beneficiation and removal of impurities in low alumina bauxites (<50% Al Chemical processes include pyrochemical techniques, acid leaching methods or reductive dissolution alternatives. The pyrochemical techniques involve treatment of bauxites at high temperatures with simultaneous sparging of gases such as H It is widely accepted that biological mechanisms are often involved in the mobilization of iron in natural systems. For the particular case of bauxites, a recent study has demonstrated that biological activity is most probably involved in the generation of gray-coloured iron depleted bauxites within the Parnassos-Ghiona deposits of Greece ( Treatment of bauxites with biologically produced organic acids, such as citric and oxalic acids produced by the fungi Direct bioreduction of iron oxides, exploiting the metabolism of iron reducing microorganisms, has not been evaluated as treatment option till now. Reduction of Fe(III) to the divalent state, Fe(II), is the most common mechanism contributing in the liberation of iron from several solid matrices to the aqueous phase. However in natural waters, particularly when the pH is buffered close to neutral or alkaline values, Fe(II) is easily associated with available anions, such as Scope of the current work is to investigate whether a treatment scheme combining the metabolic activity of iron reducing microorganisms with the chelating strength of EDTA can provide an efficient tool to obtain the removal of iron from bauxite ores. The effectiveness of this combined treatment has been recently tested for the rehabilitation of contaminated soils ( The bauxite samples originated from the Parnassos-Ghiona deposits of Greece. Their chemical analysis was conducted by fusion with KHSO Ferrihydrite and goethite were prepared in the laboratory as described by The microorganism used for the biological treatment of bauxites, i.e. Standard anaerobic techniques were used throughout. All the tests were carried out using 125 The composition of the aqueous solution during the treatment of bauxites and iron oxides was similar to that used for the growth of During the tests, aliquots of 1 The chemical and mineralogical compositions of the samples are presented in Total iron content in bauxite samples varies between 17% and 22% (as Fe The dissolution of Fe during the treatment of bauxite samples with Treatment of bauxites with To identify eventual thermodynamic constraints and obtain a better understanding of the relative contribution of the biologically induced reductive mechanisms against the purely chemical chelation mechanisms, thermodynamic calculations were carried out using VMinteq software ( During the purely chemical treatment of bauxites D2, D3, B1, B2 and B3, measured concentrations of dissolved iron were found to be close to the theoretic solubilities of goethite and hematite in the presence of 50 During the biological reductive treatment of bauxites the concentrations measured in the solution do not exceed the value of 8 Concentrations of dissolved aluminium varied between 0.57 and 3.27 Iron dissolution during the abiotic and biological treatment of synthetic iron oxyhydroxides are presented in  Comparing the results between bauxites and synthetic oxyhydroxides, it is clear that synthetic crystalline Fe(III) oxides are more refractory and less bioavailable compared to the iron phases in bauxites. The maximum biological dissolution of iron in bauxites corresponds to 8 The maximum percent removal of iron from bauxites obtained during this experimental work was 26% for sample D1 and 29% for D2. Taking into consideration the initial content of Fe in these two samples, i.e. 19.3% and 16.3% as Fe Operation at higher temperatures i.e. close to 40 It would be interesting to investigate the reductive potential of other iron reducing microorganisms, such as the facultative anaerobes of genus A treatment scheme combining the metabolic activity of an iron reducing microorganism ( This work was financially supported by the Greek General Secretariat of Research and Technology (PAVET-NE 184-2004).