Neobavaisoflavone (NBIF) is an isoflavone isolated from Psoralea corylifolia L, a plant claimed to have osteogenic activity and used to treat bone fractures, osteomalacia and osteoporosis. The present results showed that NBIF concentration-dependently promoted osteogenesis in MC3T3-E1cells, demonstrated by notable enhancement of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity, increase of bone-specific matrix proteins expression including type I collagen (Col-I), osteocalcin (OCN) and bone sialoprotein (BSP), and formation of bone nodules. However, cell proliferation in the presence of NBIF was not affected. Results also demonstrated that NBIF up-regulated the expression of runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2) and Osterix (Osx), the bone-specific transcription factors participating in regulation of bone marker genes expression. Application of p38 inhibitor SB203580 repressed not only NBIF-induced activation of ALP, the expression of Col-I, OCN and BSP, but also the matrix proteins mineralization. Western blot analysis further revealed that NBIF increased the phosphorylated level of p38 concentration-dependently. Additionally, inhibition of p38 abolished the stimulatory effect of NBIF on the expression of Runx2 and Osx. Taken together, the osteogenic activity of NBIF might probably act through activation of p38-dependent signaling pathway to up-regulate the mRNA levels of Runx2 and Osx then stimulate bone matrix proteins expression. The beneficial effect of NBIF on mineralization demonstrated that NBIF represented as an active component existed in P. corylifolia and might be a potential anabolic agent to treat bone loss-associated diseases.The most prevalent disease in postmenopausal women is osteoporosis, a disorder of excess skeletal fragility caused partly by changes in bone microstructure. Many plant-derived compounds have the potential to counteract the deleterious effects of estrogen deficiency on bone. Members of this class are the so-called phytoestrogens including the flavonoids family comprising isoflavones and flavonols derivatives. Neobavaisoflavone ( Antibodies for MAPKs (including p38, ERK and JNK) were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (Beverly, MA, USA). Secondary antibody conjugated with horseradish peroxidase was obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. All chemicals and cell culture reagents were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA) and Gibco, Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA, USA), unless otherwise indicated. The murine calvaria-derived osteoblastic cell line MC3T3-E1 were maintained in an alpha modification of Eagle's minimum essential medium (α-MEM) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, 100 ALP activity in the cells was measured by incubation in 0.1 Cells were incubated in the differentiation medium for 14 The influence of cell proliferation was evaluated by a semi-automated microfluorometric method with Alamar Blue™ (Serotec Ltd., Oxford, UK), a specific stain for enzyme activity in the mitochondria of viable cells. MC3T3-E1 cells were plated at a density of 5 Expressions of Col-I, OCN, BSP, Runx2 and Osx mRNA were examined using RT-PCR, with the amplification of glyceraldehydes 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) as control. Individual primer sequence was illustrated in Whole cell lysates, cytoplasmic and nuclear fractionates were prepared according to the previous report ( Statistical analysis was evaluated by Student's The appearance of ALP activity is represented as an early phenotypic marker for osteoblast differentiation. Cultures in the presence of 1, 5, 10, 15 and 20 Mineralization by MC3T3-E1 cells occurred in a time-dependent manner and can be easily observed after 14 Epimedium Herb is one of the most frequently prescribed traditional Chinese medicines reportedly used to cure bone diseases in ancient China. This plant has been extensively studied by modern researchers and suggested that icariin (a flavonoid) is its main active compound. Accordingly, we also evaluated and compared the osteogenic effects between NBIF and icariin by analyzing the ALP activity and mineralization in MC3T3-E1 cells. Icariin was able to stimulate the increase in ALP activity under the same concentrations range, but was less potent than NBIF. As shown in The effect of NBIF on the bone-specific matrix protein expression were analyzed by determining the mRNA expression of Col-I, BSP and OCN, respectively. Treatment of MC3T3-E1 cells with NBIF increased the mRNA levels of Col-I, BSP and OCN in a concentration-dependent manner after 48 Since osteoblast marker proteins are regulated by Runx2, the major bone-specific transcription factor responsible for bone marker gene transcription for osteoblast differentiation. We therefore hypothesize that NBIF stimulates osteogenesis by modifying the expression of this transcription factor. The expression of Runx2 mRNA was significantly increased by NBIF after 48 During the differentiation of osteogenic cells, the MAPK signaling cascade is activated along with the expression of various osteomarkers ( The role of p38 on NBIF-induced expressions of bone-specific genes was assessed in the absence and presence of SB203580, respectively. As shown in Osteoporosis is a systemic skeletal disease characterized by low bone mass and microarchitectural deterioration of bone tissue, with consequent increases in bone fragility and susceptibility to fracture. The current clinical treatment regimens for osteoporosis are anti-resorptive drugs, which maintain bone mass by inhibiting osteoclast function. However, the effect of these drugs in increasing bone mass or recovering bone loss is relatively minor, probably no more than 2% per year. Since new bone formation is primarily mediated by osteoblasts, agents that act by either increasing the osteoblast proliferation or inducing osteoblast differentiation can enhance bone formation ( A wide variety of natural compounds with therapeutic effect on bone formation and skeleton construction have been reported and several of them have been shown to enhance osteogenic differentiation ( Results obtained from our assay system also indicated that NIBF displayed more potent osteogenic activity than icariin. There are many literatures studied the effect of icariin on osteogenic differentiation in various cell cultures including cell lines and primary cultures but the results were inconsistent. In 2007, ALP, a homodimeric metalloenzyme which catalyzes the hydrolysis of phosphomonoester with release of inorganic phosphate (Pi) and alcohol, is one of the most frequently used biochemical markers of osteoblast activity and is known to be critically involved in an initiation of mineralization during bone formation. Thus, the inductive effect of NBIF (1–20 Runx2 is an essential transcription factor for osteoblast differentiation and bone formation ( During the bone differentiation of osteogenic cells, the MAPK signaling cascade is activated along with the expression of various osteomarkers. Recently, many studies discussed the relationship between MAPKs and osteoblast-related transcription factors such as Runx2 and Osx. For example, p38 MAPK regulates osteoblastic differentiation through Osx ( In conclusion, this is the first study to reveal that NBIF induces osteoblastic differentiation and maturation. With our cell culture system using osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells, it is clear that NBIF could enhance osteoblastic cell differentiation. The positive effect of NBIF on bone formation is mediated by its ability to increase the activity of ALP, the mRNA level of Col-I1, BSP, OCN and eventually enhancing matrix calcification by calcium deposit. Such responsiveness is predominantly associated with activation of p38 MAPK-dependent signal pathways to up-regulate the transcription factor levels of Runx2 and Osx and subsequent induce osteoid gene expression in MC3T3-E1 cells. Since NBIF stimulated osteoblast differentiation more potent than psoralidin and psoralen in MC3T3-E1 cells ( Authors have no conflicts of interest. We thank Miss Yu-Jou Huang for her assistance on cell culture and mineral staining experiments.