A novel process was proposed for preparing titanium dioxide by the decomposition of titanium slag in sodium hydroxide system under atmospheric pressure. The kinetics on the decomposition of titanium slag was mainly investigated. The results on effect of reaction temperature, particle size and NaOH-to-slag mass ratio on titanium extraction show that the temperature and particle size have significant influence on the titanium extraction. The experimental data of titanium extraction indicate that the shrinking core model with chemical reaction controlled process is most applicable for the decomposition of titanium slag, with the apparent activation energy of 40.8 kJ mol−1. Approximately 95–98% of titanium in the titanium slag could be extracted under the optimal reaction conditions. In addition, the content of TiO2 obtained in the product is up to 99.3%.White pigment (titanium dioxide, TiO Recently, a novel metallurgical process for ilmenite and titanium slag has been developed by Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences ( In the present study, the titanium slag, used as the raw material to prepare titanium dioxide, is manufactured by smelting ilmenite in an electric arc furnace, with anthracite as reductants ( The purpose of the present investigation is to obtain essential information on the kinetics of decomposition of titanium slag in sodium hydroxide system with respect to the reaction mechanism. Moreover, the phase identification and transformation of the products were also investigated. The solid NaOH was reagent grade (Beijing Chemical Plant). Deionized water was used through the experiments whenever needed. Water for analysis was super purified by a water super-purification machine (Milli-Q, Millipore). The titanium slag used in the present work was bought from Guoai Ferroalloy Company (He Bei province, China). The detailed chemical composition of the slag was examined by ICP-OES (Optima 5300DV, PerkinElmer, USA) and the analytic results are listed in The titanium slag was dried, ground and dry-sieved to different narrow size fractions. The mineralogical analysis of the sample was investigated by XRD (Philips 1140, Cu Kα, 40 mA current, 30 kV voltage). The result in Experiments were performed in a muffle furnace using nickel crucibles. The NaOH was first dissolved with water to make a 60 wt.% solution, and the titanium slag was prepared as already described. The concentrated NaOH solution and titanium slag were then homogeneously mixed in the nickel crucibles and put into the muffle furnace when the temperature reached the preset value, with free access of air. The water added in the former procedure would evaporate away because of the atmospheric pressure condition. The temperature of the muffle furnace was controlled by a programmable temperature controller, with a precision of ± The reaction of titanium slag with NaOH system yields sodium titanate (Na To calculate the titanium extraction, approximately 1.0 g product was taken out at appropriate time intervals during a run. The sample was dissolved in diluted HCl solution, and the dissolution reaction took place as follows: After the complete dissolution of the sample, unreacted residues were separated from the solution by filtration because it could not be dissolved in the diluted HCl solution. The concentration of titanium in the filtrate can be analyzed by ICP-OES, and the titanium extraction was calculated by the following formula: Where The dependence of particle size on titanium extraction was carried out in NaOH system at 450 °C with NaOH-to-slag mass ratio of 1.5:1 by using the three particle size fractions of titanium slag: 75–125, 58–75 and 48–58 μm. The results presented in According to reaction (1) and the chemical analysis results of titanium slag, 5 g of titanium slag needs about 5 g of sodium hydroxide (the mass ratio is 1:1) for complete reaction. Sodium hydroxide acts as a fluidizing and fluxing agent in the reaction mixture. Excess of sodium hydroxide was necessary to maintain the liquidity of the reactants and ensure sufficient reactions while the extra sodium hydroxide could not significantly affect the economy of the whole process because of the recycling procedure in the overall process ( NaOH-to-titanium slag mass ratios of 1.2:1, 1.5:1, 1.8:1 were adopted to investigate the influence of NaOH-to-slag mass ratio on titanium extraction at 450 °C by using 48–58 μm size fraction of titanium slags. The results in Temperature dependence of the alkali decomposition process can be used to estimate the apparent free energy and elucidate the macro-kinetics of the process. The effect of temperature on the titanium extraction was carried out in the temperature range of 400–475 °C by using 48–58 μm size fraction of titanium slag with NaOH-to-slag mass ratio of 1.5:1. The results in Decomposition of titanium slag in NaOH system in the temperature range of 400–475 °C is a typical liquid–solid reaction, which could be analyzed with the shrinking core model ( Chemical reaction controlled process Diffusion through ash layer controlled process Based on the titanium fractional conversion The apparent rate constant was determined from the straight lines of To investigate the extraction behavior of titanium in NaOH system, titanium slag and the products at different reaction time in the decomposition process were detected by both SEM (JEOL, Japan) and XRD, and the results were shown in The phase transformation of sodium titanate was carried out by refluxing the titanate in H The experimental results on the decomposition of titanium slag in NaOH system indicate that the temperature and particle size have significant influence on the titanium extraction. Approximately 95–98% titanium in the titanium slag could be extracted in the optimal conditions of temperature 475 °C, NaOH-to-slag mass ratio 1.5:1 and 48–58 μm size fraction of slag. The results also indicate that the shrinking core model is applicable and the decomposition process is controlled by chemical reaction with the apparent activation energy of 40.8 kJ mol This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 50574084), the National Key Technologies R&D Program in the 11th Five-Year Plan Period (2006BAC02A05) and the National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program, 2007CB613501).