Introduction
                  Though augmentation plating (AP) with decortication and bone grafting (BG) reportedly has excellent outcomes for femoral shaft nonunions, there are no established indications of AP with decortication and BG. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the results of AP with decortication and autogenous BG for femoral shaft nonunions, focussing on the indications of AP with decortication and BG.
               
                  Methods
                  Thirty-nine patients treated with AP combined with decortication and BG for femoral shaft nonunions after femoral nail failure between November 1996 and October 2010 were retrospectively reviewed. Indications of AP with decortication and BG at the time of surgery and outcomes (bony union) were evaluated.
               
                  Results
                  The mean follow-up duration was 24.8 months (range 12–81 months). Thirty-eight (97%) of 39 femoral shaft nonunions achieved bony union. One incompliant patient showed screw breakage, which was healed uneventfully with subsequent cast application. The mean time to union was 6.1 months (range 3–16 months). Primary indications at the time of surgery were nonisthmal femoral nonunions in 17 patients, isthmal nonunions in 10 patients (cortical bone defect in five and widened canal in five), failed exchange nail in seven patients, nonunions with malrotation in two patients and difficult removal in three patients.
               
                  Conclusions
                  AP with decortication and autogenous BG is a good option for nonisthmal femoral shaft nonunions, such as supra-isthmal and infra-isthmal nonunions. In addition, this option is useful for selected cases of isthmal femoral shaft nonunions in which failure of exchange nailing is expected due to lack of a tight fit between the new larger nail and femoral cortices.Exchange nailing (EN) is a well-known standard of choice for aseptic femoral shaft nonunions. Although augmentation plating (AP) leaving the previous nail in situ with decortication and bone grafting (BG) is more invasive than EN for femoral shaft nonunions, AP with decortication and BG is a feasible alternative to EN, showing excellent clinical results. The purpose of this study was to evaluate outcomes of AP with decortication and autogenous BG for femoral shaft nonunions following femoral nail failure, focussing on indications of AP with decortication and BG. A retrospective review was conducted of 39 consecutive patients with femoral shaft nonunions subsequent to failed femoral nailing that was treated using AP leaving a nail in situ combined with decortication and autogenous BG. All patients were from one institution and were treated between November 1996 and October 2010. A minimum of 1 year of follow-up data were evaluated for each patient. There were 34 men and five women with an average age of 41.9 years (range 17–68 years). Though the medical records of all patients were retrospectively reviewed to check indications of AP with decortication and BG at the time of surgery, operative records made it possible to determine the surgeon's reason for choosing AP with decortication and BG in all cases. This is because all operations were performed by a single surgeon, and indications of AP with decortication and BG in each case were described in detail in each operation record. Clinical charts were reviewed to record follow-up data such as initial treatment method, previous operations, time to union, time to AP with decortication and BG and the presence of any complications. The radiographic review included fracture pattern (degree of comminution), fracture location, nonunion site, nonunion type, cortical bone defect in length around nail and the presence of definitive bony union. Intramedullary (IM) canal widening was defined as an isthmal femoral shaft nonunion for which a tight fit between a new larger nail and femoral cortices could not be obtained due to comminuted burst fractures or displacement of fragment from initial injury. The femoral shaft (diaphysis) level was defined according to the AO/OTA classification as the area from the transverse lower edge of the lesser trochanter to the upper border of the transepicondylar width of the knee. Nonunions with infection and malalignment, except malrotation (>15°), were excluded from this study. Nonunions with malrotation were included because this deformity was able to be corrected using AP with decortication and BG and, therefore, was one of the indications of AP with decortication and BG. A nonunion was defined as the radiographic persistence of a radiolucent line without progression of callus formation after fracture fixation, with motion and pain at the fracture site, especially walking pain. This line must have been present on three sequential monthly radiographs that were taken from 4 months since initial femoral nailing. Therefore, AP with decortication and BG could be considered from 6 months since initial surgery. Bony union was defined radiographically by bridging callus formations in at least three cortices on radiographs taken in two orthogonal projections. Bony union was defined clinically as the ability to bear full weight without pain. Angular and rotational alignment was measured on radiographs. Once malrotation was suspected, rotation was measured using axial images of a computed tomography (CT) scan. Malalignment was defined as >5° angulation, >15° malrotation and >2 Quadricep-strengthening isometric exercises and range of motion exercises of the knee joint began 1 day postoperatively. Patients were permitted to bear partial weight as tolerated from 2 weeks after surgery until evidence of graft bone incorporation, and then advanced to full weight bearing (usually 12 weeks) based on clinical and radiographic evidence of healing. Radiographic union was assessed at each follow-up. Patients were evaluated at 1, 2, 3, 4, 6 and 12 months after surgery, and then every year postoperatively. If there was no evidence of progress at 4 months, patients returned for radiographic confirmation of union at 1-month intervals. The patient was placed in the right or left lateral decubitus position. The nonunion site was exposed through the lateral skin incision and using the subvastus approach for elevation of the lateral vastus lateralis. Once the nonunion site was exposed, rotational instability was verified in all cases by rotating the distal femur with the knee in a flexed position. If there was motion between the previous nail and nonunion fragment, AP with decortication and autogenous iliac BG were performed. Dense fibrous tissue was removed and the nonunion site was decorticated subperiosteally using an osteotome in all cases. The characteristics of nonunions treated with AP with decortication and autogenous BG are summarised in Thirty-eight (97%) of 39 femoral shaft nonunions treated using AP with decortication and BG achieved bony union. The mean time to union was 6.1 months (range 3–16 months). One patient who did not comply with weight-bearing restrictions due to mental retardation had early failure of the plate–screw construct (screw breakage alone) at 3 months after AP with decortication and BG. He was immobilised in a hip spica cast for 2 months because he strongly denied additional surgery. Osseous union was finally obtained at 5 months after AP with decortication and BG. There were no re-operations due to a failure of this technique. Primary indications at the time of surgery were nonisthmal femoral nonunions in 17 patients, isthmal nonunions in 10 patients (cortical bone defect in five and widened canal in five), failed exchange nail in seven patients, nonunions with malrotation in two patients and difficult removal in three patients ( In cases of isthmal femoral shaft nonunions for which AP with decortication and BG was indicated by cortical bone defect, the average length of the cortical bone defect around the nail was 3.4 There were no acute infections based on intra-operative aerobic and anaerobic cultures. However, one patient treated due to retrograde nailing with a stiff knee had a delayed infection after union, which healed after removal of the hardware and administration of intravenous antibiotics. We do not routinely perform hardware removal. Hardware removal was done on patients’ requests. In nine cases, the hardware was removed approximately 1 year after bony union. No complications related to hardware removal occurred. EN is the gold standard for aseptic isthmal femoral shaft nonunions. However, EN has poor results for the treatment of nonisthmal femoral shaft nonunions because it is based on the concepts that mechanical stability is increased through a new larger nail, and bone healing is reactivated with more reaming. This study is a relatively large long-term case series with detailed indications of AP with decortication and BG for each case. Indications of this technique were divided into three groups ( Isthmal nonunion is the ideal indication for EN. However, when isthmal nonunions are combined with cortical defects or IM canal widening of the isthmal area due to an initial bursting injury, isthmal nonunions are similar to nonisthmal nonunions because a tight fit between the new larger nail and the femoral cortices cannot be achieved. Therefore, isthmal nonunions with cortical bone defects and IM canal widening were included as indications of AP with decortication and BG in this study. However, for isthmal femoral shaft nonunions, it is not known exactly how much cortical bone defect or IM canal widening is indicated for AP with decortication and BG, rather than EN. Regardless of anatomical level, indications of this technique should be individualised according to unique situations, such as difficulty of removal and retrograde nailing with stiffness of the knee joint ( AP with decortication and autogenous BG showed excellent union rate in this study. It may be because decortication Theoretically, decortication and BG are unnecessary for hypertrophic femoral shaft nonunions. However, decortication and BG were performed in all cases The limitations of this study include its retrospective nature. However, it was a relatively large case series performed by a single surgeon over the course of 14 years at a level I trauma centre, with detailed descriptions about indications of AP with decortication and BG that were provided by the same surgeon for each case. Even though a retrospective study cannot establish a clear principle, this study can provide some guidelines for indications of AP with decortication and BG when making decisions regarding femoral shaft nonunions following femoral nail failure. In conclusion, AP with decortication and autogenous BG is a feasible treatment option for nonisthmal femoral shaft nonunions, including supra-isthmal and infra-isthmal nonunions. Furthermore, this option is useful for selected cases of isthmal femoral shaft nonunions for which exchange nail failure is expected due to the lack of a tight fit between the new larger nail and femoral cortices. None. None of the authors has any potential conflicts of interest.