This study addresses the processing of near-net-shape, chemically homogeneous and fine-grained Ti–3Al–2.5V components using vacuum hot-pressing. Two Ti–3Al–2.5V starting powders were considered. On one side, hydride–dehydride (HDH) elemental titanium was blended with an HDH Ti–6Al–4V prealloyed powder. On the other side, an Al:V master alloy was added to the HDH elemental titanium powder. The powders were processed applying a uniaxial pressure of 30 MPa. The sintering temperatures studied varied between 900 °C and 1300 °C. The relative density of the samples increased with processing temperature and almost fully dense materials were obtained. The increase of the sintering temperature led also to a strong reaction between the titanium powders and the processing tools. This phenomenon occurred particularly with boron nitride (BN) coating, which was used to prevent the direct contact between titanium and graphite tools. The flexural properties of the Ti–3Al–2.5V samples increased with vacuum hot-pressing temperature and are comparable to those specified for wrought titanium medical devices. Therefore, the produced materials are promising candidates for load bearing applications as implant materials.Titanium is characterised by the highest strength to density ratio (specific strength) among metals, outstanding corrosion resistance, excellent biocompatibility and resistance at high temperatures. This unique combination of properties makes it suitable for different applications in many industries. Nevertheless, the employment of titanium and its alloys has always been limited to high performing industries, particularly the aeronautical industry. This is because of both the high extraction and production costs of titanium in comparison to other structural metals such as aluminium or steel. The high extraction costs are mainly due to the great affinity that titanium has for interstitials elements such as oxygen, nitrogen and carbon. These elements are difficult to eliminate and, even if their percentage is relatively low, they significantly lower the ductility and fatigue properties of titanium Titanium alloys are, generally, preferred to other metallic biomaterials, such as precious metals, due to its superior biocompatibility and corrosion resistance in conjunction with its low density and elastic modulus similar to that of human bones Among the different fabrication processes, powder metallurgy (PM) techniques offer significant advantages in terms of material yield and number of production steps The problem with the employment of titanium sponge powders obtained directly from the Kroll process is the presence of residual chlorides. These chlorides generate porosity filled with gas which is difficult to close during the sintering step and make the material practically unweldable. Currently, irregular shaped elemental titanium and PA titanium alloy powders can be obtained by the hydride–dehydride (HDH) process, which takes advantage of the great affinity of titanium for hydrogen to embrittle it, reducing it to powder by means of a comminution process. The employment of HDH powders eliminates the problems connected with the presence of the chlorides. HDH powders can be processed by P&S to obtain products with properties similar to wrought materials but, typically, they suffer from residual porosity The aim of this work is to study the processing of near-net-shape, chemically homogeneous and fine-grained Ti–3Al–2.5V components using vacuum hot-pressing. In particular, the influence of processing temperature on the microstructure and on the final properties was studied. The flexural properties of the produced materials were measured due to the possible employment of the studied alloy for the production of load bearing biomedical devices. The percentages of interstitial elements were determined and the interaction between the titanium powders and the processing tools analysed in detail because these parameters significantly influence mechanical behaviour. The starting materials for this study were: an HDH prealloyed Ti–6Al–4V powder (Se-Jong Materials), an HDH elemental titanium powder and an Al:V master alloy (both supplied by GfE Gesellschaft für Elektrometallurgie mbH). The Ti–3Al–2.5V powders used to study the influence of vacuum hot-pressing temperature on the final properties and microstructure were obtained by means of the blending elemental approach. The HDH elemental titanium powder was blended with the HDH prealloyed Ti–6Al–4V powder and the produced powder was designated Ti32-BE. The same HDH elemental titanium powder was mixed with the Al:V master alloy and labelled Ti32-MA. The description of the production method and of the parameters employed to fabricate these powders can be found elsewhere Ti32-BE and Ti32-MA were fabricated by mixing appropriate ratios of the starting powders in a turbula mixer. The prepared powders were characterised in terms of their particle size distribution and chemical makeup (content of interstitials: oxygen, nitrogen and carbon). The particle size distribution and the maximum size of the powders ( The preparation of the mould for the vacuum hot-pressing experiments is illustrated in insert the lower graphite punch into the mould; line the inner of the graphite mould with a low reactivity graphite foil; place a graphite disc with the top face coated with a high temperature ceramic boron nitride (BN) spray to prevent the reaction between titanium and the graphite tools and facilitate mould release; pour and level the loose powder; place a graphite disc with the bottom face coated with the BN spray; cold uniaxially press the whole assembly at approximately 18 MPa. During the study, three sintering temperatures, namely 900 °C, 1100 °C and 1300 °C, were used. The dwell time at maximum temperature was set to 1 h for 900 °C and 1100 °C and 30 min for 1300 °C. It is worth mentioning that the time selected for each sintering temperature was dictated by the need to assure an effective dwell time of 30 min due to the delay induced by the inertia of the heating system. This delay can be clearly seen in Once obtained, the hot-pressed specimens were taken from the graphite mould and their surfaces were sandblasted to clean them. The density of the samples was determined by Archimedes' method and the relative density values were calculated using the nominal values of the density of the wrought alloy (4.48 g cm Preparation of the specimens for microstructural analysis was done using the following metallographic route: grinding with SiC paper (320), polishing with 9 μm diamond suspension and final fine polishing with silica solution. The microconstituents were revealed by means of etching with Kroll's reagent (3 ml HF + 6 ml HNO Interstitials contents (oxygen, nitrogen and carbon) were measured using the LECO analysers described previously for the characterisation of the starting powders. The surfaces of the samples were analysed using a Philips XL-30 SEM (backscatter mode) to study the nature of the interaction between the titanium powders and the BN coating used to prevent direct contact of the powder with the graphite tools. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the surfaces of the specimens were obtained using a Bruker AXS D8-Advance diffractometer equipped with a Cu Kα1 radiation source. Step scans for phase identification were carried out from 2 Concerning the mechanical properties, the variation in the hardness with sintering temperature was measured by means of a Wilson Wolpert Universal Hardness DIGI-TESTOR 930 tester performing HV30 measurements. The flexural properties (maximum bending strength and flexural strain) of the vacuum hot-pressed Ti–3Al–2.5V samples were measured using a MicroTest three-point bending test machine using the ASTM B528 standard. Because the samples show pronounced plastic deformation before fracture, the yield strength of the vacuum hot-pressed was also measured. The yield strength values were obtained by means of the offset method. It is worth mentioning that the flexural properties were determined on two types of sample: as-sintered and ground. For ground specimens, the surfaces were removed because they were in contact with the BN coating during consolidation. The removal of the surfaces permitted to study the influence of the outer layer on the final mechanical properties. Some basic physical and chemical features of Ti32-BE and Ti32-MA are reported in From The variation of the relative density of the vacuum hot-pressed samples with the processing temperature is shown in From The relative density values shown in  The microstructure of Ti32-BE and Ti32-MA hot-pressed at 900 °C ( The materials processed at 1100 °C ( The main significant difference between the microstructure of the specimens hot-pressed at 1100 °C and 1300 °C ( The comparison of the microstructural evolution of Ti32-BE and Ti32-MA indicates that there are not significant differences that can be highlighted. As a result, in the case of vacuum hot-pressing, there is no clearly better way of adding alloying elements to the elemental titanium powder to obtain the desired final composition. Regarding the results of the chemical analyses, for oxygen and carbon contents, a single value is reported in Analysing the oxygen content values shown in For the case of carbon ( From SEM analysis was carried out in order to identify and quantify the magnitude of the interaction between the powders and the BN coating. No significant differences were found between the behaviour of Ti32-BE and Ti32-MA. Thus, representative micrographs of the surfaces of the vacuum hot-pressed samples are shown in As can be seen in When the processing temperature is set to 1100 °C, the formation of an interaction layer of approximately 5–10 μm in thickness is observed, even if this layer is not actually uniform along the surface of the specimens. When hot-pressed at 1300 °C, the Ti–3Al–2.5V powders strongly react with the BN coating forming a uniform layer, which varies between 15 μm and 25 μm in thickness. This interaction layer is denser in the outer part and more porous in the inner part. The nature of the interaction layer is clearly visible in EDS analysis was performed and it was determined that the reacted layer is composed of titanium and nitrogen but boron could not be detected due to the intrinsic detection limits of the equipment. Nitrogen mean content determined by EDS was approximately 5.4 wt.%, equivalent to 16.1 at.%. To better understand the nature of the interaction between Ti32-BE and Ti32-MA powders with the BN coating, XRD analysis of the surfaces of the as-sintered samples was carried out. Only titanium compounds were detected on the surfaces of both materials. This fact is due to the greater affinity that titanium has for interstitial elements in comparison to those of aluminium and vanadium. The results of the XRD characterisation are presented in As can be seen in Moreover, on the XRD pattern of the powder sintered at 900 °C, a peak corresponding to the Al:V master alloy used to produce the Ti32-MA powder was also detected (Al The absence of boron or titanium boride in the XRD pattern of the specimens processed at 900 °C is mainly due to the higher solubility of nitrogen in titanium with respect to boron. Actually, nitrogen solubility in beta titanium is 22 at.% whilst boron solubility in beta titanium is approximately 0.2 at.% An increase in the hot-pressing temperature to 1100 °C leads to a higher degree of nitrogen diffusing into the titanium matrix ( As seen during the SEM study of the surfaces of the specimens ( From the pattern of the specimens hot-pressed at 1300 °C it can be seen that TiB has a preferred growth direction [010], corresponding to the (020) plane, due to the strongest relative density of the peak at 60.6°. Based on the work performed by Faran et al., it can be stated that the dense outside part of the reacted layer ( Finally, independent of the processing temperature employed, the XRD patterns of the vacuum hot-pressed samples shows some BN, which was most likely not removed when cleaning the surface of the specimens by sandblasting. The results of hardness measurements carried out on the cross-section of the specimens are displayed in As can be seen in In more detail, the hardness of the samples hot-pressed at 900 °C is affected by the non-homogeneous distribution of the alloying elements throughout the titanium matrix. The Ti32-BE tends to be harder than the Ti32-MA because of the presence of the original PA Ti–6Al–4V particles and the higher oxygen content ( Finally, the amount of interstitials measured in the samples is responsible for the higher hardness of the vacuum hot-pressed Ti–3Al–2.5V samples in comparison with wrought Ti–3Al–2.5V alloy, whose nominal value is 267 HV Representative examples of load–deflection curves for each of the material studied are presented in Analysing the representative behaviour of the load–deflection curves shown in Remembering that the equation specified in the ASTM B528 standard for the calculation of the transverse rupture strength is applicable only to relatively brittle materials, Analysing the yield strength mean values shown in The removal of the reacted surface by grinding becomes more important with the raising of the temperature for both materials. As can be seen in The strength of the samples hot-pressed at 1300 °C and their increase in comparison with specimens processed at 1100 °C is the compromise between the slightly higher relative density, the higher amount of interstitials dissolved throughout the material (especially oxygen) and the grain growth induced by the higher processing temperature. Taking into account the combined effect of all these factors, it can be noticed that, generally, the Ti32-BE samples reach higher strength with respect to Ti32-MA, with the exception of the specimens hot-pressed at 1300 °C where the final mean values are similar. Finally, the The maximum bending strength and flexural strain obtained during the three-point bending test of the as-sintered and ground hot-pressed Ti–3Al–2.5V samples are reported in When comparing the maximum bending strength ( Concerning the flexural strain values of hot-pressed Ti–3Al–2.5V samples shown in  This study demonstrates that irregular shaped Ti–3Al–2.5V powders produced by the blending elemental or the master alloy addition approaches are suitable for obtaining almost fully dense materials when processed by vacuum hot-pressing. The relative density values obtained are, therefore, normally higher in comparison with those of uniaxially pressed and sintered components. From the microstructural analysis, the typical laminar microstructure of the wrought Ti–3Al–2.5V can be obtained. Nevertheless, to guarantee the complete diffusion and homogenisation of the alloying elements the powders must be processed at 1300 °C. The employment of an HDH prealloyed Ti–6Al–4V powder as master alloy for the production of the Ti–3Al–2.5V alloy leads to enhanced mechanical properties in comparison with those achieved with the utilisation of an Al:V master alloy. Independently of the alloying elements addition approach employed, titanium reacts with the BN coating normally used to prevent the direct contact between titanium and graphite tools. The interaction between titanium and BN leads to the formation of a reacted layer composed by titanium nitrides and borides, which makes the material more brittle. Hot-pressing can be employed as an alternative way to produce near-net-shape, chemically homogeneous and fine-grained Ti–3Al–2.5V components starting from HDH powders. The employment of the blending elemental approach should also lead to a reduction in the fabrication costs of titanium products. The authors are thankful for the financial support from