Canale and Kelly modified the Hawkins classification of talar neck fractures by adding a type IV fracture dislocation to the original 3 types described. Type IV injury occurs rarely and is the only type involving dislocation of the talonavicular joint. To our knowledge, only 2 unusual cases have been described in published studies in which a fracture of neck of the talus occurred in association with talonavicular dislocation but the ankle and subtalar joints remained intact. We describe a very unusual case of an adult male with a fracture of the neck of the talus with talonavicular dislocation, subtalar subluxation, an intact ankle joint, and a fracture of the posteromedial tubercle of talus. Open reduction and internal fixation of the talar neck and posteromedial tubercle was undertaken. The talar neck fracture united without any evidence of avascular necrosis, but the posteromedial tubercle remained un-united. Such an injury is unusual, and the injury pattern is unique and cannot be classified using existing systems.Fractures of the talus have been attributed to a variety of traumatic mechanisms ranging from twisting sports trauma to violent injuries such as high velocity motor vehicle accidents and aviation crashes. Although the minor avulsion fractures occurring during sports often go unnoticed when asymptomatic, more complex injuries can lead to crippling disabilities unless managed judiciously at the earliest opportunity. The Hawkins' classification of talar neck fractures modified by Canale and Kelly Although undisplaced talar neck fractures can be managed with prolonged non–weight-bearing cast immobilization, surgical reduction and internal fixation is recommended for displaced fractures of the talar neck We encountered an unusual fracture dislocation of the talus in a 65-year-old male patient that could not be classified by any of the classifications described in the published reports. The probable mechanism of injury and its management are discussed along with a short review of the published studies in this report. A 65-year-old male sustained an injury to his ankle after falling into a drain. Upon presentation to our trauma center, the injury was 2 days old. He had been treated initially at another hospital with a below-knee plaster splint and analgesics. His treatment records from the primary hospital did not confirm any attempt at closed reduction. His ankle, upon our examination, showed moderate swelling and the skin appeared healthy. The radiographs showed an unusual injury pattern that included a fracture of the neck of the talus with dislocation of the talonavicular joint and subluxation of the subtalar joint, although the talar body was in its normal alignment within the ankle mortise. An associated fracture of the posteromedial tubercle of the talus also was seen, and the pedal bones displayed osteoporosis ( The patient was placed supine on a radiolucent operating table with a pillow under the ipsilateral knee joint to achieve good positioning of the affected ankle. The talar neck was exposed through an anterolateral approach that also provided access to the talonavicular joint. The rotated talar head fragment was first brought back to its normal position and placed in correct alignment relative to the navicular. At the same time, reduction of the subtalar joint was achieved by closed manipulation. A guidewire was passed from the talar head just proximal to the articular surface toward the body, from the anterolateral to posteromedial direction, provisionally fixing the neck fracture. After drilling with a cannulated drill bit, a 3.5-mm Herbert screw was used to fix the fracture. A Kirschner wire was inserted percutaneously from the medial side to temporarily stabilize the talonavicular joint. The posteromedial tubercle was then approached through a posteromedial incision just medial to the Achilles tendon, carefully avoiding the neurovascular bundle. Initially, an artery forceps was used to reduce the fracture fragment into place and checked under an image intensifier. Next, a guidewire was passed in the same direction to hold the fragment, which was finally fixed with a 3.5-mm cannulated cancellous screw and washer. The fixation was viewed under fluoroscopy before closure of the surgical wound. Antiseptic dressing was applied, and the ankle was kept in a posterior plaster slab. Strict limb elevation and active toe movements were advised. Intravenous antibiotics, analgesics, and anti-inflammatory agents were administered in the peri- and postoperative period. Non–weight-bearing crutch walking was allowed from the second postoperative day. After skin suture removal at 2 weeks postoperative, the patient was given a below-the-knee plaster cast for an additional 6 weeks. Then, the cast was discarded, and a removable ankle brace was applied for intermittent ankle mobilization out of the brace. Partial weight-bearing with the brace was instituted at the end of 12 weeks. By the end of 18 weeks the patient was bearing full weight on the limb without any support. At 28 months of follow-up when the patient was last seen, he was having a painless gait without any limp. The patient complained that he was having ankle ache following a walk of approximately 2 kilometers. No swelling or deformity in the limb was present. The final postoperative radiographs showed healing of the talar neck fracture, but the fractured fragment of the posteromedial process of the talus remained un-united ( Canale and Kelly Fractures of the posterolateral process (Shepherd's fracture) and posteromedial process (Cedell's fracture) are rarer in incidence than fractures of the talar neck and body The patient discussed in the present report had sustained an injury with a unique configuration of fractures. Fracture dislocation of the talar head from the navicular articulation with an undisplaced talar body inside the ankle mortise is extremely unusual, and this is the primary rationale for publication of this case report. Only 2 such reports were found in English studies Fractures of the talar neck have been classically attributed to forced dorsiflexion of the ankle The patient who we have described in this report had a very complex injury of the talus. This injury pattern probably can be explained by forced dorsiflexion trauma to an inverted foot. The hyperdorsiflexion mechanism first produced a fracture of the neck of the talus, with an additional dorsiflexion avulsion fracture of the posteromedial process. Continuation of the deforming force then forced the talar head to dislocate from the talonavicular articulation and in the process also caused subluxation of subtalar joint and comminution at the fracture site. We also believe that age-related osteopenia in the patient could have played a part in producing such an unusual injury. It is not possible to classify this injury using the Hawkins classification modified by Canale and Kelly or any other described classifications. Such an injury is probably best included in a “complex” or “unclassified” group of fractures. Predicting an outcome of this fracture can also be tricky. However, that the talar body remained in its position in the ankle mortise prompts us to believe that some of the vascular supply to the talar body probably escaped injury and contributed to bone healing. The authors are immensely thankful to Dr. Sambit Sahoo, MBBS, PhD, for his help in preparation of the manuscript.