There is a significant amount of early work that has been largely forgotten that deals with the validity of the pseudo-steady approximation for liquid–solid reactions. Much of this was originally published in the chemical engineering literature but is highly relevant to hydrometallurgical processes. The purpose of this paper is to summarize some criteria that have been developed by various authors for determining the error associated with use of shrinking core models for liquid–solid systems and to provide an illustrative example using data for a mineral leaching reaction.Studies of the fundamental aspects of shrinking core models have undergone a renaissance in the last 10–15 years, with Two curious facts about the early development of shrinking core models have generally been overlooked. First, Levenspiel specifically restricts his discussion to gas–solid systems. He briefly comments on some limitations on the validity of the familiar shrinking core equations ( The purpose of this paper is to summarize the relevant early papers on the PSS approximation and its use in liquid–solid shrinking core models. It is hoped that information from these publications will become an integral part of the course materials taught to future hydrometallurgists and metallurgical engineers. The scope here is limited to shrinking core models of monosized particles in a large volume of solution, i.e., effects of particle size distribution, mixing, and reactor type are not covered. The relevant literature citations are from 1963 to 1983. We first review the pseudo-steady assumption for systems controlled by product layer diffusion, then consider the literature about it. For a spherical particle surrounded by a large volume of fluid with which it reacts, the differential mass balance on the particle is as follows: In Levenspiel's development of the equation relating particle conversion (fraction reacted) and reaction time, the movement of the interface between the unreacted and product solids is initially assumed to be very slow relative to the rate species In 1968, Also in 1968, Consistent with the common observation that shrinking core models tend to fail as the conversion exceeds 0.3 or 0.4, the error An approximate solution to unsteady transport problems in confined spatial domains was developed by Some 10 years later, Bischoff revisited the question of the validity of the PSS assumption several times over a period of some 20 years ( The most mathematically rigorous examination of the validity of the PSS approximation was given by In another paper from 1983,  The criteria of For illustrative purposes, we now consider the leaching of ilmenite (FeTiO Ti solution concentration data from a typical experiment (3 M HCl, 87 °C, 700 rpm, +35 to 45 μm FeTiO Four shrinking core models were fit to this set of data: Model I, spherical particles under reaction control: Model II, spherical particles under product layer diffusion control: Model III, cylindrical particles under reaction control: Model IV, cylindrical particles under product layer diffusion control: It is also important to note that besides explicitly neglecting the time derivative, shrinking core models implicitly assume that a single lumped parameter, the effective diffusivity, adequately describes the mass transport within a reacting particle. As a result, in some instances topochemical models fail to fit experimental data even when criteria for PSS validity are satisfied. One such case is chrysocolla leached by NH Examples of these kinds have a variety of uses in an instructional setting. Perhaps most importantly, students can see for themselves that there is no uniquely right answer in fitting leaching data, and no uniquely correct mechanism. Additional complications that might be covered with an appropriate reaction include extended leaching ( In summary, there is a fairly extensive body of literature, largely unknown to hydrometallurgists, on the validity of shrinking core models for liquid–solid reactions. These papers provide some simple criteria that could be taught to beginning students, and the more mathematically sophisticated approaches should be of interest to those teaching advanced courses.