A number of different parameters influence the mechanical behavior of geomaterials, and understanding the mechanical behavior of geomaterials is important for not only academic research but also various industrial applications. For many years, many researchers have studied the mechanical behavior of various types of geomaterials under different conditions. While a considerable amount of work has been done on the effect of porosity on the dynamic fracture mechanics of metals, composites, and ceramics, In this study, to fill in some of the gaps that exist in knowledge of the effects of porosity and water content on the mechanical strength of geomaterials, we examined and compared the compressive strength, tensile strength, and Young's modulus of dry and saturated Red and Buff sandstones under static, fast, and dynamic loading conditions. Our results provide insights into how the mechanical behaviors and properties of geomaterials are affected by the water content and loading rate. Red (smaller grain size, 4.7–5.5% porosity) and Buff (larger grain size, 18.0–22.7% porosity) sandstone samples with To estimate porosity, thin section analyses of Red and Buff sandstone samples were performed by TerraTek ( In addition, the porosities of Red and Buff sandstones were estimated with the weight difference between the dry and saturated samples ( To estimate Young's modulus, the longitudinal (P wave) and transverse (S wave) wave velocities of Red and Buff sandstone samples were measured. P and S wave velocities are intrinsic properties of solid materials. The ultrasonic pulse velocity technique was used to measure the P and S wave velocities of the rock samples. A frequency of 1.0 Static compressive strength was measured by applying a uniaxial load to a cylindrical specimen under standard conditions. Sandstone specimens with two different diameters, AX and NX, were prepared with length-to-diameter ratios of 2:1, in accordance with ASTM standards. The sample diameter, as suggested in the standard, was selected to be more than ten times the maximum grain size. Small-diameter specimens were used to compare the corresponding static compressive strength with dynamic strength of a similar The indirect tensile strength of the rock samples was determined by the Brazilian method. In this method, the compressive load was applied to a disk-shaped sample. As tensile strength values can be affected by the geometry of rock specimen, to reduce the effects of these factors, disk specimens were prepared with thickness-to-diameter ratio of 0.3–1. Dynamic compressive tests and indirect tensile tests of dry and water-saturated Red and Buff sandstone samples were performed with a Split Hopkinson Pressure Bar (SHBP) ( Young's modulus has been used in evaluating rock deformation under various loading conditions, of which value can be determined with stress–strain ratios under uniaxial load. In the typical stress–strain curve for any sample, the modulus at the beginning of the loading cycle is low (due to crack closure and seating of the platens), and then, in the linear stress–strain part of the curve, the modulus becomes constant. Based on the stress–strain curves of rock samples, the Young's modulus values of dry and saturated Red and Buff sandstone samples were calculated by linear interpolation along the linear portion of the curve. In this study, we examined the effects of porosity and hydration on the mechanical strength and behavior of Red and Buff sandstones, as these two sandstones exhibit relatively homogenous grain and pore sizes, which are relevant to their behavior in mechanical strength tests. The effects of water saturation (hydration) on the static, fast, and dynamic compressive strengths of the Red and Buff sandstones were examined. The maximum strength (MPa) was greater for the dry samples than for the saturated samples, regardless of the porosity (Fi. 3). This confirms that water reduces the cohesion of geomaterials, resulting in a decrease in the compressive strength (approximately 20% in this study). The Red sandstone exhibited compressive strengths approximately 1.6–2.6 fold greater than the Buff sandstone in both the dry and saturated samples under static, fast, and dynamic loading conditions. Interestingly, the differences in the compressive strengths of the Red and Buff sandstones decreased with increasing loading rate. Under static and fast compressive loading, the strength of the Red sandstone was approximately 2.6 greater than that of the Buff sandstone, whereas under dynamic loading, the strength of the Red sandstone was only 1.6 times greater. The results support the conclusion that the degree of strength increase with increasing loading rate is greater in higher-porosity geomaterials; the porosity of the Buff sandstone is higher than that of the Red sandstone ( We also examined the static and dynamic tensile strengths of the Red and Buff sandstones under dry and saturated conditions to assess the effects of porosity and water content. Consistent with the results of the compressive strength tests, the tensile strengths of the Red and Buff sandstones were greater when dry, under both static and dynamic loading, than when saturated. Intriguingly, the tensile strengths of both dry and saturated Red sandstone samples were approximately 3.5 fold higher than the Buff sandstone samples ( The ultrasonic velocity test method is a nondestructive way to characterize geological core samples. This method involves propagating ultrasonic compression and shear waves along the longitudinal axis of a sample, measuring the velocity of the waves as they travel through the specimen, and calculating the dynamic elastic properties of the specimen including Young's modulus (the elastic stiffness) (ASTM 2845). P- and S-wave velocity measurements were used to estimate the dynamic Young's modulus of oven-dried specimens. We also calculated the dynamic Young's modulus from the results of the SHPB tests (dynamic compressive tests) conducted on the same samples. As shown in Also interestingly, Young's modulus of the Red and Buff sandstones were higher for dry samples under static and fast compressive loading than for saturated samples. However, the Young's modulus values under dynamic loading were not significantly different for the Red sandstone, regardless of the hydration conditions, whereas the Young's modulus values of the Buff sandstone samples under dynamic loading were much higher (by approximately 71%) for dry conditions than for saturated conditions ( Various parameters can be used to characterize geomaterial fracture and strength, and measured mechanical properties of rocks can differ depending on how stresses are applied. The compressive and tensile strengths of Red and Buff sandstones under static, fast, and dynamic loading conditions were measured, and the effects of porosity and hydration on these parameters were examined. The main findings of this study are as follows: (1) the Red sandstone exhibited compressive and tensile strengths two to four times higher than the Buff sandstone under static, fast, and dynamic loading conditions; (2) the compressive and tensile strengths of both sandstones increased with increasing loading rate, and the effect of the loading rate on the tensile strength was more pronounced than the effect on the compressive strength; (3) the static, fast, and dynamic strengths of dry samples were higher than those of saturated samples—on average, water saturation reduced the rock strength by approximately 20%; and (4) the Young's modulus determined from compressive loading test results was significantly greater for the Buff sandstone when dry than when saturated but the Young's modulus values of the Red sandstone when dry and when saturated were not significantly different. The results of this study provide insights into how the porosities and hydration states of geomaterials affect their mechanical properties and behavior at various loading rates. These insights can contribute significantly to improving safety and cost-effectiveness in geotechnical applications.