More than half of the global cobalt supply from primary sources is currently produced in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) from ores containing copper-cobalt oxides or copper-cobalt sulphides. Where oxide and sulphide cobalt-bearing copper minerals occur together, efficient recovery of copper and cobalt is known to be extremely difficult. This study investigates the flotation behaviour of a mixed oxide-sulphide ore where copper is hosted in sulphides phases such as bornite, chalcopyrite and chalcocite, and oxide phases such as malachite and to a lesser extent chrysocolla. Three cobalt-bearing oxide minerals are observed in the mixed ore, i.e. heterogenite, kolwezite and cupro-asbolane, while carrollite is the only cobalt-bearing sulphide mineral. A two-stage rougher-scavenger flotation process is used in which sulphides are extracted from the ore first. In the second stage, oxides are activated using controlled potential sulphidisation followed by their recovery. Tests are performed with a range of collectors, including xanthate, phosphorodithioate, dithiophosphate, thiocarbamate, and a blend type. A dithiophosphate collector proved to the most successful, achieving recovery of 94% of the carrollite, more than 90% of the copper sulphides, and 70% of the copper oxide minerals. The recovery of the cobalt oxides was less successful, with recovery of roughly half the kolwezite and only 20% of the heterogenite and cupro-asbolane. Despite the generally promising recoveries, the selectivity of the flotation process is relatively low with all the concentrates containing a significant amount of carbonate and silicate minerals. This suggests that a number of improvements require further investigation, notably the application of hydroxamate collectors, depressants and reverse flotation.Over the past two years the cobalt price has been volatile, varying by about 300% ( In this study, a bulk sample of Cu-Co mixed oxide/sulphide ore from a major DRC operation is characterised and tested for flotation. The effectiveness and selectivity of a range of different collectors is studied for the recovery of sulphide and oxide copper-cobalt minerals. While the objective is to study the floatability of cobalt minerals, the concentration of copper-bearing minerals is also considered in view of its industrial relevance. Note that cobalt is only considered to be a by-product of copper production. However, with changing cobalt metal prices and an expected increase in cobalt consumption, a higher recovery of cobalt could prove beneficial from an economical perspective for the producers. This paper focusses on flotation technology to facilitate the growing importance of cobalt recovery. Test work was carried out with a sample of ore from an active mine site located in the Katanga province, DRC. The 60 kg sample was drawn from the oxide-to-sulphide transition zone and is assumed to be representative of a typical mixed oxide-sulphide copper-cobalt ore. To enable homogenisation, the ore was initially crushed below 2 mm and riffled into representative sub-samples of 500 g for test work. The relationship between grinding time and particle size was defined with a test performed on 500 g of the mixed ore sample at 60% solids content. The sample was ground in a belt driven stainless steel laboratory mill operating at 65 RPM. The mill chamber size was 300 mm by 160 mm and contained six 290 by 23 mm stainless steel rods with a mass of 1 kg each. The particle size distribution was analysed after 5, 10 and 15 min of grinding, using a Helium-Neon Laser Optical System Mastersizer 3000 (Malvern Instruments Ltd.) coupled with a Hydro Extended Volume (EV) sample dispersion unit. For each defined grinding time, a subsample was also collected for mineralogical analysis with QEMSCAN. The size distribution for the subsequent grinding times is shown in Based on product particle size and mineral liberation data obtained by QEMSCAN, a grind time of 10 min was selected which produces a particle size of 80% passing 95 For the flotation experiments, a laboratory Denver D12 flotation cell was used with a volume of 1 An overview of the flotation experiment conducted with each of the five investigated collectors, can be found in The frother used in the experiment was Methyl Iso Butyl Carbinol (MIBC) while sodium hydrogen sulphide (NaSH) was used as a sulphidising reagent; both were provided by Acros Organics. Five different collectors were selected. Sodium IsoPropyl Xanthate (SIPX), supplied by Cheminova Agro A/S, was selected on the basis that it has been previously used as a collector for cobalt sulphides ( Portable X-Ray Fluorescence (pXRF) was used to analyse the copper and cobalt content of the individual flotation products. The device used was the Delta Premium Handheld XRF Analyser (Olympus, United Kingdom) in Geochemistry mode. Detection limits for copper and cobalt are 20 PPM for cobalt and 5 PPM for copper ( Quantitative mineralogical analysis was carried out using a QEMSCAN 4300 at Camborne School of Mines, University of Exeter, UK. This consists of a Zeiss EVO 50 Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) platform and four light element Bruker silicon drift droplet (SDD) X-ray detectors ( Average abundance of 21 minerals present in the Cu-Co mixed ore sample is shown in Copper and cobalt deportment is shown in A QEMSCAN measurement charts the surface area of a mineral species and translates this into a mineral mass by multiplying with the density and applying a stereological assumption. The percentage of the particle mass which consists of an individual mineral defines the degree of liberation for that mineral in a particle. In this study, the degree of liberation is recorded in ten equispaced classes, ranging from “≦10%” to “90–100%”. Particles in each liberation class are weighted with their total mass to reveal the proportion of the total mass of particles containing the mineral of interest in that class. Note that the liberation analysis may be biased ( The liberation of the oxide minerals is shown in The mineral association of sulphide minerals is shown in The recovery of copper in the sulphide flotation stage is shown as a function of time in The time-dependent recovery of cobalt during the sulphide flotation stage is shown in The copper grade – recovery curves for the sulphide rougher - scavenger flotation stage are shown in The grade–recovery curves for cobalt in the sulphide flotation stage are shown in The modal mineralogy of the combined sulphide concentrates is shown in  The recovery per mineral for both the sulphide and oxide concentrate per collector is shown in The recovery of gangue minerals, shown in The enrichment factors for valuable minerals are shown in The evaluation of a range of collectors for concentrating copper and cobalt with flotation from a DRC ore containing a mixture of oxide and sulphide minerals is reported. The flotation process consists of a sulphide flotation stage followed by an oxide flotation stage with controlled potential sulphidisation. QEMSCAN analysis of the ore shows that the metal deportment is complex, with seven copper-bearing minerals and four cobalt-bearing minerals associated with a complex gangue containing both carbonates and silicates. In all cases, the addition of NaSH leads to higher copper and cobalt recoveries. Differences in recovery of both copper and cobalt were observed, with copper recovery ranging from 70% to 83% and cobalt recovery ranging from 38% to 48%. The cobalt oxide minerals did not respond well to the designed flotation process: only small amounts of cobalt oxide minerals were recovered at low enrichment ratios. It was found that a dithiophosphate collector (DF245) produced the highest recovery of sulphide minerals and copper oxides after oxide sulphidisation. However, the proportion of cobalt oxide minerals recovered remained low. This study has shown that copper recovery can be increased by considering alternative collectors to the commonly applied xanthate collector. An alternative strategy is required for the concentration of cobalt oxide minerals and reduction of the gangue minerals in the concentrate. The application of hydroxamate collectors promises to improve the overall performance flotation of copper and cobalt from mixed sulphide-oxide ores. With regards to the problematic carbonate and silicate gangue, reverse flotation to remove these minerals prior to copper-cobalt flotation or the use of depressants may prove useful. In summary, an enhanced understanding of the effect of collectors on mineral recovery with a flotation process supports the geometallurgically-informed extraction of copper and cobalt from complex ore types. This work has been financially supported by the