Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) self assembles at hydrophobic graphite surfaces forming linear parallel hemicylinders with approximately 5nm spacing between adjacent hemicylinders. In this paper, we report the effect of cosurfactants on the SDS surface micelle structures. It is known from the literature that cosurfactants influence the relaxation times of bulk phase micelles. Specifically, the relaxation times of SDS micelles increase dramatically when cosurfactants, such as non-ionic 1-dodecanol (C12OH) or cationic dodecyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (C12TAB) are added, resulting in the formation of stable micelles. Soft contact AFM imaging was used to determine if these increased relaxation times in bulk solution influence the formation of surface micelle structures at the graphite surface. Surface micelles formed by adsorption from SDS only solutions were significantly different from those surface micelles formed from mixed surfactant solutions. The addition of cosurfactants produced kinks and disrupted the otherwise highly ordered linear hemicylindrical SDS structures observed at graphite surfaces. In one case (SDS/C12OH) swollen surface micelles with a spacing of more than 8nm were observed. Finally, whereas surface micelles form instantaneously from SDS only solutions, the time taken for the equilibrium surface state to be established in the presence of the C12OH cosurfactant was found to be more than 4h.The self-assembly of surfactants into spheres, cylinders and bilayers in solution is fairly well understood The hemicylindrical structures observed at the graphite surface have been attributed to the epitaxial adsorption of the initial surfactant molecules in a tail to tail and head to head fashion determined by the crystallography of the graphite surface. In this context, it is important to understand how these surface-mediated micellar structures are influenced by the addition of a cosurfactant, which means competing forces must be considered in this otherwise homogeneous system. Wanless et al. A dynamic equilibrium exists between individual surfactant molecules in the bulk solution and the micelle entity. Additionally, the micelles themselves are constantly disintegrating and reforming Micellar relaxation kinetics shows dependence on temperature, pressure and concentration. Consider solutions of SDS, the CMC of which is 8 Recently, the relaxation time studies were extended to mixed surfactant systems. For example, it has been shown that the stability of SDS micelles can be greatly enhanced by the addition of 1-dodecanol (C The improved understanding regarding the dynamic aspects of mixed micelles and the pronounced effect of relaxation time on various interfacial properties prompted us to study how these relaxation times in the bulk solution would affect the surfactant aggregates at the surface. In this work, we investigated how the increase in relaxation times observed for micelles in bulk solution would affect the micellar structures at the graphite surface. Three different systems with significantly different relaxation times were studied, 100 Sodium dodecyl sulfate (>99% purity), dodecyltrimethyl ammonium bromide (>99% purity) and 1-dodecanol (>98% purity) were supplied by Sigma–Aldrich Corp. (St. Louis, MO). The chemicals were used as supplied without further purification. The highly ordered pyrolytic graphite substrate (grade ZYH, Union Carbide) was cleaved with an adhesive tape before each experiment to remove the outermost layer and expose a fresh surface, free from contamination. Three different solutions, 100 Images at the graphite surface were captured using a Nanoscope IIIA atomic force microscope (Digital Instruments Inc., Santa Barbara, CA), using silicon ultralevers (Park Scientific, CA) with a nominal spring constant of 0.12 Before taking the images, the graphite surface was allowed to equilibrate with the solutions of interest for at least 15 The micellar structures observed at the graphite surface for adsorption of SDS from solutions with concentrations of 4 and 100 The periodic surfactant structures were found to extend unperturbed for lengths exceeding several microns at the graphite surface. Only the presence of a step or a grain boundary on the surface seemed to change the alignment of the surface aggregates, as shown in The SDS micellar structures at a graphite surface are described elsewhere in greater detail No surface micelle structures were observed for the SDS/C SDS/C A large scale image observed for this system is shown in The various characteristics for all three systems are summarized in Before discussing the surface micelle structures observed for the mixed surfactant systems it is important to examine the surface micelles observed for a single surfactant system. Several investigations, using soft contact AFM have revealed that the graphite crystal lattice serves as a template for the organization of surfactant chains and is the defining feature of the surfactant micelle morphology. This central role of the lattice has since been confirmed for a variety of surfactants with wide differences in head group chemistry and molecular geometry Changes in direction of the hemicylindrical surface micelle structures observed for the mixed surfactant systems are not so easy to explain. It may be that after some accommodation of C It can also be speculated that relaxation times of micelles are related to the shape of the surfactant aggregate structure. In a previous work For the adsorption of SDS at the graphite surface, the surface micelles are formed instantaneously. So, now if the relaxation times of micelles in the bulk change, the monomer fluxes available for adsorption are less, and hence the adsorption kinetics should also be different. This indeed is the case for the SDS/C The surface micelle structures for mixed surfactant solutions of high relaxation times have been studied. The addition of cosurfactants induced some significant changes in the continuous parallel hemicylindrical surface micelle structures observed for SDS self-assembly at graphite surfaces. The addition of a cosurfactant had the same effect on the surface micelle as structures as graphite surface defects, which perturb the alignment of the surface micelle structures. The orderliness of the hemicylinders observed for the SDS only system was replaced by a herring-bone pattern for the SDS/C