Polyaniline (PANI) nanofibers were used as hydrophilic additives to study their effect on the performance of polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) ultrafiltration (UF) membranes. PVDF UF membranes were prepared by the phase inversion method with hydrolyzed polystyrene-co-maleic anhydride (H-PSMA) and PANI nanofibers as additives. PANI nanofibers were synthesized by rapid mixing reaction and were used as a hydrophilic modifying agent with varying concentrations (0–1.5 wt.%) in the membranes. The synthesized PANI nanofibers were characterized by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscope (SEM) and transmission electron microscope (TEM) analysis. Hydrolyzed PSMA was prepared by the hydrolysis of PSMA and was used as a novel pore forming additive. The addition of PANI nanofibers into the membranes increased the membrane hydrophilicity, porosity, water uptake and permeability. The membranes also showed good antifouling nature during BSA (bovine serum albumin) filtration when compared to the pristine membrane without PANI nanofibers. Membrane with 1.0 wt.% PANI content showed highest permeability among the synthesized membranes. The membrane having highest permeability was subjected to heavy metal ion rejection which showed high rejection of 98.52% and 97.38% for heavy metal ions Pb2+ and Cd2+ respectively.Membrane filtration is one among the most promising technologies for water treatment application PVDF is considered as one of the excellent polymer materials in membrane science Many studies have been performed to improve the hydrophilicity of PVDF membranes such as physical blending, plasma treatment, chemical grafting, surface modifications, and blending with hydrophilic additives In the recent years, modifications on PVDF blends have been devoted to the blending of polymers with inorganic materials Polyaniline (PANI) is a well-known polymer which has gained importance due to its ease of preparation, high conductivity, chemical stability, and low cost and also exhibits great separation characteristics Zhao et al. In the present work, polyaniline (PANI) nanofibers and H-PSMA were used as hydrophilic additives to improve the hydrophilicity of PVDF. Polyaniline nanofibers were added in increasing concentrations into the PVDF–HPSMA membranes and their effect on membrane performance was studied. To the best of our knowledge it is the first time polyaniline (PANI) nanofibers and H-PSMA were being used as additives in PVDF membranes. PVDF ( PANI nanofibers were prepared by rapidly mixing reactions, a facile one step method using APS as oxidant, following the procedure reported in the literature FTIR spectrum and X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern were obtained to confirm the formation of PANI nanofibers. An ATR-FTIR spectrophotometer (JASCO 4200) was used to obtain the IR spectrum. XRD pattern was obtained from Rigaku Miniflex 600 with Cu Kα radiation. Scanning electron microscope (JEOL JSM-6380LA) and transmission electron microscope (JEOL JEM-2100) were used to observe the morphology of the PANI nanofibers. PSMA was subjected to hydrolysis in aqueous solution under alkaline conditions ( PVDF–H-PSMA–PANI membranes were prepared by immersion precipitation method ATR-FTIR spectrophotometer (JASCO 4200) was used to record the IR spectra of the PSMA and H-PSMA in the range of 4000–650 The morphology of the prepared membranes was analyzed by taking the cross sectional images of the membranes using scanning electron microscope (SEM). The membrane samples were frozen in liquid nitrogen and broken and then sputtered with gold for electron conductivity before they were observed under scanning electron microscope (JEOL JSM-6380LA). The contact angle of the membranes was measured using FTA-200 dynamic contact angle analyzer by sessile droplet method Membrane samples were cut into 1 The pure water flux (PWF) of the membranes was tested using dead end filtration cell. An effective membrane area of 5 The antifouling property of the membranes was studied as follows The concentration of BSA in the feed and the permeate was measured using UV-spectrophotometer at a wavelength of 280 The heavy metal ion rejection study by the membranes was performed as per the literature The FTIR spectrum of PANI nanofibers is shown in X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of PANI nanofibers is shown in  The IR spectra of PSMA and H-PSMA are shown in The SEM cross-sectional images of membranes with different contents of PANI nanofibers are shown in The change in morphology of the membranes with PANI nanofibers can be attributed to the phase inversion process taking place during the membrane formation The presence of PANI nanofibers in the casting solution resulted in the good interconnection between the pores due to the migration of PANI nanofibers and also the pores become run through giving the long finger like projections during the membrane formation The surface hydrophilicity of the membranes can be determined by a parameter called contact angle. The lower the contact angle, the more hydrophilic is the membrane. Among the prepared membranes, M0 membrane which did not contain any PANI nanofibers showed the highest contact angle of 81.6°, whereas M4 membrane with highest PANI content showed the lowest contact angle of 52.2°. The contact angle of the prepared membranes decreased gradually in the order M0 Water uptake by the property depends on the porosity of the membranes. The water uptake by the membranes increased in the order M0  However the decrease in flux was observed for M4 membrane with highest content of PANI. Similar results were observed during the membrane permeation studies in PANI incorporated membranes The water flux of the membranes during BSA filtration is shown in The FRR values of all the membranes are higher than the pristine PVDF–H-PSMA membrane ( Polymer enhanced ultrafiltration process has been used for the removal of metal ions from solutions by ultrafiltration membranes. The pore size of UF membranes is not ideal for the rejection of metal ions from aqueous solution PANI nanofibers were synthesized by facile rapidly mixed reaction method, which acted as a hydrophilic agent for PVDF UF membranes. A novel additive, hydrolyzed PSMA (H-PSMA) was used as a dispersant and pore forming agent. It was found that the hydrophilicity of the membranes increased with the addition of PANI nanofibers. PANI nanofiber incorporated membranes showed enhancement in the membrane properties such as better permeability, water uptake and contact angle values. The pristine membrane PVDF–HPSMA fouled easily, whereas membrane with PANI nanofibers showed better antifouling nature. The morphology of the membranes also improved with better pores, as the content of PANI nanofibers in the membranes increased. However from water uptake, pure water flux (PWF) and BSA filtration experiments, it was found that membrane performance increased with the increase in concentration of PANI nanofibers till 1.0 AMI thank Director, National Institute of Technology Karnataka, Surathkal, India, for providing the research facilities and encouragement. The authors also thank Prof. Narayan Prabhu, former Head, Department of Metallurgical and Materials Engineering, NITK Surathkal, India, for providing SEM and contact angle measurement facilities.