Supported liquid membranes (SLMs) are used in the extraction and separation of metals from dilute feed. In this paper, we show an innovative application of SLMs in the simultaneous separation of three metal species, employing a two-membrane–three-compartment cell. Two PTFE support membranes loaded with Alamine 336 and LIX 84, respectively, were used in this study. An Alamine 336-loaded membrane was placed between the 1st and the 2nd compartment, whereas the LIX 84-loaded membrane was placed between the 2nd and the 3rd compartment of the transport cell. With this cell, we were able to separate Fe3+, Cu2+ and Ni2+ simultaneously from a feed containing these three species in 1 M NaCl and at pH of 2, into three compartments of the transport cell. Fe3+ was separated from the feed through the Alamine 336-loaded membrane, whereas Cu2+ was transported through the LIX 84-loaded membrane. Ni2+ remained in the central feed compartment (2nd compartment) of the cell. The transport fluxes of Fe3+ and Cu2+ through the two membranes were found to be 3.6 and 5.1 μmol/m2 s, respectively.There is a need to recover metals from industrial effluents, disposal of which may cause environmental problems, and expensive metals are being wasted in this way. The vast majority of industrial effluents and waste water, such as mining water, etching or pickling baths, dilute leach solution generated during hydrometallurgy, electroplating rinse liquors, spent photographic solutions etc. may carry iron and a host of non-ferrous metals such as Cu, Ni, Zn, Mn, Cr, U etc. in low concentrations. The most common form of effluent treatment involves the precipitation of metal as hydroxide, basic salt or sulphides; but the products are rarely processed for metal recovery and for dilute streams, generally, this method is expensive. Solvent extraction and ion exchange allow the recovery of metals, but are rarely used because of high capital and operating costs when compared to the value of materials recovered and losses of solvents due to solubility and entrainment in the raffinates. Supported liquid membranes (SLMs) offer a potentially attractive alternative to these processes in that they combine the process of extraction and stripping in a single unit operation. The advantages of SLMs are well known In this paper, we give an innovative application of SLMs in the separation of three metal species, Cu Alamine 336 and LIX 84 were obtained from Henkel,USA and PTFE membranes were obtained from Millipore, India. A feed solution of Cu The concentrations of various metal ions (Cu It was observed that Fe The following observations have been made: Only Fe Only Cu Ni Fe Cu Thus, a feed solution containing Fe