The application of microwave radiation as an assisted grinding technique has shown great potential to improve comminution. Besides fracturing, the treatment also leads to phase transformations at the grain boundaries of the minerals, changing their surface properties and affecting downstream processes, such as flotation. Therefore, the study of the effects of microwave treatment on a mineral’s surface properties is important for the industrial application of microwave assisted grinding. In this work, the surface properties of untreated and microwave-treated chalcopyrite were investigated by XRD, XPS, ATR-FTIR, SEM, BET/BJH, IGC, ELS (zeta potential) and microflotation. While short exposure times were found to favor the formation of copper polysulphides (CuxFeySn) at the mineral surface, longer treatments converted CuFeS2 into iron oxides/ hydroxides/oxyhydroxides and sulfate at the surface and, enriched CuxFeySn underneath the oxidation layer. A shift in the zeta potential curves to less negative values was observed after treatment, reaching an IEP around pH 4.5. The collectorless floatability of chalcopyrite initially improved after exposure as its surface energy decreased. However, the samples’ surface became energetically more active after longer treatment times, and the flotation recovery decreased. Microwave treatment also increased the mineral’s specific surface area (SSA) and porosity; and changed the pore size distribution.Mineral beneficiation presents high energy consumption, which has increased over time. Most of this energy is spent in comminution, which makes crushing and grinding the costliest steps in mineral processing, accounting for up to 70% of the energy spent in a mill and up to 1.8% of the world’s electrical consumption [ In recent years, the application of microwave irradiation as an assisted-grinding technique has shown great potential in reducing the energy required in comminution, improving liberation and affecting downstream processes such as leaching, flotation and magnetic separation [ Chalcopyrite from Durango (Mexico) was purchased from Ward’s Natural Science (U.S.A.), with crystal agglomerates with sizes ranging from 1 to 10 cm. They were dry-crushed, pulverized and sieved to obtain a particle size in the range –150 + 38 μm. As the sample contained some impurities, purification was performed by hand picking, use of a hand magnet and Frantz Isodynamic Separator (S.G. Frantz Company Inc., U.S.A.); the product was immediately stored in a freezer to avoid oxidation. In order to measure the zeta potential and conduct elemental analysis, part of the sample was further pulverized to −10 μm (D The –150 + 38 μm and −10 μm chalcopyrite samples (20 g) were treated in a 3.0 kW, 2.45 GHz Amana RC30 multimodal microwave oven (Amana, U.S.A.). To protect from gas inhalation, the oven was installed in a fume hood. The samples were poured into microwave transparent alumina crucibles, which were then placed in the center of the cavity (215 mm x 330 mm x 380 mm) for all tests. The treatment was conducted under normal atmosphere conditions for 5, 10 and 20 s. Temperature measurements were obtained post exposure using a HH23 Omega thermocouple (Omega, U.S.A.). The chemical composition of the untreated and microwave-treated particles was investigated to confirm the purity of the sample and identify possible changes due to the treatment. For that purpose, 0.1 g triplicate samples were digested at 95 °C using aqua regia, then inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) was performed using a Thermo Scientific 6000 series spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., U.S.A.). The standards used in the analyses were purchased from SCP Science (U.S.A.): PlasmaTest RQC-1(#140-128-002) and RQC-2 (#140-128-003); and PlasmaCal S (# 140-050-161). The phase composition was analyzed to identify the possible phase transformations after microwave treatment, by performing X-ray powder diffraction analysis in a Bruker D8 Discovery X-Ray Diffractometer (Bruker-AXS Inc., U.S.A.) equipped with Co κα X-ray source (λ = 1.79 Å). The species formed on the surface of microwave-treated chalcopyrite were analyzed using a Thermo Scientific K-Alpha monochromatic X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., U.S.A.) equipped with an Al κα X-ray source (1486.6 eV, 0.834 nm), ultrahigh vacuum chamber (10 Attenuated total reflectance Fourier transform infrared (ATR-FTIR) spectroscopy was conducted on the untreated and microwave-treated samples using a Spectrum 400 spectrometer (Perkin Elmer, U.S.A.). The dried samples were analyzed without further treatment ( The possible changes in morphology of the chalcopyrite surface were examined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The investigations were performed on a Hitachi SU3500 scanning electron microscope (Hitachi, Japan) operated in VP-SEM Mode, at 15 kV, 107 μA, 30 Pa and 10.9 mm working distance. The study of the surface area and porosity of the untreated and microwave-treated chalcopyrite samples (–150 + 38 μm) was conducted by N The samples’ surface potential (zeta potential) was investigated by Electrophoretic Light Scattering (ELS) using a NanoBrook 90Plus Zeta Particle Size Analyzer (Brookhaven Instruments, U.S.A.). The suspensions were prepared by adding 10 mg of sample into 10 mL of pH adjusted 1 × 10 The floatability of the untreated and microwave-treated chalcopyrite samples was investigated by microflotation tests in a 170 cm The surface energy of the chalcopyrite samples was determined through inverse gas chromatography [ The bulk temperature measured for chalcopyrite samples ( The XRD patterns of untreated chalcopyrite ( The zeta potential of untreated and microwave-treated chalcopyrite as a function of pH is presented in The XPS data for the untreated and microwave-treated chalcopyrite were curve fitted, and the chemical species identified as shown in The fitting of the Fe 2p spectra ( The O 1 s spectra ( The Cu depth profiles produced for treated and untreated samples are shown in The baseline corrected and normalized ATR-FTIR spectra (1950 - 650 cm The SEM images of the chalcopyrite samples, untreated and microwaved-treated, are shown in The specific surface area (SSA) and the porosity of the samples were examined by BET and BJH methods, respectively. The SSA and the average pore width increased after microwave treatment ( The collectorless microflotation tests displayed a significant floatability for untreated chalcopyrite samples, as proposed by previous studies [ The dispersive (γ The work of adhesion to water (W The use of X-ray powder diffraction was not an effective technique to identify phase transformation of microwave-treated chalcopyrite. This method could be useful after longer exposure times, which would produce a thicker oxidation layer and changes greater than the phase detection limit [ Microwave radiation is absorbed well by chalcopyrite, with the energy dissipated as heat, driving the oxidation process. As a result, new species are formed at the chalcopyrite surface. At a low exposure time (5 s), no significant difference in the surface speciation was observed between the high-resolution Fe, S and O XPS spectra of non-treated samples and the treated samples. The results showed the presence of sulphides ( The oxidation reactions at the CuFeS The depth profile revealed copper enrichment from the bulk towards the surface of untreated chalcopyrite, which is slightly enhanced in the case of particles microwaved for 5 s. This indicates that the mild oxidation may have increased the polysulphide or metal deficient sulphide content [ The results obtained from IGC were also in agreement with the changes in the floatability of chalcopyrite due to microwave irradiation since the different exposure times led to the changes in the surface energy of the mineral. Five seconds of irradiation made the surface of chalcopyrite energetically more stable (lower surface energy) and increased the collectorless floatability of the sample. However, longer exposure (20 s) had the opposite effect on the surface, increasing its surface free energy and therefore reducing its floatability. In addition, the trend of the work of adhesion to water matched the expectations from flotation recovery since the sample with lowest W The surface morphology of chalcopyrite particles was modified after microwave irradiation, changing from smooth surfaces in the untreated sample to rough and porous surfaces for treatments after 10 s ( The surface properties of untreated and microwave-treated chalcopyrite were investigated. X-ray powder diffraction was not an effective technique to identify phase transformation driven by the treatment. The surface enrichment in hydrophobic copper polysulphides species on particles treated for 5 s made the sample’s surface more energetically stable, leading to a slight improvement in the collectorless floatability and no significant changes in the particles’ surface charge. Longer exposure to microwaves (10 and 20 s) produced an enrichment in copper polysulphide within the oxidation layer and the formation of hydrophilic iron oxides/hydroxides/oxyhydroxides and sulfates species at the chalcopyrite surface. These species led to property changes in the mineral’s surface, which had its surface free energy increased, became less negatively charged and more hydrophilic, causing a significant drop in floatability. A detailed investigation on the floatability of chalcopyrite in the presence of collectors is necessary to further understand the effects of microwave irradiation on flotation. Microwave treatment also increased the specific surface area and porosity of chalcopyrite, which might require greater collector dosages in the flotation of the mineral, but also could improve its leaching kinetics. The authors are grateful for the financial support from the