Cyclic voltammetry of the CuCl powder in a cavity microelectrode revealed direct electro-reduction in solid state in 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate. Potentiostatic electrolysis of the salt powder (attached to a current collector) in the ionic liquid produced Cu nanoparticles as confirmed by X-ray diffraction, energy dispersive X-ray analysis, scanning and transmission electron microscopy. The particle size decreased down to 10nm when the electrode potential was shifted from −0.9V to −1.8V (versus Ag/Ag+). The electro-reduction and the nanoparticle formation mechanisms were investigated in the ionic liquid and also in aqueous 0.1molL−1 KClO4 in which larger Cu particles were obtained.Metallic nanoparticles, particularly copper nanoparticles, are multi-functional and capable of, for example, catalysing the oxidation of CO at mild temperatures Using electrons as the “green” reductant, electrochemical processes involve fewer chemicals and impose a lower environmental impact. Particularly, copper nanoparticles were prepared in aqueous electrolytes by electro-deposition Room temperature ionic liquids (ILs) are generally considered as “green” reaction media and were used in catalytic synthesis Considering the capability of some ILs for transferring chloride ions Preparation and characterisation of 1-butyl-3-metylimidizolium chloride ([BMIM]Cl, viscous liquid as-synthesised) and hexafluorophosphate ([BMIM]PF Viscosity was measured using a rotational rheometer (HAAKE Reho Stress 600, Thermo Scientific). For [BMIM]PF The solubility of these salts in [BMIM]PF The electrochemical property of the CuCl powder was investigated by cyclic voltammetry using a cavity microelectrode (CME) In potentiostatic electrolysis, several electrodes were fabricated. When the silver foil was used as the current collector, the CuCl powder was first dispersed in acetone (∼50 All experiments in the ionic liquid were carried out in a glove-box that was dried by P The electrolytic products from the IL were washed with acetonitrile twice, dried in vacuum and analysed directly by X-ray diffraction spectroscopy (XRD, SHIMADZU X-ray 6000 with Cu-Kα), energy dispersive X-ray analysis and scanning electron microscopy (SEM, SIRION-FEG). Samples for transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEM-2010, 200 Between 28 It was thought that the solubility of transition metal chlorides would increase in the presence of Cl CVs recorded on the CME with the CuCl powder in [BMIM]PF When repeating the experiments in aqueous 0.1 These CV observations confirm that solid CuCl can indeed be electrochemically reduced. However, the electro-reduction kinetics in the ionic liquid is apparently slower than in the aqueous solution. The reason may be speculated as follow. The electro-reduction of a solid insulator compound in contact with a solid electronic conductor and a liquid electrolyte should take place at the conductor/insulator/electrolyte three phase interlines (3PIs) According to this understanding, the slower reduction kinetics of solid CuCl in [BMIM]PF The CV results discussed above encouraged potentiostatic reduction of CuCl, in which the CuCl powder was attached onto a current collector as described in Experimental Section. Typical current–time curves recorded on the CuCl–Ag electrode (area of Ag foil: 7–9 Similar experiments were carried out on the CuCl–Mo and CuCl–Ni electrodes with a much greater CuCl loading, which allowed further analysis of the reduction products by SEM, EDX, XRD and/or TEM. To investigate the effect of the applied electrode potential on the size of the Cu particles, potentiostatic reduction of the CuCl–Ag electrode was performed at different polarizations. SEM images of products prepared at −0.9 Because CuCl is scarcely soluble in the IL, there may be two possible mass transportation mechanisms for the growth of the Cu particles: surface diffusion and dissolution–deposition. The influence of surface diffusion may be responsible for the relatively larger copper particles observed in the IL at lower polarizations which are not in favour of fast nucleation but allow surface diffusion. However, this is not the case for the copper particles produced in aqueous KClO The occurrence of the dissolution–deposition process should depend on the nature of the electrolyte. It is then helpful to compare the electro-reduction of solid CuCl in different electrolytes. The CVs of the CuCl–CME in both [BMIM]PF The solubility of CuCl in pure water was reported to be 0.295 It should be pointed out that the dissolution–deposition process might be enhanced by another effect of the electro-reduction of solid CuCl that releases Cl For a thin CuCl layer, in the absence of any Cl A further speculation is that, in water, Reactions Finally, we would like to acknowledge that, in the course of preparation of this paper, a previous experiment was brought to our attention. In this early experiments, electro-deposition of germanium from GeI For the first time, direct electro-reduction of solid cuprous chloride, in the form of a powder attached onto a current collector, to copper nanoparticles has been demonstrated in 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate. The obtained copper nanoparticles were found to decrease in size by negatively shifting the electro-reduction potential. Applying the same procedure in an aqueous solution of 0.1 Financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant nos. 20125308 and 20573081) is gratefully acknowledged.