An inert gas atomization technique was employed to produce spray deposits of an Al–18Si–5Fe–1.5Cu (wt.%) alloy. The spray-deposited alloy was subsequently hot extruded with a reduction ratio of 6:1 and extrusion temperature of 480°C. The microstructural features of the as-spray-deposited and extruded alloys were examined using optical, scanning electron and transmission electron microscopy techniques, and chemical analyses of phases were carried out using energy dispersive X-ray analysis and spectroscopic methods. The microstructure of the spray-deposited alloy revealed the presence of a cellular and plate-like morphology of β-Al5SiFe phase coexisting with δ-Al4Si2Fe phase in contrast to the presence of only δ-Al4Si2Fe phase in atomized powder particles. The formation of the β-Al5SiFe phase is suggested to arise as a result of phase transformation of δ-Al4Si2Fe phase during slow cooling of the spray deposit. The hot extrusion of the alloy resulted in fragmentation of both intermetallic phases and Si into nano-sized particles. The microstructure evolution during spray deposition and hot extrusion of the alloy is discussed.The benefit of rapid solidification is well understood in synthesizing aluminum alloys for high-temperature applications In brief, the process of spray forming refers to the energetic disintegration of molten material using high-energy gas jets into micrometer-sized droplets followed by their subsequent deposition on a stationary or movable substrate Detailed studies have been carried out to account for the formation of fine-grained microstructures during spray deposition In the present investigation an Al–18Si–5Fe–1.5Cu (wt.%) alloy was spray-deposited and hot extruded. The microstructural features of both as-spray-deposited and hot-extruded alloys are reported. Alloy corresponding to the nominal composition Al–18Si–5Fe–1.5Cu (wt.%) was prepared by melting 4 The alloy was melted in a graphite crucible and the melt was superheated to 975 The chemical composition of the spray-formed alloy was analyzed using the X-ray fluorescence technique (SRS3400, Bruecker, Germany). The alloy was found to contain 17.890% Si, 5.190% Fe, 1.632% Cu, 0.007% Cr, 0.004% Mn, 0.012% Mg, and the balance Al. This is very close to the nominal composition of the alloy. Several samples were machined from the center and peripheral regions of the as-deposited and hot-extruded alloys for microstructural examination. The samples were polished following standard metallographic procedures and etched with Keller’s reagent (95% H Samples for transmission electron microscopy (TEM) study of spray-deposited and extruded alloy were prepared from a thin slice of about 50 The microstructure of powder particles exhibited coexisting faceted primary phase of Si and complex intermetallic phases. The size of Si particles varied from 3 to 10 The spray-deposited alloy revealed a considerable refinement in microstructure compared to conventionally cast alloy and oversprayed powder particles. The spray-deposited alloy showed primary Si phase 3–10 It is worth mentioning that in our previous investigation X-ray diffraction data showed that the powder particles contained Al, Si and δ-Al A comparison of the morphology of the phases present in powder particles and spray-deposited alloy shows that the intermetallics are much finer than the primary Si phase. This has been attributed basically to the large aspect ratio of intermetallics that adds to the ease of fragmentation under the influence of shear action generated by the high-velocity gas jets and turbulent fluid flow conditions due to momentum transfer from droplets to the deposition surface. It is interesting to note that the powder particles exhibited only nonequilibrium tetragonal δ-Al Several interesting microstructural features were observed in the hot-extruded alloys. The TEM study revealed that the microstructure of the extruded alloy consisted of a fine-grained matrix of the primary α-phase along with Si particles and other intermetallics of different crystal structures. The primary α-grains were normally faceted with sharp edges. The ultrafine Si and intermetallic phases were observed to decorate the peripheral regions of the primary Al grains as well as the grain boundaries. Most of the intermetallic phases were observed to be well within 30 It is important to mention that the microstructural investigations were carried out on the transverse sections of the spray-formed and extruded alloy. However, some of the specimens were also prepared using the longitudinal sections of the rods after extrusion. In addition to the microstructural features observed for transverse sections of the rod, a prominent lamellar structure was also noticed along the longitudinal sections ( A number of intermetallic compounds in Al–Si–Fe-based alloys influence the mechanical properties. The thermal state of the deposition surface during spray forming leads to considerable modification in intermetallic compounds such as α-AlFeSi, δ-Al Analytical characterization at the nanoscale with a probe size of 5.9 The microstructure of the spray-deposited alloy is a composite with Si and intermetallic particles embedded in a fine-grained Al matrix. After having attained a homogeneous composite microstructure, the material underwent a process of hot deformation using extrusion (ER, 6:1) at a temperature of 480 A case study of a hypereutectic Al–Si alloy with a composition (Al–17Si–4.5Cu–0.5Mg) close to that of the present composition (Al–18%Si–5%Fe–1.5%Cu) has been carried out to understand the spray dynamics and heat flow during the process of spray forming A hypereutectic Al–Si alloy as studied in present work can be considered as a metal matrix composite by definition that the Si particulates are physically distinguishable and chemically separable from the Al matrix. Moreover the alloy produced would definitely have improved properties compared to Al and Si considered separately. However, due to hard and nondeformable Si as reinforcement present in the soft and ductile Al matrix, the deformation mechanism of these composites is rather complex and difficult to predict. Microstructural features developed during spray atomization and deposition in the present work further underwent a grain refinement process during hot deformation while the material was extruded at 480  The oversprayed powder particles of Al–18Si–5Fe–1.5Cu alloy contain a dispersion of faceted Si particles coexisting with long needle-shaped intermetallics in the primary α-phase of Al. The solidification structure of different sized powder particles shows heterogeneous nucleation occurring from the surface of the droplet and the solid–liquid interface advancing in a diametrically opposite direction. The spray-deposited alloy had a fine-grained microstructure with uniform dispersion of ultrafine primary Si and rectangular-shaped plates of intermetallics in the α-Al matrix. In contrast, the spray-deposited and extruded alloy had dislocations present inside the Al grains/grain boundaries along with fragmented pieces of Si and intermetallics of a nanoscale size in the matrix. The EDS analysis of phases confirmed the formation of δ-Al One of the authors (A.K.S.) acknowledges the support of DST sponsored project (HR/OY/P-15/97) on spray forming and the BOYSCAST fellowship (DST-HR/BY/P-02/2000). A.K.S. thanks Professor C. Colliex (LPS, Orsay) and Dr. R. Kishore (NPL, New Delhi) for useful discussions during the preparation of the manuscript.