Nitride dispersed Al–Ti alloys have been prepared by reactive ball milling (RBM) of elemental powders of Al and Ti in nitrogen gas. The particle size and the grain size were effectively reduced by the hard and brittle TiN and the dissolved nitrogen atoms. The as-milled powder was consolidated by hot extrusion at 500°C. The grain size of the as-extruded specimen was about 50–100 nm, and TiN with a grain size of 10 nm existed all over the specimen. UTS of Al–10 wt.%(Ti+TiN) alloy produced by two-step RBM in N2 and hot extrusion was lower than that of Al–5 at.%Ti alloy prepared by RBM in H2 and hot extrusion, although the hardness of the former was higher than that of the latter. The ductilities of Al–10 wt.%(Ti+TiN) were very poor and even less than those of specimens prepared by RBM in H2. The dispersoids existing at the grain boundary appeared to restrict deformation through the grain boundary and promote the formation of micro-voids at the grain boundaries. Thus, fracture easily occurred intergranularly in this alloy and the ductility was poor at all tested temperatures.Metal nitrides have desirable properties, such as extreme hardness, high temperature stability and high corrosion resistance. Dispersion of metal nitrides thus promotes the high temperature properties of Al alloys and enhances the usefulness as high temperature applications. Metal nitrides have been known to be difficult to prepare, because they can be synthesized by reaction of metal with nitrogen at very high temperature and pressure Reactive ball milling (RBM) is a ball milling process inducing chemical reactions between solid (elemental powders) and gas by a milling in active gas atmospheres, such as H In this experiment, the tension properties of Al–Ti alloys produced by RBM in N RBM was carried out using a high-energy ball mill, attritor with 1.8- and 7.8-l SUS 304 stainless steel containers and balls. Elemental powders of Ti (99.9% pure, −325 mesh) and Al (99.5% pure, −325 mesh) were used as the starting materials and the ball to powder weight ratio was 100:1 and the mill was rotating at 250 rpm. In order to prevent excessive welding of powders, 2 wt.% stearic acid was added to the powder as a process control agent (PCA). Before milling, the attritor was charged with as-mixed powder and then evacuated with a rotary pump (about 10 As-milled powders after passing through a −200-mesh sieve were examined by XRD, SEM and TEM. DSC analysis was performed at a heating rate of 10 K s The as-milled powder sieved into −200# was consolidated by hot extrusion. For this, the as-milled powder was cold pressed at 98 MPa in an Al 6063 can (or Cu can). The samples were degassed and pre-heat treated before hot extrusion. The can was sealed by argon arc welding and degassed at 500°C by a rotary pump for 2 h. The Al can was extruded into a rod at 500°C, the same temperature for the degassing. The extrusion ratio was 25:1 and extrusion pressure was 1.5 GPa. The diameter of the as-extruded specimen was 15 mm. Hardness, micro-hardness and tensile tests were performed on the as-extruded specimen. Hardness was measured with a Rockwell hardness tester on B scale. The Vickers microhardness measurement was done at a load of 500 g with a Leitz microhardness tester. The load time was 15 s and at least 10 measurements were carried out. The specimens for tensile test were prepared according to ASTM-E8M sub-size with a 20-mm gage length, and reduced section diameter of 4 mm, and tested in a SATEC DLF 20 20000LBS machine. The room and high temperature (300, 400 and 500°C) tensile tests were performed at a strain rate of 4.2×10 The density was measured by means of the Archimedes principle. The relative densities of as-extruded specimens were over 99%. The microstructures of as-extruded samples and the tensile tested specimens were examined by TEM. Fractography was also performed on the tensile tested specimens using SEM. Thin foils of bulk materials for TEM observation were prepared by polishing in a Struers Tenupol-3 operating at 40 V (dc) with an electrolyte consisting of 10 v/o perchloric acid and 90 v/o ethyl alcohol at −25°C. As mentioned in our previous report    Tension tests were performed with specimens prepared from three powders ball milled in Ar, H    In this study, the specimens hot extruded from the powders prepared by RBM in N In this experiment, Al–10 wt.%(Ti+TiN) alloys were produced by two-step ball milling in N The following reactions are believed to occur during two-step RBM in N The grain size of the specimen hot extruded from powders two-step milled in N UTS of Al–10 wt.% (Ti+TiN) alloy produced by two-step RBM in N The ductilities of Al–10 wt.%(Ti+TiN) alloys were very poor and even less than those of specimen RBM in H The thermal stability of Al–10wt.%(Ti+TiN) alloys was superior to that of a specimen prepared by RBM in H The authors acknowledge gratefully the financial support of the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF 95-0300-09-01).