A shape correction factor for flake-like particles is applied to six different previously reported models (Leith and Licht model, ideal laminar cyclonic flow model, ideal turbulent cyclonic flow model, mixed flow model, Zhang and Basu model, and Avci and Karagoz model) to calculate cyclone collection efficiency. The correction factor was obtained using an equivalent diameter concept based on particle volume and particle geometry.
                  The results obtained after using this correction were compared to experimental data and it was found that the above mentioned models describe better the experimental collection efficiency data for particle diameters smaller than 20μm in five of the six used models.
                  Values for the D
                     50 were also calculated as well as their error compared to the experimental data. Error values for the D
                     50 calculation went from 77.8% to 7.7% for the Ideal laminar cyclonic flow model; from 92.9% to 70.3% for the Leith and Licht model, from 74.8% to 4.9% for the Mixed flow model; from 91% to 62.5% for the Avci and Karagoz model; from 87.7% to 48.6% for the Zhang and Basu model, and from 33.7% to 176% for the Ideal turbulent cyclonic flow model.
                  These are promising results to predict collection efficiency more accurately for industrial processes that use cyclones.Different approaches have been proposed to develop mathematical models to predict cyclone collection efficiency since they appeared as separation and classification devices. These have been previously classified by Likewise, For application purposes, the selection of a collection efficiency model for a cyclone separator depends on different parameters such as the application of the equipment, installed measurement instruments, accuracy required, etc. For instance, if the objective is to predict the collection efficiency of a cyclone operating in a production line, the model has to be simple and the parameters needed for the calculation have to be measured or known beforehand. In this paper, several models are used to calculate the collection efficiency for a cyclone separator operating on a production line of metallic pigments in a Mexican company. Production line operating conditions are used and results are compared to size distributions of samples analyzed using a laser particle size analyzer. A correlation factor is obtained taking into account particle geometry in form of an equivalent particle diameter. It is used in several collection efficiency models and these new results are compared to experimental values, obtaining in five out of six cases better results to predict cyclone collection efficiency. The cyclone separator used in this study is a tangential inlet one. The gas carrying the particles is air After an extensive research in the literature, six different models were selected to predict collection efficiency of a cyclone using operating conditions as calculation parameters. Some of them were chosen due to their simplicity while others (the more complicated ones) were selected attempting to obtain results with better accuracy. Many models found in literature were discarded because the calculation parameters needed for their use were not possible to obtain due to set up restrictions. The models selected for collection efficiency (η(D This model (cited in  This model (cited in  Leith and Licht (cited in The Leith and Licht model is based on the concept of constant radial re-mixing of particles that were not captured, and the calculation of an average residence time or particles within the cyclone. Where This model (cited by A mathematical model was developed by It was observed that collection efficiency depends on the flow regime (affected by inlet velocity, temperature, viscosity and surface roughness). As Reynolds number increases, this dependency decreases. The friction coefficient of the cyclone internal surfaces plays a very important role in the model performance. It was concluded that the assumption of smoothness in the model might be responsible for some deviation of the calculated results from experimental values. Where A mathematical model proposed by They developed an equation which can predict stable orbit radius of any particle size from given geometry and operating conditions. This gives a qualitative behavior of a cyclone. For qualitative calculation needs, they developed and equation with experimental data. A series of regression was carried out by using experimental data to find the relation among several parameters. Where The above mentioned models were used to calculate the cyclone collection efficiency. The results from these models were compared to the particle size distribution obtained from particle samples collected by the cyclone. Size distribution was obtained using a diffraction laser particle size analyzer for industrial applications, which has a diode laser of 830 In this case, it was found that the particles have a flake shape as it is shown in The results obtained from the application of the models using the cyclone operating conditions are shown in In this figure, experimental particle size distribution is presented using error bars of 5%. It can be observed that most models can predict cyclone grade efficiency within a 5% error for particle diameters ( Due to these error values, it is not convenient to apply these methods as they were formulated to predict the collection efficiency of a working cyclone in a production line. Therefore, an alternative for this is looked up and a consideration of an equivalent particle diameter is used. It is known that the fluid pattern and the settling velocity of the particle determine the capture of a particle in a cyclone. However, most grade efficiency models consider the particle shape to be a sphere. If Solving for This consideration can be applied to any geometry, considering as particle diameter the largest length of the particle. The characteristics of the material remain the same; this is monitored by tests every 4 In this particular case, the calculation for the equivalent diameter considers the flake shape of the particles simplifying their geometry to a cylinder. It is assumed that the particle diameter is 135 times the particle height. It is also assumed to calculate the volume of the cylinder that there is a circle inscribed into the cross area of the particle and that the cylinder diameter is approximately 80% of the particle diameter as shown in Taking into account the assumptions described above we have  From Eq. Substituting Solving for Thus, this factor (0.24) was used to calculate the equivalent diameter, and used in the models to obtain the cyclone grade efficiency, obtaining the results shown in This figure also presents experimental particle size distribution using error bars of 5%. After the consideration for an equivalent diameter the mixed flow model is able to predict within a 5% error the grade efficiency of the cyclone for every particle size tested. In the case of the ideal laminar cyclonic flow model, there is an improvement for the collection efficiency prediction in a range from 0.2μm to 12 The model proposed by Zhang and Basu gives significantly better results for particle diameter values from 16 One of the classical models to predict cyclone collection efficiency, Leith and Licht model, also improved its performance within the 5% error, originally it was for particle diameter values of 26 On the other hand, after the use of the equivalent diameter concept, the Avci and Karagoz model improves slightly its performance for smaller particle diameters, but does a poorer work predicting collection efficiency for larger diameters. Finally, the ideal cyclonic turbulent flow model suffered a large detriment in its prediction performance increasing its error as much as five times for some particle sizes. To evaluate in detail the results produced by using the equivalent diameter consideration, the These results are shown in Five out of six models improved their prediction of The use of the equivalent diameter in some simple models to calculate cyclone collection efficiency modified their behavior improving the accuracy of their results and decreasing the calculation error as much as 54 times in the case of the mixed flow model when compared to experimental results. Excepting the ideal turbulent cyclonic flow model, every model improved their prediction of collection efficiency for particles of diameter values of 20 From The ability to use the mixed flow model with the equivalent diameter consideration allows operating conditions modification in real time production depending on manufacturing needs for this particular case, which is a significant finding that deserves to be examined closely for possible use of this approach in other applications. The use of equivalent diameter concept produced a correction factor (0.24 More work is needed with models not yet studied to verify the effect of using the equivalent diameter concept and experimental work on particles of different geometries is needed before a recommendation for the use of the mixed flow model can be carried out.  height of inlet cross-section (m) width of inlet cross-section (m) drag coefficient (−) particle diameter with 50% collection efficiency (m) Cyclone diameter (m) Cyclone diameter (ft) diameter of a cylinder (m) equivalent diameter (m) particle diameter (m) diameter of a sphere (m) factor describing the geometric configuration (−) mass flow rate of gas through the cyclone (kg/s) cylinder height (m) total height (m) number of turns the gas makes around the cyclone (−) vortex coefficient (−) volumetric flow (m radius of a circular orbit of a particle in the flow (m) radius of the exit of the cyclone (m) average radius of particle trajectories (m) radial position of the inner wall of the cyclone (m) radial position of the outer wall of the cyclone (m) radial position of a particle (m) Reynolds number (−) temperature (R) tangential velocity (m/s) gas inlet velocity (m/s) particle volume (m sphere volume (m secondary volumetric flow rate (m volumetric flow rate at the abscissa z (m width of the cyclones in the direction vertical to the XY plane  gas viscosity (Pa s) collection efficiency(−) angular position of the particle (rad) solids density (kg/m ratio of the radius of particle orbit and the radius of the exit (−) gas density (kg/m relaxation time (s)