The results of quasistatic compression experiments are presented for borosilicate glass under confinement. The experiments were designed to characterize the damage development process, specifically the effect of comminution on the mechanical performance of the glass. The primary objective is to increase understanding of the transition from intact to damaged material to aid in modeling efforts for armor design applications. Load cycling experiments were performed on confined Borofloat glass samples (intact or pre-damaged) to create and evaluate the behavior of comminuted material. Samples were inserted in a high-strength steel confining sleeve, and then loaded and re-loaded at increasing compressive loads, and quasistatic strain rates, to fail the material in-situ. Several tests of the pre-damaged material were interrupted following a finite number of load cycles to investigate the onset and extent of damage. Microstructural evaluation of the glass samples following testing aided in determining the extent of damage at increasing load levels. Emphasis is on characterization and analysis of damage development in the borosilicate glass. Further details on the experimental technique and application of the results using a constitutive model are detailed in recent papers by the authors [1,2].Ceramic materials have been considered for armor applications for almost 40 years owing to their favorable physical and mechanical properties (e.g., high compressive strength, low density) Penetration of a projectile into a ceramic target creates a comminuted zone ahead of the projectile, and is accompanied by dynamic crack propagation into the target material Computational models are increasingly used to better understand the penetration process in armor, and facilitate more effective armor design. This is especially challenging for brittle materials since the failure process may change the material properties. Johnson and Holmquist To assist the modeling community in developing realistic models, current emphasis is on devising unique experimental techniques to provide more accurate descriptions of the fractured material response. Meyer and Faber The efforts of other investigators have contributed towards understanding the behavior of damaged ceramics. Curran, et al. Some insight into the comminution behavior of brittle materials is possible based on literature from the geologic materials community (e.g. The objective of the present work is to better understand the transition from intact to damaged material for borosilicate glass using non-ballistic experiments. The damaged material contains a network of cracks, as well as particulates and powder, that are created during the damage process. To accomplish the objective, the transition was first investigated under quasistatic loading. The compression experiments described herein were accompanied by microscopy evaluations to determine the onset and extent of damage to the glass due to loading. Some interrupted tests were also conducted at increasing loads to determine the extent of comminution of the glass. It is planned to investigate the transition behavior at higher (i.e., SHPB) loading rates while maintaining confinement. The ultimate goal is to use the results of these non-ballistic experiments determine constitutive constants for material models, with application to armor design. The borosilicate glass evaluated in this study is Borofloat The compression experiments were performed on polished cylindrical test samples of Borofloat glass. The samples were ground from plate material, and measured 6.35-mm in diameter and 12.7-mm long, with a length to diameter (L/D) ratio of 2. Owing to the inherent flaw sensitivity of glass, all samples were polished to a high-end optical finish to minimize surface defects. Flatness and parallelism of the sample ends, especially critical when testing brittle materials, was maintained to within 0.005-mm. Anvils were used to load the confined samples during testing. The anvils were positioned between the test sample and the loading platen. Initial tests on pre-damaged Borofloat samples were performed with tapered tungsten carbide (WC) loading anvils. The WC material grade selected was chosen for its high impact and shock resistance. Higher strength SiC–N anvils were utilized for tests on intact samples. Cylindrical SiC–N anvils were provided by BAE Ceramics, and measured 6.35-mm in diameter and 5.6-mm long. The annular confining rings used in the experiments were fabricated from maraging steel, Vascomax C350, to minimize yielding. Compression tests were performed on confined cylindrical samples of Borofloat glass at quasistatic strain rates (∼10 A thermal shock procedure was employed to pre-damage the test samples. Testing of pre-damaged BF samples also allowed validation of the confinement test procedure used for compression testing of confined, pre-damaged SiC–N material in earlier work Each glass test sample (intact or pre-damaged) was inserted in a high-strength steel-confining sleeve, measuring 3.2-mm thick. Individual confining sleeves were honed to fit a specific test sample, and minimize the clearance between the test sample and the inner wall of the confining sleeve. Each confined test sample was loaded, unloaded and re-loaded at quasistatic strain rates. Confining pressures approaching 1 Test diagnostics included measurements of stress in the sample and strain (both axial and hoop) in the confining sleeve, as well as acoustic emission for detecting the onset of damage events during loading. Axial strains in the sample were measured with an extensometer, with arms mounted against the loading platens. Strain gages were also used to measure axial and hoop strains on the outside surface of the confining sleeve. These were mounted on the confining sleeve—two gages for axial strain measurement, two for hoop strain measurement. The strain gages were situated at the mid section of the sleeve; each pair of gages was located on opposite sides of the diameter. The AE system used was manufactured by Physical Acoustics Corporation. The model is the MISTRAS 2001 operating system with AEDSP-32/16B digital data acquisition boards that operate at 10 Post-test evaluation of the glass samples aided in determining the extent of comminution for the damaged material at increasing load levels. This involved sectioning and/or removal of the steel-confining sleeve. To allow viewing of the in-situ damage, a longitudinal section of the confining sleeve was carefully removed to minimize disturbance to the glass test sample. Following photo documentation, the remainder of each steel-confining sleeve was subsequently removed. This allowed further microscopy analysis and sieving of the sample remnants for particle size analysis. A series of USA standard sieves (ASTM E-11) was used for the particle size analysis; the smallest sieve size was #325 The results of the confined experiments on borofloat glass are presented in this section. Similar tests were also conducted on unconfined samples. Variability in failure strength was observed, as expected due to variance in flaw population. Greater variability was observed for pre-damaged (versus intact), unconfined samples. The compressive strength of the intact Borofloat glass with confinement approached 3000 A similar maximum stress (i.e., 3000 Results are shown in The volume change was determined for pre-damaged samples following load–reload cycling to determine if bulking occurs. A volume decrease was measured for the pre-damaged samples, as well as intact samples that were recovered. The volume change for the sample depicted in Interrupted tests were conducted with approximate load increments of 500 Numerical and analytical modeling of projectiles penetrating brittle materials (e.g., armor ceramics, glasses) is a challenging problem. This is due to the lack of a well-defined yield surface for brittle materials, and uncertainties regarding the effect of the failure process on the material properties. The reported experimental results have been used to develop a constitutive model for damaged borosilicate glass under confinement First, the experimental results were interpreted using an analytical model of the confined compression test described above Post-test evaluation of intact and pre-damaged test samples aided in analysis and interpretation of the test results, as well as determination of the extent of damage incurred. Evaluation of interrupted test samples was critical to understanding the development of damage due to increased loading. Since test samples were not readily removed from the sleeve following testing, initial evaluations were performed by lengthwise sectioning of the test sample and sleeve. This provided internal views of the test sample and resulting fragments, but often disturbed the damage pattern. To minimize further damage to the test sample and disruption of interlocking fragments, subsequent test samples were evaluated by carefully removing a portion of the steel sleeve. Several trials were performed to ensure the cutting technique did not generate additional sample damage. Removal of a “pie section” from the confining sleeve, as shown in Post-test inspection of intact samples using this procedure revealed varying degrees of damage. Several intact samples showed only external damage (e.g., chipping) following testing; others exhibited extensive damage throughout the sample. The extent of damage to the intact samples does not appear to correlate directly with the maximum load level achieved during testing or with type of loading (cyclic versus monotonic). The observed differences are likely related to variations in minor flaw populations among the samples. Pre-test stereomicroscopy evaluations of the intact samples did not reveal any striking differences or surface anomalies for this sample group. Evaluation of pre-damaged samples following cycling to the maximum load (∼2500–3000 Evaluation of pre-damaged samples following interrupted tests with load/reload cycling to successively increasing loads was critical towards understanding damage development. To accurately assess the extent of damage due to loading, the condition of the pre-damaged (thermally shocked) samples was documented prior to loading and compared with the post-damage condition of the tested samples. Both ends of each interrupted test sample were also inspected and compared prior to sectioning and removal of the confining sleeve. The onset and extent of damage for this group of interrupted test samples was visible upon inspection of the entire sample length. Additional damage, beyond the pre-damage condition, was detected after initial loading to 500 The damage observed for the interrupted test samples can be correlated with the stress–strain response in Following evaluation and documentation of the post-test condition of the interrupted test samples (see The remnants from the five interrupted test samples, shown in A non-ballistic experiment was employed to characterize the transition from intact to damaged material in borosilicate glass. Confined compression experiments were conducted on intact and pre-damaged (thermally shocked) samples using both monotonic and cyclic loading. Load cycling experiments were conducted to create and evaluate the behavior of comminuted material. Sieving of sample remnants from testing indicates that load cycling was successful in generating comminuted material. Interrupted tests on pre-damaged samples and post-test evaluation of samples were beneficial towards understanding the damage development process. The onset and development of damage were characterized by the extent of hysteresis in the axial stress–axial strain curves, substantial increase in hoop strain, and frequency changes in the acoustic emission response. Stereomicroscopy evaluations show that damage initiates at low stresses, and is characterized by cracking. More extensive cracking and sample fragmentation occurs with increased loading at higher stresses. The confining sleeve limits shifting of the fragments and particulates; bulking does not occur in the confined sample. Sample strength is maintained until a critical stress level is exceeded. Failure of confined samples ultimately occurs by shifting of fragments along a shear plane. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the US Army for this work. Technical assistance and insight from Dr. Doug Templeton (RDECOM-TARDEC) is also gratefully acknowledged. Appreciation is extended to Mr. James Spencer for skillful assistance with the post-test sample evaluations, including sectioning, microscopy and photography.