Sampling of mineral deposits constitutes a very important part of mineral exploration. It is an act or instance of collecting a small fraction of an article in a way that the consistency of the fraction shall be representative of the whole. The basis and procedure of sample collection, the incidence of collecting samples, and the precision of the samples collected are described. Sample collection depends on the sampling method, site accessibility, geology, objectives of the project, and requirements for statistical analysis, whereas sampling pattern is determined by the nature and geometry of mineralization, that is, size, shape, orientation, and distribution. The process of sample preparation ensures that the small quantity of material analyzed represents the large quantity collected during sampling. For the success of any exploration program, it is crucial to select proper analytical methodology and elements to be analyzed. The method selected depends upon the elements which are being analyzed and their expected amount. Quality assurance/quality control–ensured sampling and analyses are of vital importance in every facets of the mineral exploration process.Introduction Sampling Geological Sampling Methods Talus Debris (Float) Sampling Trench and Pit Sampling Chip Sampling Grab Sampling Channel Sampling Placer Sampling Drill Sampling: Core/Cuttings/Sludge Bulk Sampling Dump Sampling Car Sampling Criteria for the Selection of a Sampling Procedure Collection of Samples Errors in Sampling Preparation of Samples Drying Comminution Splitting Screening and Particle Size Distribution Sample Preparation Methods for Analysis Wet Method Dry Method Analysis of Geochemical Samples Precision and Accuracy High-Quality Analyses for Exploration Sources of Error Appendix: Gy’s Sampling Reduction Formula References  The technique of sample collection and the accuracy of the analysis results indicating the closeness of true representation rely upon the degree of heterogeneity of the sampled article. An absolutely homogeneous article would need collection of just one small item keeping in mind the end goal to decide its attributes accurately, whereas an uneven heterogeneous article would need collection of several small-sized items at appropriately spaced intervals, which when consolidated, would characterize the entire body or a part of the body with a tolerable level of accuracy. The number and the spacing of the items required to be collected depend on the variability of the whole being sampled. It is of fundamental significance that all small fractions in the body have the same likelihood of being incorporated in the fraction called sample, which is a basic assumption in sampling. The objective of sampling is to obtain reliable measurements, usually chemical analysis of a bulk sample, drill core, etc., from which the analyzed samples are taken and prepared ( Sampling is an act or instance of collecting a small fraction of an article in a way that the consistency of the fraction shall be representative of the whole. Sampling should be carried out keeping the geological features of the orebody in view, and should be in the agreement with the broad geological principles. Theory of sampling states that “if enough small portions of an article, appropriately spaced, are taken, then their average value or content shall be representative of the whole.” Definition of sample has essentially two stated and inferred elements, namely, (1) typicality and (2) smallness. Collection of sample should be typical of a mineral body, else it will be collection of specimen. Each sample should be appropriately small portion of parent body, else sampling would amount to mining. Sample collection is a mechanical function and depends on sampling method, site accessibility, geology, objectives of the project, and requirements for statistical analysis. Sampling pattern is determined by the nature and geometry of mineralization, that is, size, shape, orientation, and distribution. It could be random or systematic, random during preliminary investigation and systematic during detailed exploration/target investigation. Sample spacing is a mathematical function determined by coefficient of variability (ratio of Sampling pattern is a very important function in all phases from search for minerals to the stage of actual mining and finally to marketing and shipping. Whatever may be the purpose of sampling and whatever may be the aspect, which is proposed to be studied, it is generally agreed that a sample should be representative of the whole from which it is drawn. It is also to be remembered that in addition to representativeness, there will always be some difference between the values revealed by the sample and the actual value, which will be known only after the ore is mined and used. The aim of sampling is to reduce the difference between the two values to the absolute minimum. Sampling of particulate materials and the subsequent preparation and analysis is the most important in the mining and mineral industries. The purpose of exploration is to estimate the grade and tonnage of the various qualities of the content in a given mineral deposit. In samples of drill core, when the moisture content exceeds a few percent, it should be necessary to dry the crushed samples prior to pulverization using oven. One has to ensure that the analytical results obtained from the assay of a few grams of pulverized samples reflect the contents of the primary sample taken of a bulk sample, core split, or shipment of the concentrate. While the analytical methods are accurate, the initial sampling practices and preparation of those samples to yield small representative portion for analysis are frequently inadequate. The important physical and mineralogical characteristics of each material must be considered carefully in the design of a good sample preparation system. For precious metals, first it has to be finely ground, whereas sulfide minerals are first screened before pulverization. For coarse gold particles, wet screening and then gravity separation are to be done. Ores and products containing precious metals must be given particular attention because of low concentrations, high unit values, and frequently the irregular distribution of those metals or metal-bearing minerals. Random errors are introduced which cause the final assay to differ from the true assay of the original material. The error depends upon the physical and mineralogical characteristics of the sample. It is done to study the various valuable attributes of a mineral deposit. Those attributes may be grade, specific gravity, or any other characteristic, which gives the ore its commercial value. Sampling can be from deposit, which is in situ or from mined ore, which will be a more heterogeneous mixture from dumps or other accumulations, drill cores, etc. Sampling may also be done to reveal the pattern of mineralization in a deposit or in order to demarcate the richer and the leaner portions of the ore or the contact between the ore and waste. The processing of sampling is generally divided into three stages, viz. (1) sample collection, that is, the taking of representative fractions; (2) sample preparation, that is, processing of the samples collected through reduction in size and quantity; and (3) sample testing, that is, sample analysis. Several methods of sampling are practiced depending on the type of the parent body to be sampled and the objective of sampling. In geological exploration, the following types of sampling are recognized. They are: Talus Debris (Float) sampling Trench and Pit sampling Grab sampling Chip sampling Channel sampling Placer sampling Drill sampling: core/cuttings/sludge Bulk sampling Dump sampling Car sampling. This type of sampling is undertaken in areas of scanty outcrops, which are usually under a thin cover of rock talus or float. It is presumed that this material is a product of in The trenches and pits are openings in mineral deposits directly or under shallow cover for generating data. Trench sampling is undertaken by cutting channels along the floor of the trench. The trench should be subdivided into sections based on the lithological and/or mineralization pattern. The sections may further be divided into subsections of 0.5–1.0 Pit sampling is undertaken by cutting channels on the walls of the pit employing general principles of sampling. Choice of sampling one wall, opposite wall, or all four walls is dependent upon the type and nature of mineralization. In heterogeneous type of mineralization, all four walls may be sampled to obtain a representative sample. This method is used for sampling hard dense outcrops during prospecting and face on which hard ore is exposed during mining. In chip sampling, first the outcrop or face to be sampled is cleaned properly and a regular rectangular or square pattern is made by drawing lines along and across the outcrop at fixed intervals. Then small pieces of ore are broken loose either from the center or the grid or at the intersection points of the lines. The ore pieces should have approximately the same chip size and weight. Chisel and hammer or moil are used for collection of chip samples. After collecting the rock pieces from each center or intersection point of the grid, the rock pieces are mixed together to form one composite sample. Grab sampling is undertaken to form a quick general idea of the mineralization. If composed of sufficient fragments taken over a wide area, grab sampling may reveal the grade of mineralization for that location. Care should be taken to collect materials of varying sizes according to its proportion by weight. Several such grabs are mixed together to form one sample. Grab samples are a bit more random but still useful as they can provide a basic, overall understanding of the area and the possibility of higher grade ores in the vicinity. The quantity of material to be collected depends on the size of the largest piece present in the materials to be sampled and the scale of nonhomogeneity of the material. The size of the sample is governed by the “Richards Chichette formula”: The value of K, which may be used in most cases, is given below: The “K” factor is determined on the basis of the irregularity of distribution of the principal constituent of the ore. This is the most frequently used and accepted method of sampling in most exploration projects and operating mines. The method consists of marking an outline and cutting uniform grooves into the rock about 100 Placer deposits being characteristically stratified with layers of mineral concentration, particularly in bedrock, sampling becomes a troublesome job. In the event that the placer concentrations are coarse in size, the impact of nugget effect can be significant on the determination of the average (mean) concentration. Thus placer sampling requires adequate collection of materials from bedrock as larger-sized bulk samples. Because the value of a placer deposit depends on the recoverability of the minerals by gravity methods, the sample volume is measured and a part of the sample is ordinarily concentrated in a sluice box and panned for a preliminary estimate of the minerals and values. In a drilling campaign three kinds of sampling are done, viz. (1) core samples from diamond drills or from the casing drills, (2) dry cuttings from air-flushed diamond, rotary, auger or percussion drilling, and (3) wet cuttings or sludge from churn drills, diamond drill, or wet rotary or percussion drilling. Core samples drawn mainly from ore zones are collected. Wherever disseminations of minor amount of mineralization noticed, complete host rock was sampled with large sample interval. In order to simplify the computation, for statistical analysis, evaluation, etc., equal core length samples (about 0.5 or 1.0 In dry drilling program cyclones are used to draw cuttings away from drill collar and settle the sample into bottom of the apparatus where it can be dropped out into storage containers. The sample is to be run through a splitter, and the samples are collected in plastic bags and sealed tightly. Care is to be exercised in the handling and transport of dry cuttings because the fine and heavy material has a tendency to settle to the bottoms of containers. The sludge from diamond, churn, rotary, and percussion drilling is caught in various devices, ranging from simple overflow buckets hung under the drill collars to elaborate multiple sludge tanks where all cuttings carefully settled out of drilling water. After siphoning off water for recirculation, the sludge is air-dried or dried on stream tables. Extreme temperature and direct contact with flame during drying are deleterious, as for example, partial roasting of sulfides. One should be careful against gravity settling of heavy minerals since they often are the very object of interest and of high unit volume and great error can result from small involuntary enrichment or impoverishment of samples. Bulk sampling may be made by collecting a sample from different parts of ore stockpile of trial pit of surface mine, cross-cuts from underground operation or run-of-mine ore (either every blast continuously, or from the shovels or cars) of regular operating mine. The prime purpose of any bulk sampling is to confirm grade indicated by prior sample data from drill holes and establishment of metallurgical criteria to collect more data on geological aspects and investigation of rock mechanics properties. Bulk samples may also be collected from a series of pits or number of trenches, adits, or underground drives in the case of prospects. Bulk sample is normally of large volume (hundreds to thousands of tonnes) representing all the characteristics of the orebody. Thorough mixing of the collected sample is carried out to ensure homogeneity. For carrying out bench scale beneficiation studies, bulk samples are collected from different ore zones of mine developments having different physical and mineralogical characteristics. Samples are drawn from respective zones in proportion to their reserves from a place representing the average grade of that zone determining the physical and mineralogical characteristics of orebody. Dumps are accumulation of waste and inferior grade or fine material generated during mining. Sampling of such dump materials are carried out to examine the suitability for Car sampling involves collection of samples from the broken ore material transported by mine-car from underground operations, dumpers/trucks, or aerial ropeway tubs that transport ore from surface mining operations for further processing in milling plant/smelter. The collection of samples is done at random from cars/trucks at periodic intervals to get a quick idea of run-of-mine grade that can be compared with the corresponding mill-head grade. Sampling procedure depends on the shape and type of mineralization of the deposit: When the orebody is thick and the values of mineralization are uniformly distributed, sampling can be done by chip or grab sampling. When the orebody is of medium size and mineralization is uniform, a combined chip and channel sampling will give the best results. Where the orebody is too thin but occurs in benches or layers, sampling of various layers can be done by chip sampling. When a deposit is of very large dimensions, it is essential to collect a large number of chip samples that would provide reliable results With mineral like gold, rare metals, etc., where values are too spotty and irregular, bulk sampling would give the best results. Wherever the ore is banded, channel sampling would give the best results and very hard ore, particularly massive types of iron ore would require to be sampled by blast hole cuttings. The collection of samples is a job-requiring skill and experience. All chips, blocks, and powder coming from a groove should be gathered irrespective of the size of concentration of mineral value. No extraneous material should get mixed up with the sample. The sample should be collected in a clean canvas bag. After the completion of a groove, the collected chips/blocks, etc., should be put in a bag with a proper reference tag inside the bag. A proper register showing the location of the sample coordinates, channel logs, samples weight, time taken for sampling, etc., should be maintained by the sampler. The Sampling is subject to certain limitations due to two types of errors: (1) random and (2) systematic. The random errors tend to cancel out each other, whereas the systematic error accumulates to create gross errors, which are easily recognizable because of their magnitude. The errors may also accumulate due to four factors: (1) when check samples are taken from the same spot, there would be a natural divergence between the principal sample and the check sample in terms of the grade, which cannot be overcome, (2) errors accumulated due to measurement errors, poor facilities and equipment, and poor eye judgment of the sampler, (3) errors due to mistakes of calculations, misprints, and poor numbering, and (4) limitations of the assay technique itself. In addition, errors may crop up because of intentional or unintentional salting of the sample itself. All these errors have to be avoided to the maximum extent possible to get a reliable estimate of the orebody. Check sampling and repeated sampling help in avoiding some of the mistakes like salting. Errors due to several factors may occur in the sampling process and thus affect the result of sampling. These errors can be identified broadly under three categories, viz. (1) human errors; (2) analytical errors; and (3) inherent errors. Of these, human and analytical errors can be reduced to an optimum level, whereas the inherent errors are the ones intrinsic to the type of mineralization. A list of various factors that are responsible for the errors, which should be taken care of, is given below:  improper choice of sampling method improper collection of samples including “salting” improper location of samples insufficient number of samples lack of inadequate knowledge improper mental condition improper sample preparation.  improper analysis of sample contamination. Any sampling method yields large quantities of material but for laboratory analysis only a few grams of ground material is required. The process of sample preparation ensures that the small quantity of material analyzed represents the large quantity collected during sampling. In other words, sample collected from various sample points are again sampled for the purpose of analysis in the laboratory. A geological sample is generally of a size, which is not readily handled by a laboratory for chemical or Even with the utmost care in sample preparation, a bias can be generated, that is, a difference between the actual grade of a few grams of powdered material and the large quantity of collected sample. The sample preparation is usually carried out in field or laboratory conditions by trained samplers. However, samplers being unaware of the importance of their work and not conscious of the mistakes are to be carefully addressed to. It is necessary for the exploration geologist to evolve a set procedure which should be logical and simple and ensure preparation of representative sample from the larger quantity drawn. Therefore, the sample preparation is a succession of reductions in weight and grain size. Sampling reduction formula given by In the case of cores, before starting the sample preparation, core is split into two halves along the longitudinal axis with one half preserved and the other half taken for sampling. The preparation of sample usually involves crushing, grinding, sieving, and working down or reducing volume. The most dependable way to obtain a laboratory sample is to crush the initial sample very finely to mix the mass and work it down to the required final weight. In conventional treatment, samples are crushed successively to the next half size and at each stage 50% of the material is discarded employing coning and quartering method till about 300–500 the structure and texture of the ores the size characteristics of the mineral grain the proportion of ore mineral grains in the sample the unit weight of the useful mineral the average metal content in the ore. After obtaining reliable sample weight, the entire material is further ground to finer size and working down the sample, required quantity is kept for laboratory studies. All geological samples must be dry, prior to sample preparation. The procedure for drying of mineral sample would differ depending upon the type of sample due to mass, Comminution is the process in which the rock/ore is reduced to desired size where liberation of the minerals are maximum without changing the chemical and physical properties of the rock. Pulverization of a sample plays a very important role in the chemical analysis because of the fact that most of the grains of ore minerals are so closely associated with the waste, hence they must be liberated otherwise the chemical results obtained may not be correct and reproducible. There are several methods of comminution. The comminution is done in two stages: (1) Crushing and (2) Pulverizing/grinding. Crushing of samples is required when grain sizes are too large for pulverizing equipment. This volume reducing process is normally applied to large sample types such as rocks and core. Reduction of ore lumps to a size desired for grinding is achieved through crushing. Choosing the best option for crushing can depend on both the sample type and the mineral that hosts the element of interest within the matrix—a finer crush might be appropriate for heterogeneously distributed precious metals. There are two types of crushers: (1) Primary crushers and (2) Secondary crushers.    Pulverizing of samples creates a fine homogeneous powder which allows for a representative subsample to be taken for analysis. The grains are decreased in size by a mix of impact and abrasion, utilizing different pulverizing mills ( It includes generally (1) Rod mills, (2) Ball mills, and (3) Autogenous mills.    The samples which have been crushed will require splitting to obtain an appropriate sample size for further processing (pulverization). Splitting is a cost-effective method of reducing sample volume and splits the sample into representative subsamples. To ensure a proper representative sample is obtained, careful consideration is taken when choosing the size of the splitter and its contact with the sample in order to split the rock without Screening is performed to decide the distribution of different size divisions. Mesh sizes can be customized for multiple screening processes. Determining the particle size distribution of geological material can be utilized in determining the effectiveness of grinding processes on rock samples. This is done by either the laser diffraction or the mechanical sieve shaker method. In “Laser Diffraction,” the degree to which light is scattered from the sample relates to the particle size distribution. A continuous scale can be obtained from submicron size to millimeter size. In “Mechanical Sieve Shaker Method”, the sample is passed through a series of screens with different aperture, progressively becoming smaller at the bottom layers. The samples are weighed at each level and a particle size distribution can be determined. Sample treatment procedures for soil and floodplain samples, for humus samples, and for stream sediment samples are given in The selection of the appropriate method of sample decomposition is very important for correct analysis. To achieve this, an analyst should carefully take into account the chemical properties of various minerals present in the sample. Owing to the variable characteristics of the ore, it is not possible to have any one set procedure applicable to all samples. It is often necessary to combine two or more methods to effect the dissolution of an ore Wet method constitutes the digestion of an ore sample with acid or combination of acids to convert the complex ore minerals into simple chemical compounds. The action of an acid or a mixture of acids is supplemented by heat and pressure. Heat and pressure hasten the dissolution rate. This is normally preferred over dry method due to its simplicity and it requires less attention; moreover, the vessel used is less affected by the dissolving media. Dry method constitutes the fusion of an ore with a solid or mixture of solids to convert complex minerals compounds into simple chemical compounds. The reaction is effected There has been a significant change in the use of analytical methods in exploration geochemistry over the past two decades. The simple colorimetric methods which were in wide use in the geochemical exploration campaigns, in the 1950s and 1960s, were pushed aside with the advent of atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS). AAS method of analysis has been widely accepted and predominantly used in exploration geochemistry surveys of the 1970s, because of its versatility. The uses of colorimetric methods had petered out compared to other techniques like Emission spectrometry, X-ray methods, etc. Calorimetry was the earliest and less expensive method widely adopted for the field analysis of geochemical samples Owing to rapid changes in exploration objective, analytical methods which are used changed from year to year. With the portable, handheld, X-ray analytical systems (table top and bigger lab-scale XRF unit setups), wet chemical analytical techniques are becoming less and less. In AAS, with one sample digestion, many elements could be analyzed. Whole rock analysis with multielement analysis could be done using XRF techniques. There are many manufacturers of these analytical equipment with different configurations, suiting to different budgets. Portable field analytical equipment presently available, which, under certain circumstances can have great value for exploration purposes like on-site decision making during geochemical surveys, during evaluation or follow-up studies of recognized anomalies and for directing drilling campaign. Mobile labs are the order of the day in exploration camps. Many private Accuracy describes the nearness of a measurement to the standard or true value, that is, a highly accurate measuring device will provide measurements very close to the standard, true, or known values and is calculated by the formula: Precision is the degree to which several measurements provide answers very close to each other. It is an indicator of the scatter in the data. The lesser the scatter, the higher the precision. It depends on the measuring tool and is determined by the number of significant digits. Accuracy and precision is demonstrated in In exploration geochemistry precision (the ability to reproduce and replicate the same result) is usually Limit of detection (sensitivity) is the minimum content of an element that can be measured by a specific analytical method. This value varies from one method to another and from one matrix to another. The analytical procedure for geochemical exploration, samples should be: sensitive enough to detect elements present in small concentrations reliable enough that the chances of missing an anomaly are negligible economical enough that huge number of samples be processed as a routine survey simplicity of technique, that could be entrusted to relatively untrained personnel portability of the equipment, so that lab facilities could be set up near field operations. In every trace element analysis procedure, four steps are involved as follows.  Removal of water by (a) drying of organic and clastic samples and (b) evaporation of water samples Pulverization Sizing Mineral separations according to differences in (a) density, (b) magnetic susceptibility, and (c) electrical properties.  Volatilization Fusion with (a) acid flux, (b) alkali flux, and (c) oxidizing flux Vigorous acid attack with (a) oxidizing acid, (b) dehydrating acid, and (c) hydrofluoric acid Weak attack by (a) dilute acids, (b) solution of complexing agents, and (c) pure water Sample oxidation by (a) ignition and (b) wet oxidation.  Separation in vapor phase by (a) distillation and (b) sublimation Separation in liquid phase by (a) solvent extraction and (b) complex formation Separation in solid phase by (a) ion exchange and (b) precipitation.  Optical measurements: (a) colorimetry, (b) chromatography, and (c) visible fluorescence Radiation measurements: (a) flame spectrometry, (b) emission spectrometry, (c) absorption spectrometry, (d) X-ray spectrometry, and (e) radiometry Electrical measurements, etc. The combinations of component of analytical procedures most commonly used in geochemical prospecting are amply described by In geochemical analyses and assaying, various sample decomposition/pretreatment methods are used (labtium.fi): aqua-regia digestion for geochemical analyses and assays multiacid digestions for geochemical analyses and assays sodium peroxide fusion for the assay of refractory and high-grade ores and concentrates XRF-analysis for petrology, industrial minerals, and assays phase and mineral-selective leaches individual methods for additional elements/components and physical properties. To achieve the best economic and superior quality analysis in mineral exploration, it is imperative to choose the system of analysis by deciding on the suitable analytical For the success of any exploration program, it is crucial to select proper analytical methodology and element selections. Suitable choice of analytical methodology is essential and attention should be given to the dissolution strengths and constraints of the selected methodology to make sure that all pre-requisite conditions are satisfied. Atomic spectroscopy: absorption, emission, and fluorescence techniques Flame atomic absorption spectroscopy Inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry X-ray fluorescence spectrometer Electron probe micro-analyzer Instrumental neutron activation analysis X-ray diffraction Secondary ion mass spectrometer Scanning/transmission electronic microscope. In all mineral exploration program, invariably sources of error would result from various activities including sampling process, analysis, laboratory, reliability of technique, etc. These errors get compounded and produce erroneous values. Errors are reflection of imprecision of information coming about because of the constraints of collecting small representative articles from larger whole and from the sensitivity of analytical methods. Every individual phases from sampling to analysis can be recognized as individual source of error. Adopting of a quality assurance/quality control (QA/QC) plan would aid in reducing the errors to a minimum without expecting that there will be no error. Suitable sampling and QA/QC is vital in all parts of the mineral assessment procedure for accomplishing maximum confidence in estimation of mineral resource and reserve. Comprehensive accounts on QA/QC program have been given by  c is the a mineralogical constitution factor a δA is the specific gravity of the mineral of interest in g/cm δG is the specific gravity of the gangue, β is a factor which represents the degree of liberation of the mineral of interest. It varies from 0.0 (no liberation) to 1.0 (perfect liberation) but practically it is seldom less than 0.1. If the liberation size (d f is a fragment shape factor and it is assumed in the formula that the general shape is spherical in which case f equals 0.5, g is a size dispersion factor and cannot be disassociated from d. Practically g extends from 0.20 to 0.75 with the narrower the range of particle sizes the higher the value of g but, with the definition of d as above, g equals 0.25.