Emerging energy markets demand coal products with significantly different quality specifications to those used in coke making and conventional power generation. The suitability of different types of coal as particulate fuels requires a fully quantitative understanding of the nature and associations of both mineral and maceral constituents in individual coal particles. This characterisation defines not only the chemical attributes of coal assemblages, but also a predictive understanding of utilisation performance.
                  Particle characterisation information is traditionally obtained using a combination of optical imaging methods for the organic constituents and SEM based determinations for detailed mineral information. New preparation methodologies have been developed to allow coal samples to be analysed much more effectively by both optical and SEM systems.
                  Optical microscopy measurements of coal reflectance are traditionally carried out using an oil immersion lens. Recent tests show that measuring maceral reflectance in air can produce equivalent results to measurements made using an oil immersion lens. Thus a workflow is possible that makes for fast effective collection of data from both systems from the same surface. These developments are important precursors to fully integrating an optical imaging system with the latest SEM based developments on the FEG platform.Reliable characterisation of the organic (maceral) and inorganic (mineral) constituents of coals is fundamental for resource evaluation and optimising recovery and usage. This has become increasingly important as new usages for coal are developed which demand coal products with significantly different quality specifications to those used in coke making and conventional power generation. Assessing the suitability of different types of coal as particulate fuels requires a fully quantitative understanding of the nature and associations of both mineral and maceral constituents in individual coal particles. A number of instrument techniques (i.e. Fourier Transform Infra Red (FTIR) Spectroscopy ( As the inorganic constituents can have deleterious affects on utilisation performance it is also vital to have detailed information on their abundances and modes of occurrence. Most frequently the information is obtained by using analytical techniques such as X-ray Fluorescence (XRF) and X-ray Diffraction (XRD) to determine the elemental composition of the ash residue ( An analytical method that has gained reasonable acceptance in Australia for the analysis of the minerals in coal is to use low temperature, or plasma, ashing methods to remove the organic material whilst leaving the minerals relatively unchanged. This ash is then analysed by XRD and interrogation of the spectra’s produced enables the minerals to be identified and their mass abundances in the coal sample to be determined ( A number of different probe techniques, such as electron microprobe and Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) based mineral mapping techniques such as Quantitative Evaluation of Minerals by SCANning electron microscopy (QEMSCAN) and Mineral Liberation Analyser (MLA) have been used to obtain abundance and size information on the minerals in the coal samples ( When samples that have been prepared in this manner are analysed by QEMSCAN and MLA instruments included minerals which are contained within coal particles can be discriminated from excluded or liberated minerals. As SEM systems are unable to detect hydrogen they are unable to reliably discriminate between the different maceral groups (i.e. vitrinite, liptinite and inertinite) which have different amounts of aliphatic material. Optical microscopy imaging techniques can be used to obtain quantitative information on the different macerals. These techniques can provide a reflectance fingerprint which is used to determine coal rank (by mean random vitrinite reflectance) and the abundance of the different macerals. These analyses are generally carried out using oil immersion techniques on samples that have been prepared as grain mounts using polyester or epoxy resins. Samples prepared using carnauba wax and hence suitable for analysis in a SEM system are difficult to polish flat and can contain significant topography which precludes accurate reflectance measurement of the macerals. In addition to obtaining a reflectance fingerprint optical imaging may also be used to obtain compositional information on individual coal particles. CSIRO’s Coal Grain Analysis (CGA) is one such system. Analyses are conducted on polished grain-mounts using an oil immersion lens fitted to a reflected-light microscope. The area of each grain (particle) is used to estimate its volume, and when combined with composition and component density information, enables the density and hence mass of each particle to be estimated ( The particles are classified into eight classes consisting of four liberated (single component) and four non-liberated (composite) particle types ( Whilst these methods provide comprehensive information on either the organic or inorganic constituents, integrated information on a particle by particle basis would be substantially more useful for understanding and optimising utilisation performance. A new method for preparing samples has been developed which enables samples to be analysed by both optical and SEM systems. With this method the coal sample is mixed with molten carnauba wax in a mould. The set sample is then placed face down in a round mould and reset so that the coal and carnauba wax material is constrained with a ring of epoxy resin ( An example image collected for a low rank coal with a mean random vitrinite reflectance ( Testwork was conducted to verify that the reflectance fingerprint obtained for coal that was set in this manner was comparable to the reflectance fingerprint when the coal sample was set as per the usual method in polyester resin ( A Ziess reflected light microscope, the AxioImager. Z2m was used for acquisition of optical images. This microscope has a stabilized 100 14 High resolution colour images provide good discrimination between coal and mineral particles and mounting resins for coals of different ranks. For example, the colour image shown in Vitrinite reflectance, measured in monochromatic green light (546 A 14 During the analysis of this sample 200 individual images were collected as a 10 The SEM condition in the MLA system can be fine tuned for coal analysis. By using Field Emission Gun (FEG) MLA much higher resolution can be achieved than is possible in the standard tungsten filament SEM. As the beam in the FEG system is about two orders of magnitude brighter than the conventional W-filament SEM it is possible to operate the system at a lower kV condition and still obtain high enough X-ray counts. This significantly reduces the detection of subsurface minerals. In addition the environmental SEM (ESEM) mode may be used to remove the need of coating the sample with carbon, further simplifying the data acquisition process. The same sample shown in The ability to reliably analyse the same coal samples by both optical and SEM systems provides an opportunity to integrate the systems and hence establish a practical and cost effective method for obtaining maceral and mineral information on a particle by particle basis. The work flow is critical for this process. The samples prepared with the new sample preparation method are placed in a holder that can be placed on both the optical microscope stage and the SEM microscope stage. The samples are first analysed optically with an air lens and the sample holder is removed from the optical systems stage and placed in a carbon coating device. Once the samples are carbon coated they are then analysed with a SEM for standard MLA analysis. Hence each sample stays in the same position during the whole optical and SEM analysis. This significantly simplifies the combining of data overlay of optical and SEM data. Image fusion techniques have been used in the past to combine information from two image systems ( To date analyses have been confined to 200 images which cover approximately 4 This provides significant image processing issues as the final optical image that would be analysed would be approximately 10 Once the optical and SEM images are integrated, detailed statistical information of the sample can be readily calculated, such as relative abundance of the organic and inorganic components, their size distributions, liberation and association between inorganic and organic components. Therefore, washability and recovery can be estimated. The data obtained using the optical and SEM methods on 2D sample surfaces can be complemented with 3D data from X-ray tomography technology that is now available at sufficiently high resolution ( The suitability of different types of coal as particulate fuels requires a fully quantitative understanding of the nature and associations of both mineral and maceral constituents in individual coal particles. A new method for preparing samples has been developed which enables samples to be analysed by both optical and SEM systems. The ability to reliably analyse the same coal surface of the same coal sample by both systems provides an opportunity to integrate the systems and hence establish a practical and cost effective method for obtaining integrated maceral and mineral information on a particle by particle basis. Thus a workflow is possible that makes for fast effective collection of data from both systems. This significantly simplifies the combining of data/overlay of optical and SEM data and provides a pathway to analysing sufficient area of the sample to ensure that quantitative information is obtained on mineral abundance and size distribution and mineral maceral associations are obtained. To date analyses have been conducted on approximately 40 Particle by particle information obtained using an optical imaging system and SEM analyses are routinely used by the coal industry for resource evaluation, for developing liberation and processing strategies for coals that contain deleterious minerals, such as apatite and pyrite and for better understanding utilisation performance. It is anticipated that quantitative integrated data will be significantly more useful than either single method and will become an industry standard test that will be used for assessing coals for use in coke making and conventional power generation and for new markets which may have significantly different quality specifications. The authors would like to thank CSIRO and the JKMRC for supporting this work and permission to publish is gratefully acknowledged. The authors would also like to thank Walter Pickel for providing some of the data that was used to determine the relationship between reflectance measurements made using air and immersion oil lenses.