The effects of two different oxidizing agents viz. ferric chloride and ammonium persulfate on the purification of metallurgical grade silicon (MGSi) by leaching with hydrochloric acid were investigated as a function of temperature, particle size and hydrochloric acid concentration. It was found that the addition of oxidizing agent improved the extraction of impurities from the MGSi as compared to that in the absence of any oxidizing agent. The extraction of impurities from the MGSi increased with a decrease in particle size and increase in temperature and hydrochloric acid concentration. By leaching MGSi with 10M hydrochloric acid in the presence of 0.1M ferric chloride and at 90°C a maximum of 66% Ca, 92% Cr, 27% Fe, 98% Cu, 98% Ni and 89% Zn were removed. The unleachable Si-Fe and Si-Fe-Ti phases in the grain boundaries of MGSi hindered the extraction of Fe and Ti.Among various renewable energy resources, solar energy is an important source of non-polluting energy. Solar energy can be converted into electrical energy with the help of semiconductors. Even though many semiconductor compounds have been developed for photovoltaic conversion, silicon is still the most common material in the solar industry ( The hydrometallurgical refining of MGSi is an important technique which falls under the umbrella of metallurgical options for the production of SOGSi. During solidification of molten silicon, the impurities precipitate at the grain boundaries of MGSi. Thus, when MGSi is pulverized, fracture mainly occurs at the phase boundaries, exposing the impurities to the surface. Since silicon has high corrosion resistance except against hydrofluoric acid, the exposed impurities can be effectively removed by leaching with various acids or combinations of acids. The hydrometallurgical route, being a low temperature method, consumes less energy and uses simple instruments, which leads to reduction of operating costs compared with other refining processes ( About 500 Leaching experiments were performed in a jacketed glass vessel, which was placed on a magnetic stirrer. A 10 The pulverized MGSi of particle size < In order to purify MGSi a number of leaching experiments were carried out by varying different parameters such as temperature, lixiviant composition and particle size. The leaching of impurity elements from MGSi with hydrochloric acid can be expressed by Eq. Leaching of MGSi of mixed particle size < With the addition of 0.1 The effect of particle size on the removal of impurities from MGSi with 1 Since there was improvement in the purification of MGSi with a decrease in its particle size, experiments were carried out to investigate the effect of hydrochloric acid concentration (1 to 10 In the absence of any oxidizing agent the extraction of Ca, Cr, Cu, Fe and Zn increased with an increase in hydrochloric acid concentration, and that of Ni remained constant throughout the entire concentration range ( The microstructural analysis of MGSi before and after acid leaching was also carried out using scanning electron microscopy and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM-EDS). These results are presented in The purification of MGSi by leaching with hydrochloric acid in the absence and presence of oxidizing agents such as ferric chloride and ammonium persulfate was investigated. The removal of impurities from the MGSi increased with a decrease in particle size and increase in temperature and hydrochloric acid concentration. The addition of oxidizing agents only slightly improved the extraction of impurities form the MGSi. Fe and Ti were the major impurities (0.40% Fe and 0.02% Ti in The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the