The dislocation reaction model for variant selection during the austenite-to-martensite transformation was first suggested by Sum and Jonas. The model is based on the one-to-one correspondence between the Kurdjumov–Sachs transformation products and the 24 possible Bishop and Hill slip systems. The selection criteria of the model specify that only the active slip system and their permissible reaction product variants are selected. Successful predictions have been obtained for three simple strain paths: (i) axisymmetric extension, (ii) axisymmetric compression, and (iii) plane strain rolling. Using a similar methodology, the dislocation reaction model is evaluated for the final distinct strain path, namely simple shear. Experimental deformation and transformation textures were produced via torsion experiments at a temperature of 320°C and a subsequent quenching procedure in liquid nitrogen. The transformation texture predicted using the dislocation reaction model is in excellent agreement with the experimental findings.The inheritance of preferred orientation during the austenite-to-martensite transformation has been the topic of extensive research. Depending on composition, cooling rate after deformation and extent of deformation, austenite will transform by (i) a reconstructive (diffusional) transformation mechanism to ferrite, (ii) a displacive (shear) transformation to martensite, or (iii) a combination of the two mechanisms to acicular ferrite or bainite. The texture components present in the austenite, as well as their relative intensities, will prescribe the texture of the material after transformation while maintaining a precise orientation relationship between the two phases. Inagaki Three different orientation relationships are frequently used to describe the transformation between the In these cases, it appears that variant selection occurs during the transformation so that only a portion of the crystallographically equivalent product variants contributes to the final texture of the material. Several theories have been suggested based on different selection criteria in an attempt to predict transformation textures accurately In 1999, Sum and Jonas described a simpler model for variant selection that relies on the occurrence of reactions between glide dislocations During the high temperature rolling of steel, friction between the rolls and the work piece results in the outer layers of the material experiencing deformation by simple shear. Because the steel cools during rolling, both f.c.c. and b.c.c. shear textures are developed. Upon cooling further, the sheared austenite transforms to ferrite or martensite, producing corresponding transformation textures, while the ferrite regions retain their shear textures. It is therefore important to distinguish between the b.c.c. textures produced by transformation from the former austenite and those formed by shear directly in the ferrite. As torsion testing can be used to simulate shear during rolling, a second objective of the present research was to identify, using the dislocation reaction approach, the b.c.c. transformation components and compare them to the b.c.c. shear components. The characterisation of orientations makes it possible to estimate, by the examination of ODFs or pole figures, the extent of rolling reduction applied to each of the high temperature phases in question. The basis of the dislocation reaction model is the one-to-one correspondence between the 24 slip systems of the Bishop and Hill crystal plasticity model For each parent orientation of interest, the shear rates on the 24 possible slip systems are calculated using a computer program that incorporates a rate-sensitive crystal plasticity model; for the present computations, a value of The limitations of previous slip activity models indicate that additional variants, not selected by the slip activity criterion, are necessary to complete the predictions. The present model utilises the concept of in-plane reaction of glide dislocations to account for the appearance of these additional variants. The permissible reactions between the active dislocations are deduced according to Frank’s rules (referred to as the dislocation reaction criterion) Reactions take place when dislocations of two different Burgers vectors located on a common slip plane (or on parallel slip planes aided by cross-slip) combine to produce a new product vector not originally identified by the crystal plasticity program and the positive shear criterion. In this case, two cross-slip; annihilation; Lomer–Cottrell lock formation; energy increase (no reaction possible); in-plane reaction; and reactions requiring cross slip. As explained in detail elsewhere The rules for dislocation reactions are given in Weertman and Weertman Experiments involving measurements of transformation textures are often hampered by the fact that it is difficult to determine the austenite texture prior to transformation. To avoid this difficulty, an Fe–30%Ni alloy was used for this experiment due to the metastability of the austenitic phase at room temperature. In addition, it can be transformed to martensite at temperatures below −100°C and this phase is retained when the material returns to room temperature. The alloy was supplied in the hot rolled condition with the chemical composition shown in To produce the experimental torsion textures, a specimen with a diameter of 8.8 mm was deformed on a servo-hydraulic torsion machine to a von Mises strain of three at a strain rate of 0.1/s. The torsion machine rotated in a counter-clockwise direction, producing negative shear in the specimen. The ends of the specimen were not fixed, so that some lengthening occurred during testing. A heating rate of 1.0°C/s was used to bring the specimen to the final testing temperature of 320°C, at which it was held for 3 min prior to straining; this was followed by air cooling. This test temperature was selected to be safely above the The austenite and martensite specimens were prepared for texture measurement as shown in Detailed analysis of the experimental deformation texture resulted in the selection of five major parent orientations and 19 minor parents. The five major parents are the well-known f.c.c. shear components, namely A (11–1) The transformation texture was calculated as follows: All the possible transformation products (disregarding variant selection) were determined for each parent according to the K-S relationship and the appropriate 90° 〈112〉 rotation axis. The amount of shear experienced by each slip system during a single increment of strain ( The positive shear and dislocation reaction criteria were applied to each orientation and the variants selected were identified as shown in The selected variants of each parent orientation were then weighted, firstly according to the corresponding slip system shear rate, and secondly according to the relative intensity of the parent orientation on the measured ODF (see The reaction products and positive shear variants were ultimately combined in a ratio of 3:2 for prediction of the final texture. This decision was motivated by the results of Liu and Bunge Finally, ODFs were constructed using During deformation by torsion, a monoclinic texture develops in the specimen. In this case, an For the orientations commonly developed during the shear of b.c.c. materials, similar conditions apply ( By comparing the ODFs of Careful examination of the experimental texture reveals an asymmetry or “tilt” of the texture components of approximately 5° about the After transformation, the ensuing textures are no longer monoclinic. However, to avoid confusion, both the experimental and predicted transformation textures are displayed using ODFs of monoclinic sample symmetry. (A more detailed description of the symmetry that applies is given below.) An ODF of the measured texture for the quenched specimen is shown in  This is not the case in A similar situation applies to From the above analyses, it is evident that a precise representation of the measured transformation texture is produced via combination of the positive slip and reaction variants. It can therefore be concluded that the dislocation reaction model provides an accurate representation of the transformation texture of the present Fe–30%Ni alloy after deformation by torsion prior to transformation. In order to analyse and compare the b.c.c. components developed either directly by shear or by the transformation of sheared austenite, the appropriate sets of orientations are listed in (In the above, the shear rates pertaining to each orientation are normalized so as to specify the amount of shear that would occur in 1 Textures of rolled alloys possess orthorhombic symmetry and are normally represented either via an orthorhombic ND-pole figure (ND= The It was pointed out in The triclinic nature of the transformation texture is illustrated in the pole figure of The relative absence of the D1 component and the somewhat higher intensity of the D2 are evident. This “asymmetry” is, however, consistent with monoclinic symmetry, as discussed above. In contrast, the unequal intensities of (E1 and E2) and (J1 and J2), which can be deduced by referring to  The deformation by torsion of Fe–30%Ni yields a texture comprised of the characteristic components of f.c.c. shear, namely A, A Prediction of the transformation texture solely via the selection of the positive slip variants leads to a texture that varies to some extent from the measured transformation texture. Similar remarks apply to the predictions based on the reaction product variants. The combination of the positive slip and reaction product variants provides a transformation texture that is in good agreement with experimental observations. Selection of the “negative slip”, “other” and no-reaction variants yields product orientations that are not present in the measured transformation texture. As a result, the overall texture predicted without the use of variant selection differs significantly from the measurement. The dislocation reaction model provides excellent predictions of the transformation textures resulting from prior deformation by: (i) axisymmetric extension, (ii) axisymmetric compression, (iii) plane strain rolling, and (iv) simple shear. The {110}〈110〉 component, which appears in b.c.c. The transformation texture produced after deformation by simple shear does not possess the same symmetry as the parent texture. In the present case, the parent monoclinic symmetry of the austenite is reduced to triclinic symmetry after transformation to martensite. The authors express their gratitude to the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada for the financial support of this investigation, to Professor Druce Dunne of the University of Wollongong for providing the experimental material, as well as to Dr John Root of the Chalk River Laboratories of the National Research Council of Canada for provision of the neutron diffraction facilities. They are also grateful to Professor Lászlo Tóth of the Université de Metz, France for an updated version of his ROTATE software, as well as for a critical reading of the manuscript, to Joseph Azar for permission to use his torsion slip-activity program, and to Dr George Baczynski for numerous simulating discussions.