We present the preparation and characterization of pure lead monoxide obtained through recycling of the lead paste recovered from exhausted lead acid batteries. The recycling is based on a hydrometallurgical procedure reported in a STC Patent, that includes simple chemical operations (desulphurisation, leaching, precipitation, filtration) and a final thermal conversion. Materials obtained by treatment at 600 °C consist predominantly of β-PbO. The electrochemical behaviour of Positive Active Mass (PAM) prepared from different materials (or mixtures) is then investigated and compared. An optimized oxide material, obtained by prolonged (8 h) thermal treatment at 600 °C, consists of pure β-PbO and appears suitable for preparation of battery elements, alone or in mixture with a small fraction (10%–30%) of traditional industrial leady oxide. The resulting battery performances are similar to those obtained from pure leady oxide. In comparison with traditional recycling processes, the proposed method guarantees lower energy consumption, limited environmental impact and reduced operating risk for industry workers.Power storage is a subject of increasing interest, boosted by the advent of inconstant renewable energy sources, interconnected grids and electric vehicles [ The secondary lead industry is today the main source of raw material for LABs production. The traditional recycling technology is based on pyrometallurgical processes, and produces considerable amounts of wastes: for each ton of metallic lead produced, 100–350 kg of slag are generated that contain approximately 5% of lead compounds [ The lead materials for batteries produced in industrial plants (Barton-pot or ball-mill processes) consist invariably of mixtures of metal lead (Pb) and lead monoxide (PbO) called “leady oxide” [ In this context, we have investigated a possible application of pure lead monoxide such as β-PbO, in the preparation of Positive Active Mass (PAM) used in lead-acid batteries. The scope is the conversion of exhausted LAB paste into pure β-PbO suitable for the preparation of new batteries, and the verification of the procedure at an industrial scale: about 1000 batteries with a nominal capacity of 70 Ah were produced and representative samples were tested. The recycling consists of a series of simple chemical steps (desulphurisation, leaching, precipitation, filtration) according to an STC Patent [ All reagents used for laboratory tests and low scale industrial plant production were Sigma Aldrich, Analytical Grade. S.I.A. S.p.A. (henceforth SIA) provided the samples of Pb-Ca alloy grids for the electrochemical experiments. Leady oxide was produced at SIA through a conventional ball-mill apparatus (model CAM MOP8). The leady oxide material was prepared starting from ingots of pure soft lead (Pb 99.97%). The preparation was made with standard process parameters and warm mill. The freshly prepared material contained 30% ± 2% of free Pb, estimated by a method involving dissolution of lead oxide in acetic acid, and a complexometric titration using EDTA [ The innovative STC method followed procedures reported in an STC Patent [ Preliminary preparation runs were performed at laboratory scale to produce small amounts of products (typically 1 Kg) for characterization; synthesis parameters were varied and composition, structure and electrochemical properties of the resulting materials were tested. After identification of the procedure leading to the best electrochemical performances, a relatively large amount (about 10 tons) of recycled oxide was prepared accordingly. The preparation, intended for 1000 batteries, was made in an STC's pre-industrial plant installed in a lead recycling factory (MECA S.p.A., Italy). SEM images and EDS analyses were obtained with a FEI Quanta 200 FEG ESEM instrument, equipped with a field emission gun, operating at an accelerating voltage variable in the range of 20–30 kV. X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained using a Philips X-PERT PW3710 diffractometer with a Bragg-Brentano geometry, employing a CuKα source (40 kV, 30 mA). The relative phase abundances were estimated by Rietveld analysis, using the MAUD software [ For ICP analyses, 4 g samples were grinded using a RETSCH MM200 ball mill; after treatment with concentrated acids (HNO Two series of experiments consisted in cycling the materials described in In a first series, deep cycling (extensive charge-and-discharge) was imposed by two common potentiostats-galvanostats, Autolab PGSTAT 302N and Biologic SP300. During potentiostatic control the reference electrode was a saturated mercurous sulfate electrode Hg/Hg Additional experiments - consisting of prolonged cycling with total re-charge and partial discharge - were performed in a test cell with two negative electrodes coupled on both faces of a positive electrode. In this way the positive electrode was limiting the electric storage process and its performance could be studied. Experiments were performed with positive electrodes formed with the mixtures (except STC90) described in The lead oxide recovered by the STC method was mixed in different ratios with traditional leady oxide for preparing 5 different positive batches of PAM. Compositions and some basic properties are reported in Both positive and negative batches were prepared with standard procedures (additives are referred to 1 kg of lead oxide mixture): i) dry stirring of lead/leady oxide powder for at least 5 min; ii) addition of 0.10–0.12 l of water and of 0.05–0.10 kg of PAC 251 fiber, with wet-stirring for at least 5 min; iii) slow addition (about 5 ml min Battery project involved 6 positive plates and 6 negative plates, the separator chosen was DARAMIC HP 1.3 mm thick. Battery formation was carried out with bulk charging modality, filling batteries with sulphuric acid (density 1.25 g cm After formation, batteries were refilled with sulphuric acid (density 1.28 g cm A test for assessing the cohesion and adhesion of active material of different positive batches was done through an instrument prepared internally by SIA. By this tool SIA runs a “drop-test” where plates are dropped 10 times on the floor from a height of 30 cm. By the evaluation of the weight decrease of the cured plates, it is possible to estimate the strength of the dry paste. Electric experiments on battery samples were carried out with ELTRA E7829 (for slow rate discharge, and recharges and cycle tests), and through a HRD Powerform tester 18V/2000A (for CCA, Cold Cranking Current, tests). Measures of voltage and estimation of CCA with the conductance method were done with a Midtronics MDX-600, and electrolyte density inside batteries was measured with a Anton Paar DMA35. Electric tests were carried out in accordance with the technical norm for SLI batteries [ Material preparation was performed according to the steps reported in section The presence of impurities was checked with ICP technique. Data in The microscopic morphology of a few selected oxides is provided by the SEM images of The S16 material obtained with the same procedure of the S15, but with an additional partial reduction in a reducing agent stream, shows oxide particles of essentially unaltered morphology ( The samples were submitted to XRD analysis that allows a qualitative identification of the crystalline phases present in the samples and an approximate quantitative estimation, reported in the right column of The material S19 shows a XRD pattern similar to that of S15 but without any significant peak attributable to traces of PbCO The dependence of resistivity The samples object of test are collected and described in After a preliminary activation cycle, all samples were submitted to a short sequence of 6–7 deep cycles performed as described in the Experimental Part. The relevant values of specific capacities are reported in Mixtures of S19 + SIA materials were prepared with the 70 + 30 wt% composition (mixture STC70,  The sample S19 did not show appreciable formation of gas bubbles upon contact with H  A few selected mixtures of regenerated S19 oxides (small size preparation) and of fresh industrial oxide (SIA) were submitted to prolonged cycling tests, consisting of total re-charge and partial discharge at each cycle, as described in the Experimental section. The samples included: pure SIA fresh material; pure S19 material (STC100); S19 material mixed with 20, 30 and 40% of SIA fresh oxide (wt%), identified with the codes STC80, STC70 and STC60, respectively (like in The results of these tests are given in the plots of The six mixture compositions reported in  The last column of  Cold cranking performance tests were carried out following the usual CEI EN 50342 technical norm for SLI batteries [ Endurance life cycle tests (not shown) were conducted also with the batteries, using the procedures described in section We have shown that Pb paste recovered from exhausted lead-acid batteries may be directly recycled to battery grade lead monoxide through a procedure reported in a Patent [ The recycled oxide shows some better features compared to traditional leady oxide: i) more cohesion/adhesion with consequent lower PAM losses during drop test; ii) higher capacity after some initial reluctance; iii) comparable or higher durability to cycling; iv) higher performance during cold cranking tests; v) possibility to reduce the duration of curing; vi) possibility to store the oxide for long periods of time. Since batteries preparation followed the consolidated internal SIA protocol for leady oxide, further work is necessary to optimize the procedures, adapting each step to the STC lead monoxide, in order to fully develop its potential. In comparison with traditional technologies based on pyrometallurgy, the new process offers: lower use of energy (approximately 50%); lower consumption of reagents and production of scraps; less hazardous synthesis. Besides that, it is suitable to be implemented into small plants and favours the manufacture/recovery cycle, in agreement with the principles of circular economy and green chemistry [ The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the