Background
                  Fixation of radial neck fractures can be achieved with a plate and screw construct or, in absence of comminution, with two obliquely-oriented screws. This study investigated the mechanical properties, specifically the stiffness and load to failure, of these two fixation strategies in a cadaver model.
               
                  Methods
                  Ten matched-pair radii were removed from fresh cadaver arms. A transverse osteotomy was created at the neck of each radius. Right-sided radii were fixed with two oblique headless compression screws; left-sided radii were fixed with a radial neck plate. The distal aspect of each radius was potted in urethane casting resin. The radial head was loaded in shear in 4 different planes (medial to lateral, lateral to medial, posterior to anterior, and anterior to posterior) using an Instron machine. Stiffness and load to failure were recorded.
               
                  Findings
                  The stiffness of both constructs was similar in all planes except for loading from medial to lateral where the screw construct was 1.8 times stiffer. Average ultimate failure occurred at 229N for the screws and 206N for the plate. Failure strength was not statistically different. However, mode of failure differed for both fixation constructs, the plate failed in bending while the screws failed by pullout and fracture.
               
                  Interpretation
                  The two strategies provide similar strength and stiffness for the fixation of transverse, non-comminuted radial neck fractures. While plate and screw constructs are more appropriate for axially unstable or comminuted fractures, two oblique screws might be preferred for simple transverse neck fractures since this strategy requires less exposure and the implant is buried.Displaced radial head and neck fractures frequently require open reduction with internal fixation to restore alignment and stability. Options for internal fixation include plates, screws, and k-wires in various configurations. If there is displacement or instability between the head and shaft segments, fixation across the neck is recommended ( Studies in the literature evaluating biomechanical characteristics of various radial head implants are limited ( Ten fresh cadaveric forearm specimens were used. The study was designed to have 5 matched pairs. They were from 2 male and 3 female donors with average and standard deviation age of 70 (15) and with T-score of − The transversely-cut end of the radial shaft was then potted using a urethane casting resin (R1 Fast Cast, #891, Goldenwest Mfg, CA) in aluminum rectangular cups. The length of proximal radius exposed, outside of the potting material, was one quarter of the radius length. The exposed length was 57.65 (5.32) mm and the diameter of the radial head was 20.90 (2.43) mm. Two loading conditions were applied to each specimen. First, to evaluate specimen stiffness, four non-destructive loading cycles with 1 To account for the variability in specimens' lengths and diameters, stiffness ( The stiffness was determined from the slope of the regression line fitted to the loading segment of the cyclic load displacement curves. The values calculated for the modulus in PA, AP, LM, and ML directions for the two fixation methods were compared using two-factor analysis of variance with replication. The values for the failure load, failure stress and failure strain in the PA direction for the two fixation methods were compared using paired Baseline physical exam and fluoroscopic scanning revealed no evidence of prior injury. The values of modulus from the non-destructive testing are shown in A representative failure load–displacement curve for a matched pair are shown in Over the last several decades, the surgical management of radial neck and head fractures has evolved. Historically, the threshold for performing radial head resection for trauma was low ( Despite the emerging trend towards internal fixation, using a plate to achieve this is not without complication ( Based on a recent literature search, we found only 4 published studies evaluating the strength of fixation constructs for radial head and neck fractures ( Patterson, et al. compared 2.0 Two studies employed a stable fracture model (without a fracture gap). Capo, et al. compared a T-plate with various locking and non-locking screw combinations, as well as adding an interfragmentary compression screw through the plate ( Similar to Giffin et al.'s results, we found that loading in three of the four tested orientations, the stiffness of the two constructs was similar. However, with medial-to-lateral loading, the plated specimens exhibited an elastic modulus 1.8 times lower than screws, though not statistically different. We suspect that this trend is related to subtle bending of the plate causing fracture gapping and loss of load sharing with the bone. Unlike the screw fixation, we found that it was harder to achieve evenly distributed bone to bone contact, let alone compression at the fracture site, with the plates since bone alignment tended to be highly influenced by the plate contour. This is important to appreciate when considering the various physiologic stresses across the proximal radius in vivo, which are not fully understood. Other researchers tested in compression, torsion, bending, and shear. We tested in shear as we assumed that this was the most likely failure mechanism as it represents the need for the radial head to resist the shearing load of the biceps in vivo and it is consistent with clinical observations. Our study also differed from some of those available in the current literature, in that we tested fractures without a gap, simulating the type of simple transverse fracture without bone loss that would be an indication for fixation with two obliquely-oriented screws in vivo. In terms of loading the specimens to failure, the two constructs performed similarly and the differences observed in failure forces, stresses, and strains were not statistically significant. However, failure loading could only be applied in one plane. Given the difference in construct stiffness in the medial to lateral direction, it is possible that failure testing in this plane might show a larger difference. Future work could investigate the physiologic forces applied through the proximal radius to determine if they approach the failure loads established by our study, as well as the effect of failure loads applied in multiple planes. The fatigue behavior of various fixation systems should also be investigated. The impact of variable screw length, thread pitch, as well as the impact of headed screws in the obliquely-oriented screw fixation construct, could also be investigated to identify optimal screw characteristics. One of the strengths of this study is the matched-pair design which reduces bias associated with differential bone densities among the five human cadavers. There are some limitations to our work. Given the sample size, the possibility of a type-two error occurring exists. With a larger sample size, a significant difference between the constructs may have been found. Another weakness is that load to failure was only applied in one plane, potentially masking a larger strength difference considering the asymmetric stiffness profile of the plate construct. The two-screw system may introduce flexibility in torsion, and our study is certainly limited by our failure to include torsional force in our loading design. Despite these limitations, this study offers valuable insight into the mechanical properties of crossed screw fixation of longitudinally-stable, non-comminuted radial head fractures. Our data show that crossed screw fixation, under the conditions tested in this study, may yield similar, if not better, strength and stiffness compared to a precontoured radial head plate. Additionally, there may be financial advantages to utilizing less hardware that less likely needs removal with a subsequent surgery. In conclusion, the null hypothesis was confirmed as both fixation strategies provide similar strength and stiffness for the fixation of transverse, non-comminuted radial neck fractures. While plate and screw constructs are more appropriate for axially unstable or comminuted fractures, two oblique screws might be preferred for simple transverse neck fractures since this strategy requires less exposure and results in less hardware prominence. This work was partially supported by the