Objectives
                  The study aims to evaluate outcomes of autologous iliac bone impaction grafts (AIBIGs) with locking-compression plates (LCPs) in four-part proximal humeral fracture.
               
                  Methods
                  Between October 2004 and October 2008, 21 AIBIG with LCP osteosyntheses were done for four-part proximal humeral fractures. Patients included seven males and 14 females. Their mean age at the time of the operation was 66.3±16.9years (range: 24–87years). Five patients had high-energy fractures other than fall from standing height. There were two fracture-dislocation cases, and three valgus-impacted fractures. The length of the calcar segment attached to the articular segment was 7.04±6.10mm; 13 of the 21 cases had lengths less than 8mm. Medial-hinge displacement was 16.77±15.84mm; 19 of the 21 cases had displacements more than 2mm.
               
                  Results
                  There was no avascular necrosis of the humeral head and union was achieved in all cases. Varus collapse and hardware-related complications were not observed. Postoperative neck-shaft angles were found to be 129±9° (range: 109–146°). Neer scores were 92.0±6.3 (range: 81–100).
               
                  Conclusion
                  The results of using AIBIG with LCP for four-part proximal humeral fractures are excellent. There are significant bone defects in osteoporotic or comminuted fractures and LCP alone does not always provide reliable fixation. Therefore, meticulous technique and use of AIBIG in this complicated type of fracture can ensure a favourable outcome.Proximal humeral fracture is the third most prevalent fracture among patients older than 65 Recently, the advent of the locking-compression plate (LCP) suggests promising results for displaced osteoporotic proximal humeral fractures. Although LCP overcame some drawbacks of conventional plating techniques, complications have been reported, including avascular necrosis (AVN) of the humeral head, screw cut-out, head collapse, plate impingement, implant failure and infection. In addition, one of the most important surgical errors in LCP is the failure to restore medial support or buttressing at the fracture site. Indeed, it has been emphasised throughout many articles that the surgeon should minimise head varus deformity and collapse. Our principle for the treatment of a fresh four-part proximal humerus fracture has been osteosynthesis, and we have been using LCPs and autologous iliac bone impaction grafts (AIBIGs) for this type of fracture since October 2004. The purpose of the study was to evaluate and analyse outcomes of this procedure for the typical type of proximal humeral fracture. This study is a retrospective case series with prospectively gathered data. Between October 2004 and October 2008, we enrolled patients who met the following inclusion criteria: (1) had an acute four-part proximal humeral fracture in which every fragment is either displaced more than 1.0 Radiologic exams showed four-part proximal humeral fractures according to Neer's criteria All surgical procedures were conducted by the one of the authors (LYH). The patient was placed in the beach-chair position under general anaesthesia. Skin prep was done to the affected hemi-extremity and ipsilateral anterior iliac crest. All surgical procedures were done in a standardised manner. The skin incision was approximately 20 With the assistance of fluoroscopy, the articular segment and shaft segment were reduced. Traction of the shaft was maintained by bone-holding forceps, and handling of the articular segment was done extra-capsularly to avoid damaging the vascular supply to the humeral head. However, in one case (no. 4) with a four-part fracture-dislocation, the head fragment was extracted and reduced. The void in the cancellous bone was compactly packed with an autologous bone graft via the lateral cortical window that is always present due to the comminution of fracture. Usually, stability of the head to the shaft fragment was obtained with this vigorous packing of the bone graft ( We always used a tie-down suture of the rotator cuff to the plate, which is essential for preventing tuberosity migration and varus collapse of the humeral head. A tendon-grasping suture technique was used to suture the tendon at the bone–tendon junction. We preferred placing two No. 5 Ethibond sutures in each tuberosity for a strong repair ( Postoperatively, the arm was placed in an abduction brace, and the drain was removed in 2 Standard AP, axillary and scapular Y views were taken immediately after surgery and at routine follow-up 2, 6, 9 and 12 Descriptive statistical analyses were performed using the Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) software package (version 17.0, SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Mean follow-up period was 27.5 Patients rating of the outcome was ‘excellent’ in 17 and ‘good’ in four ( Neer scores were evaluated in all patients and showed good or excellent result in all patients: 92.0 The purpose of the study was to evaluate outcomes of AIBIG with LCP in a four-part proximal humeral fracture. Although it is a retrospective case series, we observed satisfactory anatomical and functional outcomes in the most problematic proximal humeral fractures. Generally, hemiarthroplasty has been recommended to this type of fracture due to high AVN risk compared to the others. The advent of LCPs has shown superior results over conventional non-locking plates in proximal humerus fractures. However, reported complications are not negligible. The AVN mostly depends on the fracture type. The other complication is varus displacement after fixation. This complication can lead to varus malunion, nonunion or screw penetration into the joint. The use of LCP afforded greater stability at the fracture site, especially in osteoporotic bone; however, postoperative varus collapse is somewhat of an innate problem of medial comminuted or osteoporotic four-part fractures. Gardner et al. The reason why we adopted an autograft rather than an allograft may be a matter of debate. The allograft is not always amenable, and it is expensive. In addition, there are several advantages of an autograft over an allograft. There are several limitations to the present study. First, the study is a retrospective case series without a control group. However, we had no experience with hemiarthroplasty for this type of fracture and had knowledge that arthroplasty does not give constant results. Therefore, we could not design a comparative study for ethical reasons. Second, the number of patients included is small because four-part proximal humerus fractures are not frequent compared to other types of fractures. We did AIBIG with LCP only to four-part proximal humeral fractures, which is devoid of vascular supply to the articular segment, and is notorious for complications, especially AVN. A multicentre study is now needed to overcome this complication. Third, our approach to this kind of fracture is rather extensive compared to current trends towards a minimally invasive approach and needed AIBIG. However, accurate reduction and pertinent manipulation of the fracture fragment is done prior to minimally invasive procedures. Fourth, the functional outcome evaluation was performed only by the Neer score, although the score includes pain, function, range in motion and anatomy. As a retrospective one, the present study could not evaluate other useful measurements, such as visual analogue scale (VAS) for pain, accurate degrees of each ROM or activities of daily living (ADLs), due to the lack of the information in the patient's medical records. We believe that further study should be done to compare outcomes with arthroplasty or ostheosynthesis without the use of AIBIG. However, we think this study gives us the some answers about extensive use of arthroplasty, especially reverse total-shoulder arthroplasty. In conclusion, AIBIG with LCP yielded excellent outcomes for four-part proximal humeral fractures. There were no AVNs, and no hardware-related complications. All cases showed excellent radiologic and functional outcomes. We think meticulous technique, use of LCP and use of autologous grafts are indispensable for treatment of one of the most complicated types of fractures around the shoulder. All authors, their immediate family and any research foundation with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article. No funding was received related to the subject of this article.