In this study, the variations in the thicknesses of the plates cut from natural stone blocks with a circular saw block cutter machine have been investigated using Range (R) control charts. Erratic data caused by sampling errors in range values were encountered when these charts are examined. Erratic data among the range values were determined by Single Linkage Cluster Method and were eliminated from the processes. After the erratic data were sorted out, the parameters concerning the R control charts were recalculated and the charts were reconstructed. Using the reformed R control charts, it was shown that the processes are better than the previous R control charts. Finally, it was determined that the erratic data caused by sampling errors could reliably be estimated by the Single Linkage Cluster Method.Statistical process control (SPC) is widely used as a powerful method to measure, classify, analyze and interpret process data to improve the quality of products and service by detecting instabilities and justifying possible causes. SPC tools provide a graphical display of quality characteristics and data series versus the sample number ( Some studies conducted in earth sciences using control charts are as follows: R control chart is one of the Shewhart control charts ( In the literature, several studies have reported on the Single Linkage Cluster Method. The aim of this study was to examine whether or not the thicknesses of the plates cut from natural stone blocks were under control using R control charts. The erratic data caused by sampling errors among the range values were determined using Single Linkage Cluster Method and were eliminated from the process. Then, the R control charts were reconstructed.  Statistical parameters related to R control chart are computed for each subgroup. After the computation of statistical parameters, the ranges of subgroups ( The three basic parameters for the chart are calculated. These parameters are: the Central Line (CL The R control chart is drawn and is interpreted.   The three basic parameters for the R control chart are computed as Eqs. The steps in the Single Linkage Cluster Method are given as follows ( The number of clusters and the number of observations are determined. The Euclidean distances between the pairs of cluster are calculated.  The Similarity Matrix (SIM Maximum similarity value between all pairs of cluster is selected and this cluster pair is joined to form a new cluster. Above steps are repeated After, clusters are represented graphically in what is called a dendrogram. The dendrogram is examined and the erratic data caused by sampling errors are determined. The Euclidean distance among the pairs of cluster is calculated as Eq. The similarity value (Sim( Plates from natural blocks, cut at four different levels by a circular saw block cutter machine, were used in this study. A total of 36 plates from Mugla White Marble natural stone blocks and 32 plates from Denizli Travertine natural stone blocks were selected for analysis. Afterwards, thickness measurements were taken from eight different points at these plates. Using the thickness values obtained by making measurements at eight different points from the plates, the R control chart parameters were calculated and were presented in Then, using the parameters from The Single Linkage Cluster Method was utilized to evaluate the incompatible points as seen in Dendrograms were constructed using the clusters joined versus the similarity values ( Comparing After the removal of the erratic data belonging to Mugla White Marble and Denizli Travertine from the processes, the parameters for the R control charts were recalculated and were presented in Using these parameters, the R control charts were reconstructed and could be seen in In this study, the R control charts were used for examining the thicknesses of the plates cut with a circular saw block cutter machine. Examining the Mugla White Marble and Denizli Travertine for R control charts, 6th, 7th, 9th points at each level and 8th points at each level, respectively, were located in unsuitable places compared to the other values. These points were erratic data caused by sampling errors as it was determined by the Single Linkage Cluster Method and so were eliminated from the process. After, the R control charts were reconstructed. These charts showed that the processes are better than the previous R control charts. It is strongly suggested that the erratic data caused by sampling errors are determined and eliminated in the process by using a single linkage cluster method before the R control charts are constructed.