Background
                  Whereas most radial head fractures are stable injuries, they sometimes occur as part of complex injury patterns with associated elbow instability. Radial head arthroplasty has been favored in patients with unreconstructable radial head fractures and unstable elbow injuries. The purpose of this study was to review radiographic outcomes, functional outcomes, and complications after radial head arthroplasty for radial head fracture in unstable elbow injuries.
               
                  Methods
                  This study was a retrospective review of radial head fractures treated with radial head arthroplasty by a single surgeon during a 15-year period. Demographics of the patients, injury details, operative reports, radiographic and clinical outcomes, and any complications were recorded. Patients were divided into stable and unstable elbow injury groups.
               
                  Results
                  A total of 68 patients were included. There were 50 unstable fractures that were compared with 18 stable fractures. Patients with unstable radial head fractures with associated elbow dislocation achieved mean flexion and mean forearm rotational arc of motion similar to that of patients with stable radial head fractures. However, supination loss was greater in the unstable group than in the stable fracture group, with a mean difference of 10°. Radiographic outcomes and complication rates did not differ between injury groups. There was no observed decrease in implant longevity in patients with unstable elbow injuries.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Radial head arthroplasty is an effective option for treatment of unstable elbow injuries, with recovery of functional elbow range of motion and no difference in complication rate or implant survivorship compared with those patients with stable injuries.Injuries to the radial head are relatively common in any orthopedic trauma practice. They compose 30% of all elbow injuries and 1.7%-5.4% of all fractures. A retrospective cohort study was conducted of adult patients who underwent radial head replacement from December 1999 to July 2015 performed by a single surgeon. Seventy-five patients were identified using an Institutional Review Board–approved trauma database, which included patients from one geographically diverse, urban, level 1 medical center and 1 orthopedic specialty hospital. Inclusion criteria included patients who sustained a radial head injury who underwent radial head replacement, skeletal maturity, and complete follow-up. Patients with both stable and unstable radial head injuries were included. Stable elbow, radial head-neck fractures included patients with Mason type II or III fractures with or without a block to motion but no associated dislocation of the ulnohumeral joint. Unstable elbow, radial head-neck fractures included patients with Mason type IV fractures (simple fracture-dislocation with no coronoid fracture), terrible triad injuries, Monteggia fractures patterns, and Essex-Lopresti lesions. The patients' medical records, operative reports, and radiographs were reviewed. Age at injury and injury pattern including associated upper extremity injuries were collected. Operative reports were reviewed to identify the prosthesis type and any concomitant procedures on the elbow. All patients underwent a similar technique of radial head arthroplasty with a noncemented modular implant (Wright Medical Technology, Memphis, TN, USA; or Synthes, Paoli, PA, USA) through a laterally based approach to the elbow joint. It was the practice of the treating surgeon to undersize the radial head component by 1 diameter size to avoid “overstuffing.” Before the final implant size was chosen, each patient was taken through a full range of motion with the implant in place. Unstable elbow injuries underwent further fixation of bone and ligamentous injuries, with some patients requiring a hinged fixator. Follow-up data recorded included elbow range of motion at 3, 6, and 12 months postoperatively in addition to time at final follow-up. Recorded range of motion included elbow flexion, extension, supination, and pronation. Radiographic outcomes included development of heterotopic ossification, post-traumatic arthritis on the capitellum side as well as on the ulnohumeral side, periprosthetic lucency, and radiocapitellar alignment. Any complications or additional operations directly related to the initial elbow injury were recorded, including development of elbow joint contracture, wound infection, and reoperations for hardware removal or revision and contracture release. Subjects were grouped by severity of injury: those with stable elbow, radial head fractures (stable cohort); and those with associated fracture-dislocations (unstable cohort). Seven patients were excluded from the study because of lack of complete follow-up data, leaving a total of 68 patients for analysis. Elbow range of motion was recorded for flexion-extension arc, pronation, and supination. Independent There were 50 patients (73.5%) with unstable elbow, radial head-neck fractures ( Radiographic outcomes analyzed were heterotopic ossification, post-traumatic arthritis, periprosthetic lucency, and abnormal radiocapitellar alignment. Heterotopic ossification was the most common adverse radiographic finding, occurring in 28.0% of patients with unstable injuries (n = 14). Clinically relevant post-traumatic arthritis in the ulnohumeral joint was recorded in 4 patients with unstable injuries, 3 of whom concurrently had signs of heterotopic ossification. Periprosthetic lucency was noted in 14.0% (n = 7) of the unstable group. Three patients in the unstable cohort had minor posterior subluxation of the radiocapitellar joint (compared with 1 in the stable group). There was no observed difference in radiographic outcomes between the unstable and stable injury cohorts ( Complication rates were analyzed between stable and unstable groups as well as by injury pattern type (terrible triad injury, Monteggia fracture, and Essex-Lopresti lesion). Four patients with heterotopic ossification (all unstable injuries) went on to have further procedures for resection and elbow release. Five patients (7.4%) needed removal of hardware surgery (2 in stable cohort vs. 3 in unstable cohort). The two patients with stable injuries underwent removal of the radial head implant, with only 1 requiring revision. Of the 3 patients with unstable injuries, 2 required removal of ulnar plate and screws and 1 patient required removal of screws related to fixation of associated fractures. We cannot prove any difference in complication rate including need for contracture release surgery and incidence of removal of hardware between stable and unstable injuries ( This study highlights the favorable outcomes seen in patients who undergo radial head arthroplasty for unstable radial head fractures. In this retrospective review, we found that patients with unstable injuries treated with radial head arthroplasty had good clinical outcomes with respect to range of motion compared with patients who sustained stable injuries. However, there was a small observed difference in the supination achieved by patients with these unstable radial head injuries. Furthermore, the complication rate in the unstable injury cohort was no different from that in the stable injury cohort. The use of arthroplasty rather than of ORIF has been a controversial decision since the radial head replacement was developed because of conflicting evidence in the literature and the relative lack of long-term radial head replacement outcome studies. Other indications for arthroplasty include fractures with associated ligamentous or bone injuries, such as Essex-Lopresti lesions, terrible triad injuries, and Monteggia fractures. Reinstitution of appropriate length, motion, and stability for the radius and radiocapitellar joint is of paramount importance in radial head arthroplasty. Metallic implants are the most commonly used in today's radial head arthroplasty procedures. The predominant prosthesis in our study was a modular, cobalt-chromium implant, which offers the surgeon a variety of stem and head sizes that can be mixed and matched to most accurately reproduce the patient's native radial head size. Of course, one of the most important clinical outcomes for patients after radial head arthroplasty is return to functional range of elbow motion. What constitutes functional, however, varies by patient and the patient's individual activities and requirements. The first and one of the most comprehensive studies on functional range of motion was done by Morrey et al in 1981, in which they found that tasks for daily living (personal hygiene, feeding, and sedentary tasks) generally required 100° of elbow flexion (30°-130°) and 100° of rotation (50° pronation and 50° supination). In our unstable injury cohort, 68% and 92% of patients regained >100° of flexion and >100° of rotation, respectively, with use of physical therapy and early motion after surgery ( Common complications of elbow trauma and subsequent radial head arthroplasty are heterotopic ossification, post-traumatic arthritis, nerve injury, and implant loosening or failure leading to revision or removal of the prosthesis. The strengths of this study include the large cohort of unstable injuries that were included in our analysis treated by a single surgeon. Many studies of radial head replacements report cohorts of fewer than 30 patients or patients treated by multiple surgeons. Modular metallic radial head arthroplasty is a reliable procedure in unstable radial head trauma with good clinical results. There was no difference in arc of elbow flexion or arm of elbow rotation compared with patients with stable injuries. However, when radial head arthroplasty was performed for an unstable elbow injury, patients experienced decreased supination motion. Patients with unstable injuries had a complication rate no different from that of patients with stable injuries, including early failure of radial head implant. Thus, patients with unstable elbow injuries treated with radial head arthroplasty can expect to make a successful recovery. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.