Energy intensive classical metallurgical processes, the depletion of high-grade ores and primary sources push the scientific and technical communities to treat lean and complex ores as well as secondary metal resources for the recovery of valuable metals. Chlorination technique could be a suitable technology for this purpose. This paper summarizes laboratory experimentation of chlorination processes developed for the extraction of tantalum and niobium from their bearing materials, the upgrading of chromite, the treatment of sulfide concentrates, and the decontamination of jarosite, as well as for the synthesis of potassium ferrate.
                  Each investigation started by a thermodynamic study of different systems (M–O–Cl, M–S–Cl, M=metal) including the calculations of the standard free energy of chlorination reactions and phase stability diagrams of these systems. The kinetics of these chlorination reactions was studied by thermogravimetric analysis. The effects of total gas flow rate, temperature, individual reactant partial pressures, etc., on the chlorination reaction rate were investigated. Besides, experiments were also conducted in tubular furnaces. Several different qualitative and quantitative analyses methods were used to evaluate the selectivity and performance of the chlorination processes.
                  The results reported in this paper show the advantages of the chlorination technology in terms of energy saving, selectivity of the processes, and recovery rate of valuable metals. They also demonstrate the possibility to treat lean raw materials, to improve the decontamination of wastes, to generate environmentally safer residues, to engineer new compounds, etc.Chlorine is one of the major inorganic chemicals. Its production and consumption level is a reliable index of the importance of the chemical industry of a country. As mentioned in Ref. It is well known that chlorine possesses a high reactivity towards many compounds at relatively low temperature. This property drove the metallurgists to use chlorine for the extraction of valuable elements from their bearing materials. Besides, the depletion of high-grade ores and primary sources necessitated the treatment of leaner and more complex ores as well as the recycling of secondary materials. With this in perspective, during the last two decades the authors have been focusing their efforts on developing several chlorination techniques for the treatment of numerous raw materials and solid industrial wastes Recovery of Ta and Nb compounds from their bearing materials recycling of spent hydrorefining catalyst and recovery of Co, Ni, Mo and V upgrading of chromite concentrates and/or extraction of valuable elements low temperature treatment of copper concentrate decontamination of various non-ferrous residues recycling of ferrous sulfate The thermodynamic aspects such as free energy calculations ‘Δ The kinetics of the chlorination reactions was studied by thermogravimetric analysis ‘TGA’ using a CAHN 1000 microbalance with a sensitivity of 10 The first investigation step of each study was the calculation of standard free energy changes of the considered reactions. The software ‘HSC’ thermochemical database An advantage of the chlorination process is the low melting and boiling points of the generated chlorides as well as the difference between their vapor pressures in the explored chlorination temperature range. As an example, the chlorination of sulfides (CuFeS The chlorination in the presence of oxygen (oxychlorination) was sometimes used to separate selectively a group of elements. This is supported by the fact that the presence of oxygen in the system could lead to different thermodynamic feasibility of the specific oxychlorination reactions. As shown in Thermodynamic aspects were also used to explain the experimental phenomena observed during chlorination of different solids. Anomalies in the reaction rate were also observed when liquid phases are present in the chlorination process. The decrease of the reaction rate due to the liquid phase formation, as well as the exothermic nature of the chlorination reactions were also observed during the sulfide treatment in chlorine at low temperatures The following sections will be devoted to a brief summary of the experimental results obtained by our laboratory in the field of chlorine technology used for metal recovery, mineral processing, waste decontamination and/or recycling. Niobium and tantalum are important elements used in many high technology applications such as electronic, energy, superconductors and aerospace. The industrialized countries consume the majority of the world production (≥95%) of these refractory metals and produce less than 5% This section focuses on the chlorination and carbochlorination of a tantalum and niobium bearing concentrate with Cl Chlorination by Cl Extraction of Ta and Nb using carbochlorination is significant from 200 Although the chromium is found in a variety of minerals (crocoïte PbCrO About 75% of chromite is used for the ferro-chromium production. In addition, chromite is used for chemical, refractory and foundry applications. Natural characteristics such as the chromium to iron ratio, the chromite grain size and the SiO A European chromite concentrate was used in this investigation. Its chemical characteristics are summarized in   According to these results, upgrading of the chromite concentrate can be performed between 500 Another possibility of upgrading the chromite concentrate is its oxychlorination using a gas mixture of chlorine and air. Such gas mixture is cheaper than that of Cl TGA results of oxychlorination of chromite between 925 These results suggest that upgrading of the chromite concentrate could be performed between 900 Sulfide ores and concentrates are still the major source of the primary production of metals such as Cu, Pb, Zn, etc. The conventional direct pyrometallurgical routes are limited due to generation of dangerous SO The chemical and mineralogical compositions of two copper concentrates, used for this study, are given in Thermodynamic calculations  Chlorination results of HGCC up to 600 Data collected from the chlorination of two chalcopyrite concentrates at different conditions suggested the flow-sheet represented in More than 80% of world zinc is produced by hydrometallurgical routes. After roasting the concentrates, sulfuric acid is used to dissolve zinc oxide and ferrite from the calcine. In the pH range of 1–1.5 at about 95 The average chemical composition of the samples (S  Potassium ferrate (K Evrard et al. Although this method has a relatively high Fe According to this flow-sheet, the FeSO control of the water quantity during the alkali ferrate synthesis, increase of the reactivity of ferrous sulfate by decreasing their particle size through thermal embrittlement. The most important step of the proposed process is that of ferrate synthesis. The success of these steps is dependent on the reactor design and experimental parameters to insure the following functions: good contact of three substances (FeSO preferential diffusion of KOH towards reaction zone, rapid evacuation of the water released from the synthesis reaction, high and uniform heat transfer as the overall synthesis reaction is exothermic. Although the potassium ferrate synthesis is achieved without external heat supply, the reactor temperature increases due to the exothermic nature of the reactions. An increase of the reactor temperature between about 45 The last step of the proposed process consists in the separation of the synthesis products from non reacted ferrous sulfate and drying of the obtained alkali ferrates. Separation of synthesis products from the non reacted ferrous sulfate is facilitated by the important difference of particle size between the ferrate (≈5 drying of ferrate could be done at temperatures lower than 70 The examples and flow-sheets given in this paper show the possibility of using chlorine technology for mineral processing, metal extraction, waste decontamination and synthesis of a novel reagent. The advantages of the chlorination technology are related to low temperature operation, flexibility to raw material composition, selectivity of the process, etc. However, large pilot scale experimentation and a rigorous technico-economical evaluation will be necessary for the validation of the proposed chlorination processes at industrial level. This work was performed in the frame of contracts N° MA1M - 0071 - C (CD), N° BRE2-CT92-0173, N° BRE2-CT94-0975, N° BRPR-CT97-0392, N° G1RD-CT-1999-00166 and N° G5RD-CT-2001–03011 of the European Union. The authors acknowledge gratefully the European commission (DG-XII) for the financial support of this work.