A technique with coal-based direct reduction followed by magnetic separation is presented in this study for recovering and reusing iron otherwise wasted in vanadium tailings. Process parameters such as usage of additives, tailings/reductant/additives ratio, reduction temperature and time, as well as particle size were experimentally determined. The optimum process parameters were proposed as follows: using lime as the additive, lignite as the reductant, weight ratios of vanadium tailings/lignite/lime at 100:30:10, reduction roasting at 1200°C for 60min, and particle size of 98% less than 30μm in the final roasted product feeding to magnetic separation. Under these conditions, a magnetic concentrate containing 90.31% total iron and 89.76% metallization iron with a total iron recovery rate of 83.88% was obtained. In addition, mineralography of vanadium tailings, coal-based reduction product and magnetic concentrate were studied by X-ray powder diffraction technique (XRD). The microstructures of above products were analyzed by scanning electron microscope (SEM) to help understand the mechanism.In China, more than 1.2 Although total iron content in vanadium tailings is relatively high, its recovery has not been practiced due to high content of alkaline oxides such as Na Vanadium tailings used in the study were the residual slags after extracting vanadium oxides from vanadium-bearing steel slags using sodium salt roasting and leaching process. The chemical composition is given in The total iron content was approximately 36.54%. But its Na The coal used in this study was lignite with compositions listed in In China, coal-based direct reduction is the most common technique in direct iron reduction. Coal acts as reducing agent, and deoxidation reactions are completed in rotary kiln or tunnel kiln The calculated thermodynamic results for Eqs. Taking Eq. Based on the analysis above, five main factors affecting iron recovery were studied. These parameters were roasting temperature, roasting time, lignite ratio (weight percentage of lignite-to-vanandium tailings), CaO ratio (weight percentage of CaO-to-vanadium tailings) and particle size of the roasted product feeding to magnetic separation. Vanadium tailings were thoroughly mixed with lignite and CaO at different ratios. Then the mixtures were roasted at various temperatures and times in a Muffle furnace. After finishing the roast process the mixtures were immediately quenched with water. Next the roasted products were wet grinded in a rod mill, and then processed through magnetic separator with the magnetic field intensity of 111 The mineral and compositions of roasted product under optimum roasting conditions and magnetic concentrate were investigated by X-ray powder diffraction method (XRD) using Cu-Kα radiation (40 To optimize the amount of lignite addition, various lignite ratios were tested. Other parameters were kept constant as following: no CaO addition, roasting temperature of 1100 As shown in To optimize CaO dosage, various CaO ratios were studied while keeping other process parameters constant as following: lignite ratio of 30%, roasting temperature of 1100 As shown in By keeping lignite ratio of 30%, CaO ratio of 10%, the mixtures were roasted at 1100 As shown in Mixtures consisted of vanadium tailings, lignite and CaO at a mixing ratio of 100:30:10, were roasted for 60 As shown in Because of the complex dissemination characteristics of roasted products, they needed to be milled before magnetic separation. The effect of particle size of roasted product was studied here. The other conditions were kept constant as following: roasting temperature of 1200 From The roasted product, prepared in optimized conditions as following: roasting temperature of 1200 From the XRD pattern, it can be seen that the metallic iron was the main iron source in the roasted product. The metallic iron is easy to be recovered by low intensity magnetic separation after grinding as experimentally observed in this study. Meanwhile, in comparison with the XRD pattern of vanadium tailing, the peaks of Fe  By comparing SEM images of received vanadium tailings (a) and roasted product (b), it can be found that small complicated particles in vanadium tailings were changed into larger slag particles and metallic iron particles after reduction roasting. Metallic iron particles, with majority of particle size bigger than 5 The magnetic concentrate was separated from roasted product under optimized process parameters as above. Its XRD pattern is shown in From  As seen in  Major chemical compositions of vanadium tailings are Fe Lignite ratio, CaO ratio, roasting temperature, roasting time and particle size of roasted product are five main factors which affect the iron recovery. Optimized process conditions are obtained by one-factor at a time tests for recovery iron from vanadium tailings as follows: lignite ratio of 30%, CaO ratio of 10%, roasting temperature of 1200 The results demonstrate the feasibility of the technique that uses coal-based direct reduction followed by magnetic separation for recovery iron from vanadium tailings. The technique provides the possibility of comprehensive utilization of high-iron solid waste. The authors thank Analytical and Testing Center of University of Science and Technology Beijing, which supplied us the facilities to fulfill the measurement. The authors also would like to thank professor Sun Dajun and Lu Yongqiang from the United States for his generous help in the English language used in this essay.