Varying lower limits cyclic loading and unloading tests with different confining pressures were carried out to reveal the influence of confining pressures on deformation characteristics of sandstones. Increasing confining pressures reduced the development of radial irreversible strain, and increased axial irreversible strain, which prolonged the process of volumetric strain from compression to expansion. The evolution of volumetric strain is sensitive to the division of crack closure, and stable or unstable growth of cracks. Increasing the confining pressure inhibited the development and connection direction of cracks, which decreased the length of the final fracture surface.As one of the most common materials, rocks are widely used in different engineering fields including geotechnical engineering, construction engineering and mining engineering In previous relevant studies, numerous scholars and researchers have widely investigated various mechanical properties of rock mass, obtaining many significant results and using them in various engineering applications. However, these results are mainly related to the fatigue and mechanical properties of rock mass during uniaxial cyclic loading and unloading (CLU). For example, Gordon et al. In practical applications of geotechnical engineering, rock mass is generally under a three-dimensional stress state owing to the disturbance effect of excavation and mining of underground space. In this context, the mechanical properties and bearing capacity of rock mass are considerably different from those under a uniaxial stress state. Therefore, in recent years, benefitting from the developments achieved by some testers and analyzers, several scholars are carrying out the triaxial test, which can more favourably reflect the true nature of stress in rock mass. For example, by performing triaxial compression tests with varying strain rates on shale under different confining pressures, Liu et al. Actually, according to the difference in loading and unloading amplitudes, the stress path is generally classified into two modes, involving loading and unloading at a constant amplitude The off-white rock samples with blocky structures were taken from the shallow strata in Shaxian in the north of Sanming, Fujian province, China. The fresh rock blocks were tightly wrapped by applying preservative films and immediately sent to the Laboratory of Coal Mine Disaster Dynamics and Control of Chongqing University, China. The samples were formed into cylinders 50 mm in diameter and 100 mm in height according to the standard of the International Society for Rock Mechanics A geotechnical consulting & testing system (GCTS) for dynamic and static triaxial tests ( The axial strain device consists mainly of two concentric and parallel discs with two measuring bars attached to the linear variable differential transformer (LVDT) sensor at the end. Axial deformation of the rock is equivalent to the average deformation of bars A and B. The deformation value is transmitted back to the computer program in real time for the corresponding parameter calculation. The radial strain device includes a measuring chain and one measuring bar. The measuring chain is fixed directly to the rock surface by a tension spring. The measurement principle is the same as that of the axial strain measuring device. The axial and radial measuring devices have an accuracy of 0.25% FS and a resolution of 0.0001 mm. They were recalibrated after every ten tests. In the test, by employing diverse devices (such as extensometers, strain gauges and sensors) attached onto the samples, various parameters (including the number of cycles, stress, strain, confining pressure, multiaxial strain ratio and elastic modulus) of the samples were recorded in real time through the supporting program of the test equipment. In the test, the number of sampling points in each cycle was set as 100. Samples C-5-1, C-10-1 and C-15-1 were classified grouped together and separately subjected to conventional triaxial compression tests under confining pressures of 5, 10 and 15 MPa. The triaxial CLU test with an increasing lower limit of cyclic stress (ILLCS) under confining pressures of 5, 10 and 15 MPa was separately carried out on the other group including samples C-5-2, C-10-2 and C-15-2. During the triaxial CLU test with ILLCS, the minimum axial deviatoric stress on the samples was set as 1 MPa. The upper and lower limits of stress both increased by 10 MPa at every increasing level, and 30 cycles were performed at each level in which each cycle lasted for 10 s. The stress path is shown in  Conventional triaxial compression test: Confining pressures of 5, 10 and 15 MPa were separately applied on the samples with corresponding serial numbers first, and then an axial load was continuously applied on the samples at the preset loading rate until the rock samples were damaged. Triaxial CLU test with ILLCS: Confining pressures of 5, 10 and 15 MPa were separately applied on the samples with corresponding serial numbers first, and then an axial load was applied on the samples according to the stress path with ILLCS until the rock samples were damaged. The deviatoric stress–strain curves obtained through conventional triaxial compression test are shown in With the increase in confining pressure, the rock strength also improved and the changing rate of the peak stress declined. Naturally, the stress level in the CLU test also increased. Six, eight and nine stress levels were applied under confining pressures of 5, 10 and 15 MPa, respectively. In the post-peak stage of the curve, the curves gradually became gentle. The deviatoric stress-strain curves acquired through triaxial CLU tests with ILLCS are displayed in However, with the increase in confining pressure, the stress levels of the samples when entering into elastic stage showed no significant change while the number of stress levels in the elastic stage increased. Under a confining pressure of 5 MPa, the elastic stage occupied approximately four levels, starting from the second to the fifth stress levels. Under 10 MPa, the elastic stage comprised approximately five levels, starting from the second to the sixth stress level; there were approximately six levels in the elastic stage, starting from the second to the seventh stress level under the confining pressure of 15 MPa. Additionally, with an increasing confining pressure, the incremental strain at the last one or two stress levels before sample failure also declined. Under the confining pressure of 5 MPa, five complete cycles were carried out at the last stress level before rock failure, and axial strain increased by approximately 0.4%. Under the confining pressure of 10 MPa, only one complete cycle was conducted at the last stress level before rock failure, and the change range of axial strain was not larger than 0.3% in the previous 30 complete cycles. In the test conducted under the confining pressure of 15 MPa, the samples were subjected to the peak stress and then damaged when the ninth stress level was completed and increased to the next level. Within the previous stress levels, axial strain varied by approximately 0.2%. Overall, the evolution trends of stress–strain curves under the two stress paths were basically the same with no significant changes, agreeing with the result obtained by Ge et al. As a natural material, rock is different from man-made materials. During the complex formation process, geological effects often produce some primary pores and microcracks inside, which makes rock a non-ideal fully elastic material. In fact, after the rock mass is disturbed, closure of the primary cracks and development of post-disturbance cracks will cause the rock to weakly deform; however, when these deformations accumulate to a certain extent, they can be reflected by some macroscopic intensity parameters. Taheri et al. assessed the progressive damage of rock and unstable cracks using the tangential modulus of elasticity and Poisson's ratio In conventional triaxial compression tests, the elastic moduli under confining pressures of 5, 10 and 15 MPa were 13.16, 14.85 and 18.09 GPa, respectively. With the increase in confining pressure, the superficial contact surface of the pores increased after the pores in rock mass were compacted and the degree of consolidation between the grains and clay minerals in rocks was improved, correspondingly resulting in the growth of frictional force. Therefore, the elastic modulus increased macroscopically. Generally, for compact and intact brittle rocks, the confining pressure had no significant influence on the elastic modulus. For example, the test result for hard basalt with high strength obtained by Lindholm et al. On the whole, it can be seen from Additionally, the axial deviatoric stress increased to a certain value, with the threshold in the range of 40–50 MPa under confining pressures of 5, 10 and 15 MPa. This characteristic did not vary with increasing confining pressures. Under this condition, the elastic moduli of the samples remained stable at 22, 27 and 35 GPa, respectively, and the range of the elastic moduli increased with the increase in confining pressure. In uniaxial tests, Poisson's ratio is often considered as one of the deformation characteristics of materials. As the ratio of radial strain to axial strain, Poisson’s ratio is an elastic coefficient reflecting the deformation characteristics of materials. Therefore, the multiaxial strain ratio in a triaxial compression test is proposed here. It is similar to the concept of Poisson's ratio and can be calculated using the following equation: Similarly, the GCTS equipment recorded multiaxial strain ratios in every cycle during the test. According to data automatically recorded by programs, the change in the multiaxial strain ratios of sandstones during triaxial loading and unloading tests with ILLCS under different confining pressures with the number of cycles could be obtained, as shown in In conventional triaxial compression tests, multiaxial strain ratios under confining pressures of 5, 10 and 15 MPa were 0.244, 0.242 and 0.192, respectively. Under different confining pressures, multiaxial strain ratios of the samples during CLU tests in most cycles (approximately 80% of the total number of cycles) were lower than those obtained during conventional triaxial compression tests under the same confining pressures. The multiaxial strain ratios of sandstones obtained from triaxial CLU tests with ILLCS under different confining pressures are shown in Generally, objects are deformed under the effect of external forces, and they can progressively recover from deformation when the external force is withdrawn, showing elastic characteristics. However, owing to internal material properties (such as various defects including pores and cracks), objects fail to completely recover to their initial shape after deformation following the removal of the external force; therefore, a certain residual deformation or irreversible deformation is retained, thus showing plastic characteristics. The calculation of irreversible deformation is presented in Irreversible strains in rocks under two stress paths refer to the difference in strains at the end of a cycle to the beginning of the cycle. The number of sampling points was set at 100 for each cycle. The strain recorded by programs was processed by using the following formula: Therefore, through superposition, the axial irreversible strain was calculated as follows: Similarly, the radial irreversible deformation was also calculated as follows: As illustrated in Through the above processes, the relationship of axial and radial irreversible strains with the number of cycles could be determined, as shown in In summary, as shown in To more accurately determine the evolution mechanism of irreversible strain, As the confining pressure increased, the increment in axial irreversible strains within the corresponding stress levels constantly reduced. On the contrary, the increment in the axial irreversible strain during the last cycle before final failure progressively increased. Additionally, with increasing confining pressures, the increment in axial irreversible strain gradually varied from a U-shaped change trend to a ノ-shaped one. The increment in the axial irreversible strain at the first stress level considerably decreased, and therefore, the left side of the U-shaped curve became gentle. However, the cumulant of irreversible strains rapidly increased at the last one or two stress levels before failure. As a result, the rising section at the right side of the U-shaped curve was steeper; that is, with the increase in confining pressure, the U-shaped curve for the increment in axial irreversible strain was lower on the left side and higher on the right side. For the increment in radial irreversible strain during triaxial CLU with ILLCS under different confining pressures, the trend appeared as an inverse L-shaped curve. Moreover, with increasing confining pressures, the increment in radial irreversible strain was inhibited. At the corresponding stress levels, the increment in radial irreversible strain under a high confining pressure was lower than that under a low confining pressure, and the rising segment of the curve where failure was about to occur was gentler. The evolution curves showing volumetric strain and deviatoric stress are displayed in The curve for the last stress level indicates that the samples gradually changed from the expansion state to the compression state while the inflection point of the curve reflected the crack damage stress. Martin and Chandler The relationship between volumetric strain and the number of cycles is shown in The method for calculating irreversible volumetric strain is the same as that for calculating axial and radial irreversible strains. Based on calculation and statistical information, Additionally, in terms of the increment in irreversible volumetric strain, with increasing confining pressures, the absolute value of irreversible volumetric strain increased in the first cycle at each stress level. Moreover, when the confining pressure increased to 15 MPa, irreversible volumetric strains within the last several stress levels dramatically fluctuated. The samples were constantly subjected to compression and expansion until their final failure. It indicated that a high confining pressure contributed to the enhanced cohesion of grains to further increase the cohesion of rocks, thus promoting the close packing of particles. As a result, the grains in the rocks were hard to break and they only slid, thus showing a large plastic deformation. As observed in The deviatoric stress–strain curves obtained through conventional triaxial compression tests are shown in  Crack closure stage: At the beginning of this stage, microfractures and cracks in rock samples are open. With an increasing stress, cracks are gradually closed and the curve becomes concave. Elastic stage: The threshold stress of this stage is approximately 20% of the peak stress ( Stage of stable crack growth: The threshold stress ( Stage of instable crack growth: The threshold stress (  For elastic moduli of sandstones under different confining pressures, as shown in For multiaxial strain ratios, according to the evolution form of multiaxial strain ratios of sandstones under different confining pressures, the whole process was divided into three stages. In the first stress level, that is, the first stage, the multiaxial strain ratio increased; the subsequent several stress levels belonged to the second stage, during which the multiaxial strain ratio generally constantly decreased. In the last several stress levels, that is, the third stage, the multiaxial strain ratio constantly increased at each stress level. As for axial irreversible strain, except for that at the first stress level during which the value of this strain under different confining pressures almost increased linearly, it rapidly increased in the first several cycles and then slowly accumulated within the other stress levels. However, by analysing the change trend of the increment of irreversible strain, as shown in For the volumetric strain, there were three obvious stages. In the first stage (the first stress level), the volumetric strain was nearly zero. The second stage (subsequent majority of stress levels) lasted for a long time, during which the volumetric strain constantly increased. The last several stress levels before failure belonged to the third stage, during which the volumetric strain constantly declined. Overall, according to the evolution characteristics of the above deformation parameters, the whole process can be split into three stages as follows: Stage 1: The first stress levels under confining pressures of 5, 10 and 15 MPa all belonged to stage 1. Stage 2: The second and third stress levels under the confining pressure of 5 MPa and the third to the fifth stress levels under the confining pressure of 10 MPa comprised stage 2; in this case, the fifth stress level can be regarded as the transition zone from the stage 2 to stage 3, during which the multiaxial strain ratio increased and volumetric strain also increased. Moreover, stage 2, under the confining pressure of 15 MPa, contained the second to the seventh stress levels. Similarly, the seventh stress level can be considered as the transition zone from stage 2 to stage 3. Stage 3: This stage contained the fourth and fifth stress levels under the confining pressure of 5 MPa, the sixth, seventh and eighth stress levels under confining pressure of 10 MPa, and the eighth and ninth stress levels under the confining pressure of 15 MPa. The information presented in For the amplitude of the upper limit of stress in each stage, under the confining pressure of 5 MPa, the threshold of stage 2 was 20 MPa while that of stage 3 was 40 MPa. Under the confining pressure of 10 MPa, the thresholds of stages 2 and 3 were 20 and 60 MPa, respectively. Under the confining pressure of 15 MPa, the thresholds of the two stages were 20 and 80 MPa, respectively. According to the aforementioned research results and based on the evolution forms of the key deformation parameters presented in Numerous microcracks are present in rocks, and therefore, their deformation and fracture is a comprehensive process during which internal cracks initiate, propagate and connect to further form macrocracks under the effect of external forces. After the test was completed, the samples were taken out to observe the fracture surface, as shown in The rock samples were approximately subjected to three types of failures, i.e. brittle splitting, shear failure and plastic failure, under triaxial compression conditions. The specific failure modes of rock samples were largely influenced by their stress state apart from the properties of the rock samples themselves. It can be seen from In Many engineering applications suffer from complex cyclic loading and unloading disturbances. For example, the process in hydropower dams is often accompanied by high energy utilization, in the form of cyclic loading and unloading of dam foundations, underground power stations and surrounding structures The stability of rock in geotechnical engineering has always been the key to safety. In safety monitoring of previous engineering applications, stress or displacement monitoring methods were often used. Safety is estimated and evaluated based on rock strength or displacement. However, these standards do not fully and effectually reflect the true damage of the rock mass under complex stress paths. For example, according to the results of this study, the deformation parameters of rock have different sensitivities toward the true damage extent of the rock mass. Therefore, choosing the appropriate parameters for monitoring rock damage will help to more effectively identify the actual damage inside the rock. Similarly, an increase in confining pressure will increase the threshold value of the third stage, but it will also cause plastic flow failure of the rock mass. Therefore, an appropriate and economical support method can be used according to the damage accumulation inside the rock to avoid excessive support or improper or insufficient support. In this study, conventional triaxial compression tests and triaxial CLU tests with ILLCS under confining pressures of 5, 10 and 15 MPa were separately carried out to systematically reveal the deformation characteristics of sandstone samples under different stress paths. The following main conclusions can be drawn: Under confining pressures of 5, 10 and 15 MPa, axial deviatoric stress increased to a certain degree, with the threshold in the range of 40–50 MPa, which was not related to the level of confining pressure. In this case, the elastic moduli of samples remained within stable ranges in the stage, i.e. 22, 27 and 35 GPa, respectively, with the data range increasing with the increase in confining pressure. With ILLCS, the multiaxial strain ratios of the samples increased first, then reduced and finally suddenly increased with the increase in stress levels. Finally, the samples were suddenly damaged. Moreover, with the increase in confining pressure, the growth amplitude in the first stage can considerably reduce. With the increase in confining pressure, the U-shaped curve for the increment in axial irreversible strain in sandstones during CLU generally changed to a shape lower on the left side and higher on the right side, while the curve for the increment in radial irreversible strain was an inverse L-shaped curve. Moreover, as the confining pressure grew, the increment in radial irreversible strain was inhibited and radial irreversible deformation significantly declined while axial irreversible deformation considerably increased. With the constant increase in confining pressure, the volumetric strain in sandstones during CLU under a high confining pressure was lower than that under a low confining pressure at each stress level. Moreover, the higher the confining pressure, the longer was the transition of the volumetric strain from compression to expansion; the corresponding reduction amplitude of the volumetric strain during final failure was large. Based on the evolution characteristics of the deformation parameters, the whole CLU process can be divided into three stages, involving crack closure, stable crack growth and instable crack growth. The evolution trends of the deformation parameters in the three stages showed favourable consistency. The increase in confining pressure hardly influenced the threshold of stage 2 while the threshold of stage 3 was extremely sensitive to the level of the confining pressure. Additionally, by comprehensively analyzing the evolution characteristics of various key deformation parameters, it can be seen that the increase in confining pressure nearly showed no influence on the elastic moduli and axial irreversible deformation; it largely influenced the multiaxial strain ratio and exhibited the most significant influence on volumetric strain. It meant that the development trend of volumetric strain had the most significant distinctive characteristic. In engineering practice, the development of cracks can be judged according to the change in volumetric strain. The increase in confining pressure can inhibit the development and connection direction of cracks in sandstones, consequently reducing the length of the fracture surface and shifting the fracture surface to the centre of the samples. Moreover, there was a significant difference in the fracture morphologies generated during conventional triaxial compression tests. Under confining pressures of 5–15 MPa, the samples were mainly dominated by shear failure of the inclined plane during CLU tests. This work was supported by the