An efficient nonlinear finite element model based on a higher-order beam theory is developed for accurately predicting the response of two layered composite beams with partial shear interaction. This is achieved by taking a third order variation of the longitudinal displacement over the beam depth for the two layers separately. The deformable shear connectors joining the two different material layers are modelled as distributed shear springs along the beam length at their interface. In order to capture the geometric nonlinear effects of the beam, the Green-Lagrange strain vector is used to develop the one dimensional finite element model. The nonlinear governing equations are solved by an incremental-iterative technique following the Newton-Raphson method. To assess the performance of the proposed model, the results predicted by the model are compared with published results as well as numerical results produced by using a detailed two dimensional finite element modelling of the composite beams.cross-sectional area of upper and lower layers of the beam linear strain-displacement matrix for the strain-displacement matrix for the penalty function strain-displacement matrix for shear connectors constitutive matrix for the elastic modulus for the nodal load vector shear modulus for the nonlinear strain-displacement matrix for the linear cross-sectional matrix for the nonlinear cross-sectional matrix for the linear stiffness matrix nonlinear stiffness matrix penalty parameter stiffness of distributed springs used for modelling shear connectors tangent stiffness matrix geometric stiffness matrix shape function distributed external load interfacial slip between upper and lower layers longitudinal displacement of the upper layer at its centroidal or reference axis longitudinal displacement at the bottom fibre of the upper layer longitudinal displacement of the lower layer at its reference axis longitudinal displacement at the top fibre of the lower layer strain energy due to penalty function transverse displacement higher order terms residual force vector nodal displacement vector strain vectors of upper and lower layers linear strain vector for the linear one dimensional strain vector for the nonlinear strain vector for the nonlinear one dimensional strain vector for the bending rotations of upper and lower layers stress vectors of upper and lower layers distributed shear force (per unit length) at the interface between upper and lower layers Composite beams are widely used in many structural engineering applications for their superior structural performance. A two layered composite beam such as timber-timber, timber-steel, timber-concrete and steel-concrete are typically used in the construction industry. In these structures, the two material layers are properly utilised (e.g., in steel-concrete composite beams, the concrete layer is primarily used to carry the compressive stress whereas the steel layer carries the tensile stress) to enhance the performance of the overall structural system. The composite action of these beams is achieved by connecting the two different material layers with shear connectors such as nails or steel shear studs. Theoretically, if the shear connectors have infinite stiffness, full composite action can be achieved. In this case, the benefit of the composite beam can be fully exploited where no shear slip develops at the interface between the two layers and full shear interaction is achieved. However, shear connectors have finite stiffness in reality, which results in the development of interfacial slip between the two layers and partial shear interaction is therefore developed One of the initial significant research attempts on the modelling of composite beams was conducted by Newmark et al. The effect of geometric nonlinear response is incorporated in the finite element models by Ranzi et al. It has been observed that a model based on TBT is capable of predicting the global response (e.g., deflection) of beams satisfactorily, but it is not adequate for the prediction of the actual distribution of stresses (local response) In order to address these problems, a higher-order beam theory (HBT) has recently been developed by Sheikh and co-workers In the present study, a nonlinear finite element model based on HBT is developed considering the effect of large deformations based on the Green-Lagrange strain vector. This leads to nonlinear governing equations which are solved by an incremental iterative technique following the Newton-Raphson method. The results predicted by the proposed models are validated with the published results and the numerical results produced by detailed two-dimensional finite element modelling of composite beams using a commercial finite element program (ABAQUS). It is noted that the stress distributions in composite beams, considering geometrically nonlinear effects, were not found in the existing literature. Therefore, the dataset reported contributes an important resource for future references.  The partial shear interaction between the two layers is modelled by uniformly distributed springs along the entire length of the interface between these layers. The interlayer slip is defined as the relative longitudinal displacement between the upper and lower layer at their interface and it can be expressed as  The shear strain for the upper material layer of the beam ( The shear stress free condition at the top surface of the upper material layer can now be employed by substituting Similarly, the shear stress free condition at the bottom surface of the lower material layer ( Now, substituting Similarly, substituting These four Eqs. In the above equations, The equilibrium equation can be derived using the principle of virtual work and it can be expressed as From Eqs. For the finite element implementation of the proposed beam model, a displacement based quadratic isoparametric beam element with three nodes is used to have a simple formulation and no unexpected numerical inconsistencies. A typical element having a length of Using Eq. Now the nonlinear strain vectors may be expressed as The vectors and The matrix The one dimensional strain vector shown in Eq.  and Employing the above Eqs. Taking the variation of Eq. Similarly, the slip at the interface between the two layers (4) can be expressed in terms of the nodal displacement vector as As there is no nonlinear term in the expression of the interfacial slip The virtual work done by an externally applied distributed load in which Substituting Eqs. The stresses in the above Eq. The Newton-Raphson technique will be used for the iterative solution of the nonlinear equilibrium Eq. The incremental strain displacement matrix of a material layer used in the above equation can be expressed by invoking Eq. Again, the incremental stress vector of a layer can be expressed by invoking Eq. The constitutive matrix [ The incremental interfacial shear force can be expressed in terms of the incremental slip as In the proposed finite element formulation, Using Eq. After substitution of Eqs. The tangent stiffness matrix [ The system of nonlinear equations is solved using the incremental equilibrium Eq. An example of a 1000 The finite element model of Hjiaj et al. The variation of the mid-span deflection with respect to the distributed load acting vertically downward, found in the present analysis using HBT as well as TBT, is presented in Hjiaj et al. An 8.0 The load-deflection curve obtained from both modelling techniques at mid-span and quarter-span sections of the beam is plotted in The behaviour of a 2 The computational time required for solving this problem was 8.1 For further investigation, the variation of bending stress over the beam depth obtained at one of the fixed ends using all these modelling techniques is presented in A two-span continuous beam consists of a concrete slab and a steel I-girder connected by steel shear studs as shown in The beam is analysed with the proposed finite element model based on HBT and compared with TBT where the interfacial shear stiffness is taken as 10 An efficient one dimensional finite element model based on a higher-order beam theory (HBT) is developed for an accurate prediction of the geometrically nonlinear response of two layered composite beams. The partial shear interaction caused by the longitudinal separation or shear slip of the two layers at their interface due to the deformability of shear connectors is considered and modelled as distributed shear springs along the entire length of the beam. The HBT provides a true parabolic variation of the shear stress over the beam depth, and therefore does not require the use of a potentially arbitrary shear correction factor for the correct prediction of the global response such as deflection. Moreover, the model is capable of predicting the local response such as the distribution of stresses realistically. The Green-Lagrange strain is used to develop the proposed finite element model for incorporating the effects of geometric nonlinearity. The principle of virtual work is applied to derive the nonlinear governing equations which are solved by an incremental-iterative approach following the Newton-Raphson technique. Numerical examples of composite beams are solved by the proposed model taking into account different layer configurations, loading, support conditions, and interactions to assess the performance and range of applicability of the model. The published results are used for the validation of the proposed model, and a detailed two-dimensional finite element model is used for verifying the response of composite beams. The numerical analysis has confirmed that the proposed model has improved capabilities compared with existing techniques in predicting the local response of composite beams. It is also observed that an improvement in the prediction of global response of these beams is achieved when the current model is applied. The financial support provide by the