Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) involved in the formation of the teeth of Ambystoma mexicanum were located and characterized with the cuprolinic blue (CB) staining method and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Glycosaminoglycan–cuprolinic blue precipitates (GAGCB) were found in different compartments of the mineralizing tissue. Various populations of elongated GAGCB could be discriminated both according to their size and their preferential distribution in the extracellular matrix (ECM). GAGCB populations that differ in their composition could be attributed not only to the compartments of the ECM but also to different zones and to different tooth types (early-larval and transformed). Larger precipitates were only observed within the dentine matrix of the shaft of the early-larval tooth. The composition of the populations differed significantly between the regions of the transformed tooth: pedicel, shaft and dividing zone. In later stages of tooth formation, small-sized GAGCBs were seen as intracellular deposits in the ameloblasts. It is concluded that the composition of GAGCB populations seems to play a role in the mineralization processes during tooth development in A. mexicanum and influence qualitative characteristics of the mineral in different tooth types and zones, and it is suggested that GAGs might be resorbed by the enamel epithelium during the late phase of enamel formation.Glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) and proteoglycans (PGs) play an essential role in hydration, electrolyte regulation and structural organization of the extracellular matrix (ECM; see Tooth development in  Early-larvae ( In the presence of CEC of 0.0, 0.3 or 0.6 In contrast, a prominent difference was found when the GAGs of the shaft of the early-larval tooth were measured. They showed an average length of 65±31 The average length of GAGCB in the collagenous matrices evaluated decreased the higher the CEC added was. This was caused by the step-wise elimination of larger precipitates associated with the increasing MgCl Comparison of the relative proportions of the GAGs in the various populations (CEC: 0.0 In addition, the GAG populations in the mineralizing collagenous matrices of the dentine in the shaft of the transformed ( GAGs were located in the mineralizing collagenous matrix related to the dentine in the shaft, in the dividing zone and in the hard material of the pedicel of the transformed teeth of the adult axolotl. Additionally, the matrix of the shaft of early-larval teeth was analysed ( The basal lamina bordering the inner enamel epithelium along the basal parts of the transformed replacement teeth clearly revealed a layer composed of GAGCB ( In the present study, GAGs were localized and characterized in tooth-forming tissue of the Mexican Axolotl by staining with CB. GAGCB and the basal lamina were absent from the ameloblast cells of the inner enamel epithelium secreting the enamel (see also Basal lamina and surface of odontoblasts possessed smaller GAGs. The capability of GAGs to bind cations plays an important regulatory role in the mineralization of the apatite positioned close to the cell surface, although the role of GAGs is still a matter of discussion. Thus, the odontoblasts may have the function either to accumulate or to dissolve cations in the ECM (see The precipitate lengths found within the different compartments of the transformed tooth revealed similar values for collagenous and soluble matrix. The precipitates of the collagenous matrices reached an average length of 40 The glycoconjugates present in the different collagenous matrices of the tooth zones are probably the same in all areas. However, a certain proportion of the populations of GAGs, characterized by the different distributions of precipitates, differed significantly between the matrices of these zones. Possibly the different degrees of mineralization in the various parts of the urodele tooth ( Larger GAGCB were only seen in the dentine matrix of the shaft of the early-larval tooth, which is therefore different from all collagenous matrices of the adult animals teeth. These larger precipitates in the larva are distributed less densely. They probably represent two types of PGs, of which the larger ones are likely keratan sulphate rich. It is not known whether this PG composition in the matrix of the early-larval tooth modulates the way of mineralization or influences the quality of the hard material formed. Short, as well as very large and thin, precipitates in the matrix of the growing teeth of larvae were also shown in The authors are indebted to Barbara Hasert for technical assistance and to Martina Fasel for the drawings.