Mounting evidence suggests reconceptualizing osteoarthritis (OA) as an inflammatory disorder. Trauma and obesity, the common risk factors of OA, could trigger the local or systemic inflammatory cytokines cascade. Inflammatory bone loss has been well documented; yet it remains largely unknown about the link between the inflammation and hypertrophic changes of subchondral bone seen in OA, such as osteophytosis and sclerosis. Amid a cohort of inflammatory cytokines, endothelin-1 (ET-1) could stimulate the osteoblast-mediated bone formation in both physiological (postnatal growth of trabecular bone) and pathological conditions (bone metastasis of prostate or breast cancer). Also, ET-1 is known as a mitogen and contributes to fibrosis in various organs, e.g., skin, liver, lung, kidney heart and etc., as a result of inflammatory or metabolic disorders. Subchondral bone sclerosis shared the similarity with fibrosis in terms of the overproduction of collagen type I. We postulated that ET-1 might have a hand in the subchondral bone sclerosis of OA. Meanwhile, ET-1 was also able to stimulate the production of matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-1 and 13 by articular chondrocytes and synoviocytes, by which it might trigger the enzymatic degradation of articular cartilage. Taken together, ET-1 signaling may play a role in destruction of bone-cartilage unit in the pathogenesis of OA; it warrants further investigations to potentiate ET-1 as a novel diagnostic biomarker and therapeutic target for rescue of OA.Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most common of age-related degenerative joint disorders. It is a leading cause of pain and disability among older adults. OA is a whole joint disorder with low-grade inflammation, afflicting articular cartilage, subchondral bone, synovium, ligaments and joint capsule. The hallmark of OA is the degradation of articular cartilage. The integrity of articular cartilage relies on the interplay with the other joint tissues, in particular subchondral bone Recently, mounting evidence suggests that OA should be conceived as an inflammatory disease rather a simple wear-and-tear problem Actually, osteoblasts derived from sclerotic bone of OA patients exhibited high profile of inflammatory cytokines including TGF-β1, prostaglandin E2 (PGE ET-1, a 21-amino acid peptide, was first discovered as a potent vasoconstrictor in 1988 ET-1 and nitric oxide (NO) act against each other to maintain vascular homeostasis and the balance of vasoconstriction and vasodilation Also, ET-1 may contribute to the complications of hypertension or diabetes such as the fibrosis of heart, lung, kidney and skin by activating the inflammatory and fibrotic signaling pathways ET-1 has been implicated as a major informatory mediator in various autoimmune diseases such as RA ET-1 could exert its direct effects on articular chondrocytes as well as the synovial inflammation and fibrosis. Articular chondrocytes themselves rarely express ET-1 unless the natural aging process ET-1 may have a hand in mediating the inflammation-induced pain, a major complaint from arthritis patients. It was found that the subcutaneous injection of ET-1 could produce pain behavior and activate the nociceptive C-fibers in a dose–dependent manner By contrast, the exact role of ET-1 in the disturbance of subchondral bone in arthritic joint remains largely unknown. Unlike the common x-radiographic findings, the edema-like changes under magnetic resonance imaging, i.e., so-called bone marrow lesions (BMLs), were found in an association with the severity of pain in OA Role of ET-1 in the maintenance of bone homeostasis and regulation of osteoblastic function has been widely discussed ( In agreement with the Compared to osteoblasts, the information about ET-1 function in osteoclasts is limited and ambiguous. ET-1 was detected in the membrane and cytoplasm of osteoclasts by immunostaining ET-1 signaling also contributed to the pathological bone formation, e.g., osteoblastic metastasis in prostate cancer The extracellular molecular mechanism underlying ET-1-mediated bone formation was possibly involving the autocrine or paracrine activation of Wnt signaling that is essential for osteoblast proliferation, differentiation and bone development ( The intracellular molecular mechanism underling ET-1 mediated bone formation may include the calcineurin/Nuclear factor of activated T-cells (NFAT) pathway ET-1 signaling is proposed to afflict all types of cells in the joint, e.g., articular chondrocytes, osteoblasts and synoviocytes in the pathogenesis of OA ( Sin prepared the first draft of this review article and Tang supplemented the paragraphs and summarizing tables about the The authors declare that they have no competing interests. The authors acknowledge the support from