Bacterial attachment and biofilm formation are important for microbial bioleaching of metal sulfides, however, many details of the role played by bacteria are still unknown. Attachment as the first step in biofilm formation is critical. Our investigations are focused on these processes to control bacterial bioleaching processes.
                  In moderately thermophilic pure cultures of Acidithiobacillus 
                     caldus and Leptospirillum 
                     ferriphilum, only the latter one showed significant attachment and biofilm formation to metal sulfides. In pure cultures of the mesophilic strains Acidithiobacillus 
                     spp., Leptospirillum 
                     ferrooxidans, Ferrimicrobium 
                     acidiphilum and a novel undescribed leaching organism designated SPIII/3, attachment was significant by L. ferrooxidans, At. thiooxidans and SPIII/3.
                  In general, interaction of different species in mixed cultures resulted in increased attachment, increased production of extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) and leaching. Bacteria like Leptospirillum 
                     spp. enhanced the attachment of other species in mixed biofilms. Another finding is that large areas of the surface of minerals remain uncolonized, whereas at some places bacteria attach in clusters.
                  Based on these findings we conclude that attachment and thereby bacterial leaching can be improved by the production of EPS by several strains especially in combination with Leptospirillum 
                     spp.Bioleaching is a process, where bacteria dissolve metal sulfides such as pyrite, chalcopyrite or sphalerite. This process is used for metal winning in, e.g., tank or heap leaching. Metals like copper, gold or nickel are extracted by this process from low grade ores ( Various bacterial and archaeal species are involved in the process of sulfide dissolution using the “contact” and “non-contact” mechanisms. While the non-contact mechanism assumes that microorganisms oxidize dissolved iron(II) ions to iron(III) ions which in turn attack the metal sulfides and are chemically reduced to iron(II) ions, the contact mechanism requires microorganisms attached to the mineral surface ( Therefore, we quantified and visualized initial colonization and biofilm formation on pyrite for mesophilic and moderately thermophilic species of the genera It is necessary to better understand attachment and leaching of mesophilic and moderately thermophilic microorganisms to adjust the composition of leaching bacteria to optimize the different temperature dependent parts of this process. Furthermore, it is important to understand the process of bacterial attachment and biofilm formation on mineral surfaces at the molecular level. With this knowledge commercial leaching processes may be optimized or unwanted natural leaching processes may become controllable. Mesophilic iron-oxidizing bacteria The mesophilic sulfur-oxidizing bacterium Attachment tests were performed in 50 Leaching experiments were done in 150 From museum grade pyrite crystals (size approx. 3.5 Cells and selected EPS compounds were visualized by epifluorescence microscopy (EFM) ( Cells on pyrite coupons were treated like described before (see: attachment tests with pyrite coupons). Dry-fixed SPIII/3 cells on a glass slide were stained by Syto™9 and lectin. Bacterial attachment tests with pyrite grains were performed with pure and mixed cultures at 45 Two moderately thermophilic species  The mesophilic strains  Leaching of pyrite by pure and mixed cultures at 28 In The leaching test showed that cells of Dissolution of pyrite for assays with the mesophilic bacteria The graphs in Attachment of pure cultures of Cells of Visualization ( Cells of As shown in An instrumental combination of an atomic force microscope with an epifluorescence microscope was used to investigate differences in cell morphology, aggregation behavior and biofilm formation for topographically relevant areas of pyrite surfaces. Cells and their EPS compounds were visualized by DAPI-, lectin-staining and FISH. In The images in Biofilm formation or the appearance of polysaccharide structures as part of the EPS mediating the contact of leaching bacteria to mineral surfaces was investigated by the use of the fluorescence marked lectin ConA. Syto™9 and DAPI were used to visualize the whole cells by nuclein acid staining. ConA binds to structural elements like glycoproteins or glycolipids possessing internal and non-reducing terminal alpha-mannosylgroups ( It is obvious from In case of the yet undescribed leaching organism SPIII/3, experiments run under similar conditions also indicate cells and their EPS.  Bacterial attachment is an essential part of bioleaching. Moderately thermophilic mixed cultures of Several leaching organisms, such as Pyrite oxidation can thus be estimated by the determination of iron ions in the bulk solution. In leaching experiments with moderate thermophilic iron oxidizers During leaching processes by iron–ion oxidizing bacteria in absence of sulfur oxidizers, elemental sulfur may form layers on metal sulfide surfaces (passivation layers) due to a possibly insufficient or missing sulfur-oxidizing capacity. The oxidation of sulfur compounds by It is obvious that To gain more information about cell distribution and spatial arrangement of cells on mineral surfaces, cells on pyrite surfaces were stained by DAPI and counted directly. It was shown that large areas of pyrite surfaces remain uncolonized ( For further investigations on attachment and leaching it is necessary on one hand to distinguish leaching species attached to mineral surfaces. On the other hand information about a relationship between mineral topography (AFM) and attachment-mediating compounds like EPS (EFM) are needed. Therefore we visualized cells located on pyrite surfaces. Cells from pure cultures of The EPS production (chemical composition and amount) is species-specific, the chemical constituents of the EPS of mixed cultures still remain to be elucidated. Summarizing, the composition of leaching communities needs to be optimized with regard to the industrial application. Our findings seem to indicate the advantages of combining chemolithoautotrophic iron- and/or sulfur oxidizers with chemolithoheterotrophic organisms. As a consequence of increasing temperatures during leaching processes, The authors acknowledge the financial support given to this project by the European Commission under the Sixth Framework Program for Research and Development (BioMinE, European Project Contract NMP1-CT-500329-1) and Vattenfall/MIBRAG.