This paper studies the ferric sulphate leaching of converter slag (9% Cu) in order to recover Cu through a process in which bacteria regenerate the leaching agent. For this purpose, the effect of variables such as pulp density, ferric concentration, temperature and size particle have been investigated.
                  As the Cu extraction is limited by the physical refractoriness of slag, a mild grinding is necessary.
                  In only 4 h more than 93% of Cu is leached with 11.5 g/L of initial ferric sulphate, D
                     80
                     =47.03, 2% of pulp density at 60 °C.Copper extraction from Cu–Fe–S minerals is a pyrometallurgical process that entails obtaining a Cu-concentrate by froth flotation, smelting it to molten high-Cu matte, the conversion of molten matte to molten blister copper, which is finally electrorefined to ultra-pure copper. Two phases take place in smelting and converting stages. One of them contains most of Cu as matte (in smelting) and impure Cu (in converting) and the other; the slag, as free of as Cu as possible, is composed of oxides. Both phases are separated by sedimentation. It is well known that even in the most efficient pyrometallurgical method, copper is lost in discarded slag. After cooling and solidification, slag consists of a matrix of iron silicates, where droplets of matte (Cu The concentration of Cu in slag from smelting is typically in the range 0.5 to 2%, while converter slags can contain 2 to 15% Cu. This is a considerable amount of copper very much higher than those of many ores. The high content in copper requires a treatment for Cu recovery. Slag cleaning is not only necessary because of economical reasons but also because of environmental implications ( Slag is sent to an electric furnace where the sedimentation time of Cu-bearing species is prolonged. The heaviest molten phase obtained is periodically tapped from the furnace and sent to a converter for its conversion to blister copper. 2. Slag is subjected to cooling/solidification, crushing, grinding and flotation to obtain a 30 to 60% Cu-concentrate ( In the electric furnace used for slag cleansing temperature is maintained or increased by passing an electric current through slag between submerged carbon electrodes. The furnaces are designed to give slag residence times of 1 to 10 h. These settling times allow most of the matte drops to settle ( Slag cleansing by froth flotation entails solidifying slags in moulds, ladles or pits, cooling it for days and crushing and grinding the slag to 50 μm and smaller to obtain a 30 to 60% Cu concentrate that must be totally resmelt increasing the smelting capacity or replacing some primary concentrate ( It is logical to assume losses of Cu in both circuits of concentration, because Cu is mostly included in very small particles that in the first case would need very long times to sediment in the electric furnace, remaining trapped in the slag phase; and in the second one are partially or totally occluded in the slag phase, unable to interact with the collector and therefore remain in the flotation tailings. An alternative approach to the slag cleansing methods is to process the slag through hydrometallurgical routes. Leaching agents have included hydrochloric acid, sulphuric acid (in atmospheric and pressure leaching), ammonia, cyanide, ferric chloride, hydrogen peroxide and chlorine/chloride system ( This paper is the first of a series about the treatment of converter slags by BRISA process, a biotechnological process based on the indirect bioleaching ( The BRISA process consists, basically, of a dynamic leaching with ferric sulphate (ferric leaching stage) from ores and concentrates of metal sulphides (MeS), coupled with the biological regeneration (biooxidation stage) of the leaching reagent. The regenerated ferric iron is reused in the leaching step, running in a closed circuit. A scheme of the process is shown on The main chemical reactions that represent this process are: Both stages are carried out separated physically, allowing their individual enhancement: the ferric leaching by thermal activation, stirring and the use of catalysts (if it were necessary), and the biooxidation using high-efficiency bioreactors. In these bioreactors, the control of temperature, aeration, and residence time distribution is feasible in order to promote the growth and metabolic activity of bacteria ( The BRISA process has been successfully applied to the treatment of Cu sulphides concentrates and ores ( The main chemical reactions involved in the acid ferric leaching of copper from slag are the following: Fayalite dissolution: Magnetite dissolution: Matte leaching: White metal leaching: This reaction is carried out in two steps; in the first, very speedy, the transformation of cuprous sulphide into blaubleibender coveline (Cu Blister Cu leaching: The ferric leaching of a sample of Pierce–Smith converter slag has been tested in the present work. Biooxidation stage has also been investigated and it will be reported in subsequent communications, together with an economic study and the selection of operational parameters for a continuous plant for this process. A sample of converter copper slag supplied by Atlantic Copper Company (Huelva, Spain) has been studied in this work. The sample as received was characterized as follows: Representative samples, obtained by a rotatory sample divider (Fritsch), were ground in a planetary monomill (pulverisette 6 Fritsch). After being subject to attacks with aqua regia, the resulting liquid from the digestion was analysed by atomic absorption spectrophotometry (Perkin Elmer AAS 3110). For the determination of S, a LECO titrator was employed. Metallographic samples were prepared by embedding the solid samples in epoxy resin and polishing. They were visualised in a reflected-light optical microscope fitted with polarised light, Nomarsky differential interferential contrast, and in a scanning electron microscope, fitted with elemental analysis by energy dispersion X-ray (EDX). The combination of the two techniques applied to the same fields of each sample enables identifying each species (by EDX spectra and elemental quantitative analysis in SEM). Samples as received were sequentially sieved using sieves of the ASTM series (#45, 50, 70, 100, 200, 230, and 400). After grinding, the particle size distribution of samples was analysed by laser diffraction (LS 13320 Beckman Coulter). The assays of dynamic leaching with ferric sulphate were carried out in Erlenmeyer flasks of 250 mL, stirred at 240 rpm on an orbital stirrer in a thermostated chamber by forced air circulation. The water losses due to evaporation were determined by weight and were taken into account during recovery calculations. After each assay, the slurry was filtered, washed with distilled water, dried and weighed. Metallic ion concentrations in leaching liquors were determined by atomic absorption spectroscopy, except ferrous iron concentration which was analysed by titration with 0.05 N potassium dichromate in an automatic titrator (Radiometer Copenhagen) with potentiometric control of the endpoint. The initial pH was the equilibrium pH of the ferric solution used. The pH was measured at the beginning and at the end of each test. Solid residues were dissolved and analysed for copper and iron. As preliminary tests, samples, as received, were leached with ferric sulphate solution at 20 and 75 °C. After this, and in order to evaluate the physical refractoriness of slag to ferric leaching, a series of tests were performed on different size particle fractions after sieving the original samples. Each granulometric fraction was chemically characterized to determine the Cu extraction in ferric leaching. To study the effect of grinding, samples were ground in a planetary monomill (Pulverisette 6 Fritsch) by hard metal tungsten carbide balls (93.5% WC Stirred tank leaching tests were carried out in a 5L glass, baffle-stirred, thermostated vessel. The solution volume was 4 L and the stirred speed was 500 min  Sample as received is composed of coarse particles, being 40% of then higher than 840 μm and 10% higher than 1.7 mm. (refer to the second column on The microscopic observations of this material identified as main constituents an amorphous glassy iron silicate phase with occluded magnetite (Fe As preliminary tests, sample as received was leached during 2 h at 20 and 75 °C with 3 different pulp densities (2, 5 and 10 wt.%). The initial ferric concentration of the leaching solution was 11 g/L. Results are shown in By comparison of In short, two conclusions can be drawn from these results: firstly, the ferric leaching of slag is activated by temperature and, secondly, as this material is rich in copper, its leaching needs low pulp density or high ferric concentration. As it was observed that Cu-bearing particles were occluded in a silicate matrix, the contact between the reagent (ferric iron) and them will be limited. In order to study this effect, samples were sieved on different size-particle fractions and each fraction was leached with ferric iron. Experimental conditions were 70 °C, 12 g/L of ferric iron, 2% of pulp density and 6 h. On Copper seems to concentrate in fine fractions (see the second column) suggesting a preferential fracture at the fayalite/Cu-bearing particle interphase. Cu extractions (4th column) higher than 94% are only obtained after leaching fractions with a size particle under 106 μm, leaving solid residues (3rd column) with less than 1.5% of Cu. As it was expected after the mineralogical analysis, there is physical refractoriness. Copper recoveries versus time for the different size fractions of sample are plotted on  After grinding and size distribution analysis, samples were leached at 70 °C with 11.5 g/L of ferric iron for 8 h, the pulp density in these assays was 2% and the pH 1.61.  For the following study, a time of grinding of 10 min was selected because it warrants copper recoveries higher than 90% and it has been observed that an increase to 15 min does not mean a significant increase in copper recovery In relation to the final pH, a light increase respect to the initial one can be observed (1.61), since final pH varies from 1.65 to 1.70. Acid is consumed by fayalite and magnetite dissolution (reactions As thermal activation was observed, the influence of temperature has been studied in the range 20–80 °C. After grinding for 10 min ( A linear increase of Cu recovery is observed in the range 25–50 °C. Temperature values higher than 60 °C do not significantly improve Cu extraction. For this reason, the evolution of leaching at 60 °C in a stirred tank was studied; data are plotted in The copper extraction yield is limited by the physical refractoriness of slag, due to the high degree of occlusion in a silicate matrix of the copper-bearing species. Copper seems to concentrate in fine fractions suggesting a preferential fracture at the fayalite/Cu-bearing particle interphase. The physical refractoriness of slag makes necessary a mild grinding. The ferric leaching of slag is activated by temperature, a linear increase of Cu recovery is observed in the range 25–50 °C. Temperature values higher than 60 °C do not significantly improve Cu extraction. In only 4 h more than 93% of Cu is leached from this rich in copper converter slag in the following conditions: 11.5 g/L of ferric iron (pH This work was carried out in the frame of BioMinE (European project contract NMP1-CT-500329-1). The authors acknowledge the financial support given to this project by the European Commission under the Sixth Framework Programme for Research and Development. This work was carried out within the project CTM-02548, financed by the Spanish Ministry of Education and Science.