Nickel and Ni–Al composites with varying Al nanoparticle content were produced by pulsed electrodeposition using an organic additive-free sulfamate bath. The as-deposited Ni–Al composites exhibited increased compressive residual stresses with increasing Al nanoparticles. Detailed microstructural investigation revealed that Al codeposition led to significant refinement of the columnar morphology and grain structure of Ni matrix along with a texture change from strong 〈001〉 to 〈011〉 fiber texture parallel to the growth direction. The as-deposited Ni with bimodal grain structure displayed good tensile strength and ductility. The microhardness and tensile strength of the Ni deposits were increased initially with Al content and then decreased at higher particle content. Particle induced grain refinement and texture changes could be related to change in the growth of upcoming Ni nuclei on to the surface of well-dispersed Al nanoparticles. Significant grain refinement and lesser internal stresses along with good particle distribution and relatively harder ⟨011⟩ fiber texture at lower particles concentration collectively contributed to the observed higher strengths in Ni–Al composites as compared to Ni deposits. There was substantial change in fracture morphology from spherical dimples to flat regions with increasing Al content due to agglomeration of nanoparticles at higher particle loading.Many engineering applications demand proper selection and design of materials. Structural components do require improved properties such as high strength, good wear and abrasion resistance and better corrosion and oxidation resistance. According to the well-known Hall-Petch relationship, finer the grain size higher the strength and the hardness Electrodeposited nickel has become a model material to understand the mechanical behavior of face centered cubic (FCC) fine grained materials Microstructural instability which significantly affects the mechanical characteristics is one of the major issues for the fine grained nickel because of large driving force available in the form of high angle grain boundaries It is clear that most of the studies on the electrodeposited Ni–Al based composites are mainly confined to the coating based applications with emphasis on the effect of electrodeposition parameters and particle size on microstructure, corrosion and oxidation resistance and wear behavior of the deposits. There were reports on texture evolution of Ni–Al composites as a function of Al particle content, but these were merely qualitative in nature. It was reported that the electrodeposited Ni based composites reinforced with carbon nanotubes Free-standing Ni–Al foils with varying Al nanoparticles concentrations were produced by pulsed electrodeposition technique under galvanostatic condition using nickel sulfamate bath. The sulfamate electrolytic bath with typical composition of Ni(SO For microstructural analysis, the as-deposited foils were electropolished in a mixture of methanol and perchloric acid (9:1) at 20 Some selected as-deposited foils were analyzed using JEOL 2100F field emission gun transmission electron microscope (FEG-TEM) operated at 200 Field emission gun scanning electron microscope (FEG-SEM) with EDAX-OIM™ electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) detector was used at 20 To evaluate the variation in hardness as a function of Al particle content, Vickers microindentation was carried out on substrate side of the foils after electropolishing the surface. A peak load of 2    To further investigate the microstructural modification introduced by Al particle reinforcements in Ni matrix, OIM-IPF maps were recorded on the substrate, solution and cross-section sides of the as-deposited samples. Mechanical characteristics of the as-deposited foils were evaluated at room temperature by Vickers microindentation and tensile test.  Among many proposed models to elucidate the co-deposition mechanism of particles into the metal matrix during electrodeposition, Guglielmi adsorption mechanism The Ni deposit produced in the absence of any organic additive and Al nanoparticles in the sulfamate bath showed tensile residual stress of ~ The XRD peaks of Ni matrix broadened gradually with increasing Al content ( Other salient features associated with Al codeposition are refinement of the columnar morphology as well as grain structure and texture weakening of Ni matrix at lower nanoparticles loading. Refinement of Ni matrix microstructure with codeposition of Al particles (for both micro- and nanoparticles) was reported earlier Tensile tests provide better insight on the role of particle content on the mechanical characteristics of freestanding composite foils. Various factors which can affect the bulk mechanical properties have been investigated in this study viz. particle content, particle distribution, grain size, texture and internal stress state. It was noted that the Al nanoparticles codeposition in Ni matrix showed similar effect on both hardness and strength variation as a function of Al nanoparticle loading in the bath. The hardness and strength values of the as-deposited Ni without Al nanoparticles were comparable with the Ni foils produced by Ebrahimi et al. Ebrahimi and Ahmed The mechanical properties of Ni–Al electrodeposited composites largely depend upon the uniformity of particle coverage and distribution in matrix. Pure Ni and Ni with low Al particle content showed no visible cracks, whereas Ni-5 Ni–Al composites with varying Al nanoparticle content ranging from 0 to 10 Ni deposit produced without Al nanoparticles exhibited a bimodal grain structure consisting of significant fraction of ultrafine and microcrystalline grains with tensile residual stress. Ni–Al composite foils showed an increased compressive residual stress with increasing Al nanoparticle loading in the bath. At lower concentrations of Al, there was significant refinement of columnar morphology as well as the grain structure with a narrow grain size distribution and the texture changed from strong ⟨001⟩ to ⟨011⟩ fiber texture parallel to growth direction in Ni–Al composites. At lower Al nanoparticle loading (≤ However, higher Al particle loading in the bath (≥ The authors are grateful to Industrial Research and Consultancy Centre (IRCC),