Cemented paste backfill (CPB) is used extensively in Australia for providing ground support during underground mining operations. This paper considered the use of polypropylene fibres to reinforce the partial or whole body of CPB models in laboratory centrifuge tests. Specimens were cast as non-reinforced (tailings, cement and water), quarter-height, half-height and full height fibre-reinforced CPB model stopes. The stability of CPB models with vertically exposed faces was investigated by a series of centrifuge tests. The modelling data showed that the prototype height of fibre reinforced CPB stopes could be much higher than that of unreinforced stopes depending on the extent of reinforcing. The vertical displacement and failure mass ratio of CPB models were also compared and discussed. The distinct failure modes showed that fibre reinforcement was effective in preventing the CPB failing into the strong box. Furthermore, virtually no fragments were spalled from the exposed faces of reinforced sections of the stopes. It indicated that the application of fibre reinforcement would potentially reduce ore dilution and recovery costs, because the risks of failure would be lowered and prototype stope sizes be enlarged.The application of cemented paste backfill (CPB) has become increasingly common in Australia and Canada over the past decades ( Different factors that may affect the performance of CPB have been considered in previous studies, such as the properties of CPB components (  The purpose of this paper is to explore the contribution of fibre reinforcement to the potential increase of prototype heights of CPB stopes and improving the safety of stopes by utilising a material that is significantly more ductile than conventional CPB. This was done by conducting centrifuge tests on eight models using four different reinforcement configurations. These results are also compared with predicted stable stope heights obtained from UCS tests. The design of the models was based on the evaluation of previous studies on reinforced CPB and centrifuge tests. Characteristics of the failure behaviour (i.e. whether brittle or ductile) and failure mass ratio are presented and discussed. The tailings used in the models were from a copper mine in Southern China. Eight centrifuge model stopes in four different reinforcement configurations (i.e. two replicates of each configuration) were cast in wooden moulds 100 mm by 100 mm by 500 mm high, and transferred to the strongbox in the moulds after being cured for 28 days. The lateral plates of the moulds were vertical and were relatively smooth, which could thus not simulate the roughness of stope walls in-situ. However, it did make comparison of the relative performance of different reinforcement configurations easier. Separately, 3 specimens were cast into cylindrical plastic moulds 50 mm in diameter and 100 mm high for UCS tests on unreinforced and reinforced specimens in order to facilitate comparison of the predicted prototype heights with centrifuge results. All models contained 2.5% cement content by dry mass of tailings based on the study of The CPB mixture was prepared at a solids content of 78% and a slump value of 8.2 inches, which were representative of values used at the site. The unreinforced and fibre reinforced CPB mixture were produced at the same time, and poured in sequence, depending on the reinforcement configuration, into the individual model stope moulds. The prepared models and specimens then were sealed and cured for 28 days before starting centrifuge tests and UCS tests. In this study, the tests were carried out using the geotechnical beam centrifuge at Tsinghua University. The equipment has a nominal radius of 2 m and a capacity of 50 g-tonne, with a maximum acceleration of 250 g. Four CPB models were placed in a row inside a rectangular strongbox made of aluminium alloy with internal dimensions of 450 mm in length and width, 600 mm in height. Laser displacement sensors were installed above models, and cameras were fixed facing towards the exposed faces of models ( After 28 days of curing, the front plate of each mould was removed and four models were placed into the strongbox for a single flight. The front face of each model was spray painted in red and marked with a number for the purpose of recognising the failure and the model type. The marked faces can be seen through the Plexiglas wall of the strongbox in For UCS tests, the cylindrical specimens (also cured for 28 days) were compressed using a displacement rate of 0.1 mm/min. The final results were obtained from the average value of triplicate tests.   The results demonstrated that with the higher reinforcing rate, the failure mass ratio of models decreased sharply. However, the partly reinforced models were not always stable, showing sudden failures and substantial losses in mass. Any failure of a CPB stope, unreinforced, part-reinforced or fully reinforced would generate unacceptable ore dilution and severe safety issues. Although full height reinforcement appears to have the potential to eliminate significant failure, the choice of reinforcement content should be considered according to cost considerations and ease of achieving thorough and uniform mixing of reinforcement fibre within the backfill.  The fibre reinforcement demonstrated a remarkable advantage in improving the self-supporting capability of stopes. The onset of failure was observed to initiate in unreinforced zones, while reinforced zones showed ductile yield with formation of surface ridges due to the vertical compression and associated lateral restraint. Thus, even though the walls were prepared with a relatively smooth finish, friction would have been generated between the walls and the CPB as a result of the lateral expansion of CPB during spin-up. The results proved again that increasing the reinforcement configuration could benefit a large volume of the CPB in terms of improvement of stope stability and reduction of ore dilution. The value of maximum applied centrifuge acceleration on each model was presented in The equivalent prototype heights of fibre reinforced stopes were nearly twice, to more than three times as large as unreinforced stopes. This indicates the potential to increase the exposure heights of CPB stopes in underground mines using cut-and-fill, benching or open stoping mining methods, thus decreasing stope fill cycle times, which would provide productivity improvements and cost reductions. There is also the potential to reduce cement content if reinforcing is used, thus potentially balancing the cost of the reinforcing. However, it should be noted that the combined application of unreinforced and fibre reinforced CPB still has many uncertainties in stability evaluation and recipe design, etc. More centrifuge tests on part-reinforced CPB models are planned in order to explore the optimisation of this application. The solution proposed by A series of model tests were successfully carried out in the 50 g-tonne centrifuge equipment at Tsinghua University to explore the performance of fibre-reinforced CPB stopes in underground mines. The failure stope heights in the centrifuge were compared with conventional predictions based on UCS test data. The following conclusions can be drawn from this work. Fibre reinforced CPB stopes behaved in a more ductile fashion than unreinforced stopes, exhibiting significantly larger displacements towards the exposed face (i.e. outward displacement) of the model stope prior to failure (if failure indeed occurred) than unreinforced stopes, with the pattern of outward displacement also being smoother than for unreinforced stopes. The ductility of part-reinforced models was more significant when higher reinforcement configurations were used. The failure mass ratio of stopes became much lower when increasing the reinforcement configuration, especially for fully reinforced stopes, when the ratios were close to zero. Reduced ore dilution and increased production rates could potentially be achieved by using fibre-reinforced CPB, especially when filled stopes are exposed by adjacent excavations. Not all fibre-reinforced zones of model stopes failed under the maximum applied centrifugal acceleration, whereas unreinforced zones showed brittle failure behaviour, with sudden falls of material, which occurred with such velocity that the dislodged blocks were severely fragmented upon contact with the centrifuge floor. In partly reinforced stopes, the failure plane always developed from the interface between reinforced and unreinforced areas. The prototype failure heights of centrifuge model stopes with full fibre reinforcing were at least 100% greater than the predicted height based on UCS measurements. It indicates the possibility of increasing productivity by increasing the exposure height of CPB stopes and thereby requiring fewer individual stopes to be developed. The backfill design method based on UCS test data was conservative compared with centrifuge results, providing a reasonable factor of safety for unreinforced CPB. However, Mitchell's solution provided a predicted failure height for fibre-reinforced CPB stopes (based on relevant UCS tests on reinforced CPB) that underestimated the failure height of these stopes. Thus while Mitchell's approach works extremely well for unreinforced CPB (for which the solution was originally developed), future work should focus on developing a new method of stability evaluation for reinforced CPB stopes and for exploring the potential applications of fibre reinforcement in underground mining. The ability of fibres to prevent brittle failure of CPB, as evidenced in this work and previously published research, should find useful application in some operations. Financial support was provided by the