Sensitivity analysis of Wasp model for pressure gradient in solid–liquid slurries was conducted. The experimental work was carried out in 22-mm ID and 45-mm ID pipelines utilizing slurries composed of spherical glass beads having particle size distribution (PSD) following the Rosin–Rammler distribution and mean size of 50 μm. The spreads of the distribution were 1.7 and 7, corresponding to wide and narrow distributions, respectively. The slurries examined in this study had concentrations ranging from 5% to 25% by volume. Statistical tests for equivalence of means and variances provided some evidence that Wasp model is more accurate in predicting pressure gradients for the slurries of narrower PSD and at higher solid concentrations. Although the model was designed specifically for relatively large pipes, it was found more accurate in predicting pressure gradients in the 22-mm ID pipeline than in the 45-mm pipeline. Experimental results obtained in the same flow loop diameter indicated that the slurry of the narrower distribution produced higher-pressure gradients than those for the slurry of wider distribution. Pressure gradient increased markedly with increasing slurry concentration regardless of the pipe diameter and slurry PSD. However, the pipe diameter was found to have more significant influence on the pressure gradient than the slurry concentration does.The transport of solid–liquid slurries is frequently encountered in many industries, such as the coal, oil and gas, and food. There is a large body of scientific literature devoted to transportation of solid–liquid slurries in pipes. Many references can be found in Govier and Aziz An experimental investigation of flow characteristics of solid–liquid slurries of specific mean diameters and particle size distributions has been carried out. Statistical analyses was conducted to quantify the effects of pipe diameter, slurry concentration, and PSD on measured pressure drop values and the accuracy of Wasp et al. The slurries utilized in this study were glass bead–water mixtures. The solid particles had a median diameter of 50 μm, and their particle size distribution followed Rosin–Rammler distribution with three distinct spreads of distribution, wide, intermediate, and narrow. The slurry concentration had values of 5%, 15%, and 25% by volume, and the mean slurry velocity varied in the range of 0.7 m/s to 2.5 m/s. The experimental setup is shown in In the slurry tank, a mixer powered by an electric motor was installed to agitate the slurry mixture to obtain homogeneous solids distribution in the tank. The rotation rate of the mixer was monitored by an ACT-2A electronic tachometer from Monarch Instruments. The loop was equipped with a MAG 1100 MAGFLO The inside diameter of the larger tube was 45-mm; twice the inside diameter of the smaller one. Tubing of the 45-mm ID flow loop was assembled parallel to the 22-mm ID flow loop on the same frame. This loop had a 30-gallon supply tank equipped with an electric mixer. Slurry was pumped through the loop with an HM50 centrifugal slurry pump from Svedala. The pump was equipped with variable speed drive in order to adjust the flow rate in the loop. The flow rate in the loop was measured by a MAG 3000 magnetic flow meter. The loop had a 6.1-m measuring section over which the pressure drops were measured with differential pressure transmitters from Rosemount (Model 3051DP). The loop was equipped with two Model 1151 GP gage pressure transmitters also from Rosemount, one gage transmitter near the inlet and the other near the discharge of the loop. All flow loop instrumentation was connected to a data acquisition system from National Instruments, which facilitated data collection via the LabView program. This system was equipped with a Coriolis mass-flow meter (F 200-Series by MicroMotion) to monitor slurries concentration. Wasp et al. Wasp's model calculations presented here were performed with Thomas The examined slurries were composed of glass beads ( In order to obtain such particle size distribution, the following procedure was used to prepare the solids for the slurry. First, the solids were sieved into several narrow size fractions. Next, these fractions were combined according to weight percentage obtained from Rosin–Rammler distribution to obtain the desired PSD. Measured PSD were in very good agreement with theoretical one for all slurries tested in this study. Experimentally measured pressure gradients for slurries with median particle size 50 μm and In order to illustrate the influences of pipe diameter and slurry concentration on pressure loss, measured pressure gradients for the slurry of narrow spread of distribution ( Measurements of pressure gradient and their corresponding Wasp model predictions were compared against each other to determine how well Wasp model behaves at different slurry concentrations, PSD, and pipe diameters. However, simple comparison between measured and computed values of pressure gradient, for the purpose of determining if significant differences exist, does not provide sufficient quantitative and qualitative description of the discrepancies between the two groups of data and may lead to invalid conclusions. Furthermore, if a test for significance reaches the conclusion of “no statistically significant difference”, that simply means that the current evidence is not strong enough to confirm that the measurements are not equivalent to the corresponding predictions. Therefore, the data was arranged in several groups to highlight the effect of treatment; in other words to isolate and capture the effects of changing slurry concentration, PSD, and pipe diameter each at a time. Later, we constructed confidence intervals at 95% confidence level for both measured and computed values of each group of data. Then, we conducted tests for equivalence of the means and variances to provide sufficient statistical evidence if any discrepancies between experimental data and their corresponding Wasp model predictions existed.   In the case of 22-mm diameter flow loop, and based on measured pressure gradients, we hypothesized that the indifference zone for error and for all PSD has an upper and lower limits of The data was re-grouped in order to sort all measured and predicted pressure gradients that belong to each slurry concentration, regardless to PSD, separately. Similar tests of equivalence were carried out at each slurry concentration in both flow loops. Based on measured pressure gradients in the 22-mm diameter flow loop, we assumed that the indifference zones for error at a concentrations of 5%, 15%, and 25% have upper and lower limits of ± Experimental investigation and sensitivity analysis were carried out to determine the sensitivity of Wasp model to pipe diameter, and slurry concentration and PSD. Measurements of pressure gradient were obtained from slurries with PSD following Rosin–Rammler distribution in two pipelines of different diameters. The slurries consisted of water and spherical glass beads with mean size of 50 μm concentration had the values of 5%, 15, and 25% by volume. Although it was designed for pipes of relatively large diameters, Wasp model predictions for pressure gradient were better in the 22-mm ID flow loop than in the 45-mm ID flow loop. The influence of pipe diameter on pressure gradient seems to be more significant than slurry concentration and particle size distribution. Experimental results obtained in the same pipeline diameter indicated that the slurry of the narrower distribution produced with higher-pressure gradients than those for the slurry of wider distribution. Pressure gradient increased markedly with increasing slurry concentration regardless of the pipe diameter and slurry PSD.  concentration, % drag coefficient, dimensionless internal diameter of a pipeline, m friction factor, dimensionless gravitational acceleration, m/s measure of the spread of the distribution pressure drop, Pa weight percentage of retained particles on a sieve, % friction velocity, m/s mean velocity, m/s terminal settling velocity of solid particle, m/s sieve aperture degree of comminution of the solid material density, kg/m dynamic viscosity, Pa s asymmetric liquid solid slurry volume water The results presented in this article were obtained from work supported by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Environmental Management (EM), Office of Science and Technology (OST), under Grant No. DE-FG21-95EW55094.