The reductive dissolution of cerium–lanthanide mixed oxides was investigated under mild conditions in weakly acid media. The dissolution is catalyzed by platinum nanoparticles (Pt NPs) deposited onto oxide surfaces. The deposition of Pt NPs was performed by sonochemical reduction of Pt(IV). The dissolution efficiency was studied as a function of different parameters such as stirring, sonication at 20kHz, dissolution media and oxide composition. The quantitative dissolution of these oxides can be performed in 0.25M HNO3–1M HCOOH–0.2M [N2H5][NO3] and 0.125M H2SO4–1M HCOOH under stirring at 40°C in the presence of argon, or in 0.125M H2SO4 under sonication in the presence of Ar–CO gas mixture at 40°C. In nitric acid solutions mechanical stirring is more efficient than sonication due to the secondary denitration triggered by ultrasound. The incorporation of trivalent (Gd, Nd) or tetravalent (Tb) lanthanides into the ceria matrix resulted in faster dissolution. After dissolution, lanthanides and platinum can be separated by simple filtration. The catalytic dissolution of ceria-based mixed oxides offers a simple way of lanthanide and noble metal partitioning which could appear of interest for catalyst recycling.Ceria-based mixed oxides have attracted much attention as catalysts for automotive exhaust gas treatment ( The reductive dissolution of ceria-based systems seems to be an interesting alternative since Ce(III) compounds are much more soluble compared to those of Ce(IV) and the conditions used such as acidity and temperature could be far less aggressive. Several studies of CeO Commercial reagents from Sigma-Aldrich, VWR, and Strem Chemicals with ≥ The dissolution experiments were performed in a home-made glass reactor equipped with a jacketed system for temperature control under the effect of ultrasound and magnetic stirring. A 20 ‘US 1 ‘US 3 ‘Full US’: the sonication was maintained during the whole experiment without additional magnetic stirring. During the experiments, aliquots of solutions (about 0.7 In most cases, the experimental results were expressed as the percentage of dissolved lanthanide in solution as a function of the dissolution time (Eq. In Eqs. In this study, HNO During experiments, aliquots of solutions were regularly sampled from the reaction media before filtration on 0.2 The concentrations of cerium, terbium, gadolinium, neodymium and platinum in solution were determined quantitatively using inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) with a Spectro Arcos apparatus (Spectro Analytical Instruments GmbH) equipped for axial plasma observation. For each element, several analytical wavelengths were monitored and chosen by taking into account possible interferences. Filtered aliquots of solution were diluted in a 0.3 The CO PXRD patterns were collected using a Bruker D8 Advance X-ray diffractometer (Cu Kα radiation, λ A scanning electron microscope (FEI QUANTA 200 ESEM FEG) coupled with a Bruker SDD 5010 energy dispersive spectrometer was used for morphological observations and for the determination of the elementary ratios in the as-prepared samples as well as in the residues of dissolution. The powders were directly deposited onto carbon tabs without any resin embedding. The samples were analyzed by measuring 100 A Micromeritics ASAP 2020 apparatus using nitrogen adsorption (BET) at 77 The reductive dissolution curves obtained in 0.25 The induction period in the dissolution curves clearly visible in For each sample studied, the comparison of the ‘full US’ and ‘US 3 The negative effect of denitration was particularly noticeable when considering the percentage of unreduced Pt 7 The comparison of these experiments with previous results showed that the kinetics related to the catalytic dissolution of ceria-based mixed oxides were higher than those observed for pure CeO Three neodymium-containing cerium oxides with increasing Nd amounts were used to study the influence of the trivalent element content in the oxide on the dissolution rates and yields. As expected, the solution analyses performed during the ‘full US’ experiments confirmed that the higher the incorporation of trivalent element in the cerium oxide structure, the higher the dissolution rate ( In order to prevent the denitration issues encountered with HNO Several experiments were performed under Ar/CO (10 In addition some amounts of CO  It is noteworthy that whatever the ceria-based mixed oxide or leachate composition, platinum can be easily separated from lanthanides after quantitative dissolution by simple filtration using filter paper (VWR 315). The ICP-AES analysis of solution confirmed the absence of platinum in leachate. By contrast, SEM/EDX analysis indicated clearly that the filtered black fine power mainly composed from platinum. This phenomenon based on recently reported aggregation of Pt NPs during catalytic dissolution of ceria ( In conclusion, the reductive dissolution of cerium–lanthanide mixed oxides (Ce The authors declare no competing financial interest. The authors gratefully acknowledge