Microhardness tests were conducted on single grain quasicrystals of the decagonal phase in a Al–Cu–Co–Si system by varying the load from 15 to 500 g on the ten-fold plane and two-fold planes. Ultrasonic tests were also performed on ten-fold plane and its perpendicular planes. No significant difference was found in the microhardness and elastic properties measured on these two planes. The microhardness was found to be load dependent, varying from 9.01 to 7.86 GPa. The variation of hardness i.e. the indentation size effect (ISE) was attributed to both elastic recovery (important at small loads) and to cracking. The cracks arising during indentation up to a 200 g load were observed to be the Palmqvist type. Lateral cracks other than Palmqvist were also observed at 300 and 500 g loads. At 15 and 25 g loads, cracks were not observed, indicating a limited amount of plasticity. At a 100 g load the four corners of the indentation yielded well-developed and symmetrical radial cracks without any lateral cracks. The fracture toughness (K
                     IC) was calculated from the fracture mechanics relation developed for Palmqvist type of cracking. The measured value was 1.40±0.1 MPa √m, comparable to other data reported in the literature for quasicrystals. A simple model of cracking at indentations equating the release of stored elastic energy to the work of fracture, was used to explain the critical indentation size observed for crack nucleation.Quasicrystal (QC) is considered to be a new class of intermetallic compound exhibiting a rotational symmetry as well as quasiperiodic translational symmetry (see An Al(Si)–Cu–Co alloy was prepared by melting the constituent elements to produce a composition close to Al  The longitudinal and transverse velocities measured from ultrasonic testing on ten-fold plane along the ten-fold axis were about 7017 and 3932 m s Loads ranging from 15 to 500 g, were applied to indent the ten- and two-fold planes. No significant differences were observed between the two planes. The data reported come principally from the indentation of the ten-fold plane. The microhardness data at various loads (15, 25, 50, 100 and 200 g) are shown in The analysis of AFM images can be used to determine the profile of the impression with nanometer resolution and to provide information about the shape change on unloading. The ‘piling-up’ of material around the edges of the indentation has been observed ( For example, the effective angle of the diamond indenter is changed from the ideal angle of 15.95 to 15.11° at 15 g load to account for this effect. The change in indentation volume was 28, 24, 23, 17 and 16% at loads of 15, 25, 50, 100 and 200 g, respectively. This magnitude of volume change indicates that elastic deformation plays an important role in the indentation size effect of the quasicrystal.  For brittle materials, the indentation technique is well established and can be used to determine the fracture toughness ( Here, Due to elastic recovery, the depth after load removal will be always lower than the actual depth during indentation. The ratio of the recovered depth or height to the total height can be written from the geometry of the Vickers impression as Here The subscript ‘in’ denotes properties of the indenter. Now the angle of the indentation groove at a 15 g load was found to be 10.98° along the diagonal section. The equivalent angle of the Vickers indenter is 15.95°, which is the complement to the semindenter angle of the Vickers indenter. However, when the deformation of the Vickers indenter is accounted for, this angle is found to be 15.11°. This implies that there is a change of about 0.84° of the diamond indenter from its ideal angle due to the elastic deformation. The ratio of the elastic to total work was found to be ∼30% from It is interesting to note that Ashby The methodology of indentation mechanics first developed for crystalline materials appears to be equally applicable for quasicrystalline materials, as the value of Recently, Milman et al. From the present measurement, we know that The indentation size effect has been observed in metals As this material possesses a very limited amount of plasticity, the elastic energy associated with the indentation process is expected to cause cracking at higher loads. Thus, it can be assumed that the elastic strain energy released during cracking should be equal to or greater than the energy required to create a new surface during crack formation. As a first approximation the elastic energy can be considered to be stored in a hemispherical volume beneath the indenter. It can also be assumed that four half-penny cracks form. The elastic energy per unit volume stored during loading is Now, the surface energy required to form four halfpenny cracks with a crack length nearly equal to the half diagonal of the indentation can be written as The work for fracture per unit area can be determined from Using the value of  The elastic constants of an Al–Cu–Co–Si quasicrystals, as measured ultrasonically, were, The microhardness of the quasicrystal varied from 9 (at loads of 15–50 g) to approximately 7.8 GPa (at loads of 100–200 g). Palmqvist cracks were observed at the indentations made with loads of 50 g or greater. The fracture toughness ( The indentation size effect was assessed by measuring the elastic recovery of indentations after indentation from AFM measurements. Both elastic recovery and cracking contribute to the observed variation of microhardness with load. A simple model of cracking at indentations equating the release of stored elastic energy to the work of fracture, was used to explain the critical indentation size observed for crack nucleation. The values for the elastic constants and hardness of the Al–Cu–Co–Si quasicrystals fit well with trends found for other classes of brittle material. The Authors would like to thank Dr G.V.S. Murthy, Dr Jaydeep Sarkar and Dr Anandh Subramaniam for many stimulating discussions, Dr N.D. Patel for help in ultrasonic measurement and Andy Duft for AFM experiment. Authors would like to acknowledge the partial support to carry out this work from Department of Science and Technology (DST project: HR/OY/E-10/96), India and the Ontario Center for Materials Research (OCMR), Canada.