The electrochemical dissolution of platinum has been studied using cyclic voltammetry, potentiostatic and galvanostatic techniques and alternating current methods. The sinusoidal alternating current method results in platinum concentrations of 11–12 g L−1, which are useful in refining processes and the production of platinum salts.Pure platinum metal is usually obtained by a hydrometallurgical process. Chemical/electrochemical dissolution of the metal is a very important part of the process of extracting, refining and processing this metal into its compounds. However, the high chemical resistance of this metal makes the process of dissolution difficult and time-consuming, especially when the solid metal, and its alloys with rhodium and iridium, is to be processed The most common media used to dissolve platinum metal are aqua regia and solutions of hydrochloric acid with addition of strong oxidising agents, such as gaseous chlorine or hydrogen peroxide. This strategy, however, involves high temperatures and is accompanied by emission of harmful gaseous products The growing demand for pure platinum metal and its compounds makes it necessary to develop new, efficient and environmentally acceptable processes for dissolving the metal. The electrochemical route is well suited to this challenge. It was shown by  The present work was undertaken to investigate electrodissolution of platinum metal using alternating current and to develop optimum conditions for such a process. The influence of the current density, the frequency of the alternating current and the hydrochloric acid concentration were of particular interest. The system of measurements applied in this work was based on that suggested for voltammetry measurements Except for the potentiostatic investigation, all experiments involved a working electrode (WE) made of a strip of platinum, 10 mm wide and 2 mm thick, having an active area of 3 cm In individual stages of the investigations, various counter (supplementary) electrodes were used. For the voltammetric and galvanodynamic investigations and for those carried out with use of sinusoidal alternating current, the counter electrode (CE) was a platinum electrode identical to the working electrode. For the potentiostatic, galvanostatic and potentiodynamic investigations, the counter electrode was a graphite rod of 6-mm diameter, immersed in a glass, bell-shaped chamber, the bottom-locking surface being sintered porous glass. For the voltammetric, potentiostatic and potentiodynamic investigations, a saturated calomel electrode was used as the reference electrode (RE), which was positioned close to the working electrode by a Luggin capillary tube filled with saturated KCl solution. Before each experiment, the platinum electrodes were polished mechanically, washed with distilled water and conditioned for 3 min using sinusoidal alternating current of 1 A in a solution of 15% hydrochloric acid. After conditioning, the platinum electrodes were washed again with distilled water, installed in the cell, then connected to the electric circuit. The amount of dissolved platinum was calculated on a basis of chemical analysis of the solutions using atomic absorption spectroscopy (Model SP9-800, Pye Unicam). The investigations carried out using cyclic voltammetry Analysis of the voltammetric curves indicated that the working electrode processes, especially in solutions of KOH and H The overpotential for hydrogen evolution in KOH solution is so high that, in the experimental potential range, no hydrogen evolution is seen. In the H The most distinctive differences in the voltammograms were attributed to the changes in HCl concentration in the electrolyte, as shown in In the second series of experiments, carried out using HCl solutions only, the potential range was narrowed to that of the anodic process, i.e., from 0.5 to 1.5 V vs. SHE. The same rates of potential change were used as those in the previous series. The curves in In the experiments carried out under potentiostatic conditions, a constant potential was applied to the platinum wire electrode and the changes in the current flowing through the circuit were recorded for 2 h. The applied potentials were 1.5, 1.7, 1.9 and 2.1 V vs. SHE. Seven solutions of HCl concentration varying from 5% to 35% were used in these experiments. Data are presented in A 5-h period of electrolysis was carried out under galvanostatic conditions. Changes in the potential of the working electrode (3 cm The initial values of potential were found to rise with an increase in the current density and potentials depended on the concentration of HCl in the electrolyte. At lower HCl concentrations (5–20%), the potential did not change or increased only slightly, which must be attributed to the continuing passivation of the platinum electrode. At higher HCl concentrations (25–35%), a gradual decrease of the potential was observed down to the level of 0.5–0.75 V, and the maximum decrease of the potential was recorded for the HCl concentration of 30%, i.e., in the electrolyte having the highest electrical conductivity. The drop in the potential was accompanied by an increased platinum dissolution rate, which was found to increase with the increase of the current density. The influence of the current density and the concentration of HCl on the weight of platinum dissolved for 5 h are presented in Changes in the current density, cell voltage and platinum concentration were recorded under potentiodynamic conditions. The working electrode was subjected to an abruptly changing potential, which was varied in the range of 0.4–1.6 V and the frequency was altered within the range of 5–500 Hz The potential applied and the frequency of potential change were controlled with the aid of oscilloscopes, which were also used for recording the voltage and current characteristics. The effect of the frequency of potential change on the effective current generated is shown in During further experiments, the potential was changed in nonlinear fashion, within the same range as above. The durations of the cathodic and anodic impulses were varied. A ratio of the duration of both impulses was found which results in no gaseous chlorine evolution but facilitates platinum dissolution. To eliminate the effect of chlorine, evolving on the counter electrode, on the process of dissolution of platinum, further experiments involved placing the counter electrode in a glass bell-shaped casing with the bottom made of sintered porous glass. It was found that for the anodic impulse, which lasted 1–3 ms, and the cathodic impulse (several times longer), dissolving of platinum is more effective than the case where both impulses are of equal duration. HCl solutions of 15–35% concentration were used in galvanodynamic studies. The temperature of the electrolyte was maintained at the level of 25±3 °C. Using two identical platinum electrodes, an alternating current of symmetrical rectangular characteristics was passed for 2 h, and the frequency and intensity of the current were controlled. The masses of the dissolved platinum and power consumption are presented in Except for the highest concentration of HCl, all the dependencies of the mass of dissolved platinum on HCl concentration and current density are linear. The frequency of current alternations affects the process in a complex fashion. To establish the possibility of accelerating platinum dissolution by changing the levels of set values of the investigated independent parameters of the process (HCl concentration, current frequency and current density), a regression system analysis was carried out. A regression equation in the form of a polynomial was obtained When numerical values are substituted for the variables, the only significant term is that which is the product of multiplication of the three independent parameters raised to the first power. It is not advisable to increase the concentration of HCl over 30%, and any increase in the electric current frequency results in increase of the negative terms of the polynomial. Hence, the only parameter which effectively controls the mass of dissolved platinum is the current density. It must be remembered, however, that higher current density results in a larger electrolytic power consumption. In the galvanodynamic investigations, the concentrations of dissolved platinum were unsatisfactorily low, with a high electrical energy consumption. It would be impractical to use the alternating current having a symmetrical, rectangular waveform for dissolution of platinum on a technical scale. Electrodissolution of platinum under potentiodynamic and galvanodynamic conditions showed that the maximum amount of dissolved platinum occurs at the frequencies close to 50 Hz. Therefore, a series of further investigations was carried out at this frequency. Following the method described by Based upon the statistical analysis of these results, an experimental equation has been obtained, which describes the dependence of the mass of dissolved platinum on initially assumed independent variables. This equation is in the form of a polynomial as follows: An analysis of individual terms of this polynomial has shown that those containing the product of multiplication of HCl concentration by the electrolyte temperature and containing current density are of considerable validity, whereas that containing HCl concentration only is much less important. As this equation cannot determine the maximum platinum concentration in the electrolyte to be achieved when the sinusoidal electric current is used in the process, a series of 48-h experiments was carried out, where the increase in platinum concentration in the electrolyte was recorded. Other parameters of the process, current density, electrolyte temperature and HCl concentration, were maintained at the same preset levels. The results are shown in the diagrams, presenting dependence of the mass of dissolved platinum on the electric load that had passed through the electrolysis apparatus. The final, maximum concentrations of platinum in the electrolyte were between 10 and 12 g L Based on the above experiments, optimum conditions have been determined for electrodissolution of platinum metal. The concentration of HCl in the electrolyte should be higher than 25%, but it cannot exceed 30%. The temperature increases the rate of Pt-dissolving process, but because of the increased evaporation of the electrolyte and desorption of hydrogen chloride which occurs above 50 °C, the temperature should be maintained at about 40–45 °C The consumption of electric energy in the process of electrodissolution of platinum is extremely high, far exceeding the values that appear in any of the known processes applied in hydrometallurgy (some 60 times higher than that of the electroplating of platinum coatings). Considering the price of platinum metal, however, the cost of energy that is necessary to dissolve 1 kg of platinum, assuming on average a 120-kWh kg Voltammetric investigations have shown that the electrode processes at the platinum anode are irreversible, which is a necessary condition for the effective electrodissolution of the metal using alternating current. Experiments using direct current (both potentiostatic and galvanostatic) have confirmed those reported earlier in the literature for dissolution of platinum. It is only at very low current densities and high HCl concentrations in the electrolyte that stoichiometric dissolution of platinum is possible according to: However, the rate of this reaction is far too low for practical purposes. Any increase in the current density leads to passivation and metal dissolution ceases. At a very high current density, slight dissolution of the anode (despite passivation) could be observed but the concentrations of dissolved platinum are too low for practical applications. The investigations with the use of alternating current of rectangular characteristics have confirmed the observations by Llopis that the rate of dissolving platinum increases with the increase in the current density, concentration of HCl and temperature. The use of more concentrated solutions of HCl in our studies resulted in the maximum process rate being shifted toward higher frequency of the alternating current. Statistical analysis of the experimental results has shown that the influence of the frequency of the current on the process of platinum dissolution is complex, as it also affects another important parameter of the process—the current density. It has also been shown that increasing the concentration of HCl in the electrolyte over 30% affects the process adversely. The decrease in dissolution rate, which was observed by Llopis at high frequencies of the current, was attributed to the low rate of platinum oxidation. However, our potentiodynamic investigations carried out with abruptly changing potential and with different durations of individual impulses have shown that the important effect is the low rate of depassivation. Potentiodynamic investigations enabled us to make an assumption that dissolution of platinum takes place as the result of an electrochemical reaction, and the reaction of platinum with chloride ion in the electrolyte is much less important. Under potentiodynamic conditions, when the potential is properly set, together with the duration of individual impulses, it is possible to achieve much higher rate of dissolving of platinum than that for the current of symmetric characteristics and also higher than that reported in the literature. It was also found that application of such a process on a larger scale would be difficult, as no electric current feeders of suitable characteristics are available, and to construct such a device—able to work at high current loads—would pose a considerable problem. Under the circumstances, the process which has the best chance to be successfully applied in industry is the use of alternating current of sinusoidal characteristics of 50-Hz frequency. In this work, the optimum conditions for running such a process have been determined: the concentration of HCl in the electrolyte to be within 25–30%, temperature of the electrolyte 40–45 °C, current density may be chosen within the range from a few thousands to almost 20,000 A m The viability of the method has been proven as applied to dissolving solid platinum metal, which is the most difficult form to attack chemically—this means that dissolving of sponges and powders would also be possible. The solutions obtained by electrodissolution of platinum meet the requirements of different stages of production and processing of this metal, which makes it possible to apply the process in practice. The authors are thankful to the Polish State Committee for Scientific Research for the financial support (Grant No. 7 T08B 041 08).