A hybrid constitutive model for densification of metallic powders is proposed. It is based on a plasticity model for porous materials combined with a constitutive description of dislocation density evolution. The model was applied to the case of the uniaxial die compaction of copper powders. Densification behaviour during powder compaction, including the dislocation density evolution and the variation of the relative density of the compact, was simulated. The model was gauged by comparing the simulation results with experimental data generated by the cylindrical die compaction tests on copper powder.Powder forming Successful implementation of the powder forming process requires a detailed understanding of several interacting phenomena, including metal flow, heat transfer, friction and microstructural change. The aim is to better control the process variables, such as temperature, strain rate and pressure, and to optimise the design parameters, e.g. the die shape, lubrication and the initial density of the compact. This can be achieved by combining experimental studies with numerical modelling approaches. Owing to its wide applicability and high computational accuracy the finite element method is commonly applied to this type of problem. A number of studies were carried out using various constitutive models that take the density change during powder forming into account Although a large number of constitutive models for powder densification are available, there are few that can take the microstructure of powder particles into account. Incorporating microstructure into a constitutive model is of considerable importance, as it provides a possibility of relating the powder densification response to microstructural characteristics of powder particles. A unified viscoplastic constitutive model motivated by microstructural considerations and involving the dislocation density as an internal variable In this paper, the principles of dislocation density based constitutive modelling Mechanical behaviour of powder compacts is usually described by constitutive models involving a yield criterion. One general form of the yield criterion used by many investigators in the context of plasticity of porous materials It should be noted that some restrictions must be put on the parameters The specific forms of For plasticity of pressure-dependent porous materials, Doraivelu et al. Lee and Kim A later modification of In order to provide an adequate constitutive description of the cold compaction process, the above plasticity model for porous materials — which is a model with a yield criterion — was combined with the viscoplasticity model for microstructural evolution in the reference (full density) material For monotonic uniaxial loading, it suffices to use the simplest version of the viscoplastic theory The evolution of the dislocation density with the equivalent (von Mises) plastic strain  The individual components of the plastic strain rate tensor, The parameters In this section, numerical simulation results obtained with the hybrid constitutive model described above are compared with the experimental data on coarse (2.3 μm) and ultra-fine (100 nm) pure copper powders. From experimental results on aluminium and iron powders, Kuhn and Ferguson To obtain Once strain increments are known, the evolution of the relative density can be calculated using the following mass conservation equation that holds for deformation of a porous material: Here the results of calculations for cold compaction of pure copper are presented. A set of parameters of the viscoplastic model for pure copper was obtained earlier The value of Here    Although the agreement between the calculated and the experimental densification results is good, the calculated densities are lower than the experimental ones. This can be attributed to the following: firstly, the dislocation mean free path may be smaller than the powder size used in calculating In order to investigate the effects of initial relative density and the deformation rate on densification behaviour, parametric studies were performed. The densification curves illustrating the effect of the initial relative density of powders are shown in A hybrid constitutive model combining features of the plasticity model for porous materials One of the authors (H.S. Kim) acknowledges support from the Korean Atomic Energy Research Institute (KAERI) and the Korea Institute of Industrial Technology Evaluation and Planning (ITEP) through the Technology Infrastructure Promotion Program (990-16-04).