The use of long natural fibres (LNF) as reinforcement in composite systems for structural applications has been steadily growing in the automotive and construction industries as these materials offer sustainability benefits combined with high specific strength and stiffness. However, the performance of natural fibres has been questioned by a high variability in their mechanical properties and design data for structural reliability analysis of LNF composites are not yet available. Here, we present a statistical study of the elastic modulus, strength and failure strain of a comprehensive set of LNF composite systems. We have found that the variability of LNF laminate properties is similar to that of carbon fibre laminates. We provide recommendations to apply the statistical parameters determined here to the design of natural fibre composite structures. Our findings provide a deeper understanding of LNF composites reliability and are important for the further acceptance of these materials by the industry.Driven by the introduction of regulatory norms demanding more environmental-friendly products Current design practices for composite laminate structures So far, probabilistic design in composites has been exclusively used for carbon fibre and glass fibre composites. Conversely, the use of natural fibres as reinforcement for structural applications is only beginning to emerge A previous work by the authors has studied the statistical aspects of single flax fibres and unidirectional flax reinforced composites to conclude that when long natural fibres are used as reinforcements in composite laminates, the variability of the resulting composite is significantly lower than that of the constituent fibres. The present work follows up to assess the statistical behaviour of a wider range of LNF reinforced composite laminate systems. Further understanding of these systems can help in enhancing design and reliability assessment practices in natural fibre composites to extend their use in commercial applications. An extensive experimental program was carried out to determine the statistical distributions of mechanical properties. Several material and geometrical configurations were studied. Reinforcement fibres include unidirectional flax fabrics FLAXPLY provided by LINEO Composite panels were manufactured by vacuum assisted resin transfer moulding (VARTM) on a rectangular tool plate. Before infusion, the fibres were dried in an oven at 60°for 6 Uniaxial tensile tests were carried out in an electromechanical INSTRON 5584 frame using a 30 Statistical distributions were fitted to the sample data using an optimization procedure based on the Nelder-Mead method which is readily available in the open source Python library scipy.optimize To study the main aspects of the stiffness and failure response of long natural fibre composites we carried out uniaxial tensile tests on rectangular specimens. For each material system (see As expected, modulus and strength of the Flax-90 To compare the variability in elastic modulus, strength and failure strain, we have examined the coefficient of variation With the exception of the Flax-Short system, the variability in elastic modulus for all materials is between 5% and 10%, which is considerably lower than the reported values for single flax fibres in the range of 28–48% To compare the effect of matrix material in the composite variability we analysed the results for epoxy (Flax-0 To assess the effect of different reinforcement fibres in the composite variability, we compared the To characterize the statistical distributions of elastic modulus, strength and failure strain, we have fitted the experimental values to uniform, normal, lognormal and Weibull probability distribution functions (PDFs) and determined the best fit (see Section We have mentioned in the introduction of this paper that the generation of design allowables for composites structures can be treated using ply-level material properties and that a more reliable design can be carried out by incorporating the statistical description of these properties in a probabilistic design framework to quantify the structural risk of failure. Typically, the required statistical descriptors are the PDFs that best-fit the experimental distributions of the mechanical properties and their associated parameters. The estimation of these statistical parameters requires testing of large number of specimens which can be costly and time consuming. To overcome this obstacle, we propose that, when designing for a LNF composite in the same family of those analysed here, the distribution shapes and variabilities determined in Following this approach, when modelling the elastic modulus with a normal distribution, the On the other hand, to model strength and failure strain distributions, the Weibull shape parameter Similarly, the same approach can be carried out if the mean value for the material is obtained through micromechanical analysis using the constituent material properties We have analysed the statistical nature of the mechanical properties of several natural fibre reinforced composites. The variability of elastic modulus, strength and failure strain using the coefficient of variation We suggest that the statistical parameters of the fitted probability distribution functions can be used to model the scatter in similar material systems with the aim of determining design allowables and perform probabilistic design analyses. These results can assist in the development of design guidelines and reliability assessment practices for natural fibre composites and extend their use in commercial applications. This investigation was partially carried out under the Cooperative Research Centre for Advanced Composite Strutures Australia Project 1.1 “Plantfibre bio-composites”. The authors would also like to acknowledge the contribution of Sarah Schaber. This work was also supported by an Endeavour Postgraduate Fellowship granted by the Australian Government.