Zn-clinoptilolite was heated and analyzed ex-situ. Breakdown occurred between 400-700 ​°C. After 2 ​h ​at 850 ​°C gahnite and Zn-β-quartz nucleated. Exolution of zinc and aluminum from Zn-β-quartz determined Zn-α-quartz formation after 8 ​h. An increase in temperature and/or heating time determined exolution also in Zn-α-quartz, that progressively turned into cristobalite. Zn-β-quartz decreased over time at 1000 ​°C and disappeared after 100 ​h, whereas at 900 ​°C the quantitative ratio β-quartz/α-quartz asymptotically stabilized at ≈2.5. Rietveld refinements evidenced that at 900 ​°C the decrease of zinc occupancy followed an almost asymptotic path in both quartz phases. Considering the formula ZnxAl2xSi3-2xO6, if x ​< ​0.173 ​± ​0.008 Zn-β-quartz is not stable at room temperature. Treatments of 2 ​h ​at 1100 and 1200 ​°C produced the same quantities of gahnite (≈20.6%) and glass (≈11.6%), and slight differences for cristobalite (56 vs. 63%) and quartz (8.4 vs. 1.5%). Basically, gahnite incorporated all Zn2+ contained in clinoptilolite.Synthetic zeolites are attractive precursors for ceramics as, by modulating their extra-framework content, it is possible to prepare, through heating, a desired product [ Among the metal-loaded synthetic zeolites, those fully or partially exchanged with Zn The present research was developed by employing a volcaniclastic rock sampled in Sardinia island (Italy) containing 66 ​± ​4 ​wt% of clinoptilolite (sample “LacBen” in Ref. [ The preparation of a Zn-clinoptilolite as close as possible to the end-member is important to minimize the effects of residual ions and better understand the thermal behavior of the Zn-form. To achieve this goal, the material was initially subjected to a process of cation exchange with sodium and subsequently with zinc, as the pretreatment with Na The beneficiated material was initially pre-conditioned with sodium through a sequence of ten exchanges of 2 ​h each, in a 1 ​M solution of NaCl (Merck ACS salt; purity ​> ​99.5%) conducted under continuous stirring at 65 ​°C with a solid/liquid ratio of 30 ​g/L. The last two cycles were executed in an analogous solution, but prepared with a VWR Prolabo salt (purity 99.9%). After the last exchange, the powder was thoroughly rinsed until complete removal of chlorides (test performed on elutes with AgNO The chemicals analyses of BCZ were executed at the Activation Laboratories Ltd (Ancaster, ON, Canada). Major elements were determined, through Inductive Coupled Mass Atomic Emission Spectrometry (ICP-AES), after lithium metaborate/tetraborate fusion of the sample, whereas the zinc content was measured after sodium peroxide fusion via Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS). The Loss on Ignition (LOI) of BCZ was determined in our laboratories through a calcination of 2 ​h performed at 1000 ​°C in a muffle furnace Vittadini (Mod. FS.3) on two aliquots of sample placed in high-alumina crucibles (Coors BCZ was subjected to Thermogravimetric, Derivative Thermogravimetric and Differential Thermal Analyses (hereafter TG, DTG, and DTA, respectively), performed with a TA Instrument Q600 simultaneous thermal analyzer at the CeSAR (Centro Servizi di Ateneo per la Ricerca - Sassari University). About 20 ​mg of sample, placed in an alumina crucible, were heated to 1000 ​°C at the following operating conditions: 10 ​°C/min; air flow 100 ​mL/min. The results were evaluated with the software TA-Universal Analysis. BCZ was subjected to three sets of heating, all executed in a muffle furnace on aliquots of sample placed in alumina crucibles. The first set involved a sequence of treatments, each of 2 ​h, in the range 100–1200 ​°C. After each treatment, the sample was analyzed through X-Ray Diffraction (see Section The Rehydration Capacity (RC) of clinoptilolite provides an indirect evaluation of the structural integrity of the zeolite after thermal treatments and was considered, by Langella et al. [ W W W X-Ray Diffraction analyses (XRD) were performed on BCZ, both untreated as well as after each heating cycle, by using a Bruker D2-Phaser diffractometer at the following conditions: 30 ​kV, 10 ​mA, CuKα radiation, LynxEye detector with an angular opening of 5°, 2θ range 6–70°, step size 0.020°, time per step 2 ​s, spinner 15 ​rpm. The alignment of the instrument was previously calibrated using an international standard (NIST 1976b). Before each analysis, samples were micronized with a Retsch MM400 mill (ZrO The chemical composition of BCZ is reported in The results of the thermal analysis are shown in The XRD pattern of BCZ substantially corresponds to clinoptilolite ( XRD analyses revealed that treatments up to 300 ​°C did not result in significant modifications in the structure of Zn-clinoptilolite, but a 2-h heating at 400 ​°C determined an evident change in the X-ray pattern of the material ( By rising the temperature the breakdown process continued until the complete amorphization of Zn-clinoptilolite was achieved, after 2 ​h ​at 700 ​°C ( The Rehydration Capacity (RC) of a zeolite is a measure of its ability to rehydrate after a given heating, taking as a reference the weight of water hosted in the same zeolite not subjected to thermal treatment (for which RC ​= ​100% [ BCZ remained amorphous up to 800 ​°C, except for traces of residual feldspars and an incipient nucleation of cristobalite ( Overall, the sequence of transformations observed in BCZ is consistent with those reported for Zn-A and Zn–Y zeolites [ Zn-β-quartz is a kind of the so-called stuffed derivatives of silica polymorphs, which are aluminosilicate crystals whose framework of TO Taking advantage of the Topas software, we applied the Rietveld method and determined the variation with time of the ratio between the amounts of Zn-β-quartz and Zn-α-quartz at 900 and 1000 ​°C. It should be noted that this ratio is not influenced by the presence or absence of an internal standard (necessary to quantify the amorphous component and therefore the correct quantities of the crystalline phases). As for quartz phases, the refinements were performed starting from the following structures: i) the β-quartz-type unit-cell reported by Schulz et al. [ The values of zinc occupancy inside the quartz phases, determined through the Rietveld refinements, are reported in The percentage of ZnAl Although this work is essentially a basic research focused on the thermal transformations of Zn-clinoptilolite, some considerations can be drawn concerning possible applications. In fact, it can be observed that the chemistry of some glass-ceramic products is mainly based on SiO The structural breakdown of Zn-clinoptilolite occurred over a quite wide temperature range, that spans from 400 to 700 ​°C. During this process, zeolite’s channel system remained relatively accessible to water molecules, as demonstrated by Rehydration Capacity values, which linearly decreased from 84.5% at 400 ​°C to 36% at 600 ​°C, then reducing to 17% after the total collapse of clinoptilolite structure at 700 ​°C. After 2 ​h ​at 850 ​°C gahnite and Zn-β-quartz, a stuffed derivative of silica, began to nucleate from the amorphous material and, after 8 ​h, also Zn-α-quartz was detected. The latter phase formed due to the exolution of zinc and aluminum from the structure of Zn-β-quartz. However, the exolution process also occurred in Zn-α-quartz, in response of an increase in temperature and/or heating time. Zn Solid state transformations were faster during the 2-h treatments at 1100 and 1200 ​°C, which produced the same quantities of gahnite (20.7 vs. 20.6%) and residual glass (11.4 vs. 11.9%), whereas slight differences were found regarding quartz (8.4 vs. 1.5%) and cristobalite (56 vs. 63%). Basically, all Zn A.B. and G.C. conceived of the presented idea together. A.B. and G.C. designed and carried out the experiments. A.B. and G.C. discussed the results and contributed to the final manuscript. The authors (Antonio Brundu and Guido Cerri) declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The research fund “Fondo di Ateneo per la ricerca 2019” of The following are the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at