The accumulation and compaction of polymer wear particles into coherent third body compacts has been investigated in a contact between steel and poly(methylmethacrylate) under small amplitude cyclic micro-motions, i.e. fretting. Under such contact conditions, the preferential accumulation of the PMMA wear particles at the centre of the contact was found to result in the formation of a distinct third body agglomerate. Hardness and modulus measurements carried out at the nanoscale revealed that the polymer wear particles within this third body formation were progressively compacted to form an agglomerate, for which the mechanical properties were ultimately close to those of the initial PMMA substrate. The efficiency of the third body compaction process was interpreted by considering the evolving load-carrying capacity of the contact, which was characterised by progressive redistribution of the contact pressure within the third body layer. In addition, an assessment of the dissipation of frictional energy within the worn contact area demonstrated that particle compaction was enhanced by the highly energy-intensive nature of the fretting process.Various investigations of interfacial tribology The recent development of depth-sensing indentation techniques at the nanometer scale, commonly known as nanoindentation, has, however, offered new opportunities in the characterisation of third bodies. Nanoindentation allows highly localised hardness and modulus measurements to be performed on very small material volumes and is particularly suitable for the study of third bodies. Recently, investigations by Randall and co-workers The polymeric third body under investigation was generated within fretting contact between a commercial grade of cast poly(methylmethacrylate) (Perspex Nanoindentation experiments were carried out using commercially available apparatus (Nanoindenter II, MTS, USA) operated under load-control conditions. In the case of materials exhibiting time-dependent mechanical behaviour, it has been shown to be of primary importance to perform the indentation tests at a constant nominal strain rate The fretting displacement amplitude selected was of the order of 100 μm, while the characteristic length of the contact was of the order of several 100 μm. Clearly, any debris detached from the contacting surfaces will initially be trapped within the contact. The initial debris entrapping process is thus essentially a geometrical effect. The subsequent retention of debris within the contact involves, however, a much more complex phenomenon, primarily depending on third body rheology and the details of contact zone kinematics. This latter aspect was reported in previous studies Using the positioning location facility of the nano-indenter specimen stage, it was possible to select various indentation areas within the third body agglomerate with a spatial resolution of a few μm. The maximum load selected (i.e. 6 mN) ensured that the indentation depth, Further insight into the mechanical response of the third body agglomerate can be provided by examination of the dynamic contact stiffness, For a material having a constant Young's modulus through the thickness, such as fused silica, a linear relationship is usually observed between the contact stiffness and Such a linear behaviour was indeed observed for PMMA and for third body indents exhibiting type I behaviour ( In contrast, type II behaviour was characterised by a strongly non-linear response. The heterogeneous distribution of the mechanical properties within some less compacted wear-debris regions could account for these observations. There was, however, no evidence of the small stochastic drops (pop-in) that may sometimes occur in less coherent agglomerate systems due to localised failure events between particles Assuming a constant reduced modulus, the material hardness, The histograms reported in Although analysis of the nanoindentation experiments carried out within wear debris formations is complicated by some additional difficulties arising from surface roughness effects and by the existence of macroscopic defects, such as cracks, the present investigation clearly demonstrates that, under specific contact-zone kinematic conditions, the fretting wear of PMMA can result in the progressive formation of a highly coherent and homogeneous third body layer. One of the main consequences of this progressive increase in the third-body mechanical behaviour is probably to limit the rate of third-body flow out of the contact. Such an assumption is consistent with the reduced wear volumes measured when a third body agglomerate was trapped at the contact interface Basic understanding of the physical and mechanical processes involved in the formation of such coherent third-body layers remains, however, obscure for several reasons. The main one is probably the lack of information regarding the initial size of debris particles and their formation mode. Even with the resources of in situ optical microscopy, it proved to be very difficult to capture the initial stages of debris formation within the macroscopic fretting contacts under consideration. Once formed, debris particles can change in size and shape due to the crushing action of the rubbing surfaces, and the wear debris observed within the resolution of optical microscopy does not necessarily reflect the initial morphology. Particle size is probably a very important issue during third-body particle agglomeration and compaction, especially if initial wear debris detachment processes involve the formation of particles in the sub-micrometer range. Recent developments in the rapidly evolving area of the study of glass transition of polymer films have demonstrated that confinement effects on polymer dynamics can result in significant reduction of the glass transition temperature of thin (<500 Å) amorphous polymer films, including PMMA (see As the size of third body debris increased well into the micrometer range, the contribution of additional mechanical processes to debris compaction can be envisaged. The first is related to the evolving load-carrying capacity of the contact. By virtue of wear debris accumulation within restricted regions of the worn contact area, the normal pressure distribution can be altered in the same way, for instance, that an oil film modifies the pressure distribution obtained in a dry contact. This hypothesis of an evolving contact load-carrying capacity is further supported by previously reported in situ observation of the contact, which indicated that the primary rubbing surfaces were progressively separated by the third body layer In addition to the effects of normal pressure, the contribution of shearing forces to the compaction of the third body agglomerate also needs to be considered. An obvious consequence of the increased contact pressure is to enhance the shear stresses transmitted to the third body layer, which can eventually largely exceed the yield strength of the PMMA. In addition to the stress-based considerations, it is also interesting to try to evaluate the amount of frictional energy available for compaction processes within the third body. As a first approach, an upper bound can be obtained by assuming that all the frictional energy is dissipated within the third body compact. The associated dissipated power, Sliding micro-motions in a fretting contact between steel and PMMA have been found to result in the formation of distinct polymer particle agglomerates, for which the mechanical properties in terms of hardness and modulus became close to these of the initial PMMA substrate as wear proceeds. The complex nanoindentation response of the third body formations demonstrates, however, the need for improved data processing techniques to use within the context of the nanoindentation of such heterogeneous media. This latter point is probably one of the prerequisites for the incorporation of third body mechanical behaviour within wear models. Although understanding of the physico-mechanical mechanisms involved in polymer particle compaction at the micrometer scale needs further investigation, this study clearly demonstrates the influence of mechanical factors, such as the evolving load-carrying capacity of the contact and the highly energy-intensive nature of the fretting process, which involves a lot of redundant work within the constrained third body layers.