A common problem in column flotation research is designing the appropriate cell which provides all the requirements of the desired tests. The drift flux model and the axial dispersion model were used in this paper for designing a column flotation cell for research purposes. To validate the approach, a column with required values of axial mixing coefficient (E), vessel dispersion number (Nd
                     ), bubble diameter (db
                     ), column height (Hc
                     ) and gas holdup (εg
                     ) equal to 0.003 (m2/s), 0.32, 1.7 (mm), 1.15 (m) and 7.2 (%) were assumed respectively and the column diameter was calculated as 5.42 (cm) by the developed methodology. The flotation column was constructed based on the calculated value of column diameter and required values of above-mentioned variables. Residence time distribution (RTD) of the liquid phase was measured for the column using the tracer impulse response method. Vessel dispersion number (Nd
                     ) was measured from the RTD statistics equal to 0.32, which was completely similar to its required value. One other set of information from the literature was also used for validation and it was found that the methodology is capable of designing of columns with required specifications.Flotation columns for industrial application are selected from the available brochures of manufacturing companies, while laboratory flotation columns are constructed based on the relevant requirements. Dispersion and mixing are the most important characteristics being implemented by researchers for designing and scaling up of the flotation columns ( In flotation columns, mixing process could be characterized by axial mixing coefficient, For a column with required values of Theory of dispersed multiphase flows provides the fundamental information to study the column hydrodynamic conditions by applying the modeling approach known as the drift-flux. This model is derived from the momentum conservation equation for multiphase mixtures based on the relative velocity between the phases. Hence, the bubble hindered rise velocity ( This equation is used for correlating the bubble hindered rise velocity to superficial gas velocity,  According to above equations, Plug flow pattern has been considered by some literatures for mixing inside the column flotation cell; while some others suggest that the collection zone in a column is a mixed zone ( Mixing intensity, presented by axial mixing coefficient is related to the residence time distribution, superficial gas velocity and the column diameter ( Based on Eq. As it could be observed from Theoretically, if all the introduced equations are valid and consistent and if based on the desired values of In order to validate the methodology, two case studies are presented. The first one includes an example of an existing column flotation cell whose parameters are measured experimentally, while in the second case study, a flotation column is built based on the theoretical calculations and the measured variables of the column are compared to their desired values. The following specifications have been given for a column flotation cell ( Solid density ( Solid particle diameter ( Gas holdup percentage ( Vessel dispersion number ( Axial mixing coefficient ( Column height ( Using above values as input parameters of the designing method, the parameters In order to check the validity of the designing method, required values of input variables A flotation column was made of Plexiglas according to the above calculations and is presented in Peclet number is calculated by Eq. In research activities, a column flotation cell is commonly used where low intensity of turbulence and/or low variance of bubble size distribution are required. Based on the theories of drift flux model and first order dispersion model, a methodology is introduced in this paper which enables the researcher to calculate the dimensions of the cell for certain desired values of operational parameters. The methodology involves iterative solution of algebraic equations between variables of the cell, and therefore MATLAB® codes were developed in this research to do the calculations. In order to verify the methodology, data from the literature and also data from a designed and constructed cell were gathered and the approach was validated. The codes calculated that for desired values of axial mixing coefficient (