In this study, diamond wire cutting operation is performed on three different rock types. The operation is examined in three different groups in consideration with the mineralogical–petrographical properties of rocks; Ankara-Çubuk andesite group, Uşak White, Kozağaç White, Milas Leylak, Afyon Kaymak marbles group and Yeşilova Beige, Sivrihisar Limestone group. Statistical wear rate models are developed by using the results obtained from the operations and laboratory experiments by using ridge regression method. The rock type was also considered in the models developed for horizontal and vertical cutting separately, and the results are tested statistically. The statistical models developed were determined to be in accordance with the field data and could be used easily in practice.Diamond wire cutting machines have been used in marble industry since 1985 and have affected the production rate and efficiency considerably. Despite the common use of these machines in the world, there is a lack of investigation about improvement of the working conditions together with increasing efficiency. Moreover, there are no studies on factors affecting the wear of diamond beads and estimation of wear for different types of rocks prior to cutting. Statistical model equations established for different rock types separately do not show the effect of the rock type. If the effect of the rock type on the wear of diamond beads is known or the existence of the effect is considered as premonition, this effect should be included in a model as a dummy variable. When different equations are established for different rock types, the effect of the rock type cannot be shown. The wear rate of the diamond bead is a major parameter which affects operating cost in a marble quarry and this makes it very important to predict the wear rate on the beads of diamond wire before cutting the block in diamond wire cutting method Besides, the prediction of the wear of the bead helps the estimation of the life of the diamond wire and consequently ordering time of a new wire. Therefore, developing statistical model equations with the assistance of experimental studies performed in the laboratory and results obtained from the diamond wire cutting operations in the quarry production units, is an important issue. The effect of rock types on the wear of bead is obvious and so far no study has considered this effect in detail. In fact, assembling and evaluation of all rock types in a single model will lead to misinterpretations. Therefore, it is necessary to develop a model containing the effects of all rock types. The aim of this study is to develop and test the validity of statistical wear models for different rock types by using the ridge regression separately for horizontal and vertical cutting types. For this purpose, diamond wire cutting studies have been performed in seven different marble quarries for three different rock types. All of these studies have been performed separately in 31 cutting processes as vertical and horizontal cuttings. The principle behind diamond wire cutting involves pulling a spinning, continuous loop of wire mounted with diamond bonded steel beads through the stone to provide the cutting action. Through the combination of the spinning wire and the constant pulling force on the wire, a path is cut through the stone. In marble quarrying through diamond wire cutting, the initial step for making a vertical cut is to drill two holes, one vertical and one horizontal, which intersect at a 90° angle. The diamond wire is then threaded through these holes, mounted around the drive wheel, and the two ends are clamped together to form a continuous loop. The drive wheel may be set at any angle, from vertical to horizontal, required to facilitate cutting. The diamond wire cutting machine is mounted on temporary track, along which it reverses to maintain tension in the wire as it cuts through the stone. When the limit of the track is reached, the machine is returned to its starting point and the length of the wire is reduced accordingly to permit cutting to continue. Water is applied with the spin direction of the wire as a coolant and as a means of removing the particles of stone from the cut. A diagram of the diamond wire cutting layout is shown in The diamond wire is comprised of a steel cable on which small beads bonded with diamond abrasive are mounted at regular intervals with spacing material placed between the beads ( Least square method for obtaining a suitable regression equation can be used for prediction, but if there is a multicollinearity among the regressor variables, least square method is not suitable. Because: (1) the estimators can be very unstable, that is, sensitive to small, seemingly unimportant perturbations in data; (2) the estimators tend to give results for coefficients that are too large in magnitude, either positive or negative. This results from the fact that the coefficient can have a large positive bias induced by multicollinearity even though it is unbiased. Since the correlation among the independent variables is often a natural phenomenon, one cannot always alleviate the difficulty brought about by multicollinearity simply by changing the experimental plan or obtaining additional data. A solution to the problem of multicollinearity is to abandon the usual least squares procedure and resort to biased estimation techniques. In using a biased estimation procedure, one is essentially willing to allow for a certain amount of bias in the estimates in order to reduce their variances. By using the ridge regression estimates ( In the above equation, the ridge regression estimates are computed for various increasing values of The purpose of the ridge trace is to indicate, for a given set of data, a set of estimates that are reasonable. Sometimes, unfortunately, it is difficult to determine an appropriate value of Dummy variable is an independent variable used to include or exclude the effect of a qualitative factor. If the quantitative variables are important in the model, they should be added to the model. As the quantitative variables cannot be directly added to the model, they should be expressed numerically. Dummy variables are coded as “0” and “1” as described in Miller Parallel to the purpose of this study, the only and first diamond wire cutting operation (vertical and horizontal) in andesites and the applications of diamond wire cutting in real marbles and limestone (vertical and horizontal) have been performed at quarries in seven areas in Turkey. A location map of the investigated marble quarry areas is shown in In order to facilitate the analysis and interpretation of the results obtained by field and laboratory studies, the dependent variable is denoted by The correlation matrix in Ridge regression analysis is used to remove the linear dependence among the variables (multicollinearity) and consequently ridge trace graphs are drawn in this study for the vertical and horizontal cutting operations separately. Ridge trace graphs are shown in However, the main purpose of this study is prediction and it is possible to predict in the case of weak multicollinearity. It is noted that, the marble types are added to the model as “dummy variables”. Since there are three different rock types and two (3−1) dummy variables The complexity of most scientific mechanism is such that in order to be able to predict an important response, a well-known multiple regression model is needed. The quality of the estimated regression model is often tested through the very well-known method of analysis of variance (ANOVA). ANOVA approach is used to partition the total sum of squares into a portion due to regression and a portion due to errors Multiple regression analysis of the model and ANOVA are given in According to The wear rate models obtained for each rock type related to the vertical cutting are as follows: The Multiple regression analysis of the model and the ANOVA are given in the According to In this study, the regression models related with the wear of beads are developed for rocks which have different physical, chemical, mechanical and mineralogical–petrographical properties. These models are developed for horizontal and vertical cutting separately. The vertical and horizontal wear rate models yield similar results. Therefore, it is appropriate to use only one of these models. In these models, there are a number of variables, which can be determined (measured) in laboratory easily and give high correlation with the field data, so the wear rate of the diamond bead could be determined by using these models before starting of cutting operation. The regression model for different rock types can also be developed for other marble quarries to determine wire life or cutting efficiency.