A novel weld transition joint by solid state friction surfacing method is developed. Weld transition joint between Cr-Mo steel and austenitic stainless steel was developed by depositing series of Ni-alloy coatings between them. These multi-layered coatings with gradual rather than abrupt change in coefficient of thermal expansion between Cr-Mo and austenitic stainless steels are expected to improve the service life of dissimilar metal welds used in thermal and nuclear industries. Metallurgically bonded coatings with minimal dilution were achieved. Grain refinement and increase in hardness were observed in all the coatings due to the dynamic recrystallization.Fusion welded dissimilar metal weld (DMW) joints comprising Cr-Mo steel (T/P91) and austenitic steel (AISI316, 304H) used for thermal and nuclear power generation plant applications often exhibit shorter creep lives than designed life period Cr-Mo steel (T91) was taken in a plate form (50 The interfaces of the friction surfaced coatings and the substrate are shown in Friction surfaced coatings showed equiaxed fine grained microstructures in contrast to their consumable rod counterparts ( Grain size of friction surfaced coatings was found to change from top to bottom and is in line with earlier works It is further observed that friction surfaced coatings of Ni-based alloy alloys showed decrease in density of twin boundaries than the consumable rod counterparts ( We report a novel solid state manufacturing method, whereby a functional graded multilayered weld transition joint could be developed. To our knowledge, no such attempt has been made so far. Our work showed the feasibility of developing weld transition joints between Cr-Mo steels and austenitic stainless steels by depositing Ni-based alloy interlayers using friction surfacing. Minimal dilution was observed at the coating interfaces of Ni-based alloys and as well as austenitic stainless steel. Grain refinement and increase in hardness were observed in all Ni-based alloy coatings due to the dynamic recrystallization. The resultant multi-layered Ni-based alloy coatings with gradual rather than abrupt change in coefficient of thermal expansion between Cr-Mo and austenitic stainless steels is expected to improve the service life of dissimilar metal welds used in thermal and nuclear industries. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial help rendered by