A total of 19 patients (16 males, 3 females) who had fractures of the posterior wall of the acetabulum were treated by open reduction and internal fixation. Their mean age was 40 years. There were five single-fragment fractures and 14 comminuted. Fifteen patients were treated by fixation with cannulated screws only and four were treated with cannulated screws and reconstruction plates. Reduction and fixation of fragments was facilitated, and soft tissue dissection minimized, by the use of cannulated screws. Clinical results were excellent in nine hips, very good in one, good in six, and poor in three after follow-up of more than 2 years. We think that preservation of the blood supply to the fracture fragments and careful placement of the fixation components is as important as rigid fixation of the fragments for the successful treatment of posterior-wall fractures of the acetabulum. The use of cannulated screws may be helpful for this purpose.Fracture of the posterior wall is the most common form of acetabular fracture, constituting one-quarter to one-third of all such injuries. We have applied the principle of minimal dissection of fragments and careful hardware placement in the treatment of posterior-wall fractures of the acetabulum. Fixation with cannulated titanium screws was useful for this purpose and employed in all cases. Buttress-plate augmentation was also added for fractures with severe comminution. Our purpose here is to introduce our method of treatment and record our mid-term results in comparison with the those from preceding studies. We studied 19 patients with posterior-wall fractures of the acetabulum who had been treated in our institution by internal fixation using cannulated screws only or cannulated screws and buttress plates, during the period from January 1996 to February 1998. There were 16 men and 3 women. Their mean age at operation was 40 (21–62) years and the mean follow-up period was 3.3 (2.5–4.2) years. The causes of injury were traffic accidents in 18 patients (15 dashboard injuries and three pedestrian injuries) and falling from a height in one. Eighteen patients (95%) had associated posterior hip dislocation and two (11%) had fractures of the femoral head (both Pipkin type II). Thirteen (68%) had various other combined injuries. All the patients were evaluated by anteroposterior and oblique radiographs, and computed tomography. There were five single-fragment, and 14 comminuted fractures that included two with marginal impaction. In those cases with associated posterior hip dislocation, manual reduction was performed in the emergency room. Then, joint stability was tested at 90° flexion, 20° internal rotation and 20° adduction. The clinical details of the patients are listed in Two patients developed avascular necrosis of the femoral head. In one of these, surgery had been delayed for 4 weeks. He developed avascular necrosis within 4 months of the operation and thereafter underwent total hip arthroplasty. Another patient, who had a subdural haematoma, also developed avascular necrosis of the femoral head combined with the resorption of fragments, 6 months after the operation, but he refused further surgery. One patient with a posterosuperior fracture had loss of fixation with resorption of the fracture fragments despite buttress-plate augmentation. She subsequently developed subluxation of femoral head. Wear of the femoral head and post-traumatic osteoarthritis followed within 1 year. Total hip arthroplasty was recommended, but this patient also refused further reconstructive surgery. One patient had postoperative peroneal nerve palsy, which was ascribed to excessive retraction during the operation. The paraesthesia of the dorsum of the foot in this patient improved, but recovery was not complete at the latest follow-up. Ectopic ossification of low grade (Brooker type I) developed in two patients, with some restriction of hip motion. Another patient had persistent stiffness of his knee that allowed only 90° of further flexion. There was one case of superficial wound infection, which healed without functional consequences. There is a relative paucity of information about posterior-wall fractures even though these are the most common form of acetabular fracture. Despite their straightforward amenability to a posterior approach that is familiar to many surgeons, posterior-wall fractures are not simple to treat. More recent studies in which buttress-plate fixation was utilized also report a high percentage of unsatisfactory results. Saterback found that 11 (25%) of 42 patients treated surgically had complete loss of joint space by 1 year after the injury. Failure to achieve accurate reduction has been seen as the prime cause of poor outcomes. Anatomical reduction and firm internal fixation have been recommended in order to prevent the occurrence of traumatic osteoarthritis. However, the early destruction of the joint space that may occur within several months of open reduction and internal fixation cannot be explained by altered loading and an increase in contact pressure alone. Intra-articular hardware can bring about rapid wear and mechanical destruction of the femoral head. Avascular necrosis of the fragment can bring the femoral head into contact with fixation hardware that did not initially violate the joint space. We began to use cannulated screws with a view to circumventing drill slippage because drills had to be driven obliquely against the wall surface in order to avoid penetrating the joint space. The anatomical shape of the posterior wall is such that a screw that is to cross the fracture site perpendicularly but not penetrate the joint must be inserted at an acute angle to the wall surface ( The prognosis of our surgically treated posterior-wall fractures of the acetabulum is similar to that found in other studies. This work was supported by the research grant from Hallym University, Korea.