Mineralized collagen–glycosaminoglycan scaffolds designed for bone regeneration have been synthesized via triple co-precipitation in the absence of a titrant phase. Here, we characterize the microstructural and mechanical properties of these newly developed scaffolds with 50 and 75wt.% mineral content. The 50wt.% scaffold had an equiaxed pore structure with isotropic mechanical properties and a Ca–P-rich mineral phase comprised of brushite; the 75wt.% scaffold had a bilayer structure with a pore size varying in the through-thickness direction and a mineral phase comprised of 67% brushite and 33wt.% monetite. The compressive stress–strain response of the scaffolds was characteristic of low-density open-cell foams with distinct linear elastic, collapse plateau and densification regimes. The elastic modulus and strength of individual struts within the scaffolds were measured using an atomic force microscopy cantilevered beam-bending technique and compared with the composite response under indentation and unconfined compression. Cellular solids models, using the measured strut properties, overestimated the overall mechanical properties for the scaffolds; the discrepancy arises from defects such as disconnected pore walls within the scaffold. As the scaffold stiffness and strength decreased with increasing overall mineral content and were less than that of natural, mineralized collagen scaffolds, these microstructural/mechanical relations will be used to further improve scaffold design for bone regeneration applications.Scaffolds for tissue regeneration are defined as: “three-dimensional open-cell porous structures synthesized from either natural or synthetic polymers which have the potential to support attachment, migration and multiplication of living cells” Bone is comprised principally of the fibrous protein collagen (type I) To optimize the regenerative capability of a scaffold, it is generally believed that the composition and physical/mechanical properties of the scaffold should be similar to those of the physiological extracellular matrix Scaffolds with well-characterized and controllable chemical, mechanical and micro-structural properties are also suitable for basic in vitro studies of cell interactions. However, extensive characterization of these newly developed mineralized collagen–glycosaminoglycan (MCG) scaffolds has not yet been done. In this study, we fabricate MCG scaffolds with varying mineral contents via the triple co-precipitation method and characterize their microstructure as well as their mechanical properties. The mechanical properties of these mineralized scaffolds are discussed in light of the cellular solids models for porous open-cell foams. The mechanical properties were found to be less than those of scaffolds made by previous techniques, as well as those predicted by theoretical models, suggesting that their properties could be improved. In the future, we plan to modify the process used to make our scaffolds in order to improve their mechanical properties MCG scaffolds were fabricated using microfibrillar, type-I collagen isolated from bovine tendon (Integra LifeSciences, Plainsboro, NJ), chondroitin-6-sulfate isolated from shark cartilage (Sigma–Aldrich Chemical Co., St Louis, MO), phosphoric acid (H Two techniques were used to cross-link the scaffolds: (1) dehydrothermal treatment (DHT) and (2) 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodimide treatment (EDAC). The parameters for the DHT treatment were guided by previous work on CG scaffolds Relative density was calculated from the dry densities of collagen, brushite (CaHPO Semi-quantitative and qualitative analyses of the constituent mineral phases in the slurry as well as the dry scaffolds were carried out using XRD. Semi-quantitative analysis of the weight fractions of brushite and monetite was conducted using the reference-intensity-ratio method (with ∼10% accuracy). Direct comparison between the highest peak intensity of the mix phase and the highest peak intensity produced by the pure phases was used to predict the weight fraction of different phases Scanning electron microscopy (SEM; Leo VP438 SEM Leo Electron Microscopy Inc., Thornwood, NY) was used to study the pore structure of the scaffolds. Cylindrical specimens of 5 Microtomography (Scanco USA Inc., Southeastern, PA) was used to analyze the three-dimensional calcium phase distribution in the scaffolds. Cubic specimens of 1 Compressive stress–strain curves for the scaffolds were measured using a Zwick/Roell Z2.5 static materials tester (Zwick GmbH, Ulm, Germany). Cylindrical specimens, 5 The Young’s modulus of the solid comprising the scaffold, The rupture strength of the solid, The mechanical properties of cellular solids depend on relative density, the properties of the solid of which the cellular solid is made (such as density, One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Fisher’s protected least significant difference (Fisher’s PLSD) methods were used to determine statistical significance between different sets of data and pair-wise data sets, respectively. A probability value of 95% ( The experimentally measured overall scaffold densities ( Optical images of an embedded specimen perpendicular and parallel to the  SEM micrographs of the 50% and 75% by weight MCG scaffolds (images taken of the plane perpendicular to the A typical compressive stress–strain curve for a 50% by weight MCG scaffold in the dry state is shown in The values of The values of For the 75% by weight NX-DRY MCG scaffold, the Young’s modulus and collapse strength in the The Poisson’s ratios for the 50% and 75% by weight NX-DRY MCG scaffolds were measured to be 0.02 Young’s moduli of the solid, Measurement of rupture strength of the solid, The pore sizes for both scaffolds were in the range of 200–350 There were substantial differences in the microstructure and mechanical properties of the 50% and 75% by weight MCG scaffolds. The 50% scaffold had a higher relative density, as well as a more uniform density and pore size than the 75% scaffold. The walls of the 75% scaffold were more variable in thickness along their length and were less well connected, with ruptures and cracked walls visible in the SEM images, compared with the 50% scaffold. Bone mineral closely resembles hydroxyapatite, a calcium phosphate. Scaffolds for bone regeneration usually involve some form of calcium phosphate, typically hydroxyapatite The compressive stress–strain curves for the scaffolds exhibited shapes characteristic of cellular solids, with the three regimes corresponding to linear elasticity, cell collapse and, at high strains, densification We can compare the measured properties of the scaffolds with values predicted from engineering models. We first estimate the modulus of the solid strut material, using a simple Voigt–Reuss composite model, and then estimate the modulus of the scaffold, using a cellular solids model Cellular solids models for open-cell foams predict values of Young’s modulus, The mechanical properties of scaffolds in this study are lower than those of scaffolds described in the literature ( MCG scaffolds with 50% and 75% by weight mineral content were fabricated via a titrant-free triple co-precipitation method followed by freeze-drying. The pore sizes for both scaffolds were in the range of 200–350 Lorna J. Gibson has a financial interest in Orthomimetics, a start up firm that resulted from a previous collaboration on a similar mineralized collagen scaffold. However, the authors did not receive any financial support from Orthomimetics for this project. Funding for this project was provided by the National Science Foundation, Grant No. CMS-0408259. The authors acknowledge Drs. Brendan Harley and Andrew Lynn for offering their assistance and valuable discussions. The authors are grateful to Professor David Cory and Dr. Chandrasekhar Ramanathan in the Department of Nuclear Science and Engineering, Professor Elazer Edelman and Philip Seifert in the Harvard–MIT Division of Health Sciences & Technology, Mr. Alan Schwartzman in the MIT Department of Materials Science and Engineering’s Nanomechanical Technology Laboratory and Ms. Kristin Myers in the Department of Mechanical Engineering for the facilities and assistance that helped complete this research.