The safe disposal of organic solid waste (OSW) has been regarded as utmost concern in this period of green economy and the concept of producing high quality fertilizers with an enriched nutrient content is at present identified prospectively in many countries. When OSW are improperly disposed, considerable amounts of nutrients which are locked in the OSW are reduced or lost. These valuable nutrients which are lost might be recuperated through suitable biochemical technologies and employed as nutrient-rich fertilizers in agricultural fields for maintaining soil fertility. This work aimed to review macro-nutrients (N, P, K) and micro-nutrients (Ca, Mg, Na, Fe, Cu, Mn, Zn, B, Mo, S) recycling during biochemical conversion technologies e.g. composting and vermicomposting of OSW for the production of fertilizer. This work also elucidates the possible ways of enriching the nutrient content in vermicompost, the effects of possible mechanisms on earthworms linking to nutrients enrichment and the quality assessment of composts and vermicomposts in terms of nutrient content. Generally, it would appear that vermicomposts can have ‘‘added-value’’ characteristics since vermicomposting of OSW could efficiently amplify the nutrients content and vermicomposts could be inferred as a superior organic fertilizer with high nutritional content of agronomic importance in contrast to composts. The high nutrient content in vermicompost could be explicated by earthworm gut-borne microorganisms which mixed with organic matter (OM) during their passage in the intestine and those microorganisms consecutively have a vital role in the biochemical alterations of nutritive elements. This review recommends the importance of obtaining a comprehensive insight on the earthworm activity entailed in vermitechnology, especially the mechanisms they accomplish for the nutrients enrichment. Conclusively, the need for further scientific research aimed at outlining Mg and Na metabolisms by earthworm mechanism and also other trace elements (Fe, Cu, Mn, Zn, B, Mo, S) in vermicomposting processes is greatly recommended which will thus provide a meaningful direction for future study.In present time, the enhancement of living standards as a consequence of its rapid economic development, world population growth, large scale urbanization and changing lifestyle of communities implied that the generation of solid waste has escalated tremendously. In 2016, In recent years, the use of earthworms in OSW stabilization is extensively urged as a better option than composting practices in recycling the nutrients. Vermicomposting is a biological waste management technology involving the combined action of earthworms and associated microflora ( There is also dearth of review investigation to examine the content of beneficial plant macro-nutrients and micro-nutrients throughout vermicomposting as compared to composting process. Owing to the inherent limitations of the individual processes, the simultaneous application of both technologies is increasingly getting attention in favor of the stabilization of various types of OSW for reduced time of treatment process, minimized pathogenic compounds ( Composting of organic materials is an aerobic, microorganism-mediated, spontaneous biological decomposition route comprising the mineralization and fractional humification of OM, resulting in a product which is stable and contamination-free for crop cultivation ( Vermicomposting of OSW does not consist of a thermophilic phase, but is mostly linked to the joint earthworm's metabolic activity and mesophiles ( In contrast to conventional composting, vermicomposting often results in a better quality homogenous product with reduced mass, shorter processing time, high humus content, reduced phytotoxicity and greater fertilizer value in the microbiologically active manure, i.e., vermicompost ( Owing to intrinsic drawbacks of the sole system, the integration of both composting and vermitechnology is gradually getting importance in achieving stabilized final outcome ( The crucial nutritive elements are classified into two groups: macro-nutrients (nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), potassium (K)) ( In general, the TN concentration rises during composting which is caused by the concentration effect, the total reduction in dry mass with regard to CO Composts contain Ca and Mg which usually react as bases when they are found as carbonates, hydroxides and oxides. Once these oxides of Ca and Mg are added to soil, they hamper soil acidification thereby causing soil nutrients further accessible to crops ( Quantification of the amount of nutrient loss is imperative in comprehending the composting route, and in support of developing lucrative methods for nutrients conservation so as to minimize probable adverse environmental impacts. When the temperature rises throughout the thermophilic stage of the composting route, NH Quite a few approaches are being researched for conserving the amount of nutrients during the composting process, consequently promoting to augment the end level of this nutrient in the compost before its application to plants. These approaches consisted; (1) addition with nutrients-rich substances, (2) bioaugmentation with nutrients converting bacteria, (3) addition of bacteria in the composting matrix ( The generation of compost having an elevated level of nutrient demands the direction and diminution of nutrient losses throughout the composting process. Rutgers static pile composting system has proved to be an excellent technique designed for lessening N-losses all the way during NH The relative efficiency of nutrient recovery RRc: recovery rate of nutrient in control. The recovery rate (RRt) is computed by Utilization of this guideline is reasonable since nutrient recuperation from certain OSW e.g. coconut husk is too little owing to large level of lignin, broad-ranging C/N ratio and slow speed of degradadtion. Hence, high correlative nutrient level will designate the effectiveness of biochemical processes in nutrient recuperation which as well reports the time demanded for composting and/or vermicomposting. The largest relative efficiency of nutrient recovery in vermicompost prepared from coconut husk mixed with animal dung by Generally, the overall nutrient status in vermicompost relies on the composition of the feed materials and fraction of these various feed materials are employed as food source for earthworms ( The rise of macro-nutrients during vermitechnology might be reckoned owing to a change in microbial activity and pH on the OM whilst going across the earthworm's gut ( TN or TKN concentration in vermicompost is principally reliant on the primary N content of OSW used as organic waste supply to earthworms and on the extent of waste degradation sub-system ( TP is a vital nutrient that is needed for energy movement inside crops, photosynthesis as well as for plant development ( An increase in concentration of TK in OSW vermicompost was detected in various vermicomposting experiments ( There are contradictory reports as regards to K content in vermicomposts obtained from different OSW. A decrease in K has been reported in the vermicomposting process than the initial feed mixtures ( Earlier studies recorded a considerable increment in Ca level during vermicomposting process of different OSW i.e. industrial wastes, forest leaf litter, rice straw etc. as compared to feedstocks ( Vermicomposting caused substantial increase in Na content comparative to the composting product ( With regard to an improvement in sustainable agriculture, OSW improvement with nutrients is of great concern that could effectually be performed by preliminary treating the OSW with some productive microflora. Addition of appropriate supplements has been found to accelerate the vermicomposting period together with the enhancement of nutritive elements in the ready vermicompost ( Microorganisms generate enzymes which resulted in the bio-chemical degradation of OM, but earthworms are known to be the essential engineers of the system since they are engaged in the indirect stimulation of microbial communities during disintegration and consumption of OM ( The N mineralization rate during vermicomposting was found to be directly related to the earthworm mediated N enrichment ( The earthworm intestine generates a substantial quantity of acid and alkaline phosphatases ( Earthworms play a vital role in K mineralization during vermitechnology. Usually, when OSW passes through the earthworm gut, a portion of organic TK is transformed into more accessible exchangeable K owing to enzymes activity ( The Ca-mineralization during vermitechnology process reflects the outcome of earthworm's mechanism in OSW mixtures ( Vermicompost which resembles native soil humic substances ( The usefulness of compost pertaining to valuable influences on soil physico-chemical and biological characteristics, in addition to comprising a nutrient supply, relies on its quality. According to Conclusively, addition of various additives on composting process might be a resonance technique in recuperating valuable nutritive elements from OSW for rendering fertility of soil. This work has clarified that the inoculation of nutrient-rich materials, integration of nutrients from natural sources and the supplementation of microbes, signifies a propitious continuing approach to achieve a ready outcome with improved nutrient quality. The use of nutrient-rich composts could eventually contribute to diminish production costs over and above decreasing the ecological effect triggered by discarding OSW. For the most part, the development of bio-inputs which are rich in nutritive elements demands further investigation and not only in the enhancement of the end product, but also in the separation and detection of microbes permitting the transfer of nitrogenous materials and substances containing K and P available in OSW. The search for more effective additives to improve the composting technology whilst regarding the economic advantages, lessen the N loss and improving the quality of the end product in terms of nutrient content is entailed. This review demands additional research efforts to discover the most suitable method for N preservation so that compost with utmost N content at the final stage of the composting process could be attained. Moreover, an eventual demand in research is needed to confirm P, K, and Na losses during composting processes. Studies on compost with regard to nutrient conservation, supplementation, and addition with nutrient converting microbes could also be carried out as a future challenge to make the final product of the composting system valuable in nutritional properties. On the other hand, OSW can be converted into a richer environmentally-friendly nutrient biofertilizer (vermicompost) through vermitechnology operation for sustainable land restoration practices and urban forestry programme. In contrast to compost, vermicompost holds elevated quantity of major nutritive elements (TKN, TP, TK) and some minor nutrients (Ca, Mg, Na) with enhanced nutritional features for specifically improving crop quality. These increased levels of major nutrients in vermicomposts can be attributed to the improved synergetic enteric microflora secreted from earthworm's gut through earthworm activity. The secretion of metabolic nitrogenous products by earthworms as excretory substances, body fluid, enzymes and growth stimulating hormones increase the TKN profile during vermicomposting. The rise in TP concentration upon vermitechnology is performed partly by stimulation of the micro-flora present in earthworm's gut phosphatases and by the P-solubilizing microbes available in vermicasts. Increase in TK concentration subsequent to vermicomposting could be attributed to the enzymatic activities of earthworm's gut and settlement of K in the earthworm casts. The Ca metabolism is mostly linked by the gut-exuded enzymes generated from earthworm's activity and by the accelerated assimilation in the vermicast's deposition by fugal hyphae or other microbial communities. But still, earthworm's mechanism on micro-nutrients i.e. Mg and Na is not lucidly known. In this sequence, an apparent demand for further scientific investigation and development intended at outlining Mg and Na metabolisms and also other trace elements (Fe, Cu, Mn, Zn, B, Mo, S) during vermicomposting processes is needed. Composting of OSW can be a practice of a highest standard and vermicomposting of OSW can be beneficial in the supplement of superior plant nutrients. In summary, vermicomposting can be recommended as one of the technologies by developing countries or small island developing states for the management of OSW since the utilization of vermicompost in agriculture might be useful in lowering the use of inorganic fertilizer, attain sustainable development and land degradation issues. The author appreciatively expresses infinite thanks to each individual whose involvement, through scientific data, fundamental findings with broad array of critical principles and suppositions, was of colossal help in adding consistency to this review. Special thanks to the anonymous reviewers for their instructive comments and suggestions. The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at