System for the dry separation of 50×6-mm coal is described. It consists of an air dense-medium fluidized bed as the separation medium (using 0.15×0.30-mm magnetite powder as the main medium solid). The bed density stability is a key operational parameter during separation, as the feed coal is separated according to the bed density. In separating process, the fine coal (<1 mm) will continuously accumulate in the fluidized bed, thus inevitably resulting in the fluctuation of bed density. The distribution of fine coal in an air dense-medium fluidized bed was studied. We learn from the study that fine coal can mix with magnetite powder and distribute uniformly in the fluidized bed. Experiment results in the pilot system show that a mixture of magnetite powder and fine coal can also be used as medium solid, and the 50×6-mm coal can be separated efficiently with an E
                     p value of about 0.05 under 8.8 cm/s gas velocity. The stability of bed density can be maintained through split-flow of used medium solids and complement of fresh medium solids (magnetite powder) in continuous coal separation.Today, wet processes of coal beneficiation are almost the only method universally used in the field of coal preparation The dry beneficiation of coal with an air dense-medium fluidized bed is an efficient beneficiation method, which uses gas–solids phases as the dense medium. This method differs from conventional air separation methods A key operating parameter is the dynamic stability of bed density. The main factors such as the fine coal in the fluidized bed and the fluidizing gas velocity will all effect it. Hence, it should be closely controlled during the beneficiation. The pilot-scale air dense-medium fluidized bed system for coal beneficiation is made up of five parts: (1) raw coal pre-treatment, (2) separator, (3) medium solids recovery and purification, (4) air supply, and (5) dust collector. The outline of the separator and its sampling spots are shown in The separator is comprised of an air chamber, an air distributor, a separator vessel and a scraper conveyor. The separating process of the feedstock in the separator is: to use magnetite powder (0.15–0.30-mm size and 1950-kg/m The arithmetic mean density of all measurements at each bed pressure measuring point is defined as The homogeneity of the density distribution in the bed can be indicated by the sample standard deviation The mean diameter Based on a laboratory experiment, a mixture of magnetite powder and fine coal of 0.45–0.90 mm was used as medium solid in the pilot system. The experimental results show that, under proper operating conditions, the mixture has good fluidization performance and is suitable to 50×6 mm coal separation. Fluidizing gas velocity For further investigation on the bed density stability, a separation test of the pilot system with a capacity of 3.5 tons/h feed coal (50×6 mm) was carried out. The raw coal came from Yezhou Coal Mine Bureau of China. The results of the products float–sink test are given in During separation, fine coal will continuously accumulate in the fluidized bed and eventually affect the separation efficiency. In order to simulate this process in a short period, some fine coal was fed into the fluidized bed of the pilot system. The schematic diagram of the dense medium flowsheet in this system is presented in The content of fine coal in the bed is too high for coal beneficiation when the mean bed density becomes lower than a critical value of permitted separation density. In this case, the split-flow of the medium solids withdrawn from the system should be increased to restore the bed density. The bigger the split-flow is taken, the faster the restoration of the mean bed density becomes. After the mean bed density has returned to normal, the split-flow keeps a certain level to maintain the bed density stability. Another two experiments of the pilot system were carried out to investigate the stability of the separation efficiency when adjusting the split-flow of the used medium solids. The feedstock of 50×6-mm coal was obtained from Xuzhou Coal Mine Bureau of China. The bed density was maintained at about 1.63 g/cm The effect of fluidizing gas velocity on mixing the new medium solids with the recycled medium solids was also investigated. The experiments showed that the gas velocity should not be too low, otherwise, the two parts of the medium solids do not mix very well. Also, the gas velocity should also not be too high, otherwise, the bed density stability worsens and the dilute phase section of the fluidized bed increases. The distributions of fine coal in the bed at different fluidizing gas velocities are shown in (1) Coal of 50×6 mm can be separated efficiently in an air dense-medium dense phase fluidized bed, in which a mixture of magnetite powder and fine coal of 0.45–0.9 mm is used as medium solid. This medium solid has very good fluidizing performance and fair bed density stability. The probable error (2) The fluidizing gas velocity should be closely controlled at about 8.8 cm/s, or it may affect the bed density stability. The higher the fluidizing gas velocity, the lower the bed density. (3) During splitting, a part of the used medium solids from the system and adding some fresh medium solids into it, the air dense-medium fluidized bed can still efficiently separate the 50×6-mm coal with an (4) All results of the research provide a basis for the on-line measurement and control system of the bed density in the coal dry beneficiation system with an air dense-medium fluidized bed. The financial support provided by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Project 59974030) for this work is gratefully acknowledged.