Osteochondral injuries of the metacarpal head require anatomical restoration to prevent limitations in range of motion and osteoarthritis. Osteochondral bone grafting is a viable option, especially in younger patients. Central injuries allow for different types of grafting, but when the injured area is on the lateral portion of the metacarpal head, the graft must include both a cortical and a cartilaginous portion. We present here the pearls and pitfalls in the surgical technique of chondrocostal grating from the 6th rib and an example of its use within a case of comminuted fracture of the metacarpal head. This technique provides a graft with cortical bone that allows for a stable fixation, with few complications during its harvesting. The graft is viable in the long-term and shows similar magnetic resonance intensities in comparison to hand cartilage.Osteochondral injuries (OCI) of the metacarpal head are challenging for hand surgeons. The etiology of these injuries ranges from idiopatic, in the form of avascular necrosis or Dieterich's disease, including vasculitis, autoimmune diseases and, most commonly, traumatic mechanisms. Their clinical presentations include pain in the metacarpal-phalangeal joint (MCPJ), swelling of the soft tissues and finally decrease in range of motion or even joint stiffness. The range of therapeutic techniques used for the treatment of these injuries includes simple debridement, arthroplasty Whereas small injuries in the central portion of the metacarpal head may be treated with conical grafts, literature is scarce when the injury affects the whole lateral aspect of the head, making it difficult to obtain a stable graft with a correct shape. A male, right-handed 17-year old patient visited the emergency room after a direct traumatism between his fist and the mouth of another person. He presented a wound in the dorsal portion of his right hand's third MCPJ. Integrity of the extensor tendon was observed, however the patient did present a capsular injury with exposure of the metacarpal head, which had a lateral depression on its radial side, verified with an X-ray. The fragment comminution did not allow for fixation, and taking into account its small size, irrigation, debridement, capsular and wound closure was performed. Microbiological samples were taken but turned out to be negative. A cast was applied for 3 weeks. During the follow up, the metacarpal head depression presented osseous reabsorption, which ended up affecting 50% of the articular surface. Due to the bone loss (measured in CT scan to be 10 There are various options for the treatment of OCI of the metacarpal head, one being open reduction and internal fixation. Nevertheless, due to comminution and depression, fragment fixation was not considered a viable option initially, also taking into account a possible increase in infection risk due to the contact of the fracture with a human mouth. Arhtroplasty was not considered due to the age of the patient and due to a possible decrease in articular range of motion. Arthrodesis was also not considered a viable option, as it would restrict the use of the third finger from the dominant hand of a 17-year old patient. Hence, the use of osteochondral grafting was considered. Multiple donor sites have been referred to in literature. Capo However, most literature refers to graft harvesting from the chondrocostal apex. Hasegawa The chondrocostal union of the 6th rib is approached (due to its easy access and large cartilage portion), and a horizontal incision is carried out. The chondrocostal junction is identified due to its change in colour, where a sudden change from the white cartilage to the more red/pink bone is observed. After careful deperiostization (thus avoiding pleural injuries), the graft is obtained. Its size should be over-dimensioned, allowing for further modelling for proper adaptation in the receptor site. Infiltration with local anaesthetic (mepivacaine 2%) surrounding the inter-costal nerve is carried out for correct post-operative pain management. Positive pressure insuflation is applied prior to wound closure to ensure pleural integrity, and no drain is needed if the pleura remains intact ( In the next phase of the surgery, after the dorsal approach and capsular opening of the MCPJ, the receptor site is prepared, debriding it from the remaining fibrous tissue and creating a biologically viable bone surface (perforations with Kirschner wire were performed), taking care in the creation of a 90° angle to provide graft stability. The amount of osseous and cartilaginous defect is measured (defect size was measured to be 10 The graft should be slightly over-dimensioned due to the existing tendency towards reabsorption, especially taking into account that the instability of the joint due to the osteochondral defect was the patient's main concern. The graft was then fixed using one 1 The patient referred good analgesic post-operative pain management, both in his hand and his ribs. He then underwent a rehabilitation protocol of initial passive-assisted and progressive active motion. Bone consolidation was observed in X-rays within 4 months. The patient required screw removal due to intolerance, which was performed 8 months after initial surgery. A biopsy during the removal was not considered to avoid iatrogeny due to the small size of the graft. X-rays at 12-months follow-up showed a slight metaplasia form cartilage to bone of the radial lateral aspect of the graft. This phenomenon has already been described in similar uses of cartilage grafts Osteochondral grafting from the chondrocostal junction provided and adequately sized graft to model, allowing for metacarpal head reconstruction. The chondrocostal junction may be approached form the 6th to the 9th rib, and these types of grafts have already been used successfully in orthopaedic hand and wrist surgery, presenting itself as a viable option in the treatment of proximal scaphoid nonunion There are few complications associated with the CCG harvesting, and though they may be potentially severe (e.g. pneumothorax), careful deperiostization and the use of positive pressure make these complications rare. Having a cortical structure in its periphery allows for a more stable fixation with screws in comparison to other donor sites (i.e. knee osteochondral grafting), and its approach harms no joint, being particularly important for young, active patients. In addition, it allows for a recovery in range of motion and stability, preventing further osteoarthritis of the joint, and fewer complications in comparison with prosthetic substitution Anatomic reconstruction using chondrocostal grafting has also great advantages in comparison to other techniques, as it avoids the possible complications of prosthetic surgery, such as dislocations Hence, we believe that the case of lateral OCI in young, active patients, with no associated injuries in the phalangeal side of the joint is an ideal indication for metacarpal head reconstruction using chondrocostal grafting. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. No funds or grant IDs have been cereived for this research. Javier Zurriaga Carda: conception and design of the paper drafting the article, obtention and processing of the data and images. Raul Rojas Díaz: performing the surgery, conception and design of the paper, critical revision of the final text. Luis Puertes Almenar: performing the surgery, conception and design of the paper, critical revision of the final text. Antonio Silvestre Muñoz: conception and design of the paper, critical revision of the final text.