The application of inhibitors of the Rho kinase pathway (ROCK inhibitors) to the surface of the eye in the form of eyedrops has beneficial effects which aid the recovery of diseased or injured endothelial cells that line the inner surface of the cornea. The aim of this study was to test the plausibility of delivering a selective ROCK inhibitor, Y-27632, to the cornea using a thin polymeric film. Mucoadhesive polymeric thin films were prepared incorporating Y-27632 and diffusional release into PBS was determined. Topical ocular delivery from the applied film was investigated using freshly excised porcine eyes and eyedrops of equivalent concentration acted as comparators; after 24h the formulations were removed and the corneas extracted. Drug-loaded thin polymeric films, with high clarity and pliability were produced. ROCK inhibitor Y-27632 was weakly retained within the film, with release attaining equilibrium after 1h. This in turn facilitated its rapid ocular delivery, and an approximately three-fold greater penetration of Y-27632 into cryoprobe-treated corneas was observed from the thin film (p
                     <0.01) compared to eyedrops. These findings support the further development of ROCK inhibitor delivery to the cornea via release from thin mucoadhesive films to treat vision loss cause by corneal endothelial dysfunction.The cornea of the eye, which is just over 0.5 Techniques to treat vision loss caused by corneal endothelial dysfunction include an anterior corneal micropuncture and laser treatment to puncture the corneal epithelium. Although these procedures can be effective they carry a high risk of rejection and sometimes result in complications including corneal perforation and scarring ( In terms of drug therapy, the ROCK signaling pathway has received recent attention in light of the diverse therapeutic potential of changing cell behaviour in various diseases such as hypertension, vasospasm, and glaucoma ( The delivery of drugs to the eye is basically divided into three routes; topical, systemic and intraocular. The intraocular route involves an injection into the eye or use of implants, which is surgically fairly invasive, carries the risk if infection and is seen undesirable by patients. Systemic delivery is inefficient with potential unwanted side effects. The topical delivery of drugs to the eye is thus judged to be an attractive route. Examples of topical delivery include the use of eye drop solutions, ointments, suspensions and emulsions. Eye drops are widely used, but are easily washed out by blinking and nasolacrimal drainage; this means that only a small amount of the applied dose is likely to penetrate the cornea. Ointment, suspension and emulsion formulations are widely reported to cause ocular adverse effects, which include irritation and visual disturbance ( ROCK inhibitor Y-27632 dihydrochloride (MW 247.3) was obtained from ApexBio Technology LLC (Houston, US). Acetonitrile (HPLC grade), water (HPLC grade) and phosphate buffered saline (PBS) tablets were obtained from Fisher Scientific (Loughborough, UK). Methylene blue (MW 319.9), polyethylene glycol 400 (PEG 400) and trifluoroacetic acid (≥ Ingredients were weighed into a 250 Ten 0.5 Transcorneal freezing has been used as a therapeutic modality prior to Y-27632 application in the form of eye drops ( Eyedrops of equal concentration to the methylene blue and ROCK inhibitor Y-27632 film were formulated to act as a control. The working formulae of the eyedrops are detailed in Freshly excised porcine eyeballs were placed, cornea uppermost, in a 6-well cell culture plate. Circular patches, 1 After 24 The concentration of methylene blue and ROCK inhibitor Y-27632 released from each film and extracted from each cornea was quantified by reverse phase HPLC using an Agilent series 1100 HPLC system, fitted with a Phenomenex Kinetex 5μ C18 100 All data were analyzed using an InStat 3 statistical package (GraphPad Software Inc., San Diego, CA, U.S.A). Comparisons of concentration released from formulations into native and cryoprobe-treated corneas were determined using ANOVA (Analysis of variance) and Kruskal-Wallis post-tests, where Initially, a blank film (i.e. not loaded with any medication) was produced and was found to have good clarity, transparency and pliability, with the entire film weighing approximately 500 Homogeneity and recovery were determined by sampling 5 The polymers hydroxyproplymethyl cellulose (HPMC), polyethylene glycol 400 (PEG 400) and Carbopol 917 (CP) were used in the film-forming excipients described here. The suitability of a HPMC film as a drug vehicle considered several factors, such as the mechanical properties, the swelling of films, and in vitro and in vivo bioadhesion evaluations ( Diffusional release is the process whereby drug molecules spontaneously migrate from the polymeric system to the exterior of the polymer and then into the release medium ( The purpose of producing a film containing methylene blue was to provide a model solute which was visible to the naked eye and allowed us to develop the film production technique – it is however, also used clinically as a photosensitizer ( Diffusional release profiles of ROCK inhibitor Y-27632 were constructed as cumulative mass (mg The diffusional release of Y-27632 was replicated using three concentrations of Y-27632 films; 10  On a side note, methylene blue is used clinically as a visual guide during surgery or endoscopy ( As mentioned, transcorneal freezing achieved by touching the corneal surface with a cold probe can cause corneal endothelial cell death, either by forming intracellular ice that is lethal to the cell or by the formation of extracellular ice, which will create an osmotic imbalance leading to an increase in intracellular electrolytes and the collapse of cellular membranes. It was previously reported that corneal endothelial cells are expected to proliferate at the frozen wound sites after cryotherapy ( As the corneal endothelium is the target site for Y-27632 following its surface application, it was important to ensure that the drug is penetrating towards the back of cornea to reach endothelial tissue. Since Y-27632 is colourless, methylene blue film was used as a model.  Run off of the dose applied as eyedrops is a well-known aspect of this mode of delivery and was vividly depicted in this work involving methylene blue ( The delivery of methylene blue from film and eye drops of equal concentrations to untreated in vitro porcine corneas and cryoprobe-treated porcine corneas (n The corneal delivery of ROCK inhibitor Y-27632 from films and eye drops of equal concentration into native unfrozen porcine corneas and cryoprobe-treated porcine corneas (n Y-27632 has been reported to have no direct toxicity or significant effects on cell proliferation ( This study has compared drug delivery to the cornea achieved via eye drops or release from mucoadhesive thin films. Initially, methylene blue as a model agent, followed by 10