This special issue contains a selection of papers presented at the Centenary of Flotation Symposium, which was held on 5–9 June 2005, in Brisbane, Australia, to mark the introduction of flotation into the minerals industry at Broken Hill, Australia, one hundred years ago. The quality of the papers presented at the Symposium was very high, and it was an invidious task to select only 40 from the 80 papers submitted for this special volume. Inevitably, many excellent papers could not be included solely because of space limitations. The meeting was held under the auspices of the Australasian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy (AusIMM), and the Society of Mining Engineers, USA (SME). It followed the very successful conferences organised by the SME in the US to mark the 50th and 75th anniversaries. The idea was initiated by a group including Douglas Fuerstenau of the University of California, Berkeley; Maurie Fuerstenau of the University of Nevada at Reno, and Roe-Hoan Yoon of Virginia Tech. They were joined on the organising committee by Nag Nagaraj (Cytec), John Herbst (Metso), J.-P. Franzidis (JKMRC), John Ralston (Ian Wark Institute, University of South Australia) and myself. The co-chairs of the Symposium were Roe-Hoan Yoon and myself. The Symposium was attended by 450 participants from the USA, Canada, Mexico, Brazil, Chile, Peru, South Africa, Zimbabwe, Finland, Sweden, the United Kingdom, Greece, Germany, France, Denmark, the Netherlands, Spain, Turkey, Russia, India, Japan, Papua New Guinea, New Zealand, Indonesia and Australia. A total of 149 papers was presented, including four plenaries and fifteen keynotes. There was a good balance of presentations, there being 61 from industry and 88 from academia. In order to accommodate as many papers as possible, some were given as “snapshots”. One of the rules of the conference was that no person could present more than one paper, of whatever type. The snapshot authors had five minutes to introduce their work, with posters being available in an adjacent room for further discussion of the work. The snapshots worked particularly well—the discipline of having to distil the work into a limited time ensured that the gist of the papers could be grasped and understood in a way that was often better than achieved in the longer presentations. The meeting was a great success. Despite the economic importance of the flotation process, the international group of people who work in this field is relatively small, and those involved generally get to know each other over time. The excellent attendance included a high proportion of those active in the field at the cutting edge of technology, whether from industry or academia. Seldom if ever have so many flotation specialists been brought together in one place, so the occasion was a great opportunity for people to catch up on old friendships and make new ones. There were two parallel sessions: Sulfides, Fundamentals, and Non-sulfides; and Flotation Machines, Plants and Operations, Froths and Frothers, and Control and Simulation. The opening plenary lectures were given by two outstanding contributors to the field: Douglas Fuerstenau, Emeritus Professor at the University of California, Berkeley, who spoke on “A century of developments in the chemistry of the flotation process”; and Alban Lynch, Emeritus Professor and long-time director of the Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre at the University of Queensland. Their coverage of the key points over the past hundred years was absorbing not only to the older generation who had taken part in some of the experiences described and knew many of the key characters, but also to younger mineral processors, who had a chance to hear about the setbacks and the successes of earlier researchers and practitioners. Following a suggestion from Alban Lynch, a number of “living legends” of the flotation field were invited to a special lunch that followed the plenaries on the first day. The criteria for selection were that they had made significant contributions to the science and/or practice of flotation in the past, and that they were retired. The committee was assiduous in its enquiries to ensure that no-one was overlooked. All legends were presented with a celebratory scroll. The first plenary on the second day was given by Dr. Robin Batterham, of Rio Tinto PLC. Robin reviewed the current state of the minerals industry and the role of flotation within it. He pointed out that there are significant community pressures that are leading to smaller footprints for mines and processing plants, elimination or reduction in the size of dumps and tailings dams, and more underground processing. In one scenario, he questioned whether flotation would be around for another hundred years, its place perhaps being taken by in situ leaching and electrowinning. On another point, he gave examples of high-quality R&D going on in universities around the world, finishing with a question—is the R&D being applied quickly enough? Time will tell. The second plenary was provided by Megan Clark, Ian Brake, Bert Huls, Brian Smith and Mike Yu, of BHP Billiton. In a light-hearted review, Brian surveyed the role of BHP from the very beginning of flotation in Australia, touching on the pioneers such as Potter, Delprat, and de Bavay, then describing several challenges facing the operators at a number of operations, including Escondida, Ekati and Cannington. A topic highlighted in both of the Tuesday plenaries was the difficulty in floating coarse particles. Robin and Brian both showed similar graphs of copper recovery vs particle size, in which the recovery, which had been as high as 95% in the range 50–100 After the sessions on Tuesday afternoon, there was a happy-hour among the exhibitors and the poster displays. The social events climaxed on Wednesday night with the Symposium Dinner, where the names of the “living legends” were announced and also the winners of travel scholarships. When it was clear that sufficient funds were going to be forthcoming from the registrations, a previously-planned Travel Scholarship Program was put into effect. The scholarships were aimed at late-year undergraduates, graduate students and early-career mineral processors. An e-mail was sent to all registrants, authors, sponsors and exhibitors, inviting applications for scholarships that would provide registration and accommodation for the meeting, plus $1000 towards travel for overseas students. Over 30 applications were received, and there were 13 winners, eight international and five “Australian”. Some of the latter were also from overseas, so the overall composition included students and young metallurgists from Canada, Brazil, Peru, Turkey, South Africa and the USA, as well as Australia. Following a suggestion from Rob LaNauze, then of WMC, the committee agreed to set aside funds to have suitable plaques made for each of the founders mentioned earlier—Potter, Delprat and de Bavay. All were buried in Melbourne, Australia, and Rob had already located their graves. Rather sad to relate that Potter died in 1909, only a couple of years after his introduction of flotation at Broken Hill, and he did not live to see his project come to its full potential. On behalf of the organising committee, I would like to thank the team of organisers from the AusIMM, whose cheerful professionalism laid the foundations for such a memorable symposium. We are also grateful for financial support from sponsors Xstrata, Outokumpu, Ausenco, Anglo Platinum, Roche Mining, BHP-Billiton, Orica, Phelps Dodge, Huntsman, Teck Cominco, Rio Tinto, Newmont, Worley Parsons, JKMRC, and Cytec.