This study investigated the effects of mechanical vibration during solidification on the metallurgical structure of hypoeutectic aluminum–silicon A356. A series of casting trials were conducted. Emphasis was placed on the morphological changes of the primary aluminum phase of the as-cast alloy, which was subjected to different levels of mechanical vibration at various values of pouring temperature and solid fraction. It was found that the average grain size of the primary phase became relatively finer and more globular as the degree of vibration increased. This suggested that during the solidification process, dendrites that formed normally in the liquid alloy were subsequently disturbed and fragmented by the mechanical vibration introduced into the melt. This effect was enhanced when the vibration was introduced into an alloy with a larger solid fraction, as was observed with solidification at lower pouring temperatures. In addition to the macrostructure examination, semi-solid properties were also assessed and reported using the Rheocasting Quality Index. It was shown that the introduction of mechanical vibration into the A356 melt with adequate solid fraction prior to complete solidification successfully resulted in an as-cast structure featuring semi-solid morphology.It is well accepted that microstructure is one of major factors that defines the mechanical properties of aluminum alloy Many new techniques have been developed for creating semi-solid structures since the inception of semi-solid processing; for example, electromagnetic stirring In this study a robust method for introducing mechanical vibration was developed, at lower cost than ultrasonic vibration. Wu et al.  To introduce the mechanical vibration, a special setup of apparatus was developed as schematically illustrated in The vibration source is a device equipped with a magnetic coil that operates at a frequency of 55 The A356 specimens were then cut into 20   As shown in Let us now consider the microstructure of the specimens cast at 620  Based on the findings reported above, it can be concluded that introduction of mechanical vibration to the liquid A356 alloy prior to complete solidification, under appropriate conditions of pouring temperature and solid fraction, can effectively promote favorable morphology that is suitable for further semi-solid casting. It is believed that the phenomena underlying the diminished dendrite formation involve dendrite fragmentation driven by agitated liquid as well as thermal fluctuation at the liquid–solid interfaces. Small dendrites can be readily re-melted and prohibited from growing It was found that, under the range of the solidification conditions investigated in this study, the average grain size of the primary aluminum phase became relatively finer and more globular as the degree of vibration increased. This suggested that during the course of solidification, normal dendrites that were originally formed in the liquid alloy were subsequently disturbed and fragmented by the mechanical vibration introduced into the melt. This effect was markedly enhanced when the vibration was introduced at larger solid fractions and lower pouring temperatures, as observed from the specimen prepared with a solid fraction of 40 The present work was supported by the National Research Council of Thailand (2008–2009) and the Higher Education Research Budget of Production Engineering Department, KMUTT.