The performance of the TowerMill circuit at the Karara mine concentrator was evaluated after the changes in the concentrator’s operational conditions and modifications in the grinding circuit. The concentrator throughput was increased by 21%. Karara mine had shifted the grinding workload from the primary ball mill circuit to TowerMill circuit by bypassing the scalping Derrick screen in between these two circuits to cope with the increase in the throughput. These actions had led to a coarser TowerMill circuit feed and higher mass flow rate that resulted in a coarser circuit product. The TowerMill circuit audit had revealed that the feed to the TowerMill circuit was coarser with wider distribution and the multicomponent analysis of the hydrocyclone streams had exhibited the coarse, low-density gangue minerals had bypassed to the hydrocyclone overflow stream. The analysis also had demonstrated that magnetite had a finer cut size compared to the gangue minerals, i.e. 32 and 58 µm respectively. Karara mine had implemented bottom feed configuration and use of 17 mm to enhance the grinding efficiency with the new operational conditions. Moreover, the hydrocyclone was operated at a higher pressure to minimise the coarse, low-density gangue minerals to bypass through the overflow stream. The multicomponent analysis had created opportunities to understand the insights of particle breakage and classification in the TowerMill and hydrocyclone. This paper focuses on the TowerMill circuit audit outcome, multicomponent analysis, implementation of recommendations to improve the grinding efficiencies and quantification of the improvement.Comminution is an integral part of the mineral processing concentrator. The main objective of the comminution circuit is to prepare the ore with the adequate liberation of the valuable minerals from the gangue for the subsequent separation. The tumbling mills such as an autogenous mill, semi-autogenous mill, rod mill and ball mill have dominated the comminution circuits for many years. Meanwhile, the challenges in the mining industry such as decrease in the commodity price and ore grade, increase in the ore hardness as the mine progress deeper, water scarcity and ore variability have pushed many concentrators to increase throughputs to maintain the business profitability i.e. maintaining or increasing the concentrate production ( Karara Mine, a magnetite mine and concentrator that produces high-grade magnetite concentrator is located in Western Australia. The concentrator had adopted HPGR for fine crushing, primary ball milling and TowerMill for fine grinding duties to prepare the feed to reverse flotation. Gangue mineral rejection stage by using the magnetic separators were introduced in between the comminution devices that reduce the feed rate and enhances the ore grade to the subsequent comminution devices. Karara Mine had increased the plant throughput by 21% to increase the concentrate production. Furthermore, the ore hardness has increased by 7% compared to the designed value. These changes had affected the performances of the comminution circuit, i.e. the circuit product from all comminution devices was coarsened. One of the significant impacts was an increase in the circulating load in the ball mill circuit. The mass flow rate of the Derrick screen oversize stream had increased the circulating load in the ball mill circuit. Karara Mine had decided to bypass the Derrick screen and shifted the grinding workload from the primary ball mill circuit to the TowerMill circuit. These decisions had affected the grindability in the TowerMill circuit as the feed rate to the circuit increased, and the particle size was coarsened. Nippon Eirich and Karara Mine had joined forces to enhance the grinding performance of the TowerMill circuit. The main objective was to reduce the circuit product size close to the design value of 35 µm. The TowerMill circuit audit to evaluate the circuit performances. Initially, the data were treated in the single component mode, and the results revealed that multicomponent analysis was required to obtain more insights of the TowerMill circuit performances. This paper will discuss the performances of the TowerMill circuit in the single and multicomponent approach. As mentioned in the earlier section, the comminution circuit design and operating conditions were modified to cope with higher throughput and increase in the ore hardness. The decision of bypassing the Derrick screen has modified the TowerMill circuit feed characteristics. This action had coarsened the feed size distribution of the TowerMill circuit feed. The TowerMill circuit audit exercises were carried out to evaluate its current performances. The performance of the TowerMill circuit was evaluated at the various operating condition, i.e. design condition, coarse feed and high throughput. The TowerMill circuit performances were evaluated using the balanced survey data.  Survey 1 – The circuit operating conditions were closed to the design values. Survey 2 – Circuit specific energy was closed to the design value, but the circuit feed was coarser. Survey 3 – The circuit was operated at a high feed rate and coarse circuit feed. These data will enable the evaluation of overall circuit performance when the operating conditions changes. In this case, Survey 3 can be considered as an extreme condition as the circuit feed rate, and particle size (F80) had increased by 26 and 35% respectively. The performance of the circuit was determined based on specific energy (    Survey 1 shows that when the circuit was operated close to the design condition. This survey data could be used as the base case. The circuit product P80 was 38.6 µm which was close to the design value. It should be noted that the performance of the circuit was strongly influenced by the hydrocyclone as well. The circulating load was 130% which was a typical value in other TowerMill circuit operation. The operating works index value that evaluates the performance at 80% is slightly higher compared to the design value. The size-specific energy at 35 µm was approximately 35 kWh/t. Based on Survey 1 that was closer to the design specification, the performance of the TowerMill circuit at coarser feed size and higher feed rate will be evaluated. Survey 2 was carried out in the similar condition as Survey 1, i.e. similar specific energy but with coarser feed size (F80 = 67 µm). The grinding efficiency at the finer end (35 µm) for Survey 2 was almost similar to Survey 1, but at 80% passing size the operating work index was 16% lesser indicating more efficient grinding due to coarser feed. The circulating load increases from 129 to 134% with coarser feed. In this case, there are opportunities to further increase the circulating load by increasing the hydrocyclone operating pressure to decrease the cut size. This option will produce a finer circuit product size. Survey 3 was carried out at higher circuit feed rate and coarser circuit feed. The circuit product was 20 µm coarser compared to the design value. In this case, the operating work index and size specific energy values were similar to the Survey 1. Meanwhile, the circulating load had increased to 182%. These analyses had indicated that the TowerMill circuit had maintained the grindability efficiency and resulting coarser circuit product when the circuit feed rate increases and became coarser. The hydrocyclone operating pressure values were similar in all the three surveys. These analyses had indicated that there are opportunities to improve the grinding efficiency in the TowerMill to cope with the new circuit feed specification after the Derrick screen was bypassed. Classification is an important integral part of any comminution circuit, and it dictates the quality of the circuit product. There are cases where poor classification had affected the overall grinding circuit performances ( The multicomponent analysis was carried out by distinguishing magnetite and gangue minerals components in all the streams. All the stream samples were sized into single size fraction in a  Based on these findings there were opportunities to improve the overall TowerMill circuit performance. As the deflections had occurred approximately at 200 µm, there is an opportunity to re-use the existing Derrick screen by scalping at the coarser size, i.e. 200 or 300 µm. The duty of the screen could be changed from scalping to gangue rejection. The circuit feed contains 2% of particles that were coarser than 106 µm. The gangue minerals content was approximately 72% in this size fraction that could be discarded. This finding had raised opportunities to use the existing Derrick screen for gangue rejection. The screen oversize material can be discarded from the grinding circuit as it had low magnetite content. Similarly, the existing Derrick screen could be used to size the TowerMill circuit product (i.e. hydrocyclone overflow stream). In this case a finer mesh size, i.e. 75 µm could be used to size to scalp the circuit product and upgrade the flotation feed grade. The hydrocyclone overflow stream contains 3% of particles that are coarser than 75 µm. Based on the data in  Based on the circuit audit results, several recommendations were made to improve the circuit performance after the changes in operating condition and circuit design. The recommendation made was based on the short and long terms solutions. Karara mine prefers the recommendations that had minimal financial implication due to the current business climate of the iron ore market. Among the recommendations were Convert the mill feed configuration from top to bottom feed Use of smaller grinding media size, i.e. 15 or 17 mm Operate the hydrocyclone at higher pressure to reduce the bypass of coarse material to the overflow stream Convert the current 15″ hydrocyclone to 10″ hydrocyclone Karara mine had implemented the first three recommendations. The improvement was quantified and will be discussed in the following sections. Conversion to the 10″ hydrocyclone involves capital investment as the whole hydrocyclone cluster need to be modified. The choice of mill feed configuration depends on the feed size distribution, reduction ratio and hardness of the ore. The bottom feed configuration was recommended if the feed had a wide particle size distribution, requires high reduction ratio and competent. Otherwise, top feed configuration was preferred. The TowerMill at the Karara Mine was installed with the top feed configuration as the circuit feed was scalped at 100 µm and low reduction ratio application. The modification in the grinding circuit and the operational condition has changed the TowerMill circuit feed characteristics – coarser and wider particle size distribution. These changes require modification in the mill feed configuration. Based on the circuit audit results, Nippon Eirich had recommended converting the mill feed configuration from top to bottom. This recommendation had minimal financial implication as this exercise only involved rerouting the hydrocyclone underflow launder pipe from top to bottom feed port.  Two sets of TowerMill circuit survey were carried out to determine the improvement in the bottom feed configuration, i.e. design (2800 t/h) and high throughput (3137 t/h). In this exercise, one TowerMill was in the original top feed configuration, and the other TowerMill was in bottom feed configuration. The hydrocyclone was operated at a higher pressure to minimise the coarse gangue minerals bypass to the hydrocyclone overflow stream. The hydrocyclone was operated at an operating pressure of 184 kPa. A trial was carried out using the 17 mm grinding media to improve the grinding efficiency. One of the TowerMill was charged with the 17 mm high Cr grinding media. Circuit survey was carried out in two TowerMill circuits, i.e. one mill was charged with the original 20 mm grinding media and the other one was charged with 17 mm high Cr grinding media. A collaborative site work was carried out to improve the performance of the TowerMill circuit after the change in the operating condition and circuit modification. The Derrick screen that was scalping the TowerMill feed was removed after the concentrator throughput was increased by 21%. This action had led to coarser and higher mass flow rate to the TowerMill circuit that had resulted in a coarser product size distribution. Originally, the TowerMill circuit at Karara Mine was designed for small reduction ratio fine grinding duty. Therefore, some minor modifications were required to suit the new operating conditions. The TowerMill circuit was audited in 2016 to determine the opportunities to enhance circuit grindability. The circuit feed was coarser with wide distribution, and the top size was close to 1 mm. The multicomponent analysis had revealed that the low-density coarse gangue minerals were bypassed to the hydrocyclone overflow stream causing a coarse end deflection in the hydrocyclone efficiency curve. Besides that, coarser feed size, increase in ore hardness, and circuit throughput had coarsened the circuit product as well. Among the recommendations made to improve the TowerMill circuit performances were convert to bottom feed configuration, hydrocyclone operated at higher pressure, use of smaller grinding media 15 or 17 mm and convert to a smaller diameter hydrocyclone, i.e. 10-inch hydrocyclone. Karara mine had implemented the first three recommendations to improve the grinding efficiency of the TowerMill circuit. The conversion to bottom feed configuration had reduced the circulating load, operating work index and size specific energy indicated improvement in the grinding efficiency. Operating the hydrocyclone at higher pressure had reduced the deflection at the coarse end of the efficiency curve indicated a reduction in the coarse gangue minerals bypassed to the hydrocyclone overflow stream. The 17 mm high Cr grinding media trial also has indicated improvement in the grindability compared to the current 20 mm grinding media. The breakage rate of magnetite and gangue minerals increased when the mill feed configuration was converted to bottom feed and the use of 17 mm grinding media. The multi-component analysis had revealed insights of particle breakage and classification trends in the TowerMill and hydrocyclone respectively. Further investigations will be carried out to understand to gain in-depth understanding that can lead to more efficient grinding. The authors would like to thank the Karara Mine for giving their permission to publish the outcomes of this collaborative study. The authors would like to thank Alex Ciluzzo for his assistance during the survey. The contribution and assistance from the Karara site laboratory are also acknowledged.