Ultrasonic waves in pulps containing iron ore fines can start, or significantly intensify, particle cleaning, de-agglomeration or disintegration. Some softer minerals, often gangue minerals with lower iron contents such as kaolinite or ochreous goethite, disintegrate several orders of magnitude faster than the valuable iron-bearing minerals such as magnetite or hematite. This facilitates selective disintegration of the gangue minerals leaving the valuable minerals mostly unchanged.
                  A set of experiments involving ultrasonic treatment of four Australian iron ore fine samples was undertaken using three different ultrasonic experimental setups. The effect of ultrasound duration, power and pulp density on the recoveries and grades of iron, alumina and silica was studied.
                  The results showed that for hematitic/goethitic ores, the application of ultrasound enabled soft material of relatively low iron grade to de-agglomerate from the larger size fractions and report to the ultrafine size fractions. Modelled de-sliming of the ultrasonically treated ores showed that de-sliming following ultrasonic treatment could significantly improve the product iron grade, while de-sliming with a finer cut size could also improve the iron recovery compared with de-sliming identical ore that had not been pre-treated with ultrasound. It has been shown mathematically that in some scenarios it may be possible to simultaneously increase the iron grade and iron recovery in the de-slimed product if the ore has been treated with ultrasound before de-sliming.It is well known that ultrasonic waves in water or a pulp can initiate, or significantly intensify, different physicochemical phenomena such as polymerisation and depolymerisation, emulsification and coagulation, surface cleaning, reduction and oxidation, activation, and even mineral disintegration. Vibrations in the water/pulp create a series of rarefactions and compressions and the nucleation of microbubbles can be initiated when there is a pressure drop within the rarefaction areas. There are two major mechanisms proposed for microbubble nucleation: liquid gasification, when the boiling point of the liquid is exceeded, and the release of dissolved gases (gaseous cavitations). The microbubbles collapse when their diameter exceeds a critical value, and such collapses can result in shock waves which can generate very localised high pressures (up to 5000 The utilisation of ultrasonic treatments to enhance the beneficiation of different minerals and coals has been extensively studied (  In the present study, further test work has been conducted on a set of iron ore fine samples derived from Australian hematitic/goethitic ores. During the experiments, ultrasonic treatment was applied to the samples with the aim of investigating the effect of various experimental parameters on iron, alumina and silica product recovery and grade for different iron ores. In particular, different pulp density, ultrasonic duration, power, and contact method were considered. Size assay analysis of feed samples and products of ultrasound treatments was undertaken to see whether significant improvements in iron grade were possible after sonication and calculated classification (de-sliming), and to determine the interdependences between the recoveries and grades of iron, alumina and silica for the various ultrasonic treatments. Sonication experiments were performed on four different hematitic/goethitic iron ores using three different ultrasonic setups and applying ultrasonic treatments for different durations. Products from the experiments were sized, and the size fractions assayed, to compare the size and elemental distributions before and after the ultrasonic treatments. The data were analysed to calculate the iron grades and recoveries after modelled perfect cut de-sliming. Four different iron ore fine samples (Ores 1, 2, 3 and 4) were examined. All were derived from Australian hematitic/goethitic ores. The ore fine samples described in this article as Ore 1 and Ore 2 were fractions from two different ores with size below 300 The majority of the results reported here relate to tests conducted on Ore 1. Results from tests on the other ores are given if they were principally different from the results for Ore 1, or where demonstration of repeatability for different ore types was required. The first experimental setup (Setup 1) is shown in The total volume of pulp was 120 During all experiments using this setup, significant heating of the pulp was observed. For example, at the end of Exp 1 (2 Experiments with ores with larger particle size (> The second experimental setup (Setup 2) is shown in In the third experimental setup (Setup 3), the effect of high power ultrasound was studied. About 200 During the cooling down period (10–15 Products from each experiment were sized using standard laboratory wet and dry screening methods, including sub-sieve sizing (less than 38 Sub-samples of the feeds and products (including all size fractions) were assayed for a suite of elements using a standard iron ore XRF method — elements of interest included iron, silicon, and aluminium. Quantitative mineral phase data was also obtained using quantitative XRD analysis (the Rietveld method). Size distributions of products from Exps 1–4 with Ore 1 using Setup 1 are shown in In Exp 4, the duration of the ultrasound treatment was the same as in Exp 1, but the amount of ore added to the pulp was three times greater. The de-agglomeration effect was slightly reduced in Exp 4 compared with Exp 1 — there was more material in the larger size fractions and less in the combined CS6 In To understand this effect we provide a simplified example in It can be seen from To make decisions about the appropriate cut size to be used during de-sliming after sonication, it is important to understand clearly what the iron, silica and alumina grades of the product (the hydrocyclone underflow) will be, as well as the iron recovery to the underflow or loss to the overflow after de-sliming. In It can be seen from The iron grade of the de-slimed product for the 2 However, the trade off for iron grade improvement is a reduction in iron unit recovery to the de-slimed product (see It can be seen from In The data in It is important to note that for higher (> The relative behaviour of alumina recovery versus iron recovery for Ore 1 is given in In general, similar results were obtained for the other hematitic/goethitic ores tested, but some differences were noted. The main results for ultrasonic treatment of Ore 2 using Setup 1 are given in Using Setup 2, Exps 13, 14, 19 and 21 were performed with Ore 1 (see At this stage it is necessary to introduce and make clear three distinct terms that will be used further in the discussion. The first one is “specific effectiveness of fines removal” which will mean the amount of production of CS6  There are a number of possible explanations for the lower specific effectiveness of fines removal in Setup 2. Firstly, in Setup 1 the delivered power of ultrasound was greater (~ It is noted that the total effectiveness of fines removal was much higher in Setup 2. The total amount of CS6 The first reason is quite obvious — the amount of ore in the Setup 2 (Exp 14) was much higher than in Setup 1 (Exp 2). In Exp 1 (Setup 1, 2 The second possible reason for the fact that total effectiveness of fines removal is higher in Setup 2 than in Setup 1 is that in Setup 2 the rotation creates a highly turbulent flow which helps to efficiently remove disintegrated material from the particle surface. To better understand this effect it is convenient to subdivide the effect of ultrasound on a particle into two phases, the first one being the selective disintegration of the particle due to cavitation, and the second phase being the removal of the disintegrated material from the surface of the particle. If this physical model is taken into consideration, it is clear that in Setup 1, with almost laminar flow removal of the disintegrated material from the surface of the particle is much less efficient than in Setup 2. It should also be remembered that high pressure and temperature during cavitation may not only disintegrate soft material, but fuse it as well ( In Exp 19, rotation only without ultrasound was applied for 5 Exp 21 was performed with a significantly higher pulp density in comparison with Exps 13, 14 and 19 (46% solids vs. 17% solids). Once again, the specific effectiveness of fines removal of ultrasound was less in Exp 21 than in Exp 14 (with lower pulp density) where all other parameters were the same. With Setup 3, more water (800 In Setup 3 pulp was continually affected by ultrasound while in Setup 1 pulp was affected by ultrasound for only one/sixth of the time. So if normalisation on effective time and on affected volume is performed the ultrasonic power per unit volume is higher in Setup 3 (1700/800 Exp 20 was performed with Ore 1 under Setup 3 (3.5 The specific effectiveness of fines removal of ultrasound in Exp 20 was significantly less than in Exp 3 (Setup 1, 18 We consider now why Setup 3 proved to have lower specific effectiveness of fines removal than Setup 1. First of all it should be noted that even though power density under ultrasonic pole in Setup 3 was slightly higher (138 There is also another possible reason for the ultrasound being more specific effective in Setup 1. In dispersed media, the ultrasonic power density decreases with increasing distance from the ultrasonic source. In Setup 1 all the slurry passes through the area near the ultrasonic probe, while in Setup 3 only a portion of the slurry is exposed to the high power density area. It should be noted that energy efficiency (energy spent to remove a certain amount of CS6 The behaviour of Ore 3 during ultrasonic treatment in Setup 1 was different from that of Ore 1 and Ore 2 in terms of the generation of ultrafines (see The size distributions for the experiments with Ore 3 are shown in It is interesting to compare the differences in the size distributions for the products of Ore 3 under different setups (see It is noted in The effect of ultrasound on particles significantly larger than those previously considered was studied using Ore 4. Setup 1 was not suitable for such large particles, so Ore 4 (− In spite of the small observed effect (from the point of view of CS6 and CS7 fraction generation), the overall results of this experiment are quite promising. In If de-sliming was performed on the original ore by removing all size fractions finer than 300 The test results using Ore 4 are interpreted in the following manner. Due to the small surface area of Ore 4 compared to the other ores, the weight loss after ultrasonic treatment of the coarse size fractions is not large. However, all this loss can be attributed to the softest part of the ore, which has the lowest iron grade. This demonstrates that ultrasonic treatment can still be effective on relatively large iron ore particles. Intuitively, due to the small sizes of the cavitations, the dominating surface effect of the ultrasonic treatment, and the large amount of CS6 In Exp 16, 0.78% of particles with size − Nevertheless, even such a rough estimation shows that a significant amount of + To study the effect of ultrasound on iron ore fines, the pulps of four different ores were treated with ultrasound under different experimental setups. In all experiments, preferential disintegration of soft minerals (associated with higher levels of alumina and silica) and deportment of this disintegrated material to the finer size fractions occurred. As a general rule, the amount of CS6 and CS7 size fractions increased, while the percentage of size fractions above 53 By modelling subsequent desliming assuming perfect cut size removal, it has been shown that the deportment of low-grade soft material from the coarse size fractions to the ultrafine size fractions can potentially improve the product iron grade after de-sliming. Furthermore, in order to achieve the same iron recovery (with a higher iron grade) that would have been achieved by de-sliming the ore without ultrasonic treatment, separation/de-sliming should be performed at a finer cut size. For every treated ore considered, there was a possibility of simultaneously increasing the iron grade and recovery by utilising ultrasonic treatment. For the ores treated in the experiments, it was calculated that the iron grade of the de-slimed ore that was pre-treated ultrasonically would be up to 2% higher than the de-slimed ore without ultrasonic treatment when maintaining similar iron recoveries. There are reasons to believe that for particular low grade ores this value may rise significantly. The ores used for the experiments had relatively low amounts of silica (2.5–3.5%) and alumina (1%–3%), and it is likely that for ores with higher contents of alumina and silica the gain in iron grade with the application of ultrasound would be much higher. It is also worth noting that for all ores, the preferential removal of alumina, rather than silica, occurred after ultrasonic treatment. Therefore, if de-sliming after ultrasonic treatment is performed at a finer separation size, the final classification product will have a higher iron grade and relatively lower amounts of alumina compared to silica, while maintaining a similar iron recovery compared with conventional desliming. In terms of physical conditions, the experimental results showed that ultrasonic treatment without stirring is inefficient, as the ore creates a dense cake on the bottom of the vessel, and this cake has a low permeability for ultrasonic waves and low levels of cavitations. For ultrasonics to be efficient, the solids should be well suspended in the pulp and well stirred. The suspension of ore in the pulp has been shown to be a factor significantly affecting the results of ultrasonic treatment. The effect of ultrasound on lower density pulps was demonstrated to be slightly more specific effective than on high density pulps, but this difference was not critical. The increase in pulp density can in turn significantly increase the total ultrasonic effect. A comparison of the efficiency of different setups suggests that the ultrasonic power should be applied periodically so that disintegrated material can be washed away before it becomes partially fused. It is also preferable to distribute the ultrasonic power over the affected pulp volume evenly. During ultrasonic treatment, both cracking of particles into smaller pieces and peeling off of ultrafines from the larger particles take place. For every individual iron ore, it will most likely be necessary to optimise the different parameters of ultrasonic exposure (e.g. power, time and pulp density) in order to achieve the best outcome. Our experimental results indicate that the efficiency of ultrasonic treatment significantly decreases after a threshold reaction time. For ores with high levels of fine material and high contents of ochreous goethite and kaolinite, very short ultrasonic treatment times (less than 15–20 The authors wish to thank Anthony Farmer and Paul Gwan of CSIRO Materials Science and Engineering for their help in conducting experiments at the CSIRO laboratories in Lindfield, NSW. We would like to acknowledge Ralph Holmes and Steve Suthers of CSIRO Process Science and Engineering for reviewing this paper and their useful corrections and comments.