Soil organic matter pools are turned over at different rates, but uncertainty persists regarding how far the hierarchically organized soil structure controls the mineralization dynamics. To better understand carbon and nitrogen mineralization in undisturbed aggregate classes (coarse aggregates: 2–6.3mm, fine aggregates: <2mm), we conducted a long-term (224-days) laboratory incubation experiment. A grassland soil (Haplic Cambisol) was chosen since its aggregates were not disturbed by tillage. The field-moist aggregate size classes were separated by a gentle dry-sieving method. We monitored the CO2–C and NH3–N emissions, nitrogen mineralization, pool sizes of total and salt extractable (0.5MK2SO4) organic carbon and nitrogen, and microbial biomass carbon and nitrogen. By this approach, we could distinguish between the carbon and nitrogen mineralization processes of two soil aggregate size classes, relative to undisturbed bulk soil. The classes showed different aggregate architectures with variously sized subunits, but confirmed the aggregate hierarchy. For both aggregate classes, the recombined sum of respired CO2–C per unit of soil organic carbon equaled the bulk soil, proving that our aggregate separation preserved the original aggregates as intact functional units. Both aggregate size classes and the bulk soil respired only 4% soil organic carbon throughout the incubation period. The coarse aggregates, which mostly comprised small macroaggregates, mineralized more carbon per unit soil organic carbon than the fine aggregates (composed of microaggregates), indicating a higher bioavailability of soil organic matter in the coarse aggregates. Accordingly microbial metabolic efficiency was higher in coarse than in fine aggregates. Nitrogen mineralization was higher in fine aggregates than in coarse aggregates, but was impaired by carbon limitation as the incubation experiment proceeded. We conclude that bioavailability of soil organic matter was affected by different aggregate architectures in the different aggregate size classes. The lower bioavailability of soil organic matter in fine aggregates is due to an enhanced stabilization through cation bridging of the dolomitic soil material at the microaggregate level, whereas the higher soil organic matter bioavailability in coarse aggregates is explained by labile organic components at the macroaggregate level.Soil aggregation depends on the soil fauna, microorganisms, roots, organic and inorganic binding agents, and environmental and physical forces ( Previous studies on aggregate carbon mineralization have focused on land use ( Nevertheless, despite some studies ( To better understand the coupled regulation of carbon and nitrogen mineralization in undisturbed aggregates, we conducted an incubation experiment. We studied mineralization in two aggregate size classes of a dolomitic grassland soil (Haplic Cambisol), composed of different hierarchically organized substructures. Specifically, we asked the following questions: (1) Do different aggregate classes mineralize at similar rates when their water and air availabilities are comparable? (2) Do aggregate size classes differ in their substructures, external surface areas, and bioavailability of SOM? (3) Do aggregate classes of different sizes exhibit diverse heterotrophic respiration efficiencies? Thus, the present study seeks to identify the role of different intact structural units to the overall soil mineralization of carbon and nitrogen as controlled by bioavailability in aggregate substructures. The sampling site Graswang is located near Garmisch–Partenkirchen in a foothill valley (877 We separated and incubated three aggregate size classes of the sampled soil material from the Ah horizon. The material in the bulk soil class was not processed, since we wanted to conserve the intact aggregation. For both aggregate classes, the complete field-moist soil samples were gently separated into macroaggregates <6.3 We incubated bulk soil, coarse aggregates, and fine aggregates in two experimental setups. In the first setup, CO Incubation jars for CO Soil moisture contents, MBC and MBN, NH For NH Microbial biomass was determined by fumigation–extraction ( At each of the seven vessel To characterize the substructure of the macroaggregate size classes, we ultrasonically dispersed 30 For a detailed comparison of the mineralization processes, we fitted the measured values to two pool first-order exponential models ( The coarse and fine aggregate size classes showed distinctly different substructures of micro- and macroaggregates ( After (pore-size dependent) dewatering on suction plates to field capacity (pF 2.5) prior to incubation, the water contents of the samples were similar, ranging from 46 to 49 Initial SOC and N The carbon mineralization rates in both aggregate size classes and bulk soil declined over the 224 days’ incubation ( According to the cumulative carbon mineralization rates, the fine aggregates emitted more CO The NH Overall, MBC and MBN decreased with incubation time ( Bulk soil initially showed the highest metabolic quotient (0 and 14 days in The cumulative carbon was negatively correlated with nitrogen mineralization in all size classes ( Both coarse and fine aggregates were hierarchically structured; that is, the smaller subunits (the microaggregates) were accumulated into larger macroaggregates. In coarse aggregates, these macroaggregates (200 By considering the internal subunits of both aggregate classes, we can apply the aggregate hierarchy concept to the fine and coarse aggregates of our study. Both aggregate classes were composed differently according to their size, but consisted of subunits of lower hierarchical order. Fine aggregates comprised mainly microaggregates, whereas coarse aggregates were dominated by macroaggregates. The cumulative CO Fine aggregates showed the highest respiration rates per unit mass soil ( The lower specific respiration rate per unit mass SOC in fine aggregates ( Coarse aggregates contributed most to the total carbon mineralization because they were abundant in bulk soil. Recombined bulk soil equivalently respired to bulk soil ( SOM bioavailability in fine aggregates, coarse aggregates, and bulk soil declined throughout the experiment, as shown by the decreasing MBC and MBN values ( In summary, a gentle aggregate separation into different size classes neither changed nor destroyed the microbial functionality of the aggregates in the different size classes, but provided a useful tool for assessing their role in microbial mineralization within bulk soil. We therefore conclude that the mineralization behavior in the aggregate size classes differed because of specific proportions of bioavailable SOM. The coarse aggregates mineralized more carbon per unit soil organic carbon than the fine aggregates. For nitrogen mineralization, it was vice versa. The declining MBN was accompanied by an increase in SEON ( In the regression of nitrogen mineralization against CO In general, our study yielded lower carbon and nitrogen mineralization levels per unit mass soil and unit mass SOC than comparable incubation studies in literature, such as In summary, nitrogen mineralization was impaired by carbon limitation as the incubation experiment proceeded. Coarse aggregates respired more CO We can attribute the high degree of SOM stabilization in fine aggregates to the tighter stabilization mechanism in these structures, which are mainly built of microaggregates. This mechanism includes cation bridging ( We conclude that calcium-clay bridges may stabilize SOM at the microaggregate level in our dolomitic soil, whereas labile SOM (including mucilage) adheres these microaggregates into macroaggregates of higher hierarchical orders. The incubation of intact aggregate classes differing in size revealed distinct carbon and nitrogen bioavailabilites due to a specific aggregate architecture. Future studies on carbon and nitrogen mineralization in natural coarse and fine aggregates should consider (1) the different aggregate architectures of the size classes and (2) the increased surface area of smaller aggregate diameters. These physical characteristics are taken into account by referring mineralization on unit soil mass. Despite the higher surface area in fine aggregates, a smaller proportion of SOM was bioavailable in fine aggregates than in coarse ones. Therefore, future studies should also consider (3) the proportion of bioavailable SOM bound into aggregates, which was effectively depleted in the fine aggregates of our soil. The bioavailable proportion of the SOM pool can be estimated by referring carbon and nitrogen mineralization on SOC and N We thank Sigrid Hiesch for laboratory assistance. Two anonymous reviewers and the editor are gratefully acknowledged for their helpful comments. This study was supported by a grant from the