This chapter reveals that the pressure-driven membrane processes such as reverse osmosis (RO), nanofiltration (NF), ultrafiltration (UF), and microfiltration (MF) are emerging as key components of water purification systems throughout the world. The bulk of the capital and operating costs of membrane systems is associated with the high pressure needed to remove dissolved contaminants. RO and NF are very effective at removing dissolved ions and organic solutes. However, high pressures are required to operate RO and NF membranes. Conversely, UF and MF membranes require much lower pressure. Unfortunately, they are not effective at retaining dissolved ions and organic solutes. This chapter has developed a dendrimer enhanced filtration (DEF) process that can remove dissolved substances using UF and MF. Dendrimers are highly branched 3D globular nanopolymers with controlled composition and architecture. They have many reactive functional sites and binding pockets per molecule, and their globular shape and large size makes them easier to filter than linear polymers.     Pressure-driven membrane processes such as reverse osmosis (RO), nanofiltration (NF), ultrafiltration (UF), and microfiltration (MF) are emerging as key components of water purification systems throughout the world. The bulk of the capital and operating costs of membrane systems is associated with the high pressure needed to remove dissolved contaminants (e.g., monovalent ions and small organic molecules). RO and NF are very effective at removing dissolved ions and organic solutes. However, high pressures (100–1000 psi) are required to operate RO and NF membranes. Conversely, UF and MF membranes require much lower pressure (5–60 psi). Unfortunately, they are not effective at retaining dissolved ions and organic solutes. The author of this chapter has developed a dendrimer enhanced filtration (DEF) process that can remove dissolved substances using UF and MF. Dendrimers are highly branched 3D globular nanopolymers with controlled composition and architecture. They have many reactive functional sites and binding pockets per molecule, and their globular shape and large size makes them easier to filter than linear polymers. The DEF process works by combining dendrimers with conventional membrane filtration. Functionalized dendrimers are added to an incoming aqueous solution and bind with the target contaminants. For most dissolved solutes (e.g., cations and anions), a change in solution acidity causes the The availability of clean water has emerged as one of the most serious problems facing the global economy in the twenty-first century. Water treatment systems typically involve a series of coupled processes, each designed to remove one or more different substances in the source water, with the particular treatment process being based on the molecular size and properties of the target contaminants. Membrane processes such microfiltration (MF), ultrafiltration (UF), nanofiltration (NF), and reverse osmosis (RO) are emerging as key components of water treatment, reuse, and desalination systems throughout the world [ Dendritic nanopolymers include hyperbranched polymers, dendrigraft polymers, dendronized linear polymers, dendrimers, and many other supramolecular assemblies such as core-shell tecto(dendrimers) and dendrimer-like star polymers ( Chelating agents are widely used in a variety of environmental and industrial separation processes. These include (i) selective extractants in hydrometallurgy, (ii) metal ion binding functionalities for ion exchange resins, and (iii) high-capacity polymeric ligands for water treatment [ Poly (amidoamine) (PAMAM) dendrimers provide good model systems for probing the aqueous coordination chemistry of cations with dendritic nanopolymers. These dendrimers were the first dendrimer family to be synthesized, characterized, and commercialized. PAMAM dendrimers ( Diallo et al. [  Anions have emerged as major water contaminants throughout the world. In the United States, the discharge of anions such as perchlorate (ClO  As stated in the introduction, the invention of dendritic nanopolymers is providing unprecedented opportunities to develop enhanced UF and MF processes for recovering dissolved ions from aqueous solutions. The DEF process developed by Diallo [ As a proof-of-concept study, Diallo et al. [ Dendritic nanopolymers are among the most chemically and structurally diverse classes of nanomaterials available to date. These “soft” nanoparticles, with sizes in the range of 1–100 nm, can serve as high-capacity, recyclable ligands for cations and anions. The DEF process exploits these unique properties of dendritic nanopolymers to develop a new generation of low-pressure filtration Recovery of perchlorate from contaminated groundwater. Recovery of uranium from in situ mining leach solutions and contaminated groundwater. Recovery of metal ions (e.g., copper, silver, nickel, and zinc) from industrial wastewater. 