Zinc sulphide ore was leached in columns of various heights and under various irrigation rates. Sphalerite and pyrite bioleaching kinetics agreed with the colonization shrinking core model where an initial colonization phase was followed by a steady rate phase. Columns irrigated at the same rate showed colonization rate constants (μ) of both sphalerite and pyrite that increased linearly with the inverse of column height. Similarly, the shrinking core rate constants (k) were also inversely proportional to heap height. When the irrigation rate was physically adjusted to compensate for height, columns ranging from 1m to 8m tall showed leaching curves that were identical. In essence, sphalerite and pyrite heap bioleaching kinetics were proportional to the irrigation rate divided by the height (L/h). The relationships governing the colonization and shrinking core rate constants were different for sphalerite and pyrite. Sphalerite bioleaching was favoured over pyrite at lower values of L/h. The degree of sulphur oxidation was favoured at higher values of L/h.Faster bioleach rate Faster mineral colonization Faster pH breakthrough More sulphur oxidation/acid generation Decreased selectivity in sphalerite vs pyrite bioleaching Faster net ferric generation Flooding Decomposition of agglomerate Migration/washout of fines Increased selectivity of sphalerite vs pyrite bioleaching Less sulphur oxidation/acid generation Slower net ferric generation Slower pH breakthrough Slower mineral colonization Slower bioleach rate Acid limitation Excessive ferric precipitation Heap bioleaching technology has been used for more than a decade in the copper and gold industries ( Recent experiments with short columns (1 Zinc sulphide ore was obtained from Teck Cominco’s Red Dog Mine in Alaska, USA. The ore contained 15.0% zinc, 5.6% iron, 4.4% lead, and 13.0% sulphide sulphur. Lattice iron in sphalerite was 3%. This ore was crushed to −13 The ore was bioleached in PVC columns (10 Solution throughputs to the columns were monitored by careful tabulation of PLS volumes. Raffinate solution and PLS were assayed every seven days for dissolved zinc and iron by atomic adsorption. The pH and In heap bioleaching, several chemical reactions occur simultaneously; individual metal extractions cannot be studied individually. The approach used was to examine all the bioleaching reactions simultaneously as described previously ( Sphalerite and pyrite bioleaching data were interpreted according to the colonization shrinking core model ( Three columns of different heights were irrigated at the same rate: 0.17 There was a lag between column start-up and onset of pyrite colonization in the tall columns; exponential increase in pyrite Three columns, all having a 6-m-high agglomerate bed, were irrigated at different rates: 0.09 Given the results discussed in the previous section, a test was devised where the irrigation rate of a column was compensated for by its height. Four columns ranging in height from 1 to 8 Plots of Ensuring that all the columns received identical volumes of solution per volume of agglomerate over time was accomplished by dividing the irrigation rate by column height and making sure this value was the same for all of the columns. The common values of Plots of the rate constant, Plots of the bacterial growth rate constant, In contrast to the linear relationships with Proliferation of iron oxidizing bacteria in the columns was inferred from the change in PLS solution potential, Amounts of sulphide sulphur reacted and sulphur oxidized to sulphate were estimated using Reactions Column tests serve to simulate heap bioleaching. The results obtained with the various column tests allowed modeling of zinc heap leaching based on The leach curves in Given the differential leaching effects and the effects on sulphur oxidation and ferric deportment, The findings in this study identified the ratio of irrigation to height ratio, Analyses and modeling of heap leach data using The authors wish to thank Teck Cominco Metals Ltd. for permission to publish this work.