Surface roughness has a great impact on coal floatability, and usually the effect is found to be negative. In this paper, hypobaric treatment was introduced to improve the floatability of coal with varying surface roughness. The floatability was characterized by induction time, and the micro-bubble nucleation theory was proposed to explain the enhancement mechanism of hypobaric treatment. The results show that the induction time was increased with increasing surface roughness. However, hypobaric treatment was proven to be an effective method in mitigating the adverse effects of surface roughness on floatability. Under natural conditions, neither Wenzel nor Cassie model could be used to describe the wetting regime of coal surface. Instead, a mixed wetting state, where water partially wets the asperities on coal surface and partially sits on entrapped air pockets, was more appropriate. It was difficult to drain the entrapped water at the upper part of the grooves; hence, bubble-coal attachment was prevented, leading to the increased induction time at high surface roughness. After hypobaric treatment, the diffused gas molecules in water preferred to nucleate at the sites of air pockets, leading to the formation of micro-bubbles. These micro-bubbles would act as the bridge between macroscopic bubbles and the coal surface, significantly decreasing induction time and improving the coal contact angle and floatability.Surface wettability plays a key role in mineral flotation since the differences in wettability between targeted particles and gangue particles are the basis for successful flotation [ Surface roughness, heterogeneity, shape, and particle size greatly influence contact angle [ Based on the Wenzel and Cassie-Baxter theories, the effect of surface roughness on mineral floatability and flotation recovery has also received a great deal of attentions, and extensive studies have been carried out [ The first objective of this paper is to further study the effect of surface roughness on coal floatability. Secondly, hypobaric treatment was proposed to improve the floatability of coal with varying surface roughness. The floatability was characterized by induction time, and micro-bubble nucleation theory was proposed to explain the enhancement mechanism of hypobaric treatment. The outcome of the present study is expected to provide new guidance for the process intensification of coal flotation. Lump anthracite with a 9.88% ash content was used as the experimental sample. Although the ash content is a little high, the maceral specification on the coal surface was quite homogeneous from EMPA images afterwards. Coal substrates with different roughness were obtained through grinding and polishing work, with a series of abrasive paper with different meshes. A metallographic cutter (XGCB-5P, Starlight electromechanical equipment factory, Jiangyan, China) was firstly used for cutting the coal into slices. Then, grinding and polishing were performed using an automatic polish-grinding machine (ZMP-2000, Shanghai light phase preparation equipment Co., Ltd., China). 400, 1200, and 4000 meshes abrasive paper and 0.05 μm alumina powders were purchased from Buehler (Lake Bluff, Illinois, USA). The prepared coal substrates were used for subsequent Electron Microprobe Analysis (EMPA), surface roughness, and induction time tests. A field emission EPMA-8050G (Shimadzu, Japan) was used to observe the surface structure of the coal samples after grinding and polishing treatment. Gold sputtering was carried out before the EPMA test. An acceleration voltage of 15 kV with a 500–1000× magnification was used during EPMA measurement. A surface roughness measurer (Mitutoyo SJ-210, Japan) was used to measure the surface roughness of the coal samples. During the experiment, the detector must be parallel to the measuring surface of the sample. The travel distance and scanning speed of the probe was fixed at 5 mm and 0.5 mm/s, respectively. The R A vacuum degassing apparatus (VDS-1, AS One, Japan) was used for the hypobaric treatment. A vacuum pump connected to the chamber of the degassing apparatus produced a negative pressure atmosphere. Natural Milli-Q water was first used to fill a square cell (3 × 3 × 2.5 cm), and the coal sample was put into the water carefully. The cell was then moved into the chamber of vacuum degassing apparatus, closing the window and deflation valve, and opening the vacuum pump. The reduced pressure would push out any gas trapped in ravines or dissolved gas molecules in water, which is similar to hydrodynamic cavitation to some extent [ An in-housed developed induction timer was used for the test before and after hypobaric treatment [ EMPA images of the coal samples with different surface roughness are shown in Induction times of coal samples with different R Chen et al. [ Comparison of the induction time results of coal samples with different R  Interestingly, the number of micro-bubbles frosted on rough surface is much larger than that on smooth surface. Additionally, the diameter of these micro-bubbles on rough surface is much smaller than that on smooth surface. The surface at 2.98 μm roughness was fully covered by bubbles. The above phenomenon can be explained from the fact that considerably more air was entrapped in rough surface, compared with the smooth surface, providing more nucleation sites for micro-bubbles. These micro-bubbles play a crucial role in enhancing particle floatability [ Additionally, the water contact angle on coal surface 2.98 and 0.34 μm R Hypobaric treatment was introduced to improve the floatability of coal with different surface roughness in this paper. Floatability was characterized through the induction time, and the micro-bubble nucleation theory was proposed to explain its enhancement mechanism. Throughout this paper, it was found that induction time was increased as surface roughness was increased. A mixed wetting state was proposed to describe the wetting on rough coal surface. Hypobaric treatment was proven to be an effective method in mitigating the adverse effect of surface roughness on floatability. The diffused gas molecules in water preferred to nucleate at the sites of air pockets, and micro-bubbles were formed, which would act as the bridge between macroscopic bubble and coal surface, significantly decreasing induction time and improving the coal contact angle and floatability. Based on the result of the present study, it is speculated that flotation machine using hydrodynamic cavitation will be more effective than that using conventional aeration method to float rough coal particles. This work was supported by