In this paper, an indirect method for determining the Sauter mean diameter of a bubble population is presented. The technique relies on the estimation of the percent area occupied by bubbles in a 2D image as well as on the superficial gas rate. The percent area was defined as the quotient between the black pixels (bubble representation) divided by the total pixels in a binary image. A linear model to describe the Sauter diameter as a function of the percent area and the superficial gas rate was proposed. The regressions showed a fairly good predictive capacity in laboratory and industrial flotation machines under bubbly regime, which makes the proposed methodology a promising tool for monitoring and controlling gas dispersion in real time.Gas dispersion describes the non-continuous phase distribution within the flotation machines and it is, therefore, one of the most important parameters in flotation due to its direct relation with the process efficiency. The role of gas dispersion in flotation has been extensively discussed in literature for process modelling, flotation rate prediction and technology comparisons ( Bubble size distribution (BSD) is perhaps the most important indicator of gas dispersion in flotation machines since it defines the available surface area over which particles will attach. BSD can be used to predict flotation performance, and it is commonly used for process control ( The conductivity devices have shown reproducible and appropriate results for on-line measurements in two-phase systems, but hardly applicable to multi-phase industrial conditions ( Currently, the simplest and most accepted devices are those based on visual techniques. One of the most used devices is the McGill bubble viewer, which consist of a sampling tube to capture the rising bubbles from the collection zone and direct them into a chamber. Bubbles are recorded with a video camera and automated image analysis software determines the BSD based on border detection. However, this is not straightforward: the background of images varies depending upon the image sensing device and the lighting quality ( In this paper, an empirical linear model for determining the Sauter mean diameter of a BSD is presented. The model structure is based on the estimation of the percent area occupied by bubbles in 2D images and on superficial gas rate measurements. Both parameters can be obtained in real time; therefore, the proposed method is a suitable tool for on-line Several correlations for the bubble diameter estimation have been reported in literature. For instance, A new parameter named percent area,  The Experiments were structured in order to evaluate the effects of superficial air rate and frother concentration on the bubble size. The frothcrowder angle was set in 45°. Methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC) was used as a frother. The MIBC concentration in the cell was evaluated for 2, 4, 8 and 16 Bubble size distributions were measured using the McGill bubble viewer for image acquisition (installation in The image processing software USM-IMA ( Industrial BSD data was also processed in order to obtain a general model structure for the The average  An empirical model to describe the A linear model structure was proposed to describe the normalized The model structure of Eq.  The Differences in the model parameters from laboratory and industrial tests were not significant despite differences in bubble generation, machine geometry and presence of solids.  The proposed methodology for An indirect methodology to determine bubble size in flotation machines based on the superficial gas rate and the percent area was presented. Percent area was defined as the 2D projected area fraction occupied by bubbles in a black and white representation. The percent area of the binary images does not have the computational constraints of classic visual techniques for Authors are thankful to Department of Chemical and Environmental Engineering, Federico Santa María Technical University for the instrumentation facilities. In addition, the authors wish to thank to Mr. Patrick Blonde for the professional proofreading of the manuscript.