The pressure oxidative leaching of lead-containing copper matte is studied systematically. The effects of leaching time, oxygen partial pressure, leaching temperature, agitation speed, acid addition and initial Cu2+ concentration on the extraction of copper and iron are investigated. The effect of initial Cu2+ concentration is insignificant compared to the other reaction parameters. The best found conditions are: leaching time 2 h, oxygen partial pressure 0.8 MPa, acid addition 80% of matte mass, temperature 150±5 °C and agitation speed 600 rpm. Under these conditions, >95% Cu is extracted with the concentration of iron in solution <5 g/L and the yield of sulfur is 20–30% of total sulfur mass. The leach residue is about 30% of the initial mass and the recovery of lead and silver is close to 100% and 98% respectively.With increasing use of copper for different applications, worldwide efforts are being made to look for secondary resources for the recovery of copper. Copper contained in lead minerals is usually separated from the lead in the form of copper sulfide (called copper matte) by adding sulfur in the pyro-refining of lead bullion. The lead-containing copper matte is generally processed pyro-metallurgically to make copper bullion which is then refined electrolytically ( It has been found that each specific material must be studied in order to optimize the extraction technology. In comparison to common copper matte ( In the present work, the extraction behavior of copper and iron from lead-containing copper matte has been studied in acid medium in pressure oxidative leaching. Optimization of six key parameters, namely time, oxygen partial pressure, leaching temperature, agitation speed, acid addition and initial Cu After crushing and grinding, the materials were screened for different particle size classes with Tyler Sieves, using a mechanical vibrator. The leaching experiments were conducted in a 2 L titanium vertical autoclave (Model GSHAT-2, Shandong Weihai Xintai Instrument Company). Temperature was controlled with a PID controller, manipulating both the power output of an external heating mantle and the flow in an internal cooling tube. The slurry was agitated by a four blade impeller driven by a variable speed motor. The temperature, pressure and agitation speed were read-out through a PID controller. The process flow sheet is shown in Typically, 100 g matte and sodium ligno-sulphonate additive (typically 0.8% of sample) was mixed with 1 L of sulfuric acid solution in the autoclave bomb which was then heated. When the autoclave was heated to the required temperature, the slurry was agitated and oxygen was continuously introduced through a vent valve from the oxygen cylinder to maintain a constant pressure for the duration of the experiment. The reaction time was counted after the introduction of oxygen into the reactor. After cooling the autoclave to 70–80 °C within 15–20 min, the vent valve was opened for discharging gas and the autoclave was opened to pump the slurry which was vacuum-filtered immediately. The filter cake was washed with dilute sulfuric acid to prevent possible precipitation of soluble metals, and then with deionized water to remove soluble salts and free sulfuric acid. The primary filtrate and the final wash filtrate were collected, and the volumes were recorded respectively. The filtrates were taken to analyze for Cu and Fe. The residues were dried in an air oven at 110 °C for 24 h. Known amount of residues were acid digested and analyzed for Pb, Ag and S. In our work, all data points were obtained from separate experiments with no samples taken at temperature and the operation of cooling, filtration and washing was the same for each experiment. Solid materials were digested in aqua regia and the elemental concentrations were measured by ICP-AES. The matte and residues were analyzed by XRD. The effect of leaching time from 1 to 6 h on copper extraction was studied using a liquid-to-solid ratio 10:1, oxygen partial pressure 0.8 MPa, temperature 150  The dissolution of FeS consumes acid and produces FeSO Dissolution of oxygen in solution increases with an increase of oxygen pressure which improves the rate of oxidation of sulfides and the electrode potential. The effect of oxygen partial pressure from 0.6 to 1.0 MPa on copper extraction is presented in The extraction of metals is also affected by leaching temperature. High metal extraction may not be achieved in a short time at low temperatures whilst high temperatures have disadvantages such as higher energy and oxygen consumption and more sulfur oxidized to sulfuric acid. So, in our present study, a medium temperature range from 120 to 160 °C was selected and its affect on metal extraction was studied.  Agitation plays an important role in pressure leaching processes when molten sulfur is present. The results of agitation, shown in The optimum extraction of metals is also affected by acid addition, but any excess will have to be neutralized downstream by lime during solution purification operations, producing gypsum which will be disposed along with the leach residues. A series of tests was performed with 5 acid addition levels ranging from 45 to 108% of the matte mass, keeping all other conditions constant. The results, shown in In the downstream processes, the waste electrolyte which contains Cu The yield of the leach residues is about 30% of the matte mass used in the experiments. It contained about 42% Pb as lead sulfate. The chemical reaction is described as follows: The leach residues containing lead will be treated by lead smelting technology by oxidizing in a bottom blowing furnace and reduction smelting in a blast furnace. Therefore, the recovery of lead from lead-containing copper matte is close to 100%. The residue also contains about 98% of the silver present in the matte which can be recovered with the lead. The yields of sulfur and sulfate ion are 20–30% and about 65% of the total sulfur mass respectively in the Pox leach reaction under the optimum conditions. The residue also contains about 15% Fe as hematite. The pressure oxidative leaching of lead-containing copper matte offers high recovery of metals, low environmental pollution, short flow sheet, low cost etc. The experimental results show that leaching time, oxygen partial pressure, leaching temperature, agitation speed and acid concentration have significant effect but the initial Cu Optimum process operating parameters were established as follows: time: 2 h; oxygen partial pressure: 0.8 MPa; acid addition: 81% of matte mass; temperature: 150 The authors gratefully acknowledge the Production, Study and Research project (KKZ0200727027) of Kunming University of Science and Technology and Xiangyun Feilong Ltd. for the financial support.