Laser–based layer manufacturing of metals, also known as additive manufacturing, is a growing research field of academic and industrial interest. However, in the associated laser–driven processes (i.e. selective laser sintering (SLS) or melting (SLM)), optimization of some parameters has not been fully explored. This research aims at determining how the angle of laser scanning pattern (i.e. build orientation) in SLS affects the mechanical properties and structure of an individual Cu-Sn-Ni alloy metallic layer sintered in the process. Experiments consist in varying the angle of the scanning pattern (0°, 30°, 45° 60° and 90° relative to the transverse dimension of the piece), at constant scanning speed and laser beam power, producing specimens of different thicknesses. A noticeable effect of the scan angle on the mechanical strength and degree of densification of the sintered specimens is found. Thickness of the resulting monolayer correlates negatively with increasing scan angle, whereas relative density correlates positively. A minimum porosity and maximum UTS are found at the angle of 60°. It is concluded that angle of the scanning pattern angle plays a significant role in SLS of metallic monolayers.Layered manufacturing (LM) finds its origins in the late 1980s Agarwala et al. Therefore, it can be anticipated that optimization of the parameters associated with the laser processes, in particular the angle of laser scanning pattern (or build orientation) has not been fully exhausted yet, at least not in the field of SLS of metal powders. This research aims at studying how selected parameters of the SLS process affect the densification and mechanical properties, focusing on sintering a single metallic layer. In particular, the effect the laser scanning pattern angle on the mechanical and structural properties of individual monolayers is to be explored on the example of a Cu alloy. This paper explores laser sintering of metallic monolayers produced of a commercial Cu-Sn-Ni alloy powder at various scanning pattern angles and the laser scan speeds, while the effective laser beam power is constant. Degree of densification of the sintered monolayers, their thickness, porosity and mechanical strength are discussed in the context of applicability. The scheme of laser scanning strategy is shown in As the laser beam moves along a linear path over the surface of the powder bed, it produces temperature rise at each irradiated point and the heat is further transferred to the volume. If magnitude of the laser energy flux is high enough, sintering and/or melting of the powder underneath the laser spot will take place, causing consolidation of the powder. The overall temperature modulation when the laser travels from point B to A ( In the particular rectangular scan arrangement shown in The material used in this study is a metal powder precursor Direct Metal 20, hereafter referred to as DM20, commercialized by EOS GmbH. The laser source used in this study consisted of an Ytterbium fiber laser type YLR-300 by IPG Photonics Corporation, with a wavelength of 1.07 µm and a nominal output power of 300 W. The general setup is shown in The design of experiments considered two experimental sets: A and B, differing in the effective laser power transferred per unit of time. Set A consisted of SLS specimens produced with scan pattern angles of 0°, 30°, 45°, 60° and 90° (exemplified in Previous to the raster scanning the bulk, contour of each specimen was laser scanned to enclosed the powder. Uniaxial tensile test was performed at the deformation rate of 1 mm/s at each fabricated specimen to determine ultimate tensile strength (UTS). Specimens of the highest UTS were stored for further characterization. The mass density of each specimen was measured through Archimedes’ method Phosphorus was not included in The specimens selected from tensile test, were cut and embedded into hot phenolic resin for metallographic analysis. Optical images were captured by means of Moticam 2300 and analyzed employing software ImageJ  The resulting thickness, mass density, relative density, and ultimate tensile strength obtained with scanning speeds of 25, 50 and 80 mm/s, at the laser beam power of 190 W, are presented in For the same parameter combinations, the resulting porosity is shown in  For the same parameter combinations, the resulting porosity is shown in In the SLS fabrication of Cu alloy monolayer, the scanning pattern angle, scanning speed and laser beam power affect the resulting physical dimension, structure and mechanical properties in a different way and to a different degree. The particular effects and their importance are discussed at continuation. The thickness of the SLS monolayer specimens increases as scanning angle and speed decrease. On one hand, these tendencies are likely to be caused by an increased heat accumulation due to temperature overlap in the powder surface associated with a shorter travel distance of the laser beam between consecutives point locations (see For scanning pattern angles between 0° and 60°, the value of UTS increases particularly when the scanning speed is higher; whereas the contrary is observed for at 90° as seen in The thickness of the SLS monolayer specimen increases with laser beam power and decreases monotonically with increasing scanning angle. This is again likely to be caused by an increased heat concentration due to temperature overlap, as explained in The UTS has the tendency to increase at a higher laser beam power except for the 0° scanning pattern angle. If these UTS results are examined again considering the variation in heat concentration, the increasing trend in UTS with increasing scanning pattern angle coincides with a decreasing heat accumulation. This can be further explained taking into account that the specimens become thinner with increasing scanning angle, resulting too in denser and less porous monolayers. It is expected that the UTS decreases near a 90° pattern angle because for this specific angle the heat concentration increases again, resulting in a monolayer of higher porosity and thus of less structural integrity.  Scanning pattern angle affects the thermal overlap between successive scanning passes as it determines the travelling distance between two consecutive points and the time it takes the laser beam to pass over a nearby point through the scanning pattern path. At lower scanning pattern angles, i.e. from 0° to 30°, there is a greater heat flow overlap, which causes the thickness of the monolayer to increase, resulting in higher porosity, lower mass density and lower UTS values. For higher values of the angle, from 45° to 60°, low thickness and high density are achieved and the highest UTS value is obtained. For values near 90°, heat accumulation increases again resulting in lower UTS. Laser beam speed of the scanning process also affects thermal overlap for every scanning pattern angle. It conditions how much of the heat diffusion between consecutive points will overlap the heat flux from the laser beam as its passes a nearby point. Intermediate to high speeds of the laser beam scan together with a scanning pattern angle of about 60° results in monolayers of lower thickness, higher mass density and higher UTS. Increasing laser power at any scanning pattern angle produces monolayers of lower porosity but of higher mass density and higher UTS. Selection of the scanning pattern angle near 60° simultaneously with a high scan speed and maximum laser beam power during SLS processing of monolayers allows achieving the highest densification and mechanical strength and it can be expected to be also valid for fabrication of 3D multilayered SLS parts of the same alloy. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support from