Brewers’ spent grain (BSG) is a by-product of brewing that is usually used as low-value animal feed, although it can be better exploited in biotechnological processes, such as vermicomposting. Here, the chemical, biochemical and microbiological qualities of vermicomposts produced by the earthworm Eisenia fetida were evaluated using three substrates: BSG; cow manure (CM); BSG plus cow manure (1:1; BSG/CM). Over after 5 months of bioconversion by earthworms and microorganisms (thereafter vermicomposting), BSG and BSG/CM showed reduced total organic carbon, and increased total nitrogen and total humic substances like (HSl), suggesting enhanced mineralisation and stabilisation. Suitability of BSG as substrate for earthworms was confirmed by the earthworm fatty acid profile, characterised by prevalence of C:17, C18:1, C18:2 and C18:3 fatty acids. Higher fungi and yeast abundance in BSG vermicompost was accompanied by higher dehydrogenase activity. E. coli, Salmonella spp. and Ochratoxin A levels were below the legal limits.Environmental and economic sustainability is an important aspect that can give beer production added value. In this respect, recovery of the potential value of by-products, such as yeast biomass, waste waters and spent grain, represents an exciting opportunity. Brewers’ spent grain (BSG) is the main residue of the brewing process, as it represents 85% of the total by-products ( The main component of BSG is fibre (30%-50%; w/w), which includes the lignocellulose fraction, protein (19%-30%), hydrolysates of proteins, arabinoxylans and phenolic compounds. For these reasons, BSG represents a nutritionally rich by-product that requires the appropriate procedures for its recovery and re-use. One of the main problems in the re-use of BSG is its high moisture content, which results in its rapid deterioration and logistic difficulties for its storage and transportation. BSG can also be contaminated with mycotoxins, which can arise along the entire production chain, from cultivation of the barley in the field, to its storage and malt production. During all of these phases, contamination by mycotoxigenic fungi represents a high risk, with the consequent release of mycotoxins. Stabilisation of BSG might be achieved by vermicomposting it, to recycle the nutrients in agriculture and to maintain soil fertility. Indeed, composting and vermicomposting are two of the best-known processes for biological degradation and stabilisation of organic wastes. Vermicomposting is a non-thermophilic bio-oxidative decomposition process for organic waste that involves earthworms and their associated microbial communities ( The close relationship between earthworms and their associated microbiota has also been investigated in terms of their phospholipid fatty acids ( The importance of earthworm microbial communities is well documented in the vermicomposting of lignocellulosic materials. The decomposition of such raw materials, including BSG, is a particularly difficult process due to the high content of complex heteropolymers, which confers different characteristics and can inhibit the cellulase enzymes ( Proteobacteria and Actinobacteria are the two major taxa involved in lignin decomposition, where the α-proteobacteria and γ-proteobacteria classes are the most important degraders ( Most studies on vermicomposting have focused on changes in its physicochemical properties and biochemical (i.e., enzymatic) parameters ( The aim of the present study was to compare the physiochemical and microbiological quality and safety of vermicompost from both BSG and cow manure (hereafter CM) by the earthworm Red earthworms ( In the experimental trial, the organic substrates were left into the beds for 3 months after the completion of earthworms’ digestion, to complete their transformation by microbial activities into potential organic fertilisers (i.e., the ‘vermicompost’). The earthworms were left undisturbed to survive to the best of their abilities, and to reproduce. Throughout the experiment, some of the main variables that can influence the biological cycle of these earthworms were monitored twice a week (i.e., temperature, moisture, pH) and when necessary, adjustments were made. Samples of the three organic matrices used as bed for vermicomposting were taken and therefore analysed at two different times during the experimental trial: (i) before their bioconversion by the earthworms and micro-organisms; and (ii) after 5 months from the beginning of the experiment, after the earthworms (2 months) and micro-organisms (3 months) completed their activities. Three replicates for each sample of the six substrates considered were initially dried at 45 °C for 48 h, then ground and sieved to 2 mm, for use in the subsequent chemical analyses, which were performed in triple and according to the methods reported by A high-efficiency elemental combustion analyser (CHN 628; Leco, St. Joseph, Michigan, USA) was used to determine the total organic carbon (TOC) and total nitrogen (TN) levels, with the references for calibration of oat meal (Leco, 502-276) and soils (Soil LCMR Leco, 502-697; Soil Calibration sample for CSN Leco, 502-814; Soil LRM Leco, 502-062). The total extractable carbon (TEC) and the total Humic Substances like (HSl) were also extracted. In particular, to determine TEC content 0.5 g of each substrate were treated in triplicate with 25 mL 0.1 N NaOH/Na The HSl was prepared as described for TEC determination in four replicates. The supernatants extracted were merged and then used to immediately fractionate the humic and fulvic substances like content in HSl. From the whole extract, three replicates of 25 mL each were collected, acidified with 50% H Total fatty acids were extracted from 1.0 g samples of the earthworms taken after 5 months of the experimental trial and then lyophilized. Here, 0.2 g Na The gas chromatography–flame ionisation detection analysis was performed on a gas chromatograph system (GC 2010 Plus; Shimadzu Italia, Milan, Italy) equipped with a split-splitless injector and a flame ionisation detector. Hydrogen was used as the carrier gas, at a flow rate of 1.0 mL min The beds of BSG, CM and BSG/CM and the resulting vermicomposts (after 5 months) were analysed according to For detection of Determination of the BSG mycotoxins was performed using quantitative analysis for the mycotoxins deoxynivalenol, T-2 and HT-2, fumonisins, aflatoxin and ochratoxin A. This was carried out using a ‘rapid one-step assay’ system (Charm Lateral Flow R.O.S.A., Foss A/S, Hillerod, Denmark), as based on ELISA, and following the protocol provided by the manufacturer. The limit of detection of each mycotoxin with this method was 100 ppb for deoxynivalenol, 10 ppb for T-2 and HT-2, 250 ppb for fumonisins, 2 ppb for aflatoxins, and 2 ppb for ochratoxins. Three replicates were performed for each sample. Similar analyses were carried out for the mycotoxins from the beds and the vermicomposts, for ochratoxin A, fumonisins and T-2 and HT-2 using ELISA in 48-well plates (Bio-Shield fumonisin 0.15–−6 ppm; Bio-Shield ochratoxin 2.5–40 ppb; Bio-Shield T-2/HT-2 10–500 ppb; Prognosis-Biotech, Or-Sell, Modena, Italy,). This method used samples that were homogenised, weighed and then extracted with methanol: water (70:30; v/v). After filtration, the samples were ready for the ELISA test at 450 nm absorbance, and the data were analysed using the spreadsheet provided with the test. The enzymatic activities for dehydrogenase, urease and β-glucosidase were determined according to Total organic carbon (TOC), total nitrogen (TN) and total extractable carbon (TEC) levels before and after the transformation of the three substrates (i.e. BSG, CM and BSG/CM) were compared using the Student’s The two main variables that influence the biological cycle of red earthworms are temperature and moisture, and these were both kept constant throughout the vermicomposting process over 5 months. In particular, the temperature was maintained around 20 °C to 22 °C, and the moisture around 80% to 85%. For pH, this was higher at the end of this experimental period (i.e., in the vermicomposts) for all of the substrates, as it increased from 3.8 to 5.6 for BSG, from 7.8 to 8.1 for CM, and from 5.9 to 7.2 for BSG/CM. In general, earthworms avoid substrates with pH < 4.5, as prolonged exposure to such pHs can be lethal for them ( The TOC content of these substrates before and after the vermicomposting process decreased significantly for BSG and BSG/CM substrates ( Conversely, there were significant increases in TN for the BSG and BSG/CM substrates (from 3.64 ± 0.03% to 5.10 ± 0.02% and from 3.18 ± 0.03% to 3.38 ± 0.01%, respectively), with a significant decrease in CM (from 2.90 ± 0.08% to 2.54 ± 0.07%; The TN increases in BSG may be related to the higher rates of earthworms’ death and decomposition, before vermicompost was collected, due to the harsh environmental condition in this substrate. Indeed, it has been observed that the N content of the compost depends on the extent of the decomposition ( The C/N ratio represents one of the most widely expressed indices for the maturity of organic matter, as this reflects the mineralisation and stabilisation level ( It has often been reported that the C/N ratio decreases sharply during vermicomposting ( The TEC provides a measurement of the total C in total humic substances like (HSl), and this also significantly increased in the BSG and CM substrates during the vermicomposting (from 21.0 ± 1.2% to 25.2 ± 0.5% and from 17.2 ± 0.8% to 20.6 ± 0.7%, respectively) while no differences were seen for BSG/CM (from 19.1 ± 1.2% to 21.0 ± 1.5%; Along with the TEC increase after the vermicomposting, the total levels of C in HSl also increased. In particular, the high levels of C in HSl for BSG are almost certainly linked to the large amount of organic C in the unprocessed spent grain ( To determine whether BSG is a good substrate for the growth and reproduction of these earthworms, we analysed the fatty-acid profile of To assess the quality of raw materials and end products, the main microbial groups of the BSG and CM used for the beds and of the resulting vermicomposts were determined ( There is also a difference between vermicompost from manure and vermicompost obtained from organic waste: only the first can be placed on the market, while the second can only be used for self-consumption. From the regulatory point of view, when the humid matrix is used, this does not result in an earthworm vermicompost; this provides instead a mixed composted soil conditioner that has a commercial value one-fifth to one-tenth of earthworm vermicompost produced from manure. Furthermore, the norms established by EC Regulation N° 1069/2009 must be respected. Thus, from the regulatory point of view, the final product that results from the processing of BSG by earthworms should be more accurately defined as a mixed composted soil conditioner. The vermicompost producer must also be registered in the register of fertiliser manufacturers by submitting an application to the Ministry of Agriculture. Preliminary characterisation has shown that BSGs from local breweries are contaminated by ochratoxin A, fumonisins and T-2 and HT-2, while aflatoxins and deoxynivalenol have not been detected (A. Bianco, personal communication). On the basis of this information, ochratoxin A, fumonisins and T-2 plus HT-2 mycotoxins were determined for the BSG and cow manure used for the beds, and for these vermicomposts ( Ochratoxin A levels were 7.5 ppb in BSG, thus exceeding the limit of 5 μg kg Also, the 338 ppb of T-2 plus HT-2 in the BSG here is above the limit suggested by EC Recommendation 2013/165/EU, although, again, this was significantly reduced to 16 ppb after the BSG alone vermicomposting. The same trend was seen for the BSG/CM substrate, where the initial contamination of 80 ppb T-2 plus HT-2 was reduced to 21 ppb after the BSG/CM vermicomposting. The recommendation (2013/165/EU) indicates T-2 and HT-2 levels <200 ppb (i.e., μg kg Fumonisines were not detected in any of the beds or vermicomposts studied here. However, the analysis carried out on the lyophilised earthworms showed that  Microbial enzyme activities are indicators of the biological properties of the stabilized substrates. The vermicomposting of BSG and BSG/CM resulted in a significant increase in the dehydrogenase activities, which were 15.3-fold and 14.9-fold higher than those in the unprocessed substrates ( β-Glucosidase activity did not vary significantly before and after vermicomposting in any of these samples. Before vermicomposting, the β-glucosidase activity of the BSG/CM substrate was 1.7-fold those for BSG and CM. Also, for the BSG/CM substrate after the 5 months of vermicomposting, the β-glucosidase activity was 2.79-fold and 2.01-fold those of the BSG and CM vermicomposts, respectively. β-Glucosidase is an extracellular enzyme that is involved in the C cycle ( Several studies have shown that urease activity is influenced by the type of substrate used for vermicomposting ( In general, the increased enzyme activities during the vermicomposting of BSG and BSG/CM in particular probably related to increased microbial populations ( BSG are organic by-products that support The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by “