The effects of Al2O3 additions on the compaction and sintering behaviour of a leadborosilicate glass (LG) have been investigated. LG powder was prepared by melting, fritting and milling a glass of the composition: 77PbO, 10B2O3, 10SiO2, 2Al2O3 and 1P2O5 (wt.%). The mean particle sizes of the powders were: LG, 6.5μm and Al2O3, 3.3μm. The compaction behaviour of LG–Al2O3 powder mixtures can be represented by a new compaction equation: [(D
                     g−D
                     0)/(1−D
                     0)]=(P/P
                     f)
                        n
                     , where D
                     g is the relative green density, D
                     0 the relative tap density and n and P
                     f are material constants. The exponent n decreases from 0.192 to 0.065 as the Al2O3 content is increased from 0 to 100vol.%. The Frenkel equation for isothermal shrinkage has been found to be valid. It is shown that in the glass matrix composites the minimum sintering temperature can be determined by measuring the dilatometric deformation temperature. The presence of Al2O3 in excess of 15vol.% has been found to strongly retard the sintering kinetics. An addition of 45vol.% Al2O3 increases the activation energy for sintering from 67 to 112kcalmol−1. The presence of Al2O3 particles also induced a partial crystallisation in LG matrix.Traditionally the melt route has dominated in glass technology. However, there are many applications in which glass containing materials are advantageously produced via the compaction and sintering route, e.g. joining and packaging of electronic devices, thick film resistors and glass matrix composites. In such applications lead rich borosilicate glasses are widely used due to their low softening point. Very often these matrices are reinforced by second phase in the form of ceramic particles (e.g. SiO    Isothermal sintering studies were conducted on compacts having a relative green density of ≈72%. The sintering temperatures were in the range of 333–600°C for holding times of 5 The thermal expansion behaviour of the bulk glass and sintered materials were determined at a heating rate of 2°C The compaction process is a complex process involving reduction of the large voids by sliding and rearrangement of the particles followed by filling of small voids by plastic flow and/or fracture of the particles. A number of empirical equations have been developed to account for the experimental data. Some notable equations are shown in We propose a simple constitutive equation for compaction as In order to verify  To study the sintering behaviour, two parameters were determined: percentage of diametrical shrinkage and relative sintered density ( A plot of shrinkage vs sintering time for the various materials sintered at 420°C is shown in Hence, The sintering studies were also carried out at different temperatures for a constant duration of 2 From the data on  The SEM examination of the sintered LG sample (420°C for 2  The compaction behaviour of glass Al The shrinkage data can be described by the Frenkel equation. The relative viscosity of the composites at 420°C is found to increase from 1.5 to 189.3 with Al The presence of Al It is shown that in the glass matrix composites the sintering range is from the dilatometric deformation temperature ( The activation energy for sintering rises steeply from 67 to 112 The composites sintered at temperature 420°C or higher for longer times (>2 The CTE of the glass matrix composites lie in the range of 89×10