Pulsed Nd-YAG laser welding characteristics of Inconel 718 sheet material (2mm thick) were investigated. Welds were subjected to three different post-weld heat treatments: direct aging, 980°C solution treatment+aging (980STA), and 1080°C solution treatment+aging (1080STA). Weld microstructures and room temperature tensile properties were evaluated. Weld tensile properties in direct aged condition were found to be inferior in relation to the base metal due to the presence of Nb-rich brittle intermetallic Laves phase in fusion zone microstructure. Solution treatment at 980°C was found to result in considerable dissolution of Laves phase, leading to some improvement in weld properties, though not to the level of base metal. The treatment was also found to result in precipitation of needle-like δ-phase around partially dissolved Laves particles. Solution treatment at 1080°C was found to result in complete dissolution of Laves phase, but also in significant grain coarsening in the base metal, which led to considerable deterioration in base metal properties.Superalloy Inconel 718 is widely used for high temperature applications in aerospace, power and nuclear industries, which often involve joining by fusion welding. The alloy's weldability is generally considered to be good, largely because of its resistance to strain-age cracking due to the sluggish precipitation kinetics of its principal strengthening precipitate γ″ (b.c.t. Ni While the Laves problem in alloy 718 fusion welds necessitates a thorough insight into weld microstructures (especially with regard to Nb segregation and Laves phase in quantitative terms) and mechanical properties with a sound understanding on welding process influences and structure–property–fracture correlations, existing knowledge on the same is not comprehensive enough. Available information on alloy 718 weld microstructures and mechanical properties is mostly concerned with GTA and EB welds. Radhakrishna and Prasad Rao have compared Nb segregation and Laves formation in GTA and EB welds and highlighted the relative advantages of using lower heat inputs and low heat input processes for welding alloy 718 Use of post-weld solution treatments is another way of approaching the Laves problem. Although some information is available in this regard Inconel 718 cold rolled sheets (2 Welds were subjected to three different heat treatments: (i) direct aging (DA): 720 Specimens for optical and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) were prepared as per standard metallographic practices. Polished specimens were electrolytically etched with an aqueous solution of 50% HCl, at 2–3 Microhardness measurements were performed using a Vickers microhardness tester at a load of 100 The microstructure of the base material in 980 The microstructure of the weld fusion zone (top surface) is shown in  At higher magnifications, a number of bright etching irregular-shaped Laves particles were seen in the interdendritic regions ( The EDAX spectrum obtained on Laves particles is shown in Direct aging treatment did not result in any perceivable change in weld microstructure. Microstructures in DA condition were similar to those in as-welded condition. Solution treatment at 980 The results of microhardness measurements in weld fusion zone, HAZ and base material in as-welded and post-weld heat-treated conditions are given in The base material and weld tensile properties in various heat treatment conditions are shown in Laser welding is characterised by extremely high cooling rates (of the order of 10 Laser welds characteristically exhibit narrow HAZs due to very low heat inputs and extremely localised heating. It is interesting to note that microfissures in HAZ were not observed in the present investigation. Previous investigations have shown that HAZ microfissuring tendency is enhance by: welding in aged condition; coarse-grain size; presence of Laves, NbC, δ-phases at grain boundaries in excessive amounts; higher amounts of boron in the base material; sharp sectional variations in weld shape, as in nail-head shaped welds; welding conditions which promote high solidification stresses The occurrence of very fine equiaxed dendrites in the weld interior and of slightly coarser columnar dendrites at regions close to fusion boundary ( Solidification in alloy 718 starts with a primary liquid Laves phase in alloy 718 can be dissolved in the matrix when it is exposed to sufficiently high temperatures. However, Laves phase dissolution is rather difficult to achieve because of the poor diffusivity of large Nb atoms. The relative ease with which Laves phase can be dissolved depends on its Nb concentration and size. Coarser Laves particles with higher Nb concentration require higher temperatures and soaking times for dissolution, compared to finer Laves particles with lower Nb concentration. In the present study, post-weld solution treatment at 980 Post-weld solution treatment at 980 Solution treatment at 1080 Microhardness measurements ( The differences observed between weld metal and base material hardness in various treatment conditions reflect the differences in the amount of γ″ precipitation. Laves phase present in the weld microstructure consumes a lot of Nb originally present in the base material, making available less amount of Nb for the precipitation of γ″, the principal strengthening phase. It was noted earlier that the Laves phase remained as it was in the as-welded condition after DA treatment. Therefore, the amount of Nb available for γ″ precipitation is considerably lower in weld fusion zone compared to that in the base material, which results in less precipitation during aging treatment and thus in lower hardness. Weld metal hardness in 980STA condition is higher than in DA condition due to increased Nb availability for γ″ precipitation as a result of considerable Laves dissolution. However, the amount of Nb available for γ″ precipitation even in 980STA weld metal is less when compared to the base material due to the presence of Nb-rich Laves and δ-phases. δ-Phase is incoherent with the matrix and contributes very little to fusion zone hardness. For these reasons, weld fusion zone hardness is considerably lower compared to base material hardness. On the other hand, solution treatment at 1080 The strength of the base material in 1080STA condition is considerably lower than that in 980STA condition. This is attributable to the significant grain coarsening that took place during the 1080 The tensile ductility of the DA weld metal is considerably lower than that of base material in 980STA condition. Laves phase is known to be detrimental to weld mechanical properties. A number of investigators have attributed the poor tensile ductility, fracture toughness, fatigue and creep rupture properties in alloy 718 fusion welds and castings to the presence of Laves phase in the microstructure The appearance of dendritic pattern on the DA weld fracture surface ( The use of 980STA treatment has resulted in some improvement in weld tensile ductility when compared to DA condition. As mentioned earlier, solution treatment at 980 While the laser weld ductility in DA condition is inferior to the base material ductility in 980STA condition, it is significantly higher compared to the reported elongations of 4–6% in alloy 718 GTA welds in the same condition  Laser welding results in lower amount of Laves phase in alloy 718 weld microstructure with fine, discrete particle morphology and with lower Nb concentration claiming significant microstructural advantages over GTA welding. Post-weld solution treatment at 980 Post-weld solution treatment at 1080 Weld tensile properties in DA condition are inferior to base material properties, particularly with respect to tensile elongation, due to the presence of Laves phase in fusion zone microstructure. Use 980STA post-weld treatment considerably improves the weld tensile ductility. The use of 1080STA post-weld treatment is limited, though the treatment can bring about complete Laves dissolution, as the treatment results in deterioration of the base material properties. The authors gratefully acknowledge Mishra Dhatu Nigam Limited, Hyderabad, India, for providing Inconel 718 sheet material for this investigation. The authors are grateful to CE (A), CEMILAC, Bangalore, India, for giving permission to publish this work. The authors are thankful to Dr. Sreekanth Joshi, ARCI, Hyderabad, for his guidance in welding experiments.