We identified an unusual case of the medial epiondyle physeal fracture, which has been caused by a direct blow, accompanied with complete stripping of soft tissue. Surgery was performed for open reduction and internal fixation of the medial epicondyle and reattachment of the anterior oblique bundle of medial collateral ligament and flexor muscle origin. Six months after the surgery, strength of wrist flexion and forearm pronation, range of motion and valgus stability of the left elbow had recovered. One year after the injury, radiographs showed atrophy and sclerosis of the medial epicondylar apophysis. In this type of injury, revascularization of medial epicondyle fracture is not essential for recovery of elbow function when reattachment of the medial collateral ligament and flexor-pronator muscle origin to the distal medial humerus successfully restores stability of the elbow joint.In the pediatric population, fractures involving the medial epicondyle of the humerus constitute 11%–20% of all elbow fractures. An 11-year-old right-handed healthy boy tried to vault over a horse during a physical education class at an elementary school. The student lost his balance in the air and fell to the floor on his left elbow. He was referred to our hospital for evaluation of left elbow pain. Radiographs showed a Salter-Harris type II physeal fracture of the medial epicondyle of the left humerus ( Under general anesthesia, valgus instability of the left elbow compared with the contralateral elbow was found. At surgery, a fragment was found in subcutaneous space proximal and posterior to the anatomical position of the medial epicondyle. The medial epicondyle fragment was completely stripped of muscles, ligaments and even the periosteum ( After immobilization in a long arm splint for 3 weeks, active range of motion exercises of the elbow were initiated. A cock-up splint was applied to the left wrist for two weeks to protect reattachment of flexors muscle origin. Three months later, all wires were removed under general anesthesia. Intraoperative findings showed that the flexor muscle origin was united to the medial epicondyle. Six months after internal fixation of the medial epicondyle, range of motion of the left elbow and strength of wrist flexion and forearm pronation had recovered to those of the contralateral side. Gravity stress radiographs of the bilateral elbow joints showed no evidence of functional insufficiency of the left medial collateral ligament. One year after the injury, radiographs showed atrophy and sclerosis of the medial epicondylar apophysis, suggesting avascular necrosis of the medial epicondyle ( Medial epicondyle fracture is commonly caused by avulsion of the medial epicondyle by the flexor and pronator muscles of the forearm or the medial collateral ligament associated with elbow dislocation. Few cases of medial epicondyle fracture due to direct trauma have been reported since Watson-Jones described 36 cases of direct injuries in 1930. Surgical management for medial epicondyle fractures remains controversial with regard to degree of fracture displacement. A need for medial stability for valgus instability of the elbow has been accepted as an indication for surgical intervention. It is desirable to perform osteosynthesis in order to avoid underdevelopment of the medial aspect of the elbow if the epicondyle is normal and not crushed, especially in children less than ten years of the age. The authors have none to declare. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. The authors are grateful to Dr. Mikio Muraoka, Vice President, Kameda Daiichi Hospital, Dr. Kunihiko Tokunaga, Director in Niigata Hip Surgery Center, and Dr. Koshiro Imai, Chief in the Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Kameda Daiichi Hospital for their help treating this unusual case and preparing this article.