Environmental contaminants such as cadmium and persistent organochlorine pollutants have been proposed as risk factors of osteoporosis, and women may be at an increased risk. To assess associations between exposure to cadmium and two different POPs (2,2′,4,4′,5,5′-hexachlorobiphenyl CB-153, 1,1-dichloro-2,2-bis(p-chlorophenyl)-ethylene p,p′-DDE), on one hand, and bone effects, on the other, in a population-based study among postmenopausal (60–70 years) Swedish women with biobanked blood samples. The study included 908 women and was designed to have a large contrast of bone mineral densities, measured with a single photon absorptiometry technique in the non-dominant forearm. Biochemical markers related to bone metabolism were analyzed in serum. Exposure assessment was based on cadmium concentrations in erythrocytes and serum concentrations of CB-153 and p,p′-DDE. Cadmium was negatively associated with bone mineral density and parathyroid hormone, positively with the marker of bone resorption. However, this association disappeared after adjustment for smoking. The major DDT metabolite (p,p′-DDE) was positively associated with bone mineral density, an association which remained after adjustment for confounders, but the effect was weak. There was no evidence that the estrogenic congener (CB-153) was associated with any of the bone markers. In conclusion, no convincing associations were observed between cadmium and POPs, on one hand, and bone metabolism markers and BMD, on the other.The large increase in age-standardized prevalence of osteoporosis in the world, as well as the wide geographical variation in fractures incidence between countries, with Swedish women having one of the highest, cannot fully be explained by established risk factors ( Cadmium is a widespread environmental pollutant. Except for tobacco smoking, foods, such as cereals, vegetables, potatoes and shellfish, are the major sources of exposure ( POPs, such as polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and dichlorodiphenyl trichloroethane (DDT) are important environmental pollutants. The Baltic Sea is particularly contaminated area and intake of fatty fish from this area is still a major source of exposure ( Exposure to environmental chemicals that are able to disrupt the hormonal equilibrium might represent another risk factor for osteoporosis ( The aim of this study was to assess associations between exposure to cadmium and two different POPs, CB-153 and The Malmü Diet and Cancer Cohort, comprising of 17,140 women from the general population, was established during the period 1991–1996. Detailed information on menopause status, postmenopausal hormone use, and life style (including diet, alcohol, smoking and physical activity) was obtained from each participant at baseline ( We selected the 911 women from the age stratum 60–70 years to represent a wide range of BMD. One-third of the women were randomly recruited from the upper (>+1.5 standard deviation (SD) Exposure assessment was based on cadmium levels in erythrocytes (Ery-Cd). Cadmium in blood (whole blood or erythrocytes) is considered the most valid marker of recent exposure. Its half-time does, however, display both a fast component (3–4 months) and a slow component (about 10 years) ( The concentrations of cadmium in the samples were determined by inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (ICP-MS; Thermo X7, Thermo Elemental, Winsford, UK). The detection limit, calculated as three times the standard deviation (SD) of the blank was 0.01 POP levels in serum are useful as index of exposure and retention ( CB-153 and BMD was measured with single photon absorptiometry technique. Scans were made with the non-dominant arm placed in a water container. BMD in grams per square centimeter was automatically calculated from the distal forearm at a point at which the distance between the radius and ulna was 8 Body composition was measured with a bioelectrical impedance analyzer (BIA-109, RJL Systems, Inc.) ( Data from two independent groups of subjects were compared by the Mann–Whitney Women in the low BMD group tended to be older, had lower weight, were more often smokers, consumed slightly more alcohol, were younger at menopause and were less often users of postmenopausal hormones compared to those with higher BMD ( In the univariate assessments, BMD was statistically significantly negatively associated with cadmium and positively with In the multiple linear regression analyses, we evaluated further the associations between cadmium and bone markers by including potential confounders and effect modifiers in the models. Cadmium was significantly negatively associated with BMD after controlling for age, body weight, alcohol consumption and use of postmenopausal hormones ( In the multiple linear regression analyses, Inclusion of both Ery-Cd and This population-based cross-sectional study of upper-middle-aged women, representative of the general population of southern Sweden, showed negative multivariate adjusted association between cadmium in erythrocytes and BMD, which, however, disappeared after adjustment for smoking. Serum levels of the major DDT metabolite; Major advantages with the present study are the combined metal and POPs exposure assessment, the population-based, fairly large sized sample of elderly women, and the available information on the major risk factors for osteoporosis, such as low body weight, smoking, excess alcohol consumption, and physical inactivity, which are all associated with bone effects. Due to steady exposure and slow turn-over of cadmium, the Ery-Cd should represent the accumulated levels in our study group, as well as the current exposure in Swedish women ( POPs have a slow turn-over. Hence, it is likely that the serum levels represent the status of our women during long time. However, since sampling was made in 1991–1996, and POPs concentrations in fish from the Baltic Sea have decreased, their concentrations are most likely higher than in current Swedish women. The concentrations of CB153 and Alternative explanations of our positive association between POPs accumulate in fatty tissue, and are thus associated with increased body weight, which is protective against osteoporosis. However, as the association between In conclusion, we found no convincing associations between cadmium and POPs, on the one hand, and bone metabolism markers and BMD, on the other. This is important, since upper-middle age women should be representative for the most susceptible part of the population and the study was designed to include a large contrast. Although we cannot fully exclude residual or unmeasured confounding by other factors affecting our results, it seems highly unlikely that, POPs exposure, at the present exposure concentrations, would be an important risk factor for osteoporosis. Ms. A. Akantis, Ms. M. Nilsson and Ms. B. Holmskov gave skilful assistance.