A numerical study of the breakage behavior of non-spherical agglomerates is presented in this paper. Six agglomerates of various shapes (e.g., spherical, regular tetrahedral, cuboidal, regular octahedron, regular dodecahedron and regular icosahedrons) with different sphericities are examined using discrete element method (DEM) simulations. First, appropriate parameters for the simulation model are obtained based on uniaxial compressive experiments and single coal rock impact test. Then, a series of numerical simulations is performed to examine the breakage behavior of the non-sphere agglomerates produced. The study shows that better breakage performance can be obtained with a higher impact velocity. The collision behaviors of the non-spherical bodies are relatively more complex compared to those of spherical bodies. Detailed examinations of the evolutions of the damage ratio and wall force indicate that the size of the contact area plays an important role in the breakage behavior of the agglomerates. Most of the maximum wall forces and final damage ratios show a decreasing trend when the face-impact, edge-impact and vertex-impact modes are used. However, these values are still significantly larger than those of spherical agglomerates. The simulation results show that the debris and fragments created after the agglomerates fracture have independent shapes and impact modes. The value of the detected two features decrease as sphericity increases when the face-impact mode is used but increase with the sphericity when the edge- and vertex-impact modes are used. Minor changes in sphericity can result in significantly different fracture patterns in non-spherical agglomerates.In mining technology, impact crushing is a primary fragmentation method for crushing mineral materials. Currently, experimental studies of the impact breakage of agglomerates have been carried out In the last two decades, DEM has been used to explore the detailed evolution of agglomerate breakage due to impact. However, these studies primarily investigated normal impacts between spherical agglomerates and a target wall. Granular dynamics simulations of dense spherical agglomerate impacting orthogonally with target wall were studied by C. Thornton A simple and fast original method to create agglomerates with irregular shape by assembling spheres together was described by Ferellec J F, the method showed its ability to reproduce a shape, its degree of resolution and the number of spheres required However, irregular agglomerates using a DEM model are all considered to be rigid bodies. Fragments after breakage cannot typically be generated in numerical models. For non-spherical agglomerates, their breakage not only depends on the impact speed and angle but is also related to the impact mode. The breakage behaviors of three different shape agglomerates (spherical, cuboidal and cylindrical) impacting with a target wall have also been examined based on discrete element simulations In this study, the common non-spherical objects considered are restricted to regular polyhedra (regular tetrahedron, cuboidal, regular octahedron, regular dodecahedron and regular icosahedrons). This study examines the impact breakage of non-spherical agglomerates during an impact with a target wall in different impact modes. Finally, the influence of different impact modes on the breakage behavior of non-spherical agglomerates is studied, and the relationship between the sphericity of the non-sphere agglomerate and the impact mode is analyzed. In the study of particle breakage, experimentation and simulation studies have focused on sphere agglomerates. C. Thornton, Mishra B. K., Nguyen D. and Kafui K. D. have adequately studied normal impacts between sphere agglomerates and a target wall Common non-spherical objects are investigated in this study. Six agglomerates with different shapes are examined: regular tetrahedron, cuboidal, regular octahedron, regular dodecahedron, regular icosahedrons and spherical. As one of the primary parameters used to describe the morphology of a non-spherical particle, sphericity has become widely applied in various research fields. Particle sphericity is a measure of the degree to which a particle's shape approaches the shape of a sphere The sphericities of the six agglomerates investigated in this study are determined to be 0.671, 0.806, 0.846, 0.910, 0.939, and 1.000, respectively. Parameter calibration is used to determine the correct numerical representation of a given specimen. The appropriate micro-parameters of a coal specimen is critical to establish an accurate numerical model. To determine the appropriate micro-parameters for a given numerical model, a series of uniaxial compressive simulations are performed. The flowchart used to establish a discrete element model of coal is shown in Conduct uniaxial compressive experiments on coal rock materials to determine the macro-physical and mechanical simulation parameters (e.g., elastic modulus, Poisson's ratio and compressive strength). Establish a discrete element model for coal rock based on the preliminary set of microscopic characteristic parameters in PFC3D. Conduct uniaxial compression simulations on coal specimens to determine the macro-physical and mechanical simulation parameters. Compare the calculated simulation and experimental parameters. If the simulation parameters are not consistent with the experimental parameters, a new numerical model should be created by modifying the micro-parameters until the simulation parameters are consistent with the experimental parameters. Before the DEM is used to calibrate the micro-parameters of the numerical model, three coal samples are selected for uniaxial compressive experiments to determine the material's macro-parameters (e.g., elastic modulus, Poisson's ratio and compressive strength), which are used to check the simulation parameters. The uniaxial compressive experiments are performed on a SANS uniaxial compressive test system. The elastic modulus, Poisson's ratio, force–strain curve, compressive strength and other parameters can be obtained in real time in these uniaxial compressive experiments. The average strain–stress curves of three coal samples are shown in A series of uniaxial compressive simulations are performed to determine the final macro-mechanical parameters for each coal specimen. The experimental values of the macro-mechanical parameters and simulation value of the uniaxial compression for each coal specimen are shown in Single coal material impact experiments were performed to determine the impact velocity to use in the DEM simulation. The morphology of the coal material after breakage can be divided into the following three categories: unbroken, partly broken and completely broken. During the analysis, the term “completely broken” indicates that the coal material was completely broken into several fragments after impact, and the term “partly broken” indicates that the majority of coal was not broken and only several debris were created during impact. These experiments were conducted using a single-particle impact test system, as shown in To decrease the magnitude of the deviations in the experimental results, 100 coal samples with diameters ranging from 50 to 60 The parallel-bond model was created based on the micro-parameters shown in For the simulation, a wall is created and the desired impact velocity corresponding to a certain fall height is assigned to all constituent primary particles. The impact breakage of the non-spherical agglomerates can be categorized into three different breakage modes: face impact, edge impact and vertex impact. Then, the simulation of the three impact patterns is performed with a regular tetrahedral, cuboidal, regular octahedral, regular dodecahedral and regular icosahedral agglomerates, respectively. The impact mode of a regular tetrahedral agglomerate is shown in A large amount of simulation data can be obtained from an agglomerate impact simulation. To describe the simulation results presented below, two important features of the agglomerate impact must be described: the time evolutions of the wall force generated at the agglomerate–wall interface and the damage ratio, which is defined as the ratio of the number of bonds broken to the initial number of bonds The impact simulations for spherical agglomerates have been used to examine how the breakage behavior is affected by different impact velocities. As shown in As shown in The impact mode has a significant influence on the resulting damage to the non-spherical agglomerate. Agglomerate impacts are simulated to examine the breakage behavior that occurs during different impact modes. For non-spherical agglomerates during corner and vertex impacts, the breakage also relates to the agglomerate orientation; however, the orientation of non-spherical agglomerates is rather complex. In this study, the broken behaviors of the non-spherical agglomerates impact against a target wall under different impact modes are investigated. The numerical results of the agglomerate impact simulations show that the agglomerate shape and different impact modes affect the resulting breakage behavior. The numerical results of a face-impact simulation for different agglomerates at an impact velocity of 16 When these non-spherical agglomerates impact against a wall in the face-impact mode, a face of the parallel-bond primary particles impacted normally to the wall. The numerical impact result of the agglomerate with the wall at an impact velocity of 16 The variations of the wall force generated at the wall–agglomerate interface and the damage ratio of the bond breakage at different sphericities are shown in As shown in The vertex impact simulations for different agglomerates at an impact velocity of 16 The variations of the wall force generated at the wall–agglomerate interface and the damage ratio of the bond breakage at different sphericities are shown in Compared with the numerical results of the non-spherical agglomerates in the three impact modes, the maximum wall force is the smallest under the vertex-impact mode, which further confirms that the number of parallel-bonded primary particles contacting the wall is significantly affected by the magnitude of total force transmitted into the agglomerate. However, the final damage ratio exhibits a different trend compared to the results obtained from the other two impact modes. The final damage ratios of the regular tetrahedron, cube and regular octahedron are still the smallest in the three different impact modes (20%, 37%, 46%, respectively). However, the final damage ratios of the regular dodecahedron and the regular icosahedrons under the vertex-impact mode are marginally higher than that obtained from the edge-impact mode (55% and 53%, and 61% and 60%, respectively). Unlike the other non-spherical agglomerates, the final damage ratio of the regular tetrahedral agglomerate is shown to be smaller than that of the spherical agglomerate (20% and 25%, respectively). It can also be shown that the final damage ratio of the regular icosahedrons exhibit the fewest changes among the three impact modes, showing final values 68%, 60%, and 61%, respectively. The quantitative analysis shows that the agglomerate with higher sphericity is not significantly influenced by the impact modes. It is mainly due to the shape of agglomerate is more close to ‘sphere’ with the increasing of sphericity. Since sphere agglomerate is highly symmetrical object, which won't be influenced by different impact modes. Impact modes have little influence on the highly symmetrical object. Numerical simulations of six different shapes of agglomerates impacting a target wall are designed, built and analyzed. The effects of the impact velocity and mode on the wall force and the damage ratio of the parallel bonds are also demonstrated. The agglomerate experiences a large plastic deformation after impact before disintegrating into small debris. Most of the small debris after breakage is primarily near the agglomerate–wall interface, and fragments are created at the top part of the agglomerate. An impact simulation of a spherical agglomerate has been performed to examine how the breakage behavior is affected by different impact velocities. The results show that better breakage performance can be achieved at a higher impact velocity. The collision behavior of non-spherical agglomerates is shown to be more complex than spherical agglomerates. The debris and fragments created by the agglomerate during impact are shown to be independent of the particle shape and impact mode. The maximum wall force and the damage ratio both decrease as the sphericity increases under the face-impact mode but increase as the sphericity increases under the edge-impact and vertex-impact modes. Detailed examinations of the evolutions of the damage ratio and the wall force show that the contact area size plays an important role in an agglomerate's breakage behavior. Most values of the maximum wall force and the final damage ratio tend to decrease under the face-impact, edge-impact and vertex-impact modes, but most of these values are still significantly higher than that of a spherical agglomerate. Agglomerates with a smaller sphericity are shown to be significantly influenced by the impact mode. It can also be concluded that minor changes in the sphericity can result in a significant difference in the fracture patterns of non-spherical agglomerates. The financial support for this study that was provided by the