Rye bran was added to frankfurter-type sausages and meatballs with the aim of producing low-fat products with increased dietary fibre content. The addition of untreated rye bran to sausages was detrimental, causing a substantial increase in frying loss (20% compared to 13.2%). The addition of rye bran treated with hydrolytic enzymes reduced the frying loss to 15.2–16.4%. The firmness was also improved by the treatments (12.8–14.2N compared to 8.8N). Enzymatic treatment of rye bran did not however improve the water-holding capacity or the texture of sausages compared to the rye bran that had only been soaked in water. The reason could be that enzymes degraded the solubilized fraction of the dietary fibre, leaving small fragments that cannot contribute to the water-holding capacity and the texture of the sausages. The benefits of treating rye bran in water were not seen in meatballs, probably due to the more particulate structure of meatballs, which is not as sensitive to additives.There is currently a great deal of interest in new, healthy food products. A lower intake of fat, together with a higher intake of dietary fibre (DF), is one step towards a healthier diet, which may reduce the incidence of diseases such as obesity and cancer ( Sausages and meatballs are two common meat products that normally contain relatively high amounts of fat. Frankfurter-type sausages are more comminuted, and have a higher salt content than meatballs, creating a strong meat protein network. This meat protein network determines the texture and sensory properties of sausages ( There are several challenges involved in reducing the fat content of a product since fat makes a considerable contribution to the texture and taste of food. Reducing the fat content in sausages has been reported to reduce the firmness ( Rye bran is rich in DF, consisting mainly of insoluble arabinoxylans and cellulose ( Several studies have been performed, on the addition of materials rich in DF to produce low-fat meat products, for example, the addition of potato pulp and barley β-glucans to sausages ( The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of adding untreated and treated rye bran to sausages and meatballs, concerning WHC, texture, and the acceptability of the meat products, assessed by a sensory panel. It is hoped that the findings of this study will improve our understanding of how texture and other properties are affected when adding DF to meat systems. Future studies will describe and compare the addition of rye bran, oat bran, and barley fibre to sausages and meatballs. Rye bran (Lantmännen, Sweden) was used as a DF-rich additive in sausages and meatballs. Six different kinds of rye bran, one untreated (denoted RB) and 5 treated in different ways, were added to the sausage and meatball mixtures. Rye bran was ground in a mill (Retch ZM1, Germany) and passed through a 0.5 Three different references were prepared for both the meatballs and sausages, in order to be able to study the effects of reduced starch and fat contents and to have a control to the samples with added fibres. The first reference samples contained normal amounts of fat and starch in these products, and are described as high fat and high starch (denoted HFHS). The second reference samples contained a low fat content and a high starch content (denoted LFHS), while the third reference samples had low levels of both fat and starch (LFLS). The various kinds of rye bran were added to the LFLS samples. The sausages were prepared according to the recipes given in The dry ingredients, including the rye bran, half meat and half water were mixed in a food processor (Braun, Germany) at high speed for 1 The meatballs were prepared according to the recipes given in The meat and the dry ingredients were mixed in a food processor at low speed (Braun, Germany) for 1 Process loss was calculated by measuring the difference in weight before and after boiling of sausages, and expressed as a percentage of the initial weight. The water content of the meat mixtures (n Water and fat loss were calculated according to following equations: Slices of sausage, 1 Texture measurements were performed on cooked sausages and fried meatballs using a Texture Analyser (TA-XT2 A hedonic sensory test was performed on the fried sausages and meatballs. An untrained panel of 16 participants evaluated sausages on four occasions and meatballs on another four occasions. The participants evaluated 5 or 6 samples in each session and duplicates of all samples were analysed. The sausages were fried as described in The results were analysed statistically using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Pearson correlations (r) of the variables were analysed with Minitab (version 14, Minitab Inc. USA). Statistically significant differences between samples were defined as p The frying losses of the meatballs were higher than the total losses of the sausages, taking the process loss and the frying loss of the sausages into account ( In this study, fat contents of the HFHS sausages and meatballs were rather low, 4.7 and 9.1% respectively. Even so, they were considerably higher than in the low-fat samples (1.8 and 1.5%, respectively). All the sausages showed very low fat losses during processing (< The fat losses of the pan-fried meatballs were also low (< Potato starch is commonly used in meat products to increase the WHC ( No significant differences were observed for the sensory properties of the different reference sausages ( No difference was perceived by the sensory panel in the total impression of sausages or meatballs. Since all the reference samples were given values above 5, this indicates that they were all acceptable, according to the panel, including the LFLS products. When the untreated (RB) and the milled rye bran (RBM) were included in the sausage batter, the frying losses increased significantly. The RBM sausages showed the highest frying loss (23%) among the sausages with added rye bran, while the RB sausages showed a lower frying loss (20%), but still among the highest, and almost twice as high as for the LFLS reference, which has the same fat and starch content ( The addition of rye bran treated with enzymes reduced the frying losses of the sausages, compared to the addition of RB and RBM. None of them, however, reduced the losses to the level of the LFLS sausage, resulting in sausages with higher process and frying losses. The only significant difference between the sausages containing the enzymatically treated rye brans was that RBD761 resulted in a sausage with a higher process loss than the others. The sausage containing rye bran soaked in water (RBW) not only showed a significantly lower frying loss than that containing RBM, but also those containing enzymatically treated rye bran. The frying loss of RBW sausages was not significantly different from those of the LFHS and LFLS sausages. The reduction in losses when adding RBW is believed to be due to a degree of solubilization of the DF by endogenous enzymes in the rye bran during treatment in water. When rye bran treated with enzyme preparations was added, more dietary fibre were solubilized, but these were further degraded by the enzymes, leaving small fragments, leading to low viscosity and WHC ( There was a correlation between the total impression and the meat intensity and the off-flavour evaluated by the sensory panel (p When untreated rye bran or milled rye bran were added to the meatballs, the influence on the frying loss and firmness, compared to the LFLS meatballs, was not as drastic as that seen in the case of the sausages. In fact, none of these rye bran-containing meatballs differed from the LFLS references concerning frying loss, regardless of the frying method ( As discussed above, all LFLS meatballs were less firm than the HFHS and LFHS meatballs. This was found in both the texture measurements and the sensory evaluation of the compactness and these two measurements were correlated (p The differences seen in the sausages, concerning the effects of the rye bran that had been soaked in water (RBW) and the one that had not (RBM), were not seen in the meatballs. This extra step in the process is therefore not motivated when producing meatballs containing rye bran. Two cooking methods were used when evaluating the meatballs, pan frying and deep-fat frying. Fat losses during pan frying were low. As mentioned above, fat content of the meatball mixtures was low, and fat will not be transported to the surface during heating ( Differently treated rye bran was added to two types of meat products, frankfurter-type sausages and meatballs. In the sausages the meat protein network governs the texture and water-holding properties, whereas the meatballs have a more particulate structure, with higher frying losses and harder texture. The addition of untreated rye bran to sausages was detrimental, causing a substantial increase in frying loss. However, when rye bran that had been treated in water was added the frying loss and firmness of the sausages were considerably improved. Similar improvements were observed in sausages containing rye bran treated with enzymes. Enzymatic treatment of the rye brans did not improve the WHC or the texture of the sausages compared to the rye bran that had only been soaked in water. The reason for this behaviour could be that enzymes degraded the solubilized fraction of the DF leaving only small fragments that cannot contribute to the texture and WHC of the sausages. The benefits of treating rye bran in water were not seen when rye bran was added to meatballs, which suggests that the more particulate meat structure is not as sensitive to this type of additive. The only factor that substantially influenced the texture of the meatballs in this study was the addition of starch. None of the types of rye bran added improved the firmness of the meatballs, rather the contrary. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by