The process whereby a brittle fault was activated by mining is not only significant for disaster prediction, but also for earthquake prediction. Thus, it was necessary to study their activation process. In this study, stress state, AE (acoustic emission)/MS (microseismic) activities during brittle fault activation, stages of brittle fault activation, and the relation between AE/MS activities and brittle fault parameters were analysed and it was feasible to identify buried brittle faults, determine their parameters and activation process based on MS monitoring. The No. 22517 working face in the Dongjiahe Coalmine was taken as an example. Firstly, a buried brittle fault was identified in No. 22517 working face by the MS monitoring method. Secondly, the buried brittle fault parameters were determined. Its azimuth angle was 307.5° in the orbital roadway and 357.5° on the haulage roadway. Its dip angle was 73° and it was a reverse fault. Thirdly, the activation process of the buried brittle fault was determined. The buried brittle fault was not affected by the mining activities when the distance (from mining activities to the buried brittle fault) was over 300 m, the ‘disturbance stage’ was from 300 m to 80 m, and the ‘local activation stage’ from 100 m to 30 m, and the ‘whole activation stage’ around 30 m. The b value decreased during the process of brittle fault activation and reached a minimum value at the whole activation stage; it was concluded that these changes are related to the stress distribution around the brittle fault. The results demonstrated that MS monitoring technology can detect small buried brittle faults ahead of the working face, and is also an effective method to study the process and mechanism of brittle fault activation.The activation and instability of brittle faults contributes greatly to the preparation and occurrence of natural earthquakes. However, the scale of brittle faults causing natural earthquakes is usually large and the activation cycle very long. Thus, it is difficult for seismologists to systematically study large-scale and long-period brittle fault activation. In recent years, underground engineering (especially underground mining engineering) has developed rapidly. In the process of underground mining, it was inevitable to encounter some small- and medium-scale brittle faults. The presence of brittle faults can be a cause for serious problems such as rockbursts, Many scholars have carried out laboratory experiments to study the shear slips process of brittle faults. Lockner However, due to the difference between laboratory experiments and in-situ situation, it was essential to study the brittle fault activation based on in-situ monitoring. However, the brittle fault activation cycle, which drives earthquakes, is too long and the scale was too large for practical in-situ monitoring and study. The brittle fault activation induced by mining activity provided an opportunity to study brittle fault activation process based on in-situ monitoring. Donnelly et al. Many researchers have studied the activation process of brittle faults by monitoring the relationship between shear stress and shear strain in laboratory tests. Barton et al. Previous studies The numerical simulation results were shown in Based on the shear stress evolution characteristics under mining activities, the process of brittle fault activation can be divided into five stages, namely, no influence stage, disturbance stage, local activation stage, whole activation stage and re-accumulation stage. In the no influence stage, the shear stress of measuring points near coal seam in the brittle fault plane remained unchanged. In the disturbance stage, the shear stress of measuring points near coal seam in the brittle fault plane increased slowly. In the local activation stage, the shear stress of measuring points near coal seam in the brittle fault plane increased rapidly. In the whole activation stage, the shear stress of measuring points near coal seam in the brittle fault plane reached the maximum value. Above studies showed that the essence of the brittle fault activation caused by mining was process that the normal stress and shear stress on the fault plane increased continuously under the influence of mining activities until the failure of the brittle fault. Thus, the activation process of brittle fault activation can be simplified as a direct shear test process with variable normal force. At present, few people have studied the generation characteristics of AE in the process of direct shear test with variable normal force. However, many scholars have studied MS activities during brittle fault activation by direct shear test in the laboratory. The sample size was usually 100 mm × 100 mm × 100 mm. Typical experimental results are shown in Based on stress state around faults in different activation stages and the relation between stress states with AE/MS activities, the distribution characteristics of MS in different activation stages can be deduced. In the disturbance stage, low energy MS began to occur, which provided a basis for identifying the existence of buried brittle faults in advance. When brittle faults entered local activation stage, the number of MS increased continuously, and the energy released by MS continued to increase. When the brittle fault reached whole activation stage, the energy released by the MS reached its peak, while the number of MS appeared a quiet period. The number of MS and the release energy of MS gradually decreased in the re-accumulation stage. Based on the above research results, it can be concluded that buried brittle faults can be identified by the advanced detection method of MS monitoring. Recently, few scholars had studied the relation between AE/MS activities and brittle fault occurrence, but some scholars had studied AE distribution characteristics by stick-slip experiments, which provided the basis for studying relation between AE/MS activities and brittle fault occurrence. By stick-slip experiments, Goebel et al. Recently, few scholars had studied the relation between AE/MS activities and the fault type, but many scholars had studied the relationship between focal mechanisms of foreshocks and that of the main shock. Chen et al. Thompson et al. Bokelmann et al., Based on the previous studies, a MS method for identifying buried brittle faults, determining brittle fault parameters and studying the activation process was established. The MS monitoring results in No. 22517 working face of Dongjiahe Coalmine were taken as to illustrate and verify this method. Dongjiahe Coalmine was located in the border area of Shaanxi, Shanxi and Henan provinces in China, where coal resources are abundant. The general geological information about Dongjiahe Coalmine, MS monitoring system and results had been introduced in detail in previous publication by Cheng et al. In the area of the working face, the thickness of the coal seam varied from 2.5 m to 4.1 m, with an average of 3.3 m. Moreover, an anticline existed from 480 m to 720 m (pitch distance), and the maximum height difference in the anticline area. A thin seam zone also existed from 530 m to 840 m (pitch distance) on the orbital roadway and from 500 m to 810 m (pitch distance) on the haulage roadway. There were two small faults found in the working face. One was located at 190 m (pitch distance) in the haulage roadway, whose strike was 5° south by west, dip was 30° and fault throw was 2.9 m. The other fault lay at the open-cut with the strike of 70° south by west, the dip of 40°, and the spacing of 1.6 m. Fully-mechanized coal mining method was used in the working face, while blasting mining method was used in the range of the thin seam zone. The advancement schedule in the working face was shown in When a MS event occurs, an elastic wave is generated in the rockmass around the MS event. The elastic wave is propagated through the rockmass to the sensors, which were close to the rock face, and the signal transmitted through the cable to the underground workstation for digital to analogy conversion. Finally, these elastic waves were transmitted to the ground server through optical fibre. The ground server set the trigger value for each sensor to judge whether the waveform was a MS event or not. If the waveform was a MS event, the appropriate time window was selected to save the waveform. A typical MS event waveform should consist of P wave and S wave. The location of MS event could be achieved by determining the arrival time of P wave and S wave. In order to satisfy the requirement of location, the elastic wave of a MS event should be received by at least four sensors. After a MS event was located, geophysical properties of MS events (energy, seismic moment, magnitude, etc.) can be calculated based on the original waveform received by sensors and the relative spatial position of sensors and the MS event. Thus, it was very important to select suitable MS sensors for MS monitoring. There were two main types of MS sensors, accelerometers and geophones. Geophones exhibit better sensitivity over a relatively narrowband at the lower frequencies of interest, whereas accelerometers cover a relatively wide band, excelling in sensitivity at the higher frequencies and measuring without distortion the large amplitude, low frequency strong ground motions of nearby large events. Geophones were usually used for MS monitoring in coalmines. In Dongjiahe Coalmine, one-component geophones, with a sensitivity of 43.3 V/m/s, were adopted in the MS monitoring system. The response frequency of these geophones was in the range from 15 to 2000 Hz. The sampling rate of the underground workstation was 2000 Hz. The layout of geophones in the No. 22517 working face is depicted in The general MS monitoring results have been introduced in detail in previous publication by Cheng et al. The spatial distribution characteristics of MS in Zone II was analysed and the result was shown in From August 2015 to October 2015, a large crack formed from 335 m to 345 m (pitch distance) in the orbital roadway of the No. 22517 working face and its length was nearly 10 m (as shown in In addition, it could be seen from As shown in Focal mechanisms were determined from double-couple components of the decomposed moment tensors computed from first-motion P-wave amplitudes and a homogeneous velocity model. Focal mechanism analysis was carried out by selecting MS, which were larger than 50 J, from April 17, 2015 to November 3, 2015 around the buried brittle fault. The focal mechanisms for some selected MS in Based on the Mohr-Coulomb strength criterion, the angle between the fracture surface and the largest principal stress was The change characteristics of cumulative MS number, energy and average energy per day with time during the activation process of the buried brittle fault in Dongjiahe Coalmine, are shown in In the first phase (phase A in To find out the causes of MS at each phase, the relation among mining activities in the No. 22517 working face, tunnelling activities in the No. 22515 working face and spatial distribution characteristics of MS were analysed. As shown in Based on the mining schedule in the No. 22517 working face, mining activities were mainly concentrated in 628 m (pitch distance) on August 30, 2015 and 578 m (pitch distance) on October 27, 2015. Because a thin seam zone also existed from 530 m to 840 m (pitch distance) on the orbital roadway and from 500 m to 810 m on the haulage roadway. Because of the thin seam zone from 520 m to 830 m, the blasting mining method was used in this area. The distance between mining activities in the No. 22517 working face and location of the buried brittle fault was from 300 m to 200 m. As of October 11, 2015, the MS frequency density clouds in Based on the above analysis, the distance between the buried brittle fault in Dongjiahe Coalmine and mining activities in the No. 22517 working face was over 150 m during the phase C. Based on the a brittle fault activation process induced by mining activity in a working face and the stress state around a brittle fault, the local activation or whole activation of the brittle fault cannot happen during the phase C. Thus, it can be inferred that the buried brittle fault in Dongjiahe Coalmine was in the disturbance stage of the brittle fault activation process before phase D. To determine the activation stages of the brittle fault, MS events after November 1, 2015 were selected to analyse the change characteristics and the results were shown in Based on the above analysis, the following phenomena were found: Firstly, small energy MS occurred near the brittle fault from Aug 30, 2015 to Dec 29, 2015. Secondly, the rate and energy of MS continued to increase from Dec 30, 2015 to Jan 26, 2016. Thirdly, the period from January 27, 2016 to March 2, 2016 belonged to the quiescence period of MS. Fourthly, the average energy of MS per day reached the maximum value on Mar 3, 2016. Fifthly, the number and energy of MS decreased rapidly after Mar 4, 2016. Based on the distribution characteristics of MS in different activation stages, it could be concluded that the brittle fault was in the disturbance stage before Dec 29, 2015, the local activation stage from Dec 30, 2015 to March 2, 2016, the whole activation stage at Mar 3, 2016, and the re-accumulation stage after Mar 4, 2016. Thus, when the distance between the location of mining activities and the buried brittle fault was over 300 m, the buried brittle fault was in the no influence stage. When the distance between the location of mining activities and the buried brittle fault was from 300 m to 100 m, the buried brittle fault was in the disturbance stage. When the distance between the location of mining activities and the buried brittle fault was from 80 m to 30 m, the buried brittle fault was in the local activated stage. When the distance between location of mining activities and the buried brittle fault was around 20 m, the brittle fault was in the whole activation stage. When the brittle fault was more than 25 m behind the location of mining activities, mining activities had little effect on the brittle fault. The seismic size distribution follows, in most instances, a power law, with the slope of this power law described by the Many scholars have studied the changing characteristics of On this basis, the relationship between the variation characteristics of the b value and the stress state has been studied by many scholars. Schorlemmer et al. On this basis, the b value during each brittle fault activation stage was calculated. Considering that the typical calculation of Based on the shear stress evolution characteristics under mining activities, the process of brittle fault activation can be divided into five stages, namely, no influence stage, disturbance stage, local activation stage, whole activation stage and re-accumulation stage. On this basis, the influence of mining activity on the stress state around the brittle fault and the distribution characteristics of MS in different activation stages were revealed. Based on the activation process of brittle faults, the relation between stress states with AE/MS activities and the relation between AE/MS activities with brittle fault parameters, it was feasible to identify buried brittle faults, determine their parameters and activation process based on MS monitoring. Based on the change characteristics of the cumulative MS number and cumulative MS energy, the activation process of the buried brittle fault in Dongjiahe Coalmine can be divided 6 phases. MS in phase A were caused by tunnelling activities in the No. 22515 working face, while phase C, D, E and F were caused by mining activities in the No. 22517 working face. Based on in-site exposure in the orbital roadway and MS monitoring results in phase A, it can be determined that there was a reverse brittle fault from 200 m to 350 m with an azimuth angle of 307.5° on the orbital roadway and 357.5° on the haulage roadway, a dip angle of approximately 73°. Based on the activation process of brittle faults and the relation between stress states with AE/MS activities, the activation process of the buried brittle fault in Dongjiahe Coalmine was studied. When the distance between location of mining activities and the buried brittle fault was over 300 m, the buried brittle fault was in the no influence stage. When the distance was from 300 m to 100 m, the buried brittle fault was in the disturbance stage. When the distance was from 100 m to 30 m, the buried brittle fault was in the local activation stage. When the distance was around 30 m, the brittle fault was in the whole activation stage. When the brittle fault was more than 25 m behind the location of mining activities, mining activities has little effect on the brittle fault. The b value decreased first and then increased during the process of brittle fault activation and reached the minimum value at the whole activation stage. After the whole activation stage, the b value of the brittle fault increased to about 1. The change characteristics of b value during brittle fault activation were related to the stress distribution around the brittle fault. Based on the above research, MS monitoring technology could not only detect small-buried brittle faults in working face ahead, but also was an effective method to study the process and mechanism of brittle fault activation. By this method, we could not only further study the effect of the ore extraction sequence on brittle fault activation and find a more suitable ore extraction sequence, but also predict engineering geological hazards caused by the activation of brittle faults through the precursor information, and adopt corresponding safety precautions. We thank Shaanxi Coal and Chemical Technology Institute Co., Ltd. for approving our publication, and personnel at the Dongjiahe coal mine. We thank, Dalian University of Technology for facilitating our project and personnel at the State Key Laboratory of Coastal and Offshore Engineering in Dalian University of Technology. The project was funded by the