The influence of shear rate on the mechanical behavior of rough rock joints prepared using a molding method was examined by testing jointed samples of four rock joint groups, which were obtained from the underground caverns of the Huangdao State Oil Reserves in China. The tests were performed using a JAW-600 coupled shear-flow machine under constant normal load (CNL) conditions. Shear rate and joint roughness coefficient (JRC) were the two primary considerations in this study. The results indicate that the peak shear strength is controlled by shear rate and joint roughness. Shear rate has a nonlinear relationship with the peak shear strength, whereas joint roughness exhibits good linearity with a high correlation coefficient (>0.97, except for results under a shear rate of 24.0mm/min). Furthermore, shear rate affects the damage incurred by the rock joints, as illustrated by the acoustic emission of rock joints monitored by a PAC acoustic emission system. The joint surface breaks earlier with increased shear rate. Furthermore, because of the more rapid generation of macrocracks under higher shear rate, the corresponding cumulative acoustic emission (AE) count and AE energy are inversely proportional to the shear rate. A new shear strength criterion that considers both shear rate and joint roughness was developed based on the experimental results and Barton’s shear strength criterion. Then, the validity of this proposed criterion was verified with an average estimated error of 10.539% using the shear strength values of rock joints proposed by Barton, indicating that the new criterion is capable of providing an accurate estimate of shear strength for rough rock joints under different shear rates.One of the key pieces of information used to assess the dynamic response and safety of rock structures is the strength of the rock joints under different shear rates. Dowding and Rozen Several researchers A constitutive model is fundamental for theoretical calculations and numerical simulations in engineering analysis. Numerous peak shear strength criteria and constitutive models have been developed in the literature, To date, only a few studies have considered the seismic response of rock joints, particularly under cyclic loading conditions. Most studies have focused on the analysis of the trend in mechanical properties of rock joints with cyclic shear number while ignoring the influence of the variation of dynamic loads on the mechanical properties of rock joints, namely, the seismic influence of different shear rates, joint roughness and normal loading stress. The present study investigated the effect of shear rate on the mechanical properties of rough rock joints. Twenty direct shear tests were performed on four groups of rough rock joints, considering the shear rate and joint roughness. The rate-dependent behavior of the rock joints was investigated based on an analysis of the acoustic emission (AE) under different shear rates. The experimental results were used to develop a new shear strength criterion based on Barton's JRC-JCS criterion, Joint roughness is one of the most important factors for understanding and estimating the shear behavior of a rock joint. The JRC–JCS criterion proposed by Barton in 1977 is the most well known criterion and is used in this paper to select the joints and develop the new shear strength criterion. The rough surface must be quantified before calculating its JRC. In this study, the rock joint surface data were acquired using a three-dimensional laser-scanning rock surface instrument. The advantages of this type of system are its high precision and good repeatability. Furthermore, it has low time and computational requirements because it is able to digitize the entire surface at once. The system consists of a measurement head containing a central projector unit and two high-resolution charge-coupled device (CCD) cameras. The resolution of the spatial location of each point in the three-dimensional space along the To obtain the average JRC, comparison of JRC calculation under different profile interval were conducted to determine a better profile interval, as indicated in In this study, the average value obtained using an interval of 0.25 To conduct an experimental study on rough rock joints, it is necessary to prepare identical samples using a molding method. The artificial rock-like joints are illustrated in Additionally, 12 cylindrical samples ( The direct shear test under constant normal load (CNL) conditions were performed using a JAW-600 coupled shear-flow machine. In this experiment, 2  The peak shear strength for the same joints decreases in a nonlinear manner with increased shear rate, and this decreasing rate of shear strength is observed to increase with increased shear rate ( The AE of the rock-like joints was also monitored by a PAC Acoustic Emission System. This property has previously been studied by Moradian et al. The trends in the AE for different rough joints under different shear rates are consistent. The entire shear process is accompanied by the AE monitoring. In pre-peak I stage, as illustrated in The curves of the AE count and AE energy rate vs. time in Several criteria exist to estimate the shear strength of rock joints. Among all, Barton's JRC–JCS criterion is the most widely used in practice, However, the criteria discussed above are used for static or quasi-static conditions, which do not consider the shear rate. The large deviation (average value is 32.87%) between the static shear strength calculated using Eq. To eliminate the JRC effect when obtaining the relationship  The relationship between the shear rate and JRC can be derived by substituting Eq. No further normalization is needed, because of the elimination of the rate effect on After substituting Eqs. An additional three groups of rock-like joints proposed by Barton and Choubey were tested to verify the proposed shear strength criterion. The calculated JRC of these joints is listed in The rate-dependent behavior of the rough joints, physically modeled using cement plaster, was investigated using twenty direct shear tests with a shear rate ranging from 0.6 to 24.0 A new shear strength criterion, which considers both the shear rate and JRC, is developed and is capable of providing an accurate estimate for the peak shear strength of rock joints under different shear rates, as validated by an additional 20 direct shear tests on the Barton joints and rough joints. This study was funded by the