The separation of high levels of iron from acid leaching liquor is a difficult task, especially in the atmosphere acid leaching process for laterite ore. In this paper the removal of iron by goethite precipitation from the leach liquor of reduced laterites is reported. The goethite precipitation process uses air as oxidation agent, that is, V.M. method, and does not need the pre-reduction of ferric iron since the soluble iron in leach liquor is mainly ferrous ion. The effects of pH value on the rate of iron removal and the loss of nickel to the residue were investigated. It was found the pH value had remarkable influence on the nickel loss during goethite precipitation. By carefully controlling the pH value to less than 2.5 the loss of nickel could be restricted to below 5%. Attempts of recover the nickel lost to the goethite residue through weak acid washing were unsuccessful, suggesting the retention of nickel by the goethite.Nickel-bearing ores mainly exist in oxide form, laterites, which account for 72% of the world land-based nickel resource. The lateritic ores can be simply divided in two types, limonite and silicate-rich. The former is rich in ferric oxide and has low contents of magnesium, aluminum, and other acid consuming elements, thus is usually processed by hydrometallurgical methods, especially acid leaching methods, including high pressure acid leaching (HPAL) ( In nickeliferrous limonite, (Fe,Ni)O(OH)·nH HAPL is a proven economic method for the selective extraction of nickel from limonitic laterite. At high leaching temperature, normally 240–260 Atmospheric leaching (AL) at lower temperature and in open vessels avoids the need for expensive HPAL autoclaves. However, two key issues are the kinetics of nickel extraction and the ease with which the liquor can be processed subsequently. Specifically, the leach liquor from AL is likely to contain significant concentrations of soluble iron and methods must be found to selectively reject these metals from solution ( Various methods have been tested to improve the nickel extraction kinetics by AL and the selectivity over iron to decrease the acid consumption, which include using sulphur dioxide as reducing agent ( An alternative method to resolve the problems of the AL process is reduction pre-treatment, which changes the chemical nature of the ore before leaching. If the iron-bearing oxide laterite ore is reduced to low valence iron oxide, the AL can proceed at higher reaction rate and with selectivity to the nickel than for non-pretreated ore ( Though the extraction of nickel from the reduced laterite ores by sulphuric acid leaching showed partial selectivity over iron, a large part of the iron constituent in the reduced ores seemed to be wustite, and the solubility of the iron constituent under ambient pressure remained on a high level. In order to separate the high levels of iron from the solution, precipitation is the most widely used method, including jarotsite, goethite and hematite technique, which mainly came from the zinc industry. Removal of iron via goethite precipitation process can be effected by the Vieille Montgane (V.M.) technique, which was developed somewhat later in the sixties by Societe de la Vieille Montgane, and then came into commercial application in the zinc industry ( Although reduction pre-roasting followed by sulphuric acid leaching of the laterite ore and the reductive leaching have been examined previously, little attention has been paid to the purify of leaching solution containing high levels of ferrous ions. The aim of this present study is to investigate the iron removal by goethite precipitation from the acidic leaching liquor of the pre-reduced limonite laterite ore, Particular interest was devoted to the factors that affect the nickel loss during iron precipitation process. Mother liquor containing nickel for iron removal investigation was prepared by acid leaching reduced limonite laterite ore. The reduction procedure using microwave heating, and the leaching of reduced calcine, have been previously examined ( Acid leaching was performed at room temperature, and the concentration of nickel and iron (in ferrous form) were 0.63 The apparatus used for goethite precipitation is shown in The total reaction is an acid generating process, thus a neutralizing agent must be used to ensure the reaction proceeds to completion. The pH value not only affects the oxidation rate of the ferrous ion but also affects the nickel loss in the goethite residue. So it is the key parameter in the precipitation process. The control of pH was achieved by adjusting the addition rate of basic magnesium carbonate, which neutralizes the acid released from the iron hydrolysis. The neutralization agent was added at stoichiometric ratio. Different pH values were selected to examine the effect on the ferrous oxidation rate and the nickel loss to the goethite residue. Due to the coating of precipitate onto the glass electrode of digital pH meter, the pH was directly measured by precision pH test paper. Ferrous iron content in the solution was determined by the titration method using K The effect of pH value on iron precipitation rate and characteristics of the precipitates are presented in To provide insight into the effect of pH value on the precipitation, XRD patterns and SEM images of the precipitates gained at different pH value are shown in During the iron removal process the loss of nickel to the precipitate was an issue of concern. The effects of pH value and Fe/Ni ratio on nickel loss are shown in In order to recycle the lost nickel to the residue, the weak acid washing tests were conducted. The results are shown in The precipitation of iron from the leaching liquor of reduced laterite ore was demonstrated, using air as oxidation agent, that is, using V.M. method. The iron concentration in the final liquor can be lowered and decreased to below 1.0 The pH value has remarkable effect on the rate of ferrous ion oxidation and the loss of nickel to the residue. Increasing pH value enhances the oxidation rate of ferrous ion but results in greater nickel loss to the residue. At a pH value of 2.5–3.0 the oxidation rate of ferrous ion is about 53.8 In the precipitation process some nickel appears to co-precipitate with iron. This nickel could not be recovered by weak acid washing of the precipitate. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the