Four hundred and fifty acetabular fractures in a prospectively recorded cohort were studied. Forty-one patients had died, 201 had a follow-up of more than 2 years and 25 were excluded which left a study population of 176 patients. Harris Hip Score (HHS) and modified HHS were used as outcome instruments. Acetabular fracture displacement and roof arc angles converted into a Roof Arc Score were assessed and correlated with clinical outcome at 2 years follow-up. For surgically treated fractures with residual steps and diastases after operation the correlation between steps and 2 year outcome was good. The location of fracture lines in the acetabular dome, expressed as a Roof Arc Score, proved to be more important than the residual step for 2 years clinical outcome (p
                     <0.05). The impact of location of fracture lines in the acetabular dome on clinical outcome disappeared when open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) resulted in a perfect anatomic reduction, i.e. without any residual steps or diastases assessed in the three radiographic views. The general association between fracture diastases and functional outcome was poor, except for non-operatively treated fractures without measurable steps.Predicting clinical outcome after acetabular fractures has long attracted interest. Type of fracture, displacement and comminution as well as concomitant diseases and patient conditions have been said to affect clinical outcome. Different fracture types Radiographic roof arc angles were originally introduced to decide the area of the weight-bearing dome of the fractured acetabulum. The associations between residual fracture displacement – anatomical versus non-anatomical reduction – and functional outcome have been established with non-parametric chi-square statistics with highly significant The purpose of the current study was to evaluate the associations between fracture displacement, roof arc angles and clinical outcome of both surgically and non-operatively treated fractures. Furthermore, we wished to establish what was the most important prognostic factor of step, diastases or fracture line location using regression analysis. The patient records were selected and stored according to guidelines given by the hospital and official authorities. The Data Inspectorate and the Regional Committee of Ethics approved the study. Acetabular fractures in a prospectively recorded 10-year cohort from 1993 were studied. Four hundred and fifty patients were recorded. Forty-one had died because of the initial trauma or of unrelated causes during the first 2 years. Two hundred and one patients had a follow-up of 24 months or more. Thirteen patients were excluded due to total hip arthroplasty (THR) and nine because the clinical outcome was influenced by other trauma or due to inadequate radiographs. Three patients with posterior wall and low anterior Pipkin fractures were excluded. This left a study population of 176 patients, 69 had non-operatively treated fractures, while 107 were treated surgically. The fractures were classified according to Judet et al. The largest steps and diastases in all three standard radiographic views (front, obturator and iliac view) were measured and then added. The residual steps and diastases on the postoperative examinations were recorded in the operated group. Total displacement was then defined as the sum of steps and diastases in the three radiographic views The roof arc angles Fracture displacements and Roof Arc Score were correlated to the recorded functional data from the 2 year follow-ups. Harris Hip Score (HHS) and the modified HHS were used as outcome instruments. NCSS Statistical Software for Windows (version 2004) was used. The statistical analyses were based on the added values of steps, diastases, and Roof Arc Score versus the total original and modified HHS. Fisher exact test was used on the fractures with residual steps and diastases after ORIF and non-operatively treated fractures with steps and diastases. For the Fisher exact test modified HHS was categorized into excellent (106–120), good (91–105), fair (76–90) and poor (<75). Roof Arc Score was categorized by intervals of five points into central dome (11–15 points), medium (6–10) and peripheral (1–5) fractures. Steps, diastases, total displacement and Roof Arc Score were also correlated separately to the Pain domain and the function/relative strength/relative ROM in the modified HHS and to function/absence of deformity/ROM in the original HHS. There were 73 (42%) simple and 103 (58%) associated fractures and the fracture types are shown in Modified HHS mean for the patients was 99.9 points, median 103.0 (44–120) and the original HHS showed mean 90.6, median 96.0 (36–100) ( For the operatively treated acetabular fractures with residual step and diastases after ORIF and the non-operatively treated fractures with steps and diastases, the association between steps and 2 years clinical outcome was moderate/good. Diastasis correlation was poor/moderate to outcome for these fractures. The Roof Arc Score correlated moderate/poor to clinical outcome score—central fracture lines in the dome, however, had a higher association with a poor outcome in the regression analyses. Fractures without residual steps or diastases after operation behaved differently, without any association between Roof Arc Score and 2 years outcome. On the other hand the non-operatively treated fractures without any recorded step or diastasis were different to the operated ones, with a moderate/poor association between Roof Arc Score and clinical outcome. Non-operatively treated fractures with diastases, but no steps, showed moderate association between Roof Arc Score and outcome, whereas the association between diastases and 2 year outcome was good. For operatively treated fractures without a residual step, but with residual diastasis, the association between diastasis and outcome was poor. Surprisingly, the association between Roof Arc Score and outcome was moderate/poor with a negative correlation coefficient indicating that a central fracture lines was associated with better outcome in these fractures. The proportion of transverse fractures with posterior wall was high in this group, 11/27 (41%). Types of fractures in the different groups are shown in The correlation analyses indicated how strongly the steps, diastases, total displacement and Roof Arc Scores were associated with 2 year clinical outcome. The multiple regression analyses gave the relation between steps, diastases and Roof Arc Scores as independent variables. For non-operatively treated fractures with steps and diastases and fractures with residual steps and diastases after ORIF, Roof Arc Score was dominating with a regression coefficient of 1.31, Several authors have emphasised accuracy in reduction as important to a good clinical outcome in acetabular fracture treatment. The impact of location of fracture lines in the acetabular dome (Roof Arc Score) on clinical outcome disappeared when ORIF resulted in a perfect anatomic reduction, i.e. without any residual steps or diastases assessed in the three radiographic views. An association between Roof Arc Score and clinical outcome was not detectable for these fractures. There was, however, an obvious difference between operatively and non-operatively treated fractures without residual displacement. While the association between Roof Arc Score and clinical outcome disappeared for fractures treated with ORIF, the association for the non-operatively treated fractures was about the same as for fractures with residual steps and diastases. One possible explanation for this phenomenon is that the non-operatively treated fractures dislocated further secondary to the initial trauma. Analyses of the non-operatively treated fractures without steps, but with diastases supported this hypothesis; for these fractures the association between Roof Arc Score and clinical outcome was even higher, moderate/good. It is, however, important to underline that a high correlation between Roof Arc Score and clinical outcome for these fractures was not synonymous with a low outcome score. Non-operatively treated fractures without any steps or diastases had a mean modified HHS of 104.4 (87.0% of maximum score) and a mean original HHS of 95.3 (95.3%), while fractures without steps, but with diastases had a mean modified HHS of 103.2 (86.0%) and original HHS of 99.4 (99.4%). For the operatively treated fractures with residual displacement, analysis of the association between diastasis and clinical outcome showed poor correlation. Furthermore, the association between diastasis and total outcome score was poor for operated fractures disregarding residual step. Also, the regression analyses showed that diastases were not important to clinical outcome for either operatively nor non-operatively treated fractures with residual steps and diastases. The moderate to good association between diastases and clinical outcome for non-operatively treated fractures without steps is not easily explained. One possibility is that the initially measured diastases indicated a secondary minor step displacement that was revealed in the analyses as a high correlation coefficient. Again, it should be noted that the outcome for these patients was good, with modified and original HHS of 103.2 and 99.4 points. For operated fractures with diastases, but without steps, the association between Roof Arc Score and outcome was remarkable, indicating that central dome fractures had better outcome than peripheral fractures. The added diastases in the AP and oblique radiographs were mean 5.6 Methodologically, the main strength of the study was the consecutive series of patients followed accordingly to a standard protocol for both operative and non-operative treatment and rehabilitation with minimum 2 year follow-up. Exclusion of patients with outcome scores affected by other traumas than the acetabular fractures gave homogenous, but small study groups when analysing on both steps and diastases. The small study groups, on the other hand, might have influenced the statistical analyses concealing findings of clinical relevance. Another limitation was the uneven distribution of fracture types in the different study groups. In addition operated fractures dominated on behalf of non-operatively treated fractures in the entire series. In conclusion this study showed good correlation between steps and 2 year outcome for operated fractures with residual steps and diastases. Roof Arc Score proved to be more important than steps in these fractures, but was not important at all for operated fractures without residual step. The correlation between diastases and outcome was poor, except for non-operatively treated fractures without steps, probably indicating a minor secondary step displacement. There is no conflict of interest. The work was supported by The Research Council of Norway. Modified Harris Hip Score has four domains adding to a total numeric score as the original score. The Pain domain is based on VAS with weighted scores during different activities. The Pain domain in modified Harris Hip Score. No pain at rest is weighted 85% of no pain at night. Pain at gait is weighted 65%.