Copper wire is used to remove vanadium from crude TiCl4 in titania and titanium sponge production which produces a copper–vanadium precipitate. The recovery of copper and vanadium from this precipitate was studied. Experiments found that the precipitate can be naturally oxidized by stacking for one month in air, converting >90% metallic copper contained in the original precipitate into CuCl2·2H2O, Cu2Cl(OH)3 and Cu2(OH)3Cl. The copper oxy-chlorides were easily converted to Cu(OH)2 by stirring in dilute NaOH at pH 11 and 80°C under a liquid-to-solid ratio of 4:1. When the pH was lowered to about pH 2.5 by sulfuric acid, iron, titanium and vanadium oxides remained in the first acid leach residue and copper was selectively leached into solution. By evaporating and cooling the leach solution, a product of CuSO4·5H2O with 99.7% purity was obtained.
                  To recover the vanadium, the filter cake was roasted with Na2CO3 at 700°C for 3h under the stoichiometric proportion of 2.5 for V. The calcine was then leached with water at 70°C and NH4VO3 was precipitated by the addition of NH4Cl. Calcination of NH4VO3 at 550°C for 2h produced V2O5 with a purity of 98.6%. After vanadium recovery, the residue was leached once again with sulfuric acid and the total recoveries of copper and vanadium were 98.6% and 95.7% respectively.Titanium tetrachloride,TiCl VOCl Therefore, the precipitate formed in the basin contains mostly metallic copper which is usually treated pyrometallurgically. This treatment volatilizes a great amount of chlorides, which cause serious environmental pollution, and vanadium cannot be recovered as it is dispersed in the exhaust gas and the slag. The aim of this paper is to present a new cleaner method to recover both the copper and vanadium from the copper–vanadium precipitate. The precipitate formed in the wash water was used as the experimental raw material. After filtration, the precipitate was stacked on the ground for one month to allow the metallic copper to be oxidized by air at temperatures ranging from 16 to 27 Laboratory grade sulfuric acid, sodium hydroxide, sodium carbonate, ammonium chloride and distilled water were used in the experiments. The leaching of copper and vanadium from the precipitate was carried with a magnetic stirrer and the metal contents in solution were determined by atomic absorption spectrometer (AAnalyst 100, U.S.A.). Vanadium was titrated with ferrous ammonium sulfate, chloride ion was titrated with silver nitrate solution, and the pH was determined using a pH meter (ORION-230A, USA). The experimental process flow diagram is shown in After one month of storage, the metallic copper contained in the original precipitate was almost oxidized by air to CuCl Since the oxidized copper products all readily dissolve in acid solution, the solubility of copper in acid solution was used to examine the natural oxidation rate of the precipitate. As shown in Since there is much chloride ion contained in the precipitate (  The leaching of copper from the de-chlorinated precipitate and the filter cake was carried out by stirring with dilute sulfuric acid at 80  Comparing  Experiments found that although the remaining copper content in the filter cake was above 7%, the copper could be completely extracted after acid leaching once again with 20–40  The precipitate formed from vanadium removal from crude TiCl After natural oxidation, the copper contained in the precipitate was readily recovered by de-chlorination with NaOH solution followed by selective leaching of the Cu(OH) Vanadium was recovered from the leach residue through soda roasting and water leaching. After adding NH