A three-factor, three-level, face centered cubic (FCC) experimental design was used to study the effect of important chemical variables—collector chain length, collector concentration and frother type—on the collector properties of the recently developed N-allyl-O-alkyl thionocarbamates (ATC) in copper flotation from a porphyry ore. The objectives of this study were to exploit the advantages of using experimental designs to evaluate multivariable effects and interactions, and to develop fundamental applications knowledge that is currently lacking for the ATC collectors.
                  The effects of these process variables on copper recovery, copper concentrate grade, iron recovery, and particle size of the flotation concentrate were determined and the best process conditions were identified. The flotation efficiency of the ATC was compared with that of two better-known collectors, the O-alkyl-N-ethoxycarbonyl thionocarbamate (ECTC) and the N-alkyl-N-ethoxycarbonyl thiourea (ECTU).The optimization of flotation conditions is a complex task because many process (independent) variables can affect flotation responses. Studies which employ a “one-variable-at-a-time” approach to flotation optimization can be highly inefficient, and sometimes misleading, since many process variables can often interact so as to influence a measured (dependent) variable or response. It is not uncommon for multiple interactions to occur between independent variables, and identification of these interactions plays an important role in advancing our understanding of the chemistry of such systems in plant operations. Factorial experimental designs are efficient and afford optimization of process conditions in a multivariable system. Recently, Fundamental studies using single minerals to investigate effects of certain variables often fail to predict the optimum level of these required to achieve a target metallurgy in either batch flotation or plant practice. This arises because such studies fail to provide information on the behavior of other minerals present in the ore. For example, a study of the effect of collector chain length on the flotation of individual copper minerals may predict the optimum chain length required to obtain the best copper recovery. However, such a study cannot predict the optimum chain length required to obtain the best concentrate grade (i.e. no information on gangue flotation, or on the interactions that occur between gangue and value minerals). Hence the evaluation of novel collectors is best performed on ores under conditions that are typically found in flotation plants. Since it is both expensive and time consuming to evaluate new collectors directly in large-scale plant trials, they are best studied on suitable ores in small-scale batch flotation studies. By obtaining the optimum operating conditions to meet important metallurgical objectives (i.e. highest copper recovery and grade) in small-scale batch flotation studies, the collector can then be tested with greater confidence in the industrial flotation circuits. Collectors which possess not only high affinity to float copper minerals from porphyry ores, but also high selectivity against flotation of pyrite, such as the alkoxycarbonyl thionocarbamates and alkoxycarbonyl thioureas, have proven to be popular alternatives to xanthates ( The The objectives of the present study were to employ a factorial design to investigate the effect of chemical variables on the flotation performance of ATC collectors for a porphyry copper ore, to optimize these variables for copper recovery and concentrate copper grade, and to compare performance of ATC collector to that of two proven collectors, ECTC and ECTU. The key process variables chosen for the study were collector chain length, collector dosage and frother type. The The collector concentrations used in this study were expressed as moles of collector per ton of ore (mol/t) rather than the customary grams of collector per ton of ore (g/t) because the former provides for a more rigorous and scientific comparison between collectors of differing molecular weight (note that the conversion from mol/t to g/t is simple, viz. Two frothers, 4-methyl-2-pentanol (commonly known as methyl isobutyl carbinol or MIBC) and polypropylene glycol ether (Dowfroth® 250—abbrev. DF), were supplied by Cytec and Dow Chemicals, respectively. Both were added to the flotation pulp “as is”. A composite sample of a porphyry ore from an operating plant in South America was used in this study. This ore contained 2.0% Cu, 6.8% Fe, and 5.5% S. Mineralogical analysis revealed that the copper sulfides were predominantly chalcocite (Cu A three-factor, three-level, face centered cubic (FCC) experimental design was used (see Test conditions were based on normal operating conditions in the plant. 1.0 kg of ore was ground for 10 min in a mild steel rod mill (with lifters) at 67% solids with a 9.5 kg rod charge and lime (amount required to obtain the desired flotation pH of 9.4) to obtain a pulp with a The important response variables chosen in this study were copper recovery, copper grade (in concentrate), iron recovery, and particle size of the flotation concentrate ( E-Chip® software was used for the regression analysis, statistical and optimization calculations. The experimental flotation data were modeled using linear and quadratic least-squares curve fitting, shown schematically in The suitability of the copper ore for the present study was determined by evaluating the collector performance of C2 ATC at three concentrations. The flotation results are shown in In flotation, the total error consists of errors associated with grinding, flotation, sampling and assaying processes, combined with operator and random errors. The overall error was estimated by replication of a single flotation experiment four times, as shown in Pronounced froth suppression was noted for C6 ATC during the first minute of flotation. A very hydrophobic, mineralized film, akin to a rigid oily monolayer, formed when the air was turned on, and noticeable froth began to form gradually only after this film was removed from the surface by gentle scraping. Froth suppression effects were observed to increase with an increase in collector chain length as well as collector dosage. The observed suppression is attributed to the greater hydrophobicity of adsorbed films of ATC collectors at the liquid/air and solid/liquid/air interfaces ( The residual sum of squares value, used to evaluate the accuracy of the different types of curve fitting, has the advantage of incorporating all experimental error into this value. The quadratic models can often “overfit” data, thereby leading to severe curvature. The linear model, conversely, may “underfit” the data, thereby masking some “real” trends (for example, influence of frothing characteristics resulting from chemistry of collectors on copper flotation). The closeness of fit to the experimental data can be tested by comparing the experimental data against the data predicted by the models used for the regression analysis. Such a comparison is shown in The major effects of the three process variables—collector dosage, collector chain length and frother type—on flotation responses at The pronounced froth suppression effect observed for the C6 ATC can explain most of the effects of the three process variables on flotation performance ( That the froth suppression effect of longer-chain ATC collectors was essentially most pronounced in the initial stages of flotation, and that it was overridden as flotation progressed, is borne out by the flotation results at the end of 15 min shown in The effect of collector chain length and collector dosage on copper recovery, iron recovery, and the In general, concentrate grades are inversely correlated with recoveries. This straightforward correlation can be complicated by the simultaneous effects of several variables, as was observed in the present system, especially in the initial stages of flotation. As in the case of copper recoveries, the effects of variables on 15 min concentrate grades were far simpler (see Collector chain length had a very significant positive effect on final grades; i.e. grade increases going from C2 to C6, which is not consistent with what is generally noted for effect of chain length in other collector systems. However, the response surface goes through a minimum for intermediate chain length—i.e. C4 ATC. Note Cu recovery behavior is reverse (i.e. maximum for C4), as expected. There was also a strong, positive interaction between collector type and frother type. For MIBC and mixed frother C2 ATC gives higher grades than C6 ATC, but for DF250 C6 ATC gives higher grades than C2 ATC, which cannot be readily explained. These results highlight the unique behavior of the C6 ATC as compared to the other homologs. In view of the overall lower copper recoveries obtained with the C6 ATC, the enhanced concentrate grades obtained with C6 ATC would be less relevant. In terms of copper grades, the C2 ATC provides the best performance. Simultaneous determination of the optimum conditions of three (or more) process variables that yield a maximum (or minimum) in flotation response is very useful for plant operation. The traditional “one-variable-at-a-time” approach would require hundreds of flotation experiments, and even this approach may fail to predict such conditions accurately, especially when the behavior of two process variables changes as a function of a third variable. However the use of an experimental design will reduce the number of experiments required (15 in this example) and will allow the user to predict the vicinity of the optimum conditions for the process variables. The optimum conditions predicted for frother type, collector type and collector concentration to yield the maximum in flotation responses are given in From The flotation performance of the ATC collector was compared against the performance of the ECTC and ECTU collectors. The results, shown in A factorial experimental design approach was used for a comprehensive study of the allyl thionocarbamate collectors. The effect of the important process variables—collector chain length (C2, C4 and C6), collector concentration (0.01, 0.025 and 0.01 mol/t) and frother type (MIBC, DF250, 80:20 mixture of MIBC:DF250)—on the copper recovery from a porphyry ore was determined. The E-Chip® software was used for statistical calculations and for modeling responses. A quadratic model was found to provide the best fit of flotation data. Numerous interactions between independent and measured variables were identified. The largest standard deviation in replicate tests was 4.6% (relative) for the 5 min copper recovery. Many complex effects and interactions characterized initial stages of flotation. Collector chain length and collector dosage had by far the most significant effects overall on froth characteristics, copper recovery, copper grade and flotation of coarse particles. Significant froth suppression, particularly in the initial stages of flotation, was observed for longer-chain ATC collectors, such as C6, which are very hydrophobic. Most of the observed flotation data could be rationalized on the basis of the observed froth suppression effects. Frother type had a significant effect only in the initial stages of flotation. C4 ATC was found to be the optimum with respect to both chain length and froth characteristics. Predicted optimum conditions based on the quadratic model were: C4 ATC, 0.09 mol/t and 65:35 DF250:MIBC; under these conditions the responses were 97% copper recovery, 33% Cu grade of concentrate, 25% iron recovery and The financial support from the Australian Mineral Industries Research Association and the Australian Research Council, through the Special Research Centres Scheme, is gratefully acknowledged. The authors also wish to thank Mrs. Jennie Coe for her mineralogical analysis of the ore, Mr. James Lee for valuable assistance in the laboratory, and Cytec Industries for permission to publish this work.