As a stress wave propagates in rock, the amplitude of the stress wave will attenuate, and the waveform will dissipate, which can be equivalently characterized by the stress wave propagation in a viscoelastic material. The stress wave propagation may induce rock damage when the stress is greater than the rock strength. In this study, viscoelastic wave propagation in rock and the damage and failure process of rock induced by viscoelastic wave propagation, which are usually examined separately in existing theoretical and numerical models, were investigated under a unified framework. Based on viscoelastic damage theory and the theory of stress wave propagation in a one-dimensional viscoelastic bar, theoretical equations for spalling fracture of a viscoelastic bar were obtained. Then, the numerical model implemented by the one-dimensional wave propagation program was validated by reproducing the dynamic spalling of green sandstone bar; after that step, the program was employed to study the behavior of viscoelastic bar spalling. Based on the numerical simulation, the condition, position and time of the dynamic spalling induced by quarter sine wave propagation in the viscoelastic bar were examined, and the influence of the amplitude and frequency of the quarter sine wave and the viscosity coefficient and length of the viscoelastic bar on the spalling were quantified.In mining engineering, earthquake research, protective construction design, and in environmental and civil engineering applications, rock is generally subjected to dynamic loading. Investigation of the dynamic properties of rocks is of importance for determining rock breakage and fragmentation upon explosion, impact, earthquake and percussive excavation. Micro defects and micro cracks exist in rocks that sometimes behave viscoelastically under dynamic loading. When a stress wave propagates across a rock mass with joints and across intact rocks with micro defects and cracks, attenuation and dissipation occur. It is of great importance to study viscoelastic wave propagation across intact rocks with micro defects and cracks to assess the stability and damage of rock structures. There are two main analytical methods for evaluating viscoelastic wave propagation when considering the effects of joints on rock mass and of micro cracks on intact rock. The first one is the displacement discontinuity method (DDM), which was proposed by Mindlin The other is the equivalent medium method (EMM), which treats the jointed rock mass as a whole and evaluates the influences of the joint on the viscoelastic wave propagation in the rock mass under dynamic loading by using a representative elementary volume (REV) to use continuum mechanics to analyze the attenuation and dissipation of the stress wave. EMM is based on the substitution of the fractured and discontinuous medium with a homogeneous and continuous one, which is characterized by effective elastic moduli. In addition to the existing micro defects in rock and natural joints in rock mass that contribute to viscoelastic wave propagation, the viscoelastic wave propagation may also further induce damage to rock and rock mass, which may in turn induce new micro defects in rock and extension of joints in the rock mass. In recent years, several viscoelastic constitutive models for rock with micro defects and for jointed rock mass have been developed. However, these models have usually focused on the amplitude attenuation and waveform dispersion Compared to its compressive strength, rock exhibits low strength under tension. When rock is subjected to impact or explosion, if the compressive stress is lower than the compressive strength but its absolute value exceeds the dynamic tensile strength of the rock, dynamic spalling occurs when the compressive wave is reflected into a tensile one at the free end. In recent years, the spalling of slender rod specimen has been suggested as an alternative method for determining the tensile strength of brittle materials such as ceramics In the past, viscoelastic wave propagation in rock and the rock failure induced by the wave propagation were usually separately studied. However, these factors interact with each other and should be studied in a unified model. The aim of this study was to investigate the viscoelastic wave propagation in rock and the damage and failure process of rock induced by viscoelastic wave propagation under a unified framework. Combining the viscoelastic wave propagation model and the elastic damage model, a numerical simulation of a dynamic spalling test of a one-dimensional viscoelastic bar was conducted. The dynamic spalling induced by harmonic wave propagation in the viscoelastic bar was studied via theoretical analysis and a numerical simulation. The influences of the harmonic waveform and the viscoelastic property on the condition, position and time of the dynamic spalling were examined in detail. According to the principle of elastic damage theory, the elastic modulus of an element monotonically degrades as damage evolves, and the elastic modulus of the damaged material is expressed as According to Similarly, a material may be damaged in the compressive mode, if the compressive stress exceeds the uniaxial compressive strength, where the damage variable, The elasticity modulus of the rock degrades after rock damage under loading; however, the corresponding response of the viscosity coefficient is still unclear. The viscosity coefficient of rock is larger than that of air; thus, the viscosity coefficient of damaged rock should be between that of intact rock and air. This indicates that the viscosity of the rock degrades after the rock is damaged, whose variation is similar to the elasticity modulus. According to Eqns. If the compressive stress exceeds the uniaxial compressive strength, the material may be damaged in the compressive mode, and the damage variable, According to the calculation of elastic moduli in Eqn. The Kelvin-Voigt model has been used to describe one-dimensional wave propagation in viscoelastic material As shown in The behavior of harmonic wave propagation in the one dimension viscoelastic bar is relatively simple, so it is used to analyze the spalling of a one-dimensional viscoelastic bar by harmonic wave. The half-sine wave and quarter sine wave are both harmonic wave. In order to simplify the theoretical analysis, the quarter sine wave is finally chosen. The theoretical analysis, experiments and numerical simulation of half-sine wave on the spalling of a one-dimensional viscoelastic bar will be investigated in the future. In this section, we describe the numerical simulation of the dynamic spalling of a one-dimensional homogeneous bar when the triangular and quarter sine waveforms were input as the incident wave to validate the one-dimensional wave propagation program for simulating the dynamic failure process. The numerical model and incident stress waves are shown in For incident compressive stress wave I, as shown in As shown in According to Rinehart and Pearson, The theoretical model is shown in The equation for the incident compressive stress wave is When the incident compressive stress wave applied at left end of the bar arrives at the right free surface, it is reflected back as a tensile pulse and superposed with the incident compressive wave. When the superposed tensile stress exceeds the dynamic tensile strength of the bar, spalling occurs at a distance If the first spalling fracture of the bar occurs at distance After the first spalling, if the maximum compressive stress is sufficiently higher than 2 times the tensile strength, a second spalling may occur at distance Therefore, if the According to Eqns. For the numerical model shown in For incident compressive stress waves I and II, as shown in The stress distributions of the right-running, left-running and superposed stress waves in the elastic bar for different times are shown in The spalling induced by stress wave propagation in a one-dimensional brittle bar is mainly determined by the amplitude of the stress and strength of the bar. For a viscoelastic bar, in addition to the effect of the stress amplitude and strength, spalling is also affected by the viscosity coefficient, bar length and duration of the stress wave. A harmonic wave was used to analyze the spalling of the viscoelastic bar. The geometrical shape and size of the long viscoelastic bar is shown in When the compressive stress wave arrives at the right free surface and is reflected back as a tensile stress wave, the waveform of the tensile stress wave is the same as that of the compressive stress wave; however, the amplitude of the stress wave attenuates due to the viscosity. When the tensile stress exceeds the dynamic strength of the viscoelastic bar, the long bar spalls, and a new free surface (spalling surface) is created. If the first spalling of the viscoelastic bar occurs, the following Eqns. If the viscoelastic bar spalls, the tensile stress wave is generated by reflection at the free surface, and the compressive stress wave must be superposed; thus, time When the stress of the viscoelastic bar and the propagation time satisfy Eqns. The time of spalling ( When the amplitude of a loading wave is sufficiently high, the frequency of spallings of a viscoelastic bar can be two, three or even more. Based on the one-dimensional theoretical analysis of spalling presented in Section A new free surface (SF If a second spalling occurs, the following Eqns. When the second spalling occurs again, the tensile stress wave is generated by the reflection, and the compressive stress wave must be superposed; thus, time When the stress in the viscoelastic bar and the propagation time satisfy Eqns. The time ( The calculation of multiple spallings is similar to that of two spallings; thus, when the When the viscoelastic bar spalls Therefore, when the stress in the viscoelastic bar and the propagation time of the residual harmonic wave satisfy Eqns. The time (   The tensile stress wave and compressive stress wave propagate in the first spalling segment after the first spalling occurs. The secondary spalling of the first spalling segment occurs if the following Eqns. The time ( The spalling segment may spall several times due to the nonlinearity and non-monotonicity of the stress distribution along the spalling segment.  The secondary spalling of the spalling segment may occur not only after the first spalling but also after multi-spalling. The calculation of the position, frequency and condition of secondary spalling after multi-spalling is similar to that after the first spalling, and the following Eqns. The time ( In this section, only one secondary spalling of the spalling segment is discussed; however, multiple secondary spallings may also be induced. The pendulum hammer driven SHPB experimental apparatus presented in The geometric dimensions of the green sandstone bar were 50 × 50 × 1000 mm, and the distances of the two sets of attached strain gauges were 250 mm (point P1) and 750 mm (point P2) away from the left end of the bar. The basic parameters of the green sandstone were measured in a prior study As shown in In addition, a numerical simulation of this experiment was also conducted. The strain wave measured at point P1 during the dynamic spalling test, as shown in A good correlation between the experiment and the numerical simulation for the location of the spalling fracture confirmed that the model predicts well the dynamic spalling behavior of green sandstone. As shown in For incident compressive stress wave II, The right-running and left-running stress waves in the bar, together with their superpositions, are shown in For incident compressive stress wave I, as shown in For incident compressive stress wave II, As shown in As for incident compressive stress waves III and IV, as shown in The attenuation coefficient and phase velocity of the harmonic wave propagating in a viscoelastic bar is influenced by the frequency of the harmonic wave. Thus, the effect of the harmonic wave frequency on the spalling behavior is discussed. The numerical model used for the results presented in this section was the same as that for Section The right- and left-running waves, together with their superposition under incident Wave VIII are shown in The amplitude of the harmonic wave attenuates with the wave propagation along the bar because of the material viscosity. If the loading stress is constant, the stresses decrease progressively along the bar. However, the time history of the loading stress monotonically increases; thus, the stress distribution along the bar is not monotonous at According to Eqns. As shown in As shown in The numerical model used for the discussion in this section was the same as that in Section For the right- and left-running stress waves, their superposed stress waves are together under incident wave IV, as shown in As shown in The behavior of stress wave propagation in a viscoelastic bar is influenced by the viscosity coefficient. The distance between the spalling face and the right free end increases and the frequency of the spalling decreases with an increase in the viscosity coefficient, as shown in The energy of stress wave propagation in an elastic rock bar does not attenuate; thus, the spalling of a long bar occurs when the amplitude of the incident wave is higher than the tensile strength of rock-like materials. However, for a viscoelastic bar, when the bar is long enough, spalling does not occur because the amplitude of the stress wave attenuates along the bar. Thus, the reflected tensile stress may not exceed the tensile strength. The numerical model used for the discussion in this section is the same as that in Section As shown in Based on a one-dimensional viscoelastic wave propagation model and damage model, dynamic spalling induced by viscoelastic wave propagation was investigated. The effects of the amplitude and frequency of the harmonic wave and viscosity coefficient and length of the viscoelastic bar on the spalling fracture were analyzed. The following conclusions can be drawn from the theoretical analysis, experiments and numerical simulations: Theoretical equations for the occurrence of dynamic spalling in a viscoelastic bar were proposed, and the spalling segments induced by the harmonic wave were quantified. The position, frequency and time of spalling predicted via the theoretical equations are in good agreement with the experimental observations. The numerical model was implemented into a one-dimensional wave propagation program, which is able to reproduce the laboratory experiments and the theoretical results for dynamic spalling of a viscoelastic bar, thus confirming the capability of the numerical model to simulate the dynamic spalling of rock bar. The position, frequency and time of the dynamic spalling of a one-dimensional homogeneous viscoelastic bar are dominated by the incident waveform and the mechanical and geometrical parameters of the bar. Thus, spalling of a viscoelastic bar induced by the reflected harmonic wave at the free surface can be avoided when the viscosity coefficient of the bar is increased and when the bar becomes longer. We declare that we have no conflict of interest. This work is funded by the