The effects of five parameters, temperature, pH, leaching duration, stirring speed and pulp density on the bioleaching of copper, cobalt and nickel from a polymetallic flotation concentrate were investigated. The leaching was carried out according to the L25 (55) orthogonal design. The optimal values of the parameters were determined using a Taguchi method through signal-to-noise analysis. ANOVA was applied to verify the individual contribution of each parameter and their degree of significance. It was found out that pulp density was the most influential factor on the bioleaching yield of the three metals altogether, followed by pH and temperature. For the copper bioleach, the following optimal parameters were determined: temperature – 37.5°C, pH 1.6, leaching duration – 20days, stirring speed – 350rpm and pulp density – 7.5%. Verification experiments conducted according to these optimal parameters brought copper yield of 72.6%. For the cobalt bioleach, SEM observations of pure carrolite indicated a progressive bacterial colonization of mineral surface with time.During the last decades the interest in mineral bioleaching technology has been growing constantly which has reflected in several research and development projects at various scales, ranging from laboratory and pilot to industrial ones ( In the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) the base metal extractive metallurgy has relied since the very beginning of its activities on the pyrometallurgical route when treating sulphide polymetalic concentrates. This classical way involved roasting of sulphides followed by acid leaching while the oxides have been treated in majority by direct leaching. Over the recent years, however, the environmental constraints imposed by the recently enacted mining legislation coupled with the rising treatment costs have lead to a strong shift towards exploitation of oxide ores on the expense of sulphide ones. This practice has led to the current situation of surplus of economically exploitable sulphides found in either non-exploited deposits or in abandoned ones, like Kamoya. Several feasibility studies have been recently performed aiming at economical recovery of the base metal sulphides met in these deposits or in laid mineral processing tailings ( The most frequently mentioned advantages of bioleaching are associated to its competitive cost and low pollution level. On the other hand, certain technological parameters, like the operating temperature, are viewed as serious obstacles which preclude some proven projects at lab-scale from up-scaling. Temperature is considered a decisive factor as far as leaching kinetics is concerned and one way to face low leaching kinetics issue is to utilize thermophilic bacteria. This approach was found feasible during oxydation of “bio-refractory” ores containing chalcopyrite ( The main objective of the present study was to investigate the influence of selected technological parameters on the bioleaching yield of copper, cobalt and nickel from a polymetalic concentrate. For accomplishing the above aim, two statistically-based methodologies have been chosen, namely the Taguchi method and the analysis of variance (ANOVA), both relying on a L The Taguchi method is based on a simple and systematic experimental approach and has been largely used in variety of industries for identification of the main technological parameters and their optimisation ( The analysis of variances (ANOVA) has been employed to rank the studied parameters in terms of significance and further onto evaluate the contribution, in percentage, of each of them on the bioleaching yield of copper, cobalt and nickel. Further objective of the work was to document bacterial attachment on pure carrolite during its bioleaching. While extensive studies could be found on bioleaching of chalcopyrite, covelite and pyrite ( Statistica v.10 software has been utilized for experimental design and results processing for both Taguchi and ANOVA methods. An experimental plan based on an L The primary objective of the parametric variation of the studied process factors was to find the values at which maximum bioleaching yield for copper, cobalt and nickel could be attained. In order to achieve this, Taguchi recommends using the so called Signal-to-Noise ratio ( For calculating the optimal values of the studied variables which provide the best response of the objective function under investigation, the In the ANOVA method, if the calculated The polymetalic concentrate under study has been supplied by the Département d’Etudes Métallurgiques (EMT) of the Gécamines S.A., Lubumbashi (DRC). It has been obtained during pilot flotation tests using flowsheet resembling exactly the existing plant circuit. The chemical analysis of the homogenized and dried concentrate has yielded the following major element concentration (wt%); Cu: 22.0, Co: 1.95, Ni: 0.09, Fe: 20.4, Mg: 3.0, and S: 25.5. The mineralogical analysis shown in Pure carrolite samples accompanied by their dolomitic gangue have been handpicked from the rich mineralized zones at a deposit’s site. Further on, selected samples between 25–50 Analysis for Cu, Co and Ni in the liquid samples has been done using an atomic absorption spectroscopy (Analytic Jena CONTRAA 300). Mineralogical analysis has been performed using a Brucker D8-Advance difractometer (Cu Kα The mixed culture used for the bioleaching consisted of three different mesophilic acidophilic chemolithotrophs: Bioleaching of the polymetalic concentrate has been conducted in a 1-L double-jacket thermostatized mechanically stirred reactor. The leaching media consisted of 450 Bioleaching of the pure carrolite has been done in triplicate shake flasks of 250  The study aim was to find the optimal factorial levels which maximize the yield of each of the three metals of interest and to investigate their leaching sequence. Therefore the effect of the operating variables on bioleaching yield was studied independently for each metal and the obtained results have been grouped and analyzed separately. The For the copper bioleaching, the calculated means of the Processing the obtained results gave an optimal combination of A The mean The results from the cobalt bioleaching have been investigated in a similar manner to those for copper and the obtained optimal levels for the variables which maximize cobalt yield are summarized in For the bioleaching of nickel the calculated mean of On the other hand, the ranking of the variables in terms of their influence upon the performance statistics and shown by the window of their magnitude in The overall results from the Taguchi analysis show that bioleaching of all three metals strongly depends on pulp density and the suggested optimal solids concentration being always the lower one tested – 7.5%. This is anticipated due to known shearing stresses and lower dissolved oxygen concentration at high solids loading and should be considered when selecting technological flow sheet. Furthermore, the results indicated that stirring speed has more influence on cobalt than on nickel and copper suggesting predominant mass transfer phenomena. Also, optimal cobalt extraction has required less leaching duration. In order to verify the order of operating parameters significance suggested by Taguchi method, the experimental results were tested with ANOVA. The statistical data determined for copper, cobalt and nickel bioleaching are presented in For the case of copper bioleaching, the studied parameters could be grouped by their significance order as follows: pH with maximum influence of 22.88%, followed by temperature – 16.39% and pulp density – 15.22%. The test of significance regarding the effect of pH indicates a relatively low critical probability value (0.0271) and For the cobalt, the results summarized in From the data shown in The electron microscopic observations of the bioleached pure carrolite taken at an interval of 10, 15, 20 and 30 These observations are consistent with studies on bioleaching of pyrite where it has been found that if bacteria are not attached to their preferred sites such as surface scratches, pits and grooves, cells attachment takes place parallel to the 〈1 The perusal of the images shown in The results obtained in the present work show that copper, cobalt and nickel could be leached to a certain degree from a polymetallic flotation concentrate. As observed during the statistically planned experiments, pulp density appeared to be the factor of primary importance for the bioleaching of all three metals. Stirring speed can be seen to show more influence on cobalt than on copper and nickel dissolution, suggesting a diffusion-controlled reaction. The effect of pH should be taken into account as well, especially with regard to copper and nickel dissolution which was found to be catalysed by bacteria. At pH higher than 2, iron precipitates are known to occur and hence to have inhibiting role upon bacterial activity. Verification tests using the optimally found variables for copper have confirmed the feasibility of the chosen statistical approach: mean copper recovery of 72.6% which is higher than the one obtained with the array table was achieved. It has been shown that cobalt requires lower leaching times, followed by copper and nickel, but as a whole the suggested leaching times should be reduced in view process economy. Clearly, high leaching yields require longer times, but this offers interesting options in view selectivity. The authors would like to thank the Gécamines Département d’Etudes Métallurgiques for providing the samples of the Kamoya polymetallic concentrate. G.N. wishes to acknowledge the BTC (Belgian Technical Cooperation) for PhD fellowship granting.