A variant of a topochemical reaction model based on the shrinking core mechanism was developed for application to leaching of high carbonate uranium ores using sodium carbonate as leachant and oxygen as oxidant. Since the ground ore was not uniform in size, particle size distribution was incorporated in the model according to the well known Gates–Gaudin–Schumann equation which best represented the size distribution of the ground ore. The model was fitted to leaching data obtained from a uranium ore from a prospective deposit at Gogi in Karnataka, India. The ore comprised pitchblende and coffinite (0.2% as U3O8) as principal uranium minerals and a high percentage of pyrite (about 5%), calcite (62%) and quartz (13%) as main gangue minerals. Partial pressure of oxygen (0.15–3atm), temperature (70–110°C), concentration of leachant (0.47–0.94g/L) and stirring speed (573–900rpm) were tested. The activation energy for dissolution of uranium was determined to be 7kcal/mol, which implies that leaching was controlled by chemical reaction. Extraction of uranium was found to be faster at partial pressures of oxygen below 1atm and decreased significantly with increasing pressure due to the increased rate of dissolution of pyrite. Energy Dispersive X-ray spectroscopy of scanning electron micrographs of the ore and leach residue has also showed high extraction of uranium and low dissolution of pyrite at <1atm partial pressure of oxygen. The dissolution rate of uranium from the ore studied was found to be much higher than that of pure UO2 under the same leaching conditions.The uranium ores currently being mined in India are mainly from medium and high tonnage deposits in Jaduguda, Bhatin, Narwapahar, Turamdih and Banduhurang in the state of Jharkhand for the two mills operating at Jaduguda and Turamdih ( Though leaching is a heterogeneous process, the kinetic models reported in literature on leaching of various minerals and ores are derived from the rate equations of both homogeneous and heterogeneous processes. Leaching of ulexite mineral in perchloric acid ( In the present study, a topochemical model for heterogeneous reactions, namely, shrinking core model incorporating particle size distribution effects is developed for leaching under agitated conditions. The model is verified with the alkaline leaching tests using Na The macroscopic chemical reaction combining both oxidation of uranium present in uraninite/pitchblende and its subsequent dissolution is given by Eq. The hydroxyl ion precipitates uranium back as Na But, sodium bicarbonate may not be required to be added if the ore contains pyrite, which generates sodium bicarbonate in situ upon reaction with sodium carbonate, as given by Eq. Autoclave batch leaching of uranium ore particles may be represented by the conventional shrinking core model, the governing equation of which depends on one or more of the controlling mechanisms: (1) film diffusion, (2) chemical reaction at the surface and (3) ash diffusion of reactants/products (  For mono-sized particles of diameter For a group of particles of various sizes divided into discrete size ranges, This equation transforms as following for a continuous distribution of particles, Eq. Popular Gates Gaudin Schumann (GGS) size distribution function is chosen for Differentiation of Eq. Substituting Eqs. Alkaline leaching experiments were conducted to verify the above kinetic model on a high carbonate pyritic uranium ore from Gogi, Karnataka, India. The ore was split as bromoform lights, methylene iodide lights and methylene iodide heavies. Minerals in each fraction were estimated under transmitted and reflected light by microscopic grain counting. Cellulose nitrate film auto-radiography was carried out on all fractions to estimate the distribution of radioactive phases. The complete mineralogical composition of the feed ore sample is given in In view of the high carbonate content of the ore, alkaline leaching is adopted. Of the two commercial alkaline leachants, Na Leaching experiments were carried out in a 5-L autoclave consisting of a cylindrical stainless steel vessel with a top lid, coupled to a motor drive with a magnetic seal. It is equipped with a two stage gas induction pitched blade turbine impeller, thermo well for thermocouple, oxygen inlet pipe, sample addition device under high temperature and pressure, cooling water coil, pressure sensor, rupture disk and a solenoid pressure relief valve. An electrical heater is wrapped outside the vessel and is covered with insulation. The heater is connected to a temperature controller to maintain a constant temperature. When the temperature rises above the set point, water is pumped from a cooling tank into the cooling coil provided inside the vessel. Each leaching experiment was conducted using 1 Particle sizes between 150  The conversion of uranium ( On a log–log plot, Eq. The conversion of uranium with time at different stirring speeds was plotted in The effect of particle size was incorporated in Eqs. Results of experiments # 1 to # 5 were plotted in Several authors have observed that the rate of dissolution of uranium mineral, present either in pure form or in ores, increased monotonously with increasing oxygen pressure, with a reaction order of 0.5 ( It is interesting to note that if one carries out leaching of Gogi ore between 0.5 In The order of leaching reaction found for each variable from the plots in In order to find The dissolution rates of uranium from Gogi ore under different temperature and pressure conditions are calculated from both experimental and calculated conversion ( Alkaline leaching kinetics of Gogi uranium ore indicate that surface chemical reaction is the rate controlling step modeled by the shrinking core model coupled with particle size distribution represented by Gates Gaudin Schumann density function. The overall equation for conversion of uranium is given by The kinetic model fit is in close agreement with the experimental data and possibly can be applied to ores with low silica, high pyrite content and mineralogy similar to Gogi uranium ore. The activation energy of 7  concentration of U particle size (μm) size of particle below which particles are fully reacted at time size of largest particle in the system (μm) feed grade (% U overall rate constant (min rate constant (μm/min) particle size parameter of the Gates Gaudin Schumann function concentration of sodium carbonate (g partial pressure of oxygen (atm) stirring speed (rpm) time (min) temperature (K) universal gas constant (0.0019 volume of leach liquor (L) dry weight of solids (g) fractional conversion of uranium at time calculated value of the fraction reacted experimental value of the fraction reacted The authors wish to thank their colleagues in chemical laboratory of Mineral Processing Division and Material Science Division of Bhabha Atomic Research Centre for delivering timely wet chemical analyses and scanning electron microanalyses respectively. They also acknowledge the services of the Petrology Laboratory of Atomic Minerals Directorate for Exploration and Research in carrying out mineralogical analyses. The authors are thankful for the valuable suggestions from two anonymous reviewers.