Potato processing generates large amounts of by-products, which include potato peels and the outer layers of flesh, which contain phenolic compounds. The purpose of this study was to establish an extraction method for phenolic compounds from industrial potato by-products by using response surface methodology (RSM). Box-Behnken design (BBD) was performed to optimize the extraction conditions of phenolic compounds considering different extraction temperature, ratios of ethanol/water, time of extraction and sample/solvent ratio. The optimum extraction conditions were obtained with ethanol/water 55/45 (v/v) by ultrasound bath during 35 min at 35 °C and 1/10 sample/solvent ratio. The best conditions were applied to determine the phenolic content in five potato by-products. The analyses by HPLC-DAD-ESI-MS showed that chlorogenic acid accounted for a 49.3–61% of the total phenolic compounds.
                  Positive Pearson correlations between HPLC data and antioxidant activity confirmed that the phenolic compounds had significant antioxidant properties.Potato is one of the most consumed foods in the world and it also has a wide place of industry. Although the potato cultivated globally belongs to just one botanical species, The global use of potatoes is moving from fresh potatoes to processed products such as fries, chips, mashed and canned potatoes ( Potato provides noteworthy portions of phenolic compounds located in the peel and the close tissues. In many studies, it is reported that potato is a good source of phenolics with an antioxidant capacity ( Some epidemiological investigations showed a negative correlation between the intake of dietary antioxidant components and diseases, such as atherosclerosis, cancers, faster aging of the body, and heart attacks ( In this two-stage study, first optimum extraction conditions were determined for the All the reagents were purchased from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). All the analytical standards were supplied by Sigma-Aldrich (Saint Louis, MO, USA). The samples were supplied by Pizzoli SpA in January 2016. All samples were harvested in Corticella (BO, Italy, 44°32′55.42″N 11°21′17.54″E) in the same field. Potato by-products were obtained from 5 potato varieties ( Box-Behnken design (BBD) was chosen to determine the extraction parameters for phenolic compounds from potato peels due to its advantages ( The evaluation of the predicted model, by response surface methodology (RSM), was done adjusting the response variable to a second-order polynomial model equation (Eq. To test the predicted model on the response variable, an analysis of variance (ANOVA) with 95% confidence level was performed to evaluate the effect of each factor. Besides, the regression coefficient (R Powdered potato by-products were extracted according to the optimal data obtained by the experimental design. Briefly, potato peels were extracted using ethanol/water 55/45 (v/v) by ultrasound bath during 35 min at 35 °C and with a solid/solvent ratio of 10% (3 g of samples and 30 ml of ethanol/water 55/45 (v/v)). Ultrasound bath was Starsonic 90 Liarre (Bologna, Italy) equipment with frequency 34 kHz, output power (W) 190RMS, dimensions (H × W × D) 345 × 315 × 246 cm. HPLC-DAD-ESI-MS was used to determine the phenolic compounds in the extracts according to The analyses were performed on a liquid chromatography apparatus HP 1100 (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA, USA) including a degasser, a binary pump delivery system and an automatic liquid sampler, and coupled with diode array and mass spectrometer (single quadrupole) detectors. The HPLC column was a Poroshell 120 EC-C18 (100 mm × 3.0 mm, 2.7 µm). Separations were carried out using the gradient elution used by The injection volume was 2.5 µL; UV–vis spectra were recorded from 210 to 600 nm, while the chromatograms were registered at 280 and 330 nm. Separation was carried out at 25 °C. The MS analyses were carried out in full scan mode (range Antioxidant capacity of the samples and the extracts obtained during the experiments was evaluated by two different antioxidant assays. The radical scavenging activity of the extracts was assayed measuring the reduction power against DPPH radical at 517 nm as reported by several authors ( Hydrogen-donating antioxidant activity was measured as previously described by The results reported are the averages of three extraction replications. One-way ANOVA (analysis of variance) together with Fisher’s least significance difference (LSD) test and Pearson correlations were used for statistical analyses (Statistica 7.0 software, 2002, StatSoft, Tulsa, OK, USA). Before optimizing the extraction method by Box-Behnken-RSM methodology, an ethanolic extract was prepared as reported by The extracts obtained from potato by-products were analysed by HPLC-DAD-ESI-MS and eleven phenolic compounds were detected with respect to their UV and mass spectra data ( Three compounds with The compound at These data were used to quantify the phenolic compounds in the extracts in order to establish the RSM methodology. The optimization of the extraction by ultrasound assisted extraction (UAE) of phenolic compounds from potato by-products was carried out by a BBD. Moreover, the RSM approach was used to find out the combined effect between the factors (ethanol/water ratio (% (v/v)) (Χ The experimental values varied from 0.21 to 6.09 mg/g d.w. ( The mathematical analysis of the model was accomplished with Statistica 7.0 (2002, StatSoft, Tulsa, OK), which uses an approach called least squares method (LSM), a regression model that provides the lowest residual value ( Furthermore, analysis of variance (ANOVA), only for the significant terms ( RSM methodology consisted of the evaluation of the combined effect of several factors in the response of the variable to maximize. For that, it is necessary to find out the optimal conditions which are usually given by the software. Thus, three dimensional response surface plots ( Briefly, as it could be seen in Regarding Considering these results, optimal conditions were selected as follows: 55% (v/v) ethanol/water ratio (Χ  The value obtained with the present optimized method was compared with the amounts of phenolic compounds obtained by The potato by-product samples were extracted using the method established by RSM as previously described. The other caffeoylquinic isomers (1-CQA and 4-CQA) accounted for 12.2 and 36.3% of the total phenolic compounds and, in agreement with previous data ( Finally, feruloyl derivatives were also described in the analysed samples; they accounted for 4.2–5.9% of the total phenolic compounds and their content is comparable with those obtained by The relationship among antioxidant activity (evaluated by DPPH and ABTS) and the phenolic content was explored using the Pearson correlation coefficient. Positive correlations were detected between antioxidant activity by DPPH and phenolic content (r = 0.9248; p < 0.001) and, ABTS and phenolic content (r = 0.9489; p < 0.001). Other researchers ( When individual phenolic compounds were evaluated, several positive correlations between single phenolic compounds and DPPH or ABTS assays were observed ( Box-Behnken design was a valuable tool to determine the best extraction conditions of phenolic compounds from potato by-products. The Response Surface Methodology (RSM) study indicated the highest recovery of phenolic compounds when the following conditions were used: 55% of aqueous ethanol, temperature of the ultrasonic bath at 35 °C, 35 min of extraction time and a sample/solvent ratio of 1/10 (w/v). These conditions were used to determine the phenolic contents in five potato by-products obtained from an industrial plant after potato processing. The presence of valuable amounts of chlorogenic acid and other caffeoylquinic derivatives suggested that potato by-products could be a good and cheap raw material (cheaper than green coffee), and they could be used to obtain caffeoylquinic derivatives enriched extracts. However, further investigations are required in order to establish the best recovery process to produce phenolic enriched extracts without the presence of unhealthy compounds normally present in this matrix ( Vito Verardo thanks the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness (MINECO) for “Ramon y Cajal” contract. The authors declare no conflict of interest. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: