Present studies deals with the application of supported liquid membrane (SLM) technique for the separation of uranium (VI) from phosphoric acid medium. Tri-n-octyl phosphine oxide (TOPO)/n-dodecane is used as a carrier and ammonium carbonate as a receiving phase for the separation of uranium (VI) from the phosphoric acid medium. Throughout the study PTFE membranes are used as a support. The studies involve the investigation of process controlling parameters like feed acidity of phosphoric acid, carrier concentration and stripping agents. The effect of nitric acid and sodium nitrate in feed is also studied. It is found that there is negligible transport of uranium (VI) from pure phosphoric acid medium but it increases to very significant amount if 2 M nitric acid is added to feed phase. More than 90% uranium (VI) is recovered in 360 min using 0.5 M TOPO/n-dodecane as carrier and 1.89 M ammonium carbonate as stripping phase from the mixture of 0.001 M H3PO4 and 2 M of HNO3 as a feed. The flux and permeability coefficient are found to be 9.21×10−6 mol/m2 s and 18.26×10−5 m/s, respectively. Lower concentration of phosphoric acid with 2 M HNO3 and higher concentration of carrier is found to be the most suitable condition for maximum transport of uranium (VI) from its low-level sources like commercial phosphoric acid.The nuclear power has an important short-term and long-term role in the present energy scenario in the world ( Hence there is considerable interest on the development of a suitable separation scheme for the removal of uranium from phosphoric acid medium. The separation of an element or compound containing the element of interest may take effect using different separation techniques like solvent extraction, ion exchange, precipitation etc. ( Supported liquid membrane (SLM) technique is very significant because of its potential application for industrial-scale separation and enrichment of metal salt species ( All the reagents used are of analytical grade. Weighed amounts of UO Details of glass SLM transport cell is described elsewhere ( Throughout this study, flat-sheet type PTFE (poly-tetra-fluoro-ethylene) hydrophobic microporous polymeric membranes are used. The porosity of the membrane is about 84%. The membrane had an average pore diameter and thickness of 0.45 and 160 μm, respectively. Filling the pores of these dry support polymers with the carrier solution is accomplished by immersing the membrane in the organic phase for at least 6–8 h before use. The pores are immediately and apparently quantitatively filled with the carrier solution by capillary action. This type of SLM polymeric support eliminates the transport of water through the membrane and is free from osmotic effects. The U (VI)–TOPO complex can diffuse across the membrane supported through the microporous structure. The concentration of uranium (VI) solution used in the present study is deliberately kept very dilute. The organic membrane phase is prepared by dissolving a weighed amount of TOPO (Fluka) in dodecane (Aldrich) to provide carrier solutions of varying concentrations which are subsequently equilibrated with acid solutions of the desired molarity before use. Various membrane experiments give the permeation results reproducible to approximately ± The flux is defined as the rate of mass transport of the solute through the SLM, and it is the criteria often used to evaluate a SLM. According to the Flick's first law of diffusion, the rate of diffusion (d Permeability coefficient is calculated using Eq. 15 mL of U (VI) std prepared in 0.5 M phosphoric acid is taken in a separating funnel. 1 mL of The transport of uranyl ions across TOPO /dodecane membrane is strongly dependent upon the nature of a strippant present on the recovery phase of the membrane. Hence detailed solvent extraction experiments are carried out to select the most suitable strippant. It is apparent that out of several aqueous strippants such as HNO Single-ion transport of uranium (VI) across TOPO/ Single ion transport of uranium (VI) across TOPO/ Only 12% uranium (VI) could be transported while using the 3.5 M phosphoric acid. The permeation coefficients and average flux are found to be 18.26 This is partly in agreement with the expected trend since the flux of a cation varies with H And, hence, there would be an increase in permeability with increase in proton or nitric acid concentration. The increase in phosphoric acid concentration requires more and more H Composition of the organic solution has a marked effect on a cation flux. When transport across a membrane occurs via a carrier, as in facilitated transport, the flux is generally expected to increase with increasing carrier concentration. The effect of TOPO/ Generally an increase in carrier concentration produces an increase in cation flux; however, the concurrent increase in viscosity results in a steady decrease in the diffusivity of the carrier as well as of the metal–carrier complex. Eventually the cation flux will increase as the carrier concentration is increased, as observed in the present study ( The difference in permeability between experiments with varying feed acidity, carrier concentration and uranium molarity can be understood by considering the probable expression for the rate of formation of the diffusing species at the feed interface: It is important to note that the trend for transport of uranyl ions through the liquid membrane is nearly alike as that encountered with this cation in liquid–liquid extraction system ( The transport of uranium (VI) by TOPO/ The authors wish to thanks Sri S.D. Misra, Director, Nuclear recycle group, Bhabha Atomic Research centre, Mumbai for his keen interest to carry out this work and for his constant encouragement during the entire work.