Understanding of the metallurgical behaviour of indium is dependent on an accurate appraisal of the mineralogical site of the element in a given ore or concentrate. The dominant indium-bearing mineral in (Pb)–Zn ores and concentrates is sphalerite. Indium is substituted within the crystal lattice of sphalerite via the coupled substitution 2Zn2+
                     ↔Cu+
                     +In3+, typically at concentrations ranging from <1ppm up to several wt.%. Chalcopyrite may play a subordinate role as an indium-carrier, but is only important when there is little sphalerite present. Discrete indium-minerals such as roquesite (CuInS2) or laforêtite (AgInS2) are generally only minor phases, except in indium-bearing ores with extremely low Zn content. Minor amounts of indium may also be incorporated into other phases such as stannite or stannoidite, but these minerals are likely to play a negligible role in the overall mineralogical balance for indium.Due to increased demand for its usefulness in a number of high-technology applications, indium has attracted considerable attention in recent years (e.g., Indium forms a small number of independent indium-bearing minerals. The most abundant of these is roquesite (CuInS There is a voluminous literature on the capacity of both natural and synthetic sphalerite to contain and concentrate indium, and the vast majority of indium is currently produced as a by-product of the zinc mining industry. Indium occurs directly within the crystal lattice of sphalerite ( In mines that exploit Zn–(Pb) ores, there is thus considerable economic interest in by-product indium if the concentrations in sphalerite are sufficiently high, even if the bulk of current indium production is from the refining of zinc concentrates in which the indium content is rather low. Our recent conspectus of indium concentrations in sphalerite from various types of deposits worldwide ( In the LA-ICP-MS studies ( The other mineral that can carry significant indium in base metal ores is chalcopyrite (e.g., Other indium-carriers include stannite, ferrokësterite and stannoidite and possibly tetrahedrite–tennantite ( It is well known that the presence of trace and minor elements can significantly influence the dissolution behaviour of a mineral. In the case of sphalerite (e.g.,  The influence which significant concentrations of indium will have on sphalerite behaviour is much less well constrained, but the few studies available (e.g.,   Ultimately, the leaching behaviour of indium-bearing sphalerite is of direct interest to the geological community as much as it is to metallurgists, since it may supply additional information on the incorporation of indium in the structure and the mechanisms by which this is achieved – and thus controls on its distribution in ore deposits. A pre-requisite of any hydrometallurgical study is, however, a comprehensive knowledge of the mineralogy of the ore studied (e.g., at Neves Corvo; We thank David Muir, co-Editor of