In a single-bandgap solar cell, efficiency is limited by the inability to efficiently convert the broad range of energy that photons possess in the solar spectrum. One of the effective ways of enhancing the efficiency of solar cells is to split the broad solar spectrum into smaller energy ranges and to utilize each range with a photovoltaic (PV) cell of the appropriately tuned bandgap. The conventional approach to implementing this idea is to use stacks of PV cells sequentially placed in the order of increasing bandgap energy, with the highest bandgap cell at the top. Lateral spectrum splitting can avoid many of the disadvantages of this conventional approach. We demonstrate that spectrum splitting with a prism and a lens can achieve enhanced efficiency with a combination of GaAs and c-Si solar cells.Power-conversion-efficiency enhancement of photovoltaic devices is an important topic of research for the photovoltaics community. In a typical single junction photovoltaic cell with a given bandgap, there are two significant loss mechanisms that reduce the conversion efficiency. Photons with energy smaller than the bandgap will be transmitted without converting to electrons In contrast to the series arrangement, an alternative option is lateral spectral splitting in which the solar cells are assembled in parallel, electrically and optically Spectral splitting can be achieved through various approaches such as diffraction, interference-based filtering A spectral-splitting setup was assembled using a dispersive equilateral prism, a cylindrical lens, light source, and solar cells mounted on a scanning stage as illustrated in The spatial-spectral distributions in the image plane were measured by an Ocean Optics SD 2000 spectrophotometer, which was mounted on the scanning stage. The intensity-wavelength data was recorded by an OOI Base 32 software using scope mode. A Cole-Parmer fiber optics illuminator was used as the light source. The lamp delivers a total power density of 0.016 W/cm  Power conversion efficiency (η) for each cell was calculated as the ratio of the maximum power calculated from the current-voltage measurements to the total incident power. Furthermore, the relative efficiency plots ( As expected, these results correlate with the lateral separation of the peak open-circuit voltages for both cells as shown in In order to evaluate performance in real life scenarios, some experiments were also conducted in actual sunlight. The spectral splitting assembly and PV cell, in this case, was fully covered using an opaque wooden frame so that any light from other sources (or direct light) into the cell can be minimized. We have chosen the spectrum segment that was responsible for highest efficiency. It can be seen that the electrical performance without splitting was much higher than with splitting arrangement (see These results clearly indicate the feasibility of enhanced efficiency when a combination of laterally separated cells is illuminated with a split-spectrum. Although various commercially available monochromators such as Czerny-Turner monochromator or the Fastie-Ebert monochromator produce light of narrow wavelength, the present design is significantly simpler and cost effective. Our results indicate that a prism and a lens can effectively separate white light into bands that can then be efficiently converted by laterally separated GaAs and c-Si solar cells. The concept can also be examined to evaluate the performance of other types of solar cells of similar bandgaps including copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS) A prism-cylindrical lens combination was used for spectral splitting of white light. This combination can be useful for the subdivision of the broad solar spectrum into multiple energy ranges and utilization of each range with a photovoltaic cell of an appropriate bandgap. To validate this concept, the characterization of GaAs and monocrystalline Si solar cell was conducted under split-spectrum illumination. These solar cells were mounted in a moving stage and efficiency of cells was recorded for each small segment of spectrum. Results suggest that the energy-conversion efficiency of both solar cells may be enhanced up to 10% under appropriate illumination conditions. With a more judicious choice of materials (bandgaps) it is possible to get an even higher enhancement in efficiency. The experimental approach outlined in this work can be used to help design the optimum parallel solar cell configurations consisting of cells with different band gaps. The authors would like to thank Dr. R Menon and Ye Zhang for valuable guidance and external quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements, respectively.