This paper involves integration of a mineral carbonation process developed at Åbo Akademi University with an industrial lime kiln. Optimization of energy integration and flue gas compression is studied by means of exergy analysis. In addition technical challenges of process scale-up from laboratory to pilot scale are discussed. Aspen Plus was used to model the process. The intended pilot scale is to process 620 kg/h lime kiln gas which is almost two orders of magnitude more than processed at laboratory scale. Process integration brings significant improvements to energy economy compared to earlier studies as here also a flue gas compression strategy is addressed and CO2 pre-separation is avoided. The utilization of 500 °C waste heat from the lime kiln leads to exergy demand per ton CO2 sequestered for heat and power of 2595 MJ and 885 MJ, respectively, processing 550 kg rock/h and sequestering 187 kg CO2/h. With the heat and power requirement equivalent to a production of 9 kg CO2/h, this gives a net sequestration of 178 kg CO2/h. The calculations were made for serpentinite rock from a nickel mine in Hitura, Finland, assuming a 90% conversion of Mg from rock to Mg(OH)2 and a 90% carbonation conversion of this.CCUS (carbon capture, utilization and storage) processes are being developed in different laboratories, however, they need to be considered for industrial applications, and therefore it is necessary to investigate the scale-up and integration of the processes with industrial CO This paper addresses the integration of a carbon dioxide mineral carbonation process with an industrial CO Besides process energy efficiency optimization (using exergy analysis) some of the challenges are the corrosive nature of fluids, the risk of salt build-up and scaling, inlet flue gas composition, high pressure and temperatures in some of the process steps, high solids content in liquids and finally the size of the pilot plant. If these issues cannot be resolved using standard industrial approaches and equipment then special materials and equipment will be needed for several of the process steps, adding considerable costs to this CCUS (carbon capture, utilization and storage) process. The mineral carbonation process considered in this paper is the one under development in Finland at Åbo Akademi University (ÅA) The serpentinite rock reacts with AS (ammonium sulfate) and water at 450 °C and atmospheric pressure in order to produce The production of lime is a CO Challenges with the mineral carbonation process are the need to operate the process with two high temperature reactors, not to mention the need for a high percentage of ammonium salt recovery. Exergy analysis is used for process energy and chemicals use efficiency and for the flue gas compression strategy optimization. From this, the industrial feasibility of the studied process in its current layout can be evaluated, and parts may have to be modified. This paper can be seen as a continuation of a paper by Romão et al. Exergy analysis was chosen as the tool for optimizing the energy integration of the mineral carbonation process. By doing an exergy analysis, which is based on Second Law of Thermodynamics, it is possible to calculate the amount of useful work or maximum power that can be produced from a given energy form The mineral carbonation process has been discussed in several publications  The simulated Aspen Plus The material streams entering and exiting the mineral carbonation process are given in The cooling water has a low exergy due to it being pressurized. The hot flue gas and the power used to drive the compressors are the only relevant sources of exergy to drive the process. As can be seen in By utilizing waste heat generated inside the CO The power consumption by pumps and fans for the transport of the materials or pressure loss in the equipment and pipes has not been considered; these are expected to be small to the overall process energy picture. A lot of heat is required for several steps in the mineral carbonation process. The main consumers of heat are the extraction of Mg(OH) The extraction process and the pre-heating before the carbonator require high temperatures and therefore require high temperature heat to satisfy the energy requirements. Hot flue gas at 500 °C (stream 3 in One source of high temperature heat not fully optimized in this study is the hot gas exiting the extraction reactor. The gas is mainly NH After providing heat to the process steps that require lower temperatures there is still a lot of hot water and steam at 100 °C left. These can be used to produce hot water for distribution as district heat with a capacity of 0.8 MW. Before the solids exiting the extraction reactor are dissolved in water they are first cooled in two heat exchangers in series. The first uses hot water from the compressor cooling system while the second uses fresh cooling water, cooling the solids from 440 °C to 130 °C and then finally to 80 °C. The solids are cooled to 80 °C as MgSO Magnesium hydroxide is precipitated from MgSO The solution from the dissolution tank is cooled to 30 °C before it enters the precipitation stages where ammonia (released during the solid/solid extraction) is added. The precipitated solids from the first precipitation step are removed from the process (the use of the iron oxide by-product for iron/steelmaking is the subject of a parallel study). As for the dissolution tank, the temperature of the process is too low for heat recovery. In the second precipitation tank the Mg(OH) During the compression the flue gas heats up. This heat is removed from the compressed flue gas in intercoolers cooled with water. This cooling water is further heated by other hot units that need cooling and is used to heat process steps that require lower temperatures. The flue gas to be treated needs to be cooled before compression. This cooling is achieved by first using it to pre-heat compressed flue gas (HX-1) after which it is used to pre-heat the Mg(OH) The cooling causes most of the water vapor (95%) in the gas to condense. The condensed water is separated from the gas before it enters the first compression stage. Between the compression stages the gas is re-cooled to 40 °C while condensate is separated from the gas stream. The power requirement for the respective compression stages decreases slightly as the mass of gas decreases due to the water condensing in the heat exchangers. The compression ratio in the final compression step is higher than in the other steps. A higher compression ratio was selected as by that stage almost all of the water is condensed and it was also selected to raise the temperature of the gas before it enters the pre-heating heat exchangers prior to the carbonator. The final compression ratios used in the simulation is 2:2:2:2:5, respectively, for the five compression steps. More detail on selection and optimization of the compression/expansion section is given elsewhere In two pre-heating heat exchangers the compressed flue gas is first heated to 473 °C (HX-1) and then to 500 °C (HX-3) with the CO The carbonation reaction in the fluidized bed reactor is exothermic and the reactor needs to be cooled to maintain the desired 515 °C reaction temperature. The solid and gaseous products are separated after exiting the reactor, most likely with the use of a cyclone. After preheating the compressed flue gas, the CO Heat of the solid magnesium carbonate and unreacted magnesium hydroxide (stream 20) exiting the carbonation reactor is recovered by using it to heat water. As noted above, the degree of carbonation is assumed to be 90%. As can be seen in  The hot water entering module C is only a heat carrier and exits at a lower temperature as medium hot water. Water in the AS solution is evaporated, the AS and evaporated water are recovered separately. The two biggest exergy streams exiting module D are in the solid product and as power from the expansion turbines, as can be seen in The destruction of exergy is clearly visible in Finally it is possible to calculate the overall exergy demand per ton CO A five-stage compression process with intercooling was selected for this study as it has a low power requirement compared to compression with fewer steps and a lower exergy loss Compressors and expansion turbines with an efficiency (polytrophic/isentropic) of 72% and a mechanical efficiency of 80%, pressurized-water cooled counter-current heat exchangers and a heating unit were selected and used to calculate the loss of exergy in the system. The exergy was calculated separately for each stream and the effect the different units has on the exergy of the streams was assessed. See The exergy of the streams was calculated from the stream data given by Aspen Plus and normalized with data for similar streams at ambient conditions (1 bar and 15 °C). As can be seen in As it can be seen in  The heat-generating carbonation reactor will provide for some of the heat needed to pre-heat the gas after compression to the carbonation reactor temperature. In this study only physical exergy for the gas and cooling water is considered and the exergy of the solids exiting the reactor are assumed to be the same as for the solids entering the reactor. Heat from the carbonation reactor will be used to pre-heat the gas. Some of the exergy added to the flue gas, after its compression, before the entering the carbonator can be recovered with expansion turbines. The preferable option for using the power from the expansion turbines is to have one or more of the compression stages connected on the same axis as the turbines. There are several properties, such as density, viscosity and solid fraction of the liquids and slurries, that must be determined before the equipment such as pumps, tanks and filters can be properly selected. For the bulk solids and the particles in the process it is also important to determine size, shape and hardness. Once the optimum conditions are known these must be found from laboratory scale tests. One of the main challenges will be the design of the serpentinite/ammonium sulfate (AS) reactor for the extraction of Mg from Mg-silicate-based rock. In the first part of the extraction reactor the ammonium sulfate is mixed with the serpentinite and heated up to ∼400–440 °C. The gases released during the reaction are to be recovered for use in later stages of the process. The serpentinite conversion reaction is endothermic and requires an external source of heat. Here, hot flue gas taken from the lime kiln can be used as this heat source. The flue gas cannot be in direct contact with the solids, however, as this would interfere with the conversion reactions. When the reaction gas leaves the serpentinite/AS reactor it has a temperature of ∼400 °C. Recovering the thermal energy in the gas is difficult because of its composition. When the gas reaches 420 °C its components may start to react and form solid ammonium sulfate (AS) according to an HSC Chemistry simulation After a first dissolution tank for removing unreacted rock and insoluble products like silica, the precipitation in two sequential precipitation tanks is based on the change of solubility with pH. The tanks work in series: iron oxyhydroxide is precipitated in the first tank at a pH of ∼8–9 and magnesium hydroxide in the second tank at pH ∼10–12. Process control is important to ensure that the resulting particles are of a suitable particle size distribution and quality (i.e. specific surface) for the carbonation as studied by Fagerlund The process requires that solid particles are removed from aqueous streams at several stages. To reduce the loss of solution it is important that the solid cake formed in the filter is as dry as possible, e.g. by using heated press filters. Lime kiln flue gas used for heating purposes has to be taken from the end of the kiln in order for it to be hot enough The construction of the pressurized fluidized bed reactor may be challenging as during normal operation the reactor needs to be able to withstand a total pressure of 80 bar and a temperature of 500 °C. The intended 620 kg/h lime kiln gas is about 70 times the scale used in the laboratory at ÅA so far. This means that the pilot scale fluidized bed reactor would have an inner diameter of about 10 cm for the first level of scale-up considered in this paper, compared to the 1.6 cm lab scale reactor used in the lab The intended pilot scale is still very small when compared to an industrial scale mineral carbonation process at a lime kiln plant that processes all flue gases. This is problematic as equipment designed for laboratory use is too small while industrial sized equipment is typically too large. In this regard the biggest problem is the flue gas compressor: compressed flue gas will be stored in an intermediate tank that will continuously feed the carbonator. The pressure in the tank will drop below a set target thus the compressor will be run periodically at nominal capacity. In the process described by Romão et al. Integrating the mineral carbonation process with an industrial lime kiln and utilizing waste heat generated in the process facilitate a significant reduction of the external exergy requirement. Compared to the exergy requirement reported earlier the need for hot flue gas to drive the process is reduced by slightly over 30%. This is a significant reduction. The integrated process utilizing waste heat has an exergy demand per ton CO As the Mg(OH) Technical challenges in the design of a small industrial scale demonstration installation arise when evaluating the carbon dioxide storage by mineralization process being developed at ÅA. Some can be solved by slightly modifying existing process equipment while others require custom-made equipment or alterations to the proposed process. One major challenge is the relatively small scale of the test installation as it is too small to utilize standard industrial process equipment. The use of intermediate storage tanks and pressure vessels may overcome this challenge at the expense of energy and cost efficiency. The exergy and energy balances for the mineral carbonation process should be studied for varying ambient conditions. Variations in the ambient temperature (−30 to 30 °C) during different seasons can have an impact on the process. During winter with low ambient temperatures more heat will be needed to heat up the rock and ammonium sulfate while less cooling water will be needed due to the lower temperature of cooling water. This might have a clear impact on the exergy use and energy efficiency for the system. The authors want to acknowledge the