The mechanical properties of the Ti-6Al-4V alloy are significantly determined by the process used for manufacture. In this study, the mechanical properties of the Ti-6Al-4V alloy manufactured using cold rolling, asymmetric rolling and asymmetric cryorolling were characterized by subjecting it to the tensile test and the microhardness test. The evolution in the microstructure was studied using scanning electron microscopy, transmission electron microscopy as well as energy dispersive X-ray spectrometry. Results show that the Ti-6Al-4V alloy sheets subjected to asymmetrical cryorolling with low rolling speed ratio between the upper and lower rolls have the highest tensile strength and microhardness. The tensile stress of the alloy samples after cold rolling was found to be 1008MPa, 1046MPa after asymmetric rolling, and 1113MPa after asymmetric cryorolling. The highest Vickers hardness (HV395) is achieved by asymmetric cryorolling. We discuss the mechanical behavior using the criteria of grain size, size of second phase as well as dislocation density.Titanium (Ti) alloys have attracted ever-increasing attention due to their suitability for military, aircraft, spacecraft and medical device applications. The Ti-6Al-4V alloy is one of the most utilized Ti alloys, accounting for more than 50% of total titanium usage. Ti-6Al-4V is the biomaterial of choice for many load bearing surgical implants, for it combines good biocompatibility with excellent mechanical strength and corrosion resistance In recent years, studies have shown that grain size refinement of the Ti-6Al-4V alloy results in greatly improving in mechanical properties. Li et al. Asymmetric rolling is a special rolling technique in which shear deformation occurs in the rolling deformation zone Ti-6Al-4V is an (α+β) dual-phase alloy whose microstructure is sensitive to the processing conditions Ti-6Al-4V alloy sheets were studied in this investigation. The length, width and thickness of sheets were 250 After rolling, the Ti-6Al-4V sheets were machined with parallel width 6 The fracture surfaces of tensile test samples were analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The focus iron beam (FIB) technique was used to prepare transmission electron microscopy (TEM) samples to study the cross sections in the rolling direction and across the thickness. The microstructures of the rolled samples were analyzed by TEM with the energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) system. The distribution of elements of the rolled samples was mapped by EDS. A GBC MMA X-ray diffractometer (XRD) with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418     In According to the Hall-Patch equation, the yield stress of metals increases with finer grain size  A higher dislocation density in metals is usually associated with higher strength The following two equations describe the dislocation density evolution rates in the cell interiors ( Here Shi et al.  Ti-6Al-4V alloy sheets were manufactured using cold rolling, asymmetric rolling and asymmetric cryorolling. The alloy fabricated using asymmetric cryorolling shows the highest strength and microhardness compared with the other two processing techniques. EDS mapping results clearly show that cold rolling, asymmetrical rolling and asymmetric cryorolling lead to a shrinking of the V element-rich regions (i.e. the β-Ti phase). The mean thicknesses of V element-rich regions were seen to be 333.3 Smaller grain size, smaller size of the second phase and higher dislocation density may contribute to an improvement in the mechanical properties of the Ti-6Al-4V alloy subjected to the asymmetric cryorolling. This research was supported by