During grinding, in cascading mills, the mass distribution of the material moves continuously to finer sizes. Grinding models are usually designed to predict the size distribution of the mill products either as a function of effective breakage events and the time or the energy consumed by the mill. Mill products are always tested for their size analysis and their fineness is usually expressed as the size d through which a certain amount of material passes, i.e. d
                     80. However, particulate materials have some supplementary properties that a grinding model should predict as well. The specific surface area is such an important supplementary property. Initially, the present work examines the relationship between mass distribution and the surface area of ground materials and determines the conditions under which, mass distribution can be used to determine the surface area. Based on these findings the work further examines the operating conditions of a cascading mill under which the surface area of the material increases at the highest rate. The operating parameter examined is the mill load ratio expressed as the mass ratio of mill grinding media and the material present in the mill.Grinding models are usually designed to predict the size distribution of the mill products either as a function of effective breakage events, the time or the energy consumed by the mill. They also take into consideration the size distribution of the mill feed. The models are tested against experimental data and are approved if the agreement is acceptable. The test is always based on the size analysis of the mill products. This analysis gives the mass distribution of the material at predetermined size classes and the criterion is the correlation between experimental and theoretical data. However, particulate materials have some supplementary properties that a reliable model should predict as well. An important supplementary property of particulate materials is their surface area, usually expressed as the specific surface area. Almost all grinding models fail to predict the specific surface area of the mill products, especially at intensive grinding conditions, when the products are much finer than the feed. An attempt to relate the surface area of a material to the energy consumed is described by The specific surface area of particulate materials is usually calculated either by measurements of nitrogen adsorption, using the BET method, or by the size analysis of the material, using screens or the laser scattering method. For non porous materials both methods should give comparative results but for materials with open pores the BET method gives a much larger surface area than the one corresponding to the size analysis. If one is interested to relate the size analysis to the specific surface area of a particulate material then the latter must be calculated from the size analysis. In this case the results represent the external surface area, regardless of any existing pores. Almost all the grinding models assume that in any mill product there exist particles down to zero size and as grinding proceeds the mass of the material in the The present work explains the reason of such a discrepancy and determines the conditions under which the size analysis of a material can be used to determine its surface area. After this, it treats grinding as a surface area creating process and examines the effect of mill load on the surface creation efficiency of the mill. The results obtained conform to the theory of energy distribution in comminution, The size analysis actually gives the cumulative mass fraction The total mass of the material is Τhe cumulative mass fraction Τhe external surface area The surface area d The total surface area The overall specific surface area Depending on the function In many cases for For For For For For most comminution products In practice the methods used to measure the size analysis give the mass fraction Δ After this the mass fraction of the material finer than size The average size Taking into consideration Eqs. Eq. The material used is hand selected quartz from Assyros, Macedonia, Northern Greece, crushed to −0.85 During each test the mill was stopped at The energy The mill power is supposed to be the one used for the breaking action and does not include the transmission and friction losses. It is a function of the mechanical design, the rotation speed and the load of balls or rods in the mill. For laboratory cascading mills the net power can be calculated by the following formula, The mass specific energy Some results for surface areas, calculated both by the size analysis and at the same time by the BET nitrogen adsorption method, are compared in The calculation of the specific surface area from the size analysis, obtained by the laser method, assumes that particles are spherical and the specific surface area of each size class is given by Eq. The parameter The lower particle size given by the laser beam analyzer is about 0.06 The results of the size analysis obtained for the case of 1.5 The corresponding distribution of the surface area of the material in the mill versus the size is presented in The variation of the specific surface area, versus energy input, is presented in The specific surface area (m All three curves of  It appears that as grinding proceeds, at the lower feed ratio, the specific surface area of the material is higher for the same specific energy input. In other words, although the total surface in the mill is lower at low feed ratios, however, it exists in a state of higher specific area. Generally speaking the value of a powder is higher when its specific surface area is high and one could use the value of the specific surface area as an index of its quality. Accordingly one can attribute a cost index (money per kg) to the potential specific energy. In doing so, one can plot the cost of a material (potential specific energy, kJ/kg) versus its quality (specific surface area, m For low quality materials (low specific surface areas) it is better to have a high feed ratio in order to increase the production rate. However if high specific area products are required there is a substantial benefit in running the mill at low feed ratio (less material in the mill for the same grinding media). It is well known that the higher the specific surface area of a product, the finer its particle size. The particle size of a particulate material is usually expressed by a size modulus below which a predetermined fraction of the material passes. It is customary to use the According to the distribution theory of comminution, The corresponding values for The parameter The efficiency is defined as the ratio of energy used to create new surfaces to the total energy input. The parameters of This equation produces a straight line, in a log–log diagram of This type of relationship between specific energy and material size is found in the case of previous theories like those of As it appear, from the above analysis, the surface area of a particulate material can be calculated from its size analysis only under the condition that there is no material below a certain lower size. The fact that the measurements of the specific surface areas by the BET process give defined values supports this condition. It appears that this lower size is close to the detection limits of the laser beam size analyzer. It also appears that BET is not reliable for relatively coarse materials that have specific surface areas below 0.6 In the present case the parameter studied is the feed ratio defined as the mass ratio of the material present in the mill to that of the grinding media. It is understood that a low feed ratio represents a more intensive energy operating condition per unit mass of the material. The total surface area production rate in m It appears that there is a lower size limit of particles that can be produced from the specific grinding technique used and this is also supported by the work of Even more the production cost kJ/kg increases rapidly as the required specific area m The results obtained are in agreement with the energy distribution theory of comminution and suggest that the surface equivalent size modulus