Macroporous S/DVB copolymer containing N,N-dichlorosulfonamide groups was used for removal of thiocyanate ions from aqueous solutions. This copolymer contains active chlorine in functional groups (8.2 meq Cl∗/g) and oxidises thiocyanates to considerably less toxic products (such as sulphate, cyanate, carbonate and ammonium ions). The resin was employed in static and dynamic conditions and thiocyanate solutions containing 116 or 560 ppm SCN− were treated. The effects of various parameters on the rates of reaction have been studied. The proposed method is particularly advantageous for treating highly diluted solutions. Using this redox copolymer, it was possible to reduce thiocyanate concentration in solutions below 0.5 mg SCN−/dm3. The oxidation capacity of the resin was found to be nearly 60 mg SCN−/g. The resin was especially efficient for removal of SCN− ions from neutral and weakly acidic solutions, whereas in alkaline media it lost a part of its oxidising properties as a result of escape of active chlorine. Reactivation of the stripped resin was performed in a one-step treatment by an acidified solution of sodium chlorate(I). The regenerated copolymer can be reused in the next cycle.Thiocyanates are highly harmful compounds. They are extremely undesirable in surface and municipal waters. The admissible level in first purity class water is very low, i.e., 0.02 mg SCN For the removal of thiocyanate ions from waste solutions, oxidation processes are mostly employed. The traditional oxidation procedures are performed by low molecular oxidising agents (such as chlorine, peroxide compounds and air oxygen) but, in practice, they do not achieve the removal of these undesirable contaminants to levels regarded as safe for disposal. They are useful for concentrated thiocyanate solutions rather than for trace quantities. Specific difficulties occur in the case when dilute solutions are treated — slow reaction rate, disadvantageous reaction equilibrium, possibility of secondary pollution in case of exceeding the permissible dose of the oxidising agent. To overcome the above problems, a new method of rapid and complete removal of thiocyanates useful especially for dilute solutions treatment was tested. This method focuses on using a redox copolymer — A reaction similar to The primary products — cyanate ions formed according to To prepare the DCSR the following procedure was applied: The product, DCSR contained 2.05 mmol/g –SO Potassium thiocyanate GR (E. Merck) served for the preparation of aqueous thiocyanate solutions used for testing. These solutions contained potassium thiocyanate alone or in mixture with sodium hydroxide or sulphuric acid in different concentrations: solutions used in experiments carried out in static regime were: 0.01 M KSCN (i.e., 580 mg SCN solutions used in experiments carried out in dynamic regime were: 0.002 M KSCN (i.e., 116 mg SCN The thiocyanate ions concentration was determined by: (a) a colorimetric method (Spekol, C. Zeiss, 453 nm) using its complex with ferric ion; the method was found to be sensitive down to 0.5 mg SCN Experiments on the decomposition of thiocyanate ions by DCSR were carried out at room temperature, batchwise and in a flow system. In preliminary investigations carried out in a static regime, 0.5 g of DCSR was added to 0.01 M thiocyanate solution (25, 50 or 100 cm For the experiments carried out in the dynamic regime, DCSR (29.3 g in dry state, approx. 50 cm Initially, the maximum oxidising capacity of DCSR for thiocyanates was determined. In order to estimate this value, DCSR was mixed with 0.01 M KSCN and the concentration of residual SCN With acidic KSCN solution (curve b), the reaction runs a bit more slowly, finishing after 4 h. In case of two alkaline KSCN solutions examined, the oxidation is considerably slower and, curiously enough, the kinetic curves cross (curve c and d). The results of the experiments carried out in alkaline media are consistent with those in the previous contribution The next step of investigations carried out in the batch mode were the equilibrium studies. In this series of the experiments, stoichiometric amounts of reagents were used. Again, a considerable influence of the acidity of the reaction medium on the kinetic course of the oxidation was observed ( In order to investigate the efficiency of the copolymer with respect to trace quantities of thiocyanates as well as the stability of the active chlorine attached to the macromolecular carrier, more experiments were carried out using a 100% excess of active chlorine in relation to stoichiometry. One of the reasons why an excess of DCSR was chosen was to drive the reaction to completion. As can be seen from The behavior of DCSR in continuous processes was studied by column operations. During these tests, a 50 cm At the beginning of the column experiments, the aqueous solution containing KSCN alone was passed through the resin bed and the effect of the flow rate on the oxidising action was tested. It was found that, when the flow rate was approx. 4–5 bed volume/hour, the concentration of SCN During the column test, the pH value of the effluent was measured. According to The column process with the acidic KSCN solution progressed similarly ( Contrary to the previous two column tests, in treating an alkaline KSCN solution some perturbations were observed. They were caused by the evolution of a gaseous product in the resin bed, whereby the flow of the tested solution was disturbed. As it was stressed in the earlier contribution concerning oxidation of cyanides by DCSR After the column experiments, the exhausted resin was washed with distilled water, removed from the column and air-dried. The weight of the stripped copolymer was nearly 26.0 g. Reactivation of the exhausted resin was performed in one step by treatment with a slightly acidified solution of sodium chlorate(I) at abated temperature: Performing the experiments with DCSR, one should take into consideration that this copolymer is not perfectly stable (likewise its low molecular analogues and other sulfonamide copolymers containing active halogen in the functional groups). The sulfonamide copolymers containing active halogen undergo gradually self-decomposition. As it was pointed out earlier, DCSR stored for 6 months in the dry state lost a few percent of the originally present active chlorine  The results presented here illustrate the strong oxidative properties of DCSR in relation to thiocyanates. The SCN In processes carried out by the column method, it is possible to obtain effluents essentially free of thiocyanates (concentration of SCN During thiocyanate solution treatment, the reactive copolymer undergoes dechlorination, i.e., sulfonamide groups are restored. Reactivation of the stripped bed is accomplished in one step by treatment with an acidified solution of sodium chlorate (I) under controlled conditions. The high efficiency of DCSR for thiocyanates removal from solutions makes it a promising material for wastewater purification. The research project was financed by Polish Committee for Scientific Researches, Grant KBN No. 3 T09B 055 13.