 P. Aarne Vesilind, W.A. Worrell, D.R. Reinhart, Brooks/Cole, Thomson Learning, United States, Hard Cover, 428 pages,. US $84.95 Although professionals in our field have reached consensus on the fact that solid waste management is not solved through just technical solutions, we also acknowledge that technology does play a critical role in the solution. The key phases of solid waste management—segregation, collection, treatment and final disposition—depend on technology. The efficiency and financial viability of the process depend on the type of technology used. Consequently, we as solid waste professionals must pay due attention to technological aspects. Solid Waste Engineering consists of a Preface, nine chapters and three appendices. In addition, the book includes a Foreword written by Dr. John Skinner the current Executive Director and Chief Executive Officer of the Solid Waste Association of North America (SWANA). The preface reviews the history of two barges, one that as a matter of practice discharged wastes off the New York Bight at the turn of the 20th century, and the other barge, the well-known “Mobro” that travelled up and down the East Coast of the USA in 1987 searching for a community that would permit it to off load the wastes. Chapter 1 deals with “Integrated Solid Waste Management”. In this chapter the authors discuss the management of wastes from very early civilizations to the description of the precursor of today's modern landfill in 1935 in California. The chapter also discusses some aspects of economics and solid waste as well as legislation, regulations and the hierarchy of solid waste management. “Municipal Solid Waste Characteristics and Quantities” is the title of Chapter 2. The material in this chapter includes information on the characteristics of municipal solid waste and provides basic information on the procedures for conducting waste characterization analyses. Chapter 3 deals with “Collection of Municipal Solid Waste” and describes the procedure for determining the number of containers and the number of vehicles required for a collection route. Additionally, the material in this chapter explains the various types of vehicles available for collection and provides the basic steps for designing collection routes. Chapter 4 covers “Landfills” and, as the title suggests, the material in the chapter provides the basic tools for designing a landfill including leachate and landfill gas collection systems. The next four chapters (5–8) cover a wide range of topics dealing with processing and treatment, from the various pieces of equipment needed to process MSW, to the design of MRFs, to various aspects of combustion and of biological processes. It is clear that these sections were written by someone who understands the fundamental laws of physics, thermodynamics, and mass transfer; who knows what NCRR stands for; who has used the Handbook of Mineral Processing by A.F. Taggart; and who is familiar with the work conducted by Boettcher on air classification. The final chapter of the book (Chapter 9) is entitled “Current Issues in Solid Waste Management” and it describes a number of topics that indeed are of importance in waste management such as: life cycle analysis, flow control, contracting for the services, financing facilities, and others. The material in the book is properly supported by key references and provides many examples that would be very useful to students in the field. The material also is “sprinkled” with a combination of humor and philosophy that makes the reading interesting and thought-provoking. For this reviewer, reading this book was like taking a nice, comfortable walk down memory lane. It was enjoyable to see some of the discussion of work carried out by a number of researchers that laid the foundation for much of modern solid waste management in the United States (from waste characterization to mechanical processing and biological treatment). I also was impressed by the modifications made to the photographs that I took to describe hammer wear and to see how the photos showed even the pitting in the metal. As expected in any new book covering such a wide range of topics, there are a few minor errors that will hopefully be corrected by the authors in the preparation of the next edition. These errors deal primarily with definitions, semantics and references. For example: the definition of “Recovery” on page 15 is not clear and requires additional explanation. The research conducted for Fig. 2-14 is attributed to the wrong researcher; it should be reference 26. Perhaps one of the major suggestions for the authors when they are ready to write their next edition is to consider incorporating material published after 1990. For instance, the list of references for Chapter 5 only contains three references (out 39) that were written after 1980. Finally, I completely support the idea suggested by the authors of establishing the Trabi Award. This book will be a very useful teaching tool for an undergraduate course for engineering students in solid waste management. The students, however, should be in their senior year as the content of the book requires a sound understanding of engineering principles. The comprehensive explanations combined with the examples and problems written by professionals who have been in the field of waste management for a number of years will provide a sound foundation for other more specialized courses or for the students to undertake an engineer-in-training position in solid waste management. Dr. P. Aarne Vesilind is a Professor of Civil and Environmental Engineering at Bucknell University, Lewisburg, PA; Mr. William A. Worrell is with the Integrated Waste Management Authority of San Luis Obispo County, CA.; and Dr. Debra R. Reinhart is Interim Chair and Associate Dean in Civil and Environmental Engineering at the University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL.