The recovery of rhenium from acidic wash solution originating from a copper smelting process using sodium thiosulfate were investigated. Effects of reaction time, reaction temperature, flocculant addition and redissolubility of precipitate on the precipitation of rhenium have been studied. The temperature, Oxidation-Reduction Potential of the solution, reaction time in favor of the precipitation efficiency of rhenium. For the recovery of rhenium, copper is precipitated synchronously with a proportion of arsenate. Fine particles in the solution were slow to agglomerate and particle flocculation aids the precipitation rate of metal sulfide. The precipitation time under particle flocculation was shortened about 15 min, and the recovery percentage of rhenium was 98.89%.Rhenium (Re), a rare transition metal, has important applications in industries due to its multiple valences and high melting temperature ( In nature, Re exists as a lattice substitute in molybdenite and chalcocite with 0.02–0.20 wt% in molybdenum and copper sulfide concentrates ( Zagorodnyaya et.al reported the recovery of rhenium from an acidic wash solution generated from the chalcocite concentrate based smelting process using a mixed trialkylamine extraction method ( Several groups have reported the performance of solvent extraction and ion exchange to remove perrhenate ions from synthesized solutions or simple copper leach liquors ( In this work, we proposed a novel strategy to their recovery based on the selective sulfide precipitation using sodium thiosulfate (Na Industrial grade sodium thiosulfate (Na Sulfurization precipitation experiments were conducted in a 1-m The saturated Na After reaction, the precipitate was filtered using plate-frame pressure filtration at 70 °C and the liquor was analyzed to determine the metal concentration (see 2.4). The representative product was filtered, washed with high-purity water, dried in a vacuum oven at 80 °C for 12 h, and analyzed to determine the chemical and phase compositions. All metal analyses of aqueous samples were carried out following acidification with 2 wt% nitric acid (HNO The metal and sulfur element in solid samples were first dissolved by mixed solutions of perchloric acid and hydrochloric acid [15 wt% HClO The ORP of the real acidic wash solutions was measured using the oxidation-reduction meter (SG8 pro, Mettler, ORP electrode InLab@ Redox). The acidity of the real acidic wash solution was analyzed by the acid-base titration using 0.1 mol/L NaOH solution.  As shown in The experiment 2–0 in At the same time, the elemental sulfur particle originating from the reaction of the thiosulfate ion with sulfurous acid, which has good chemical activity and large surface area in the acidic wash solution. The influence of micro-heterogeneous nucleation that reacts at the surface of sulfur particles on the recovery is not fully understood. Therefore, the effect of reaction time on rhenium recovery under particle flocculation was studied, and the results are shown in  The principle of particle flocculation is coagulation, which is a physicochemical process that facilitates the agglomeration of fine particles (colloids) contained in the water to form a floc that can be easily filtered from water or electrolyte solution under the action of the flocculant. It can be considered that the fine particles (colloids) from the metal sulfurization are difficult to be secondary nucleation and agglomeration for the supersaturation of metal sulfide. In the conventional recovery process, a long time is required to achieve the growth of fine particles, the precipitation efficiency and results were shown in The particle flocculation can used in the separation rhenium from the undegassed acidic wash solution, a range of organic flocculants can be used that will not reduce the composition of rhenium in the residue. The optimum reaction condition using PA flocculant is: the PA is 0.01 wt% of the solution, the reaction temperature is 70 °C and the reaction time is 15–30 min. Experiment 3 in It can be observed that the extent of metal precipitation increased with an increase in temperature. Typically for the temperature, the recovery of rhenium and copper increased to 99.18 wt% and 99.77 wt%, then the precipitation percentage was stable with increasing temperature. The precipitation of arsenic increased from 11.21 wt% at 50 °C to 14.40 wt% at 80 °C. The optimal temperature of the reaction is 70 °C, and the reaction time is about 30 min. It was found that the copper is precipitated synchronously during the recovery of rhenium at the lower ORP of acidic wash solution. The precipitation percentage of copper and rhenium /arsenic separation as the function of reaction time was examined and monitored, as shown in In The experiment 4–0 solution is the washing acid aqueous solution for the study, the 4–1 to 4–6 is the solutions at a different time. The 4–6 in A large number of fine particles (colloids) generated from the sulfurization reaction are difficult to settle and agglomerate in aqueous solutions. The experimental results showed that the flocculation technology can be used to collect the sulfide particle and solid-liquid separation. Due to the change of sulfuric acid concentration in the acidic wash solution, the fine particles in the precipitation residue may be redissolved into solution. In the industrial experiment, the possibility of redissolution of the precipitation residue in the acidic wash solution was tested. Experiment 5–0 to 5–3 in It can be seen from the results that the main change in the acidic wash solution is the concentration of copper and rhenium, especially the concentration of copper and rhenium in the reacted solution and the filtrated solution is lower than the unreacted solution. Meanwhile, the concentration of rhenium in the filtered solution is the lowest of all samples. It indicates that the metal sulfide residue using the flocculation technology has good stability and filterability in the acidic wash solution, the precipitation residue will not be redissolved into the acidic solution. The acidic wash solution showed the reducibility for the dissolution of SO The particle flocculation favors the precipitation rate of metal sulfide in the acidic wash solution. The precipitation time under particle flocculation was shortened from 90 min to about 15 min and the recovery percentage of rhenium and copper was 98.89% and 94.77%, respectively. The authors declare no competing financial interest. The authors are grateful for the financial support from the Investigation on the recovery of rhenium in the high arsenite wash acid solution from the copper smelting process using reducing sulfide precipitation method. I have made substantial contributions to the conception or design of the work; or the acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data for the work; AND. I have drafted the work or revised it critically for important intellectual content; AND I have approved the final version to be published; AND. I agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work in ensuring that questions related to the accuracy or integrity of any part of the work are appropriately investigated and resolved. All persons who made substantial contributions to the work reported in the manuscript, including those who provided editing and writing assistance but who are not authors, are named in the Acknowledgments section of the manuscript and have given their written permission to be named. If the manuscript does not include Acknowledgments, It is Because the authors have not received substantial contributions from nonauthors.