Background
                  Complex fracture-dislocations of the proximal ulna and radius include multiple anatomic lesions, the management of which is known to be demanding. Although several classifications have been proposed, none appear to be exhaustive, and most of them have neither therapeutic nor prognostic value. The purpose of this study was to design a comprehensive classification that may provide a guide for the operative management of these injuries.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  The classification is aimed at identifying definite anatomic lesions, called the “main lesions,” the presence of which can affect the prognosis and require peculiar treatments. The main lesions include (1) ulnar fracture (including its location with respect to the insertion of collateral ligaments and coronoid fracture), (2) radiohumeral dislocation, (3) proximal radioulnar dislocation, (4) radial fracture, (5) distal radioulnar joint and interosseous membrane lesion, and (6) humeral-ulnar dislocation. Intraobserver and interobserver reliability was assessed in 25 complex fracture-dislocations. Standard radiographs and computed tomography scans were analyzed by 3 independent observers.
               
                  Results
                  The main lesions were labeled by an alphanumeric system. Numbers 1 through 6 identified the type of ulnar fracture, and letters A through E indicated the dislocated joint or presence of a radial fracture. The direction of dislocation and the type of radial fracture were identified by Roman numerals, from I to III, placed after the letter. A κ value of 0.873 or greater resulted from intraobserver and interobserver evaluation.
               
                  Conclusion
                  We created a comprehensive classification of complex fracture-dislocations of the elbow. The classification appeared to be reproducible and may represent a useful tool for the management of such difficult injuries.Complex fracture-dislocations of the proximal ulna and radius represent 2% to 5% of elbow injuries. In 1814, Monteggia Several classifications of complex fracture-dislocations of the proximal ulna and radius have been proposed. The purpose of this study was to report a new comprehensive classification of complex fracture-dislocations of the proximal ulna and radius that may provide a guide for operative management and be useful in determining the prognosis of these conditions. In 1967, Bado In 1974, Biga and Thomine In 1982, Marotte et al In 1991, Jupiter et al In 2001, Chick and Court The Bado classification Biga and Thomine Jupiter et al Chick and Court Finally, the presence of complementary classifications is likely to cause misleading diagnoses. For instance, Monteggia-like, Monteggia-equivalent, and Monteggia-variant lesions and transolecranon fracture-dislocations are frequently confused, Because complex elbow fracture-dislocations involve bone and soft-tissue injuries, a comprehensive classification of these lesions should include most of the known conditions that may occur in such injuries and show therapeutic and prognostic value. To identify any possible injury occurring in fracture-dislocations of the proximal ulna and radius, it is crucial to obtain high-quality radiographs and a computed tomography (CT) scan including 2- and 3-dimensional reconstruction. An intraoperative evaluation of elbow and wrist ligamentous damage under fluoroscopy should be performed before and after osteosynthesis, to better define the condition. Ultrasound or magnetic resonance imaging may be useful in diagnosing soft-tissue involvement in longitudinal radioulnar dissociation. With the term “fracture-dislocations of proximal ulna and radius,” we include any ulnar fracture associated with isolated dislocation or multiple disloction of elbow joints (radiohumeral, ulnohumeral, and proximal radioulnar joint). To be included in this definition, the ulna has to be totally injured to distinguish it from other conditions, such as terrible-triad injuries or other lesions, where only a portion of the proximal ulna (ie, the coronoid process or supinator crest) is fractured. Terrible-triad injuries and elbow dislocations associated with coronoid or radial head fractures have their own therapeutic algorithm that is different from that of fracture-dislocations of the proximal ulna and radius. The classification is based on specific anatomic injuries, defined as the “main lesions,” including (1) level of ulnar fracture (with respect to collateral ligament insertion and coronoid process), (2) radiohumeral dislocation, (3) proximal radioulnar dislocation, (4) radial fracture, (5) distal radioulnar and interosseous membrane lesion, and (6) ulnohumeral dislocation. In our experience, any pattern of fracture-dislocation results from the association of 2 or more main lesions, including an ulnar fracture along with isolated or multiple dislocation of elbow joints (radiohumeral, ulnohumeral, and proximal radioulnar joint). We developed an alphanumeric system to classify the main lesions. Ulnar fracture was labeled with numbers (1-6), and the presence of elbow joint dislocation, distal radioulnar dislocation and radial fracture was labeled with letters (A-E). The direction of dislocation and the type of radial fracture were labeled with Roman numerals (I-III) placed after the letter. The progression of the alphabetic and numeric codes indicates an increase in complexity of the lesion and, thus, in the treatment. Type 1 includes an olecranon fracture involving the articular surface, entailing loss of posterior osseous stability and possible loss of ulnohumeral congruency. The coronoid process is intact. Type 2 includes a shaft fracture that may cause angular, translational, and torsional deformities. The coronoid is intact. Type 3 is a metaphyseal fracture involving the coronoid process with articular and ligamentous damage. The fracture, particularly when extending to the zones of ligament insertion (supinator crest and sublime tubercle), may cause a loss of anterior, medial, and lateral stability of the elbow. Type 4 is a metaphyseal fracture extending to the olecranon. There is articular, osseous, and ligamentous damage, which may cause elbow instability. Type 5 is a fracture of the metaphysis that extends to the ulnar shaft. There is articular, osseous, and ligamentous damage, which may cause elbow instability. Type 6 is a fracture that involves the epiphysis, metaphysis, and diaphysis of the ulna, with osseous, articular, and ligamentous damage. It represents the most complex injury of the ulna. Type A indicates the presence of a radiohumeral dislocation but that the proximal radioulnar joint is uninjured. This lesion is usually associated with type 1 ulnar fracture (olecranon fracture). The dislocation of both bones of the forearm occurs as a single unit. We distinguish 2 directions of radiohumeral joint dislocation: anterior (AI) and posterior (AII). A type AI lesion is the anterior transolecranon fracture-dislocation described by Biga and Thomine, Type B is a radiohumeral dislocation that is associated with proximal radioulnar joint dislocation. The latter can be anterior (BI), lateral (BII), or posterior (BIII). The annular and quadrate ligaments are always injured, and a complex lesion of the LCL is often associated. Type B lesions identify the typical joint damage of Monteggia fracture-dislocation described by Bado. Type C includes proximal radial fractures. We distinguish 3 types of fracture: CI, radial head fractures that may be fixed, such as Mason-Hotchkiss types I and II; CII, fractures of the proximal one-third of the radial shaft (proximal radial shaft fracture); and CIII, radial head fracture in which osteosynthesis is not indicated, such as Mason-Hotchkiss type III fractures. Type D is a concomitant lesion of the interosseous membrane and the DRUJ, including a possible tear of the triangular fibrocartilage complex (TFCC). These lesions, when associated with a comminuted radial head fracture, correspond to the Essex-Lopresti injury. A type D lesion causes a longitudinal instability of the forearm with proximal radial migration. Type E indicates the presence of an ulnohumeral dislocation associated with ulnar fracture distal to the coronoid process (type 2). The LCL complex, anterior and posterior capsule, and MCL are consistently injured. This lesion results from high-energy trauma, and the prognosis is often poor, as reported by Strauss et al The proximal ulnar and radial fracture-dislocation comprehensive classification system (PURCCS) is shown in The management of complex fracture-dislocations of the proximal ulna and radius should include (1) a careful preoperative evaluation aimed at identifying osseous, articular, and ligamentous injuries; (2) anatomic reduction and stable internal fixation of bone injuries; (3) reconstruction of ligamentous injuries; and (4) early mobilization of the elbow. The most appropriate surgical procedure should be selected based on the type of injury included in the reported classification ( Internal fixation with a posterior precontoured plate is usually indicated once an accurate reconstruction of the trochlear notch has been achieved. Tension-band wiring may also be used in simple transverse fractures. In the presence of a comminuted fracture, autologous bone graft or allograft may be placed under the articular surface to obtain stable internal fixation. Shaft fractures should be treated with a posterior precontoured plate, taking care to obtain correct rotational and longitudinal alignment and length of the ulna. A posterior precontoured plate should be considered as the only surgical option for metaphyseal fractures. In the presence of a comminuted fracture, it is essential to restore the ulnar length to obtain a satisfactory reduction of the dislocated radial head. Bone graft may occasionally be needed to achieve this goal. The coronoid process may be fixed with screws, pins, or transosseous sutures, depending on fracture pattern. For instance, in the presence of a large anteromedial coronoid fragment, an anteromedial plate may be indicated ( Type 4, 5, and 6 injuries should be treated with the same surgical procedure previously described for the first 3 types. An instability of the radial head rarely persists after ulnar osteosynthesis ( In cases of radiohumeral and proximal radioulnar joint dislocation showing persistent radial head instability after ulnar ORIF, the radiohumeral joint should be exposed to evaluate possible soft-tissue interposition. The injured ligaments can be repaired with nonresorbable sutures or anchors. In the rare cases in which the ligaments cannot be repaired, the use of tendon autograft is advisable. In the presence of persistent instability or irreducibility of the radial head, the ulnar alignment and length should be assessed, because the condition may be related to ulnar shortening. Osteosynthesis with headless screws or a precontoured plate is indicated in type CI fractures (reparable). In type CII (proximal shaft) fractures, a plate is often necessary to restore rotational and longitudinal alignment of the radius and its length. In type CIII fractures (irreparable), a radial head arthroplasty is indicated. Radial head resection should be avoided because it may lead to elbow and forearm instability, particularly in the presence of an associated type D lesion (Essex-Lopresti injury). Radioulnar pinning and/or TFCC repair is indicated if DRUJ instability persists after radial head ORIF or arthroplasty. In the presence of elbow dislocation along with an ulnar fracture distal to the coronoid process, reduction of dislocation, ulnar osteosynthesis, and LCL repair, with nonresorbable sutures or anchors, are indicated. Elbow joint stability is then checked under fluoroscopy, and if the joint is unstable, the MCL should also be repaired and/or a hinged elbow fixator applied. Interobserver and intraobserver consistency is a prerequisite for the effective use of any classification system. For this reason, we studied retrospectively our hospital’s record of patients with fracture-dislocations of the proximal ulna and radius who were followed up in our clinic from 2005 to 2009. Twenty-five patients with fracture-dislocations of the proximal ulna and radius were assessed; 3 surgeons (G.G., A.G., and F.M.S.) were asked to classify each fracture. The assessors were subdivided into the following levels: senior, junior, and resident. These observers used standard radiographs and 2- and 3-dimensional CT scans to label each case according to the PURCCS. At the first evaluation (time T1), all radiographs and CT scans were assessed in a numeric sequence. Three weeks later, at the second evaluation (time T2), the order of the initial radiographs and CT scans was randomly changed to generate a new sequence. Data were collected on spreadsheets, and the κ coefficient Complex fracture-dislocations of the proximal ulna and radius are known to be among the most challenging conditions of the upper limb. These injuries are frequently associated with ulnohumeral instability and should be included among complex elbow instabilities. In this study, we presented a comprehensive classification of fracture-dislocations of the proximal ulna and radius, including Monteggia and equivalent fracture-dislocations, transolecranon fracture-dislocations, and a wide spectrum of other conditions that are not included in any of the classifications currently available. The aim of our classification was to provide a clear description of the conditions that should be included among complex fracture-dislocations of the proximal ulna and radius. It is based on specific pathologic conditions, including the main lesions, each of which affects the prognosis and requires specific treatment. Ulnar fractures were classified into 3 types, based on specific features of bone and soft-tissue involvement and goals of treatment. Type 3 ulnar fractures include the most complex lesions, because both collateral ligaments and the coronoid process are involved. Because a missed diagnosis of soft-tissue injuries—associated with the dislocation of 1 or more joints in the elbow and wrist—was one of the most frequent causes of poor outcome, Injury to the DRUJ (type D) was included among the main lesions because it can be associated with fracture-dislocations of the ulna and radius and require additional treatments. The presence of a radial fracture is an additional factor that plays a relevant role in the prognosis of elbow fracture-dislocations. We believe our classification has several strengths: (1) most of the types of fracture-dislocations of the proximal ulna and radius are included; (2) several fracture types, which were difficult to classify by use of previous systems, may now be located based on their specific features; and (3) the use of a comprehensive classification is paramount because it allows authors to compare surgical outcomes and to realize standardized protocols in the management of these fracture-dislocations. An accurate evaluation of the injury including the presence of 1 or more main lesions should be performed to use the classification. In particular, before surgery is planned, these specific questions should be addressed: (1) To what extent has the ulna been injured (from type 1 to type 6)? (2) Is the radiohumeral joint alone involved (type A lesion), or is it found in association with proximal radioulnar joint dislocation (type B lesion)? (3) Is the radius fractured (type C), and if so, what type of fracture it is? (4) Are the elbow joints alone involved, or have the interosseous membrane and the DRUJ (type D) also been involved? (5) Finally, is an ulnohumeral dislocation (type E) present? When answering these questions, the surgeon has to keep in mind all the possible main lesions that need to be treated to obtain good results. The type of surgery that should be selected in each case may be planned based on the reported classification. The classification shows a few limitations: it is not an analytic and descriptive classification, nor does it consider the biomechanical characteristics of trauma. Moreover, our classification does not consider possible subtypes of each lesion—that is, coronoid and olecranon fracture types, as well as types of IOM, TFCC, and DRUJ lesions—because it refers to the pertinent existing classifications. We propose a comprehensive validated classification (PURCCS) for fracture-dislocations of the proximal ulna and radius that (1) includes most subtypes of fracture-dislocations described in the literature and (2) provides a therapeutic algorithm for each lesion. The PURCCS seems to be helpful in the management of these complex injuries and could also help in determining the prognosis. Finally, the alphanumeric system is also appropriate for the recording and analysis of data; it facilitates further studies that can better define the prognosis of each single injury pattern and compare treatment results among series. The authors thank Maria Iva Sacchetti for her drawings used in The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.