Concrete filled steel tubes (CFST) have been widely used in constructing high-rise buildings, arch bridges and factories for the past few decades. In this research, numerical studies were carried out to investigate the flexural behaviour of CFST columns under both static and dynamic loads. The numerical models were calibrated and validated against a number of experimental data where the proposed models showed very good agreement with the test results. The results indicated that CFST columns showed good resistance against flexural loads under both static and dynamic loading conditions and therefore it has the potential to be widely used in these areas where potential blast attacks or frequent earthquakes are expected. The verified numerical model can also be extended to predict performances of concrete-infilled steel tubes under different loading conditions.A concrete filled steel tube (CFST) simply consists of one steel tube with concrete filled inside. In recent years, the use of CFST members has been increasingly popular in the field of construction due to the attractive properties such as ease of construction, high strength and excellent ductility The main advantage of CFST columns is the passive confinement effect resulted from the interaction between the core concrete and the steel tube. Several studies have suggested that the overall axial load capacity of a CFST column can be much larger than the combined ultimate capacity of the steel tube and the concrete when acting alone and the ductility of a CFST column under axial load as well as flexural load can be also significantly enhanced Although much effort has been put to study the behaviours of CFST columns under static load, the investigation on its structural behaviours under dynamic load is still relatively lacking. Prichard and Perry Recently, a number of tests on CFST members under transverse impact load have been also carried out. Han et al. Numerical simulation has been widely adopted as an effective way to study the behaviours of CFST members under different loading conditions since the laboratory tests are often costly and time-consuming. A number of previous researches have demonstrated the ability of numerical simulations to deliver reliable predictions of CFST columns under transverse impact load The aforementioned research evidently demonstrated the outstanding performance of CFST members under static and dynamic loading conditions. However, due to the increasing threat of terrorist attack, the ability of a structural member to withstand and survive an explosion has never been more important. Blast loading is generally classified into three different types based on the distance from the explosives to the surface of the structure, including near-field blast The finite element model was developed using steel and concrete elements in LS-DYNA The K&C concrete model (MAT CONCRETE DAMAGE REL3) was used herein because it is able to model the behaviours of concrete member subjected to active/passive confining stress and high strain rate effect which is particularly suitable for the simulation of blast experiment Additionally, Omega, which controls the volume expansion, is suggested to be 0.75 for a case without confinement and 0.9 for a confined case. It is well known that under high strain rate impact, the strength of concrete can significantly increase, by more than 100% for concrete in compression and by more than 600% for concrete in tension where The formulation used for concrete׳s DIF in tension was developed by Malvar and Crawford where Material model 24, namely MAT PIECEWISE LINEAR PLASTICITY, is used to represent the steel tube. It should be noted that an elasto-plastic stress–strain relationship for steel is assumed and the strain rate effect on the steel tube is incorporated by the Cowper and Symonds law which multiplies the yield stress by a factor given as Since the test required to obtain the exact values for parameter In total, four CFST specimens were used for three point bending test and four CFST specimens were used for blast tests and the details are listed in C40 grade concrete was used for all specimens and the compression testing was conducted on 100 The strengths of steel tubes were determined by direct tensile test using a high capacity hydraulic machine, in accordance with the Chinese Standard GBT228-2002. The specimen size used for direct tensile test was as shown in Three point bending tests were carried out to investigate the behaviours of CFST columns under static transverse load combined with axial load. The test machine was displacement-controlled and both ends of the specimen were simply supported and the axial load was only applied to one end of the specimen. The applied axial The calculated axial load capacities were 2200 Prior to applying the lateral displacement, the specimen was gradually loaded axially to 0.5 In total, 4 CFST columns were tested including 2 square CFST columns and 2 circular CFST columns; however, due to mechanical failure, the data of CFST column S1 were not recorded. Blast tests on CFST columns were carried out by PLA University of Science and Technology in China. It is shown in  As shown in To capture the pressure-time history of each blast event acting on the specimens, a pressure transducer was also used. In order to minimise the risk of damaging the pressure transducer, it was positioned 760 All the data cables of the measurement devices were buried beneath the ground and the data-acquisition system as well as the command console was placed inside a protected concrete bunker. During the blast test on specimen S3, the blast wave propagating into the test pit and several recording apparatus were destroyed. Consequently, the deflection–time histories of specimen S3 were not recorded successfully and only the residual deflection was measured manually afterwards. The corresponding LS-DYNA numerical model of the three point bending test shown in  By comparing specimen C1–C2, it is clear that the applied axial load increased the maximum flexural load capacity while sacrificing the specimen׳s ductility. To further demonstrate the influence of axial load on the flexural load capacity and the ductility, another numerical simulation was conducted on a circular CFST specimen with an axial load of 808  In blast effects analysis of columns, it is often necessary to use several phases to apply the loading to avoid undesired oscillation In LS-DYNA, one approach to simulate a blast event is to build an air domain which contains the explosive and target structure inside. However, in order to capture the realistic blast physics such as wave propagation within the air, a very high grid resolution is required which is too computationally expensive especially for a large standoff distance. An alternative way is to use the ConWep air blast model ConWep air blast model has been widely adopted to investigate the structural response under blast load and it has shown a high level of accuracy with a reasonable computational cost compared to other techniques Emulsion explosives were used in the current study during the blast test. Simoens To investigate the aforementioned matters, ConWep is used as a benchmark for the peak overpressure and the impulse for TNT  It is well known that steel structure is prone to local buckling due to its thinness which can result in the reduction of load capacity. Although the concrete infill can delay the local buckling of the steel tube, it still cannot be prevented especially when subjected to large impact load The energy absorbed by local and flexural deformation was investigated based on the numerical simulation of specimen S4. The local deformation, as shown in In order to compare the ratio between the energy absorbed by local and global deformation, it is assumed that between This paper presented a numerical study of CFST members, with both circular and square cross sections, under both static and blast loads and the following conclusions can be drawn based on the numerical results presented in this paper: The CFST member behaved in a very ductile manner under lateral static load. The applied axial load can slightly increase its flexural load capacity, however, at the cost of reducing the column׳s ductility at the same time. The numerical model developed in this paper can deliver accurate predictions for CFST members under transverse static load. When validated against the blast test, the model still corresponded with test results quite well in terms of the maximum deflection and the period of oscillation. Discrepancies in the residual deflections were found, however considering the complexity and uncertainty associated with a blast experiment, the error is still within the acceptable range. Based on the numerical results, for a CFST member under blast loading, the majority of the energy is absorbed by global deformation due to the fact that local deformation of steel can be effectively prevented by the infilled concrete. More parametric studies can be made using the developed numerical models in the future to address the key parameters that affect the overall behaviours of CFST members under blast loading. The authors gratefully acknowledge the