Measurements
                  of the drop velocity in the absence of mass transfer, for two liquid-liquid systems in a rotating liquid–liquid extractor unit have been carried out using a high-speed video camera. The drop velocity was measured as function of rotational speed, radius and physical properties.
                  These velocities were compared with those predicted from the equation of motion for the drop and it was found that the contribution of the history integral was important in predicting drop velocity.drop radius acceleration number ratio of the drop drag coefficient to the Stokes law drag coefficient drop drag coefficient Stokes law drag coefficient drop diameter mean Sauter drop size drag force gravitational acceleration drop mass the mass of fluid displaced by the drop radial distance from the axis of rotation particle Reynolds number the radius between rotor axis and hole in Podbielniak extractor virtual mass variable in Laplace space time drop volume drop velocity drop velocity in the radial direction mean Sauter velocity of drop motion ratio of the continuous phase density to the drop density empirical coefficient modifying the added mass term empirical coefficient modifying the history term characteristic time for a drop mass density continuous viscosity time interfacial tension angular velocity of the rotating packed bed kinematic viscosity    continuous phase dispersed phase dimensionless variable There are numerous designs of centrifugal extractor to meet the requirements of the Pharmaceutical, Nuclear and Petroleum industries, where systems with minute specific gravity differentials, short contact times requirements, easy emulsion formation or the requirement for small equipment size are encountered. The development of the centrifugal extractors and the commercial designs available up to 1980, up to 2004, and up to 2007 was reviewed by The drop size and velocity with their direct effects on hold up, flooding and mass transfer performance are of key importance in designing and operating any counter current liquid–liquid contactor. Although these two parameters have been intensively investigated for liquid–liquid columns, similar studies in centrifugal extractors are less developed. Work on the hydrodynamics and mass transfer in the Podbielniak extractor carried out by Blass and his coworkers is summarized by Blass up to 1994 ( In this work, the mathematical and experimental investigations were conducted on drop velocity, and a detailed comparison of the measured velocities to those predicted from an equation of motion were presented and discussed. The equation of motion for a particle is rarely used in the exact form as given by For a drop moving in a radial direction in a centrifugal field, the weight and buoyancy force change as it moves. This continually changing force causing the motion means that the drag force contains extra terms. The drag force acting on a drop in transient motion is given by the following equation: The terms on the right hand side of Eq. For a drop moving in a centrifugal field, the tangential motion caused by the Coriolis force, assuming the continuous phase is in solid body rotation, is of the order of 1 The work of The terms on the left-hand side term of Eq. The terms in the right-hand side of Eq. Using the numerical solution of Eqs.  Rearranging and simplifying Eq. A common strategy in solving Eq. Simplifying this equation by substituting The initial velocity is zero Eq. In preparation for finding inverse transforms, Eq. Taking inverse Laplace transforms for the terms in Eq. The advantage of Eq. The shapes of drops were predicted using the correlation of Initially the empirical corrections to the added mass and history terms were calculated from the work of In Eq. In order to test the predictions of Eqs. The program ImageJ was used to measure the drop size and position. The scale and the pixel aspect ratio were set using a calibration image. Once the scale had been set an ellipse was drawn around each drop and the program measured the major axis of the drop ( Images of a rotating system with an angular velocity, As illustrated in Eqs. If the time between two subsequent photos is This velocity is at the average radius As shown in The equation predicts the mean velocity in the Podbielniak extractor and was derived for a system that had physical properties that were similar to those of the dodecane–water system. This may explain why the predictions of Eq. Drop velocities have been accurately measured in a rotating liquid–liquid contactor using a high speed video camera for the systems water–butanol and water–dodecane. The interface between the phases must be considered to be contaminated for these measurements as no special precautions were taken to ensure the cleanliness of the system. The data is thus comparable with the majority of experimental data on drop velocities in liquid systems. On comparing the experimental measurements with drop velocities predicted by solving the unsteady state equation of motion for the drop, it was found that in order to predict the drop velocity in a rotating system, the history integral in the equation of motion must be evaluated. This appears to disagree with previously published work (