Immiscible polymers, including polystyrene (PS) and polyethylene terephthalate (PET), were blended in the solid state via mechanical attrition, the first step of a near net-shape manufacturing (NNSM) technique. Subsequent analysis via Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FT-IR) with synchrotron radiation successfully distinguished between blend components. Characteristic absorbance peaks for each polymer allowed both qualitative and quantitative mapping within prepared samples. Reproducible area maps were created for 50/50 blends of polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA)/PET and PET/PS, which exhibited areas of macroscopic phase separation. Fluctuations in blend concentration were particularly evident for PS/PMMA. However, spatial resolution was shown to limit the detection of heterogeneities. Further modifications with the synchrotron IR apparatus will improve resolution and allow for the direct comparison of NNSM-processed and melt-blended polymers.The blending of immiscible polymers via conventional routes is rife with technical issues such as chemical compatibilizer kinetic barriers, thermal degradation, inadequate mixing, undesirable side reactions with a solvent, and dispersed-phase domain coarsening during thermal shaping. One form of near net-shape manufacturing (NNSM) comprises mechanical attrition followed by consolidation with hot isostatic pressing (HIP), all in the solid state The solid-state approach provides an opportunity to blend immiscible polymers that are otherwise incompatible via conventional means and to better understand the factors that control blending. Retention of dispersed-phase domain size during thermal shaping is the typical proof of compatibility, i.e., coarsening of the dispersed phase leads to macroscopic phase separation and degradation of material properties. In fact, fine (micron or submicron scale) dispersions evolve from reduced interfacial tensions and large interfacial thicknesses and promote property synergism A better understanding of NNSM-induced morphological changes necessitates a variety of characterization techniques. Microscopic methods have superior resolution but often have issues associated with phase contrast, beam-induced sample degradation and charging. Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FT-IR) is a useful analytical tool for polymers, providing detailed structural information via active vibrational transitions. Furthermore, the advent of synchrotron IR radiation allows for improved 2-D chemical mapping due to high throughput and low signal-to-noise ratios. FT-IR microspectroscopy has been used to investigate the morphology of immiscible polypropylene blends, to complement thermal characterization techniques in studying nonisothermal crystallization, and to observe concentration gradients of biodegradable polymers Three common semicrystalline and amorphous polymers were chosen for blending and subsequent investigation via synchrotron IR. Hydrophobic polymers polystyrene (PS), polyethylene terephthalate (PET), and polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) were blended into selected binary mixtures, e.g., PS/PET and PET/PMMA. All polymers were purchased from Alfa Aesar (Ward Hill, MA) with the exception of PET (Intercontinental Polymers, Morristown, TN). All polymers were either milled as homopolymers or co-milled with another polymer (e.g. PS/PET) in a 50/50 ratio by weight. The SPEX 6750 Mixer/Mill, used for comminution and milling, was operated at liquid nitrogen temperature (− The next set of investigations involved microtomed, thin (∼ Microtomy was performed at room temperature with a Leica Reichert Autocut S microtome (Leica Microsystems, Bannockburn, IL) with a glass knife. These microtomed slices were then placed on a KBr window for microspectroscopic observation. The microspectroscopy was performed at the J. Bennett Johnston, Sr. Center for Advanced Microstructures and Devices (CAMD) in Baton Rouge, LA. Synchrotron IR radiation was directed from a Thermo Nicolet Nexus 670 FT-IR spectrometer into a Thermo Nicolet Continuum microscope after being extracted from a bending magnet port to a diamond window and subsequently collimated with a series of mirrors The software packages responsible for microscope-to-computer imaging and infrared mapping are Atlus and Omnic, respectively. For signal averaging, 250 scans with a resolution of 4 cm Any peak height differences due to concentration were normalized via peak area normalization. The total mapping areas were arbitrarily chosen as 300 The use of thin (∼ Since the background spectrum of the resin was already taken before comparison to spectra taken within the particles themselves, peaks from the polymer blend components were isolated from the resin's set of peaks. In a row-by-row fashion, an area grid of the spectra was collected, and, depending upon which blend component was chosen for map creation, the qualitative composition map was constructed for each blend. Sometimes, it is useful to determine the specific concentration gradient in one direction, a procedure known as line mapping. This information is more quantitative than area mapping and gives a less subjective insight into phase separation in solid-state blends. The plot in The concentration profile shows a unique set of transitions. Starting at the left end of the line map and moving right across the sample, the blend shows a transition from near-nominal ‘bulk’ concentration (0 μm) to large fluctuations in concentration (30 and 90 μm). Thus, the second and fourth points correspond to areas of nearly pure PS and PET, respectively. These compositional transitions convey that interphases have been traversed in the line map. Quantitatively, the last 6 points in the line are 47.2 The advantages of using FT-IR microspectroscopy for the characterization of NNSM-blended polymers have been shown. These include both qualitative and quantitative evidence of blend heterogeneity with both visual and IR maps as well as reproducibility and accuracy of results. This characterization allows for a better understanding of the phase behavior in solid-state blends processed with NNSM. The simultaneous visual and IR maps with the same microscope and the non-destructive, non-contact nature of the technique allow for further experimentation with the same samples and evaluation of sample thickness and uniformity Immiscible blends are characterized by areas that are rich in a particular polymer and have domains big enough for analysis. The samples in this study were clearly immiscible, for they exhibited distinct concentration gradients and heterogeneity on a scale large enough to be characterized. The finer the dispersion, the larger the interfacial thickness, so concentration gradients will be more gradual and uniform in compatibilized blends. Further studies will show the contrast between polymers that are melt-blended and those that are processed with NNSM as well as the effect of consolidation via HIP. Since this technique gives an indication of heterogeneity and phase conditions, it can be used in further studies to see if NNSM can inhibit or reduce dispersed-phase coarsening relative to melt-blended polymers. The use of synchrotron IR microspectroscopy with other characterization techniques (DSC and SEM/TEM) should give a more complete picture of the effects of NNSM on immiscible polymer mixtures. The authors wish to thank Drs. Orhan Kizilkaya and Eizi Morikawa for their assistance with the microspectroscopy data acquisition. Financial support for the project was provided by NASA grant NCC3-946.