The main objective of this paper is to study the possible use of d-mannitol as phase change material (PCM) for thermal energy storage. PCM are materials that have high phase change enthalpy and this thermophysical property gives them the ability to store energy as latent heat. d-mannitol is a material which has different morphological phases (polymorphism); here were studied β-form and δ-form. Different polymorphic forms produce changes on melting point of d-mannitol. For this reason it is necessary to establish a suitable working temperature range for the use of d-mannitol as phase change material. The thermal characterization was performed with DSC analysis using 0.5Kmin−1 slow-dynamic method. Polymorphism analysis of d-mannitol was analyzed to associate the thermal behavior obtained by DSC with a specific polymorphic phase. d-mannitol presented three different thermal behaviors: the first one had a melting peak at 167°C, the second was a double melting peak at 155°C and 166°C, and the third a single peak at 155°C. Due to irregular results, two working range were studied and through the thermal characterization, it was possible to define a working range where d-mannitol could be used as PCM for energy storage: this range is between 135 and 175°C. Furthermore, it was possible to differentiate two crystalline phases of d-mannitol applying FT-IR analysis and to link them with thermal behavior observed in DSC. The percentage of times each thermal behavior is observed in DSC analysis was calculated. δ-form is obtained 15.8% of analyzed cycles, the β-form appears 44.7% of times, and an intermediate transition between the two phases is found 39.5% of cycles.Thermal analysis of materials used for energy storage is a prerequisite of its application. One of the most widely used equipment for thermophysical analysis at is differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) Thermal energy storage (TES) propose phase change material (PCM) as materials which are able to store high amount of energy as latent heat during the phase change (  This substance presents different polymorphic phases. Several compounds crystallize in different crystalline forms while retaining the same chemical composition producing changes in the melting point of Polymorphism of The most stable phase of The main objective of this paper is to study the possible use of  During the thermal characterization, each sample analyzed is a pure new sample of Thermophysical characterization was performed with DSC analysis. This is a powerful technique where the sample and one reference (sapphire) are subjected to a certain heating rate between one established temperature range. Sapphire is a material completely inert within huge temperature range. The heat difference between both signals (sample and reference), is due to the enthalpy absorbed by the sample ( The analysis method used for A total of 14 samples were analyzed, three were cycled once, three were cycled twice, five were cycled three times, and three samples were cycled five times applying DSC analysis. Polymorphism analysis of The analysis was performed by FT-IR. The equipment used is a Thermo IZ10 and it was used coupled to an attenuated total reflection accessory (ATR) of diamond. The equipment has available DTGS detectors, KBr beam splitter and source Glowbar. The spectral range measured was between 4000 and 500 To discern between the two possible The results obtained by DSC have three different thermal behaviors, as shown in The first sample (sample 1) shows a single peak at 167 On the other side, sample 2 shows a double peak. The global heat of fusion is 238 Polymorphic transformations presented by Furthermore, the thermal behavior of To perform these DSC analyses of First of all, it was observed that Results of the morphological characterization of The bands selected by The three different thermal behavior obtained by DSC ( Based on DSC analysis, the percentage of occurrences of each thermal behavior obtained depending on how many times the sample has been cycled were calculated following Eq. The average values of melting temperature in the cases with a single peak ( When the sample was analyzed once, all the samples solidified as β-phase. After the second cycle, the metastable δ-phase formation started. When the samples were cycled three times, 50% presented a double peak (transition between phases) and 50% solidified as δ-phase. Then, all samples showed a double peak during the fourth cycle. Finally, the β-phase is formed again 33.3% of the time because this phase is more stable than the other one and its formation is favored. Due to these irregular results, two working ranges were analyzed. The first working range studied was between 135 and 200 The second working range analyzed was shorter: between 135 and 175 Three different thermal behaviors were observed by DSC analysis: the first one corresponded to β-form and had the melting temperature at 167 It was possible to identify and characterize the morphological phases of the There is an occurrence trend of the Furthermore, by the thermal characterization, it was possible define a working range where To summarize, The work is partially funded by the Spanish government (ENE2011-22722) and the European Union (COST Action TU0802). The authors would like to thank the Catalan Government for the quality accreditation given to their research group GREA (2009 SGR 534) and research group DIOPMA (2009 SGR 645). A. Gil would like to thank the Col·legi d’Enginyers Industrials de Catalunya for his research appointment.