Graphene oxide (GO) sheets prepared by chemical exfoliation were spread at the air–water interface and transferred to silicon substrates by Langmuir–Blodgett technique as closely spaced monolayers of 20–40μm size. Hydrazine exposure followed by annealing in vacuum and argon ambient results in the formation of reduced graphene oxide (RGO) monolayers, without significantly affecting the overall morphology of the sheets. The monolayer character of both GO and RGO sheets was ascertained by atomic force microscopy. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy supported by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy revealed that the reduction process results in a significant decrease in oxygen functionalities, accompanied by a substantial decrease in the ratio of non-graphitic to graphitic (sp
                     2 bonded) carbon in the monolayers from 1.2 to 0.35. Raman spectra of GO and RGO monolayers have shown that during the reduction process, the G-band shifts by 8–12cm−1 and the ratio of the intensities of D-band to G-band, I(D)/I(G) decreases from 1.3±0.3 to 0.8±0.2, which is in tune with the smaller non-graphitic carbon content of RGO monolayers. The significant decrease in I(D)/I(G) has been explained by assuming that substantial order is present in precursor GO monolayers as well as RGO monolayers obtained by solid state reduction.Graphene has attracted unprecedented scientific and technological interest in a short span of time, since its discovery in 2004 GO is a sheet of graphene containing carboxylic acid and other reactive oxygen functional groups, which is dispersible in water and other organic solvents. GO dispersions can be deoxygenated to form reduced graphene oxide (RGO) dispersions using a variety of chemical reducing agents and electrochemical methods In recent years, Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) technique has also been used to transfer graphene and GO monolayers from air–water interface using spreading solutions which contain graphene/GO, respectively. In a pioneering approach, Li et al. The above results clearly demonstrate that the classical LB approach of transferring monolayers from air–water interface is a promising method for obtaining large sheets of GO on solid surfaces. As explained by Kim et al. Synthesis of GO was carried out by Hummers–Offeman's method The solution was filtered and washed with water using a teflon membrane filter of 0.45 The above solution was used to spread GO monolayer at air–water interface, which was subsequently transferred by vertical dipping method using a KSV-3000 instrument. The subphase consisted of ultrafiltered and de-ionized water. The pH of the subphase was maintained at 5.5 The solid state reduction of GO into RGO was carried out by a two step process used by Becerril et al. The surface morphology and chemical composition of as-prepared GO and RGO films were studied by the following techniques. AFM measurements were carried out using a Digital Instrument's Veeco-Nanoscope IV Multimode scanning probe microscope in tapping mode. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) measurements were carried out using a Raith 150-Two instrument operated at 10  Identification of the chemical nature of defects present in GO and RGO monolayers and assessment of the extent of deoxygenation in the later has been done by XPS and FTIR techniques. In comparison, the C-1s peak of the RGO monolayers shows a dominant component due to undamaged alternant hydrocarbon structure along with a broad shoulder on the higher binding energy side containing several other components. These components have also been deconvoluted and their peak positions along with the corresponding area percentages are listed in  Raman spectroscopy is the most sensitive technique for investigation of carbon based materials, including graphene I(D)/I(G) ratio has been extensively used to characterize the disordered carbon content, bonding defects, and In the present work, I(D)/I(G) ratio has been found to decrease significantly during the reduction process of GO monolayers. The significant and concurrent decrease in I(D)/I(G) ratio as well as X indicates that during the reduction process, a substantial recovery of graphitic carbon takes place along with an increase in the extent of aromatic network within the RGO monolayers. The validity of this inference is based on the assumption that there is sufficient degree of structural order present in both GO and RGO monolayers. This is attributed to the inherent molecular level order in precursor LB monolayers and their anchoring on the substrate during the surface reaction resulting in its reduction. It must, however, be pointed out that more detailed investigations are needed to understand the issues related to solid state reduction behavior of LB GO monolayers as well as other precursor GO films having substantial structural order. Monolayers of closely spaced GO sheets of size 20–40 The authors would like to thank CRNTS, IIT Bombay for Raman spectroscopy, FIST (Physics)-IRCC Central SPM Facility, IIT Bombay for AFM measurements, and Central Surface Analytical Facility, IIT Bombay for XPS measurements.