This paper presents a comparative study of methods used for the analysis of the stability of rock slopes for hydropower projects. The comparison concerns the application of the limit equilibrium method, the block element method, and the finite element method on the stability analysis of two hydropower engineering projects in China. The study results show that the limit equilibrium method and the block element method give very close result, while the finite element method gives more conservative safety factor.Landslides present an important issue in hydropower project. Various methods have been proposed to evaluate the stability of rock slopes. The limit equilibrium method is very popular for such analysis because of its simplicity and convenience. Since the 1950s, numerical methods based on stress and strain analysis have gained popularity. However, these methods do not generally give identical results. This paper includes a comparison of three types of methods: (i) the limit equilibrium method (LEM) which involves classical mechanics and widely used in engineering practice (ii) the finite element method (FEM) which is also very popular in engineering practice and (iii) the block element method (BEM) which was developed recently within the framework of discontinuous media mechanics. Comparison is carried out on two important hydropower projects in China. Landslides can be onset by various factors such as earthquake and heavy rainfall. Since the interest of this paper concerns a comparative study of different methods through the safety index, the calculation is carried out only for the case of natural state without the effects of earthquake and rainfall. The safety index is specified as the strength reduction safety factor The limit equilibrium method (LEM) presents important advantages, mainly simplicity and practicability. As this method is adopted by various design codes for long period; it benefices from thorough practical experiences. There are various strategies to implement this method. This paper includes the use of two strategies: The Sarma method ( The residual thrust method (RTM), which assumes that the reaction force between slices is parallel to the slip surface. This method has been used in the Chinese railway engineering and mining engineering for long time. The program SA containing above two methods developed by the authors’ group was used in the study. The finite element method (FEM) is popular in numerical modeling of engineering structures ( The program ACORE of FEM developed by the authors’ group is used in the study ( The block element method (BEM) considers the rock mass as a discontinuous material composed of rock blocks and discontinuities ( The program BLOCK of BEM developed by the authors’ group was used in the study ( Preliminary evaluation showed a potential landslide at the upstream of the water intake in the Sanbanxi hydropower project ( The slip body was divided into 20 slices ( The safety factors calculated by the different methods are listed in  Preliminary evaluation by geologists showed a potential landslide at the downstream of the spillway in the Shuibuya hydropower project (   This paper presents a comparison of three methods used in the stability analysis of hydropower projects. Results show that the thrust forces between slices and the safety factors calculated by the LEM and the BEM are close, while the FEM generally gives lower thrust forces and safety factor. However, from the practical point of view, the safety factors determined by the three methods used in this paper have no significant differences. Support of the Science and Technology Innovation Foundation of the Water Resources Ministry of China under Contract No. SCX2003-21 is gratefully appreciated. Authors thank the Lille University of Science and Technology who offered a guest professor position for the first author from June to July of 2004 to complete this research.