The application of titanium (Ti) based biomedical materials which are widely used at present, such as commercially pure titanium (CP-Ti) and Ti–6Al–4V, are limited by the mismatch of Young's modulus between the implant and the bones, the high costs of products, and the difficulty of producing complex shapes of materials by conventional methods. Niobium (Nb) is a non-toxic element with strong β stabilizing effect in Ti alloys, which makes Ti–Nb based alloys attractive for implant application. Metal injection molding (MIM) is a cost-efficient near-net shape process. Thus, it attracts growing interest for the processing of Ti and Ti alloys as biomaterial. In this investigation, metal injection molding was applied to the fabrication of a series of Ti–Nb binary alloys with niobium content ranging from 10wt% to 22wt%, and CP-Ti for comparison. Specimens were characterized by melt extraction, optical microscopy, X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS), and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Titanium carbide formation was observed in all the as-sintered Ti–Nb binary alloys but not in the as-sintered CP-Ti. Selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns revealed that the carbides are Ti2C. It was found that with increasing niobium content from 0% to 22%, the porosity increased from about 1.6% to 5.8%, and the carbide area fraction increased from 0% to about 1.8% in the as-sintered samples. The effects of niobium content, porosity and titanium carbides on mechanical properties have been discussed. The as-sintered Ti–Nb specimens exhibited an excellent combination of high tensile strength and low Young's modulus, but relatively low ductility.Titanium (Ti) and its alloys are fast emerging as the most attractive choice for the majority of medical applications. Commercially pure Ti (CP-Ti) has been an important biomaterial in this field for a long period, due to its high specific strength, excellent corrosion resistance and superior biocompatibility ( The utilization of Ti alloys as implant material is limited because of the rather high costs of the raw material, the complex fabrication process, and associated geometry design constraints ( There have been several attempts in the MIM of Ti and Ti alloys in recent years. CP-Ti components which had biocompatible properties were produced via MIM process. The debinding process was successfully controlled, so that the binder was completely removed before sintering. The tensile strength, elongation and oxygen levels of the components met the requirements for ASTM Grade 2 CP-Ti ( In this study, the MIM technology was used to fabricate CP-Ti and Ti–Nb binary alloys containing (10–22) wt% Nb. The purpose was to understand the effects of different Nb contents on the microstructure and mechanical properties of Ti–Nb binary alloys fabricated by MIM. The Ti powder (<45 Samples made from CP-Ti, Ti–10Nb, Ti–16Nb and Ti–22Nb (all wt%) were produced by a MIM process, where the CP-Ti samples were fabricated as a reference. The alloys were produced by blending elemental Ti powder and Nb powder. The powder blends were then mixed with a polymer binder that consists of 5 After granulation, an Arburg 320S machine was used for the injection molding of the feedstocks. The feedstocks were injection molded as standard “dog bone” shape tensile specimens, with a nominal length of 89 The green (after injection) samples were subjected to solvent extraction by immersing them into hexane at 40 The linear shrinkage of all samples after injection molding and after sintering was found to be 11.5±1%. The density of the as-sintered samples and the as-HIPed samples were determined by the immersion method (Archimedes's principle) outlined in ASTM B311. A conventional LECO melt extraction system was used to determine the impurity levels of oxygen (O), carbon (C) and nitrogen (N). Constituent phases of the samples were characterized by the X-ray diffraction (XRD), which was conducted on a conventional diffractometer using Cu K In order to understand the evolution of the carbide precipitates during sintering and to explain the differences in the microstructure of the as-sintered CP-Ti and Ti–Nb alloys, the solubility of carbon in Ti–10Nb and Ti–22Nb were calculated using Thermo-Calc software. The as-sintered samples as well as the as-HIPed samples were directly used in the tensile tests without any preparation. Tensile tests were performed on a servohydraulic test machine equipped with a 100 Due to the influence of the impurity elements O, C and N on strength and ductility, the Ti powder, Nb powder and all the as-sintered samples described in the following sections were analyzed with respect to their content of these elements (  The optical micrographs of the as-sintered CP-Ti and Ti–Nb binary alloys and the as-HIPed Ti–22Nb are shown in  EDS results of the precipitates marked in In order to investigate the nature of the TiC Stoichiometric TiC adopts the cubic sodium chloride (NaCl) structure (   The bulk density of CP-Ti, Ti–10Nb, Ti–16Nb and Ti–22Nb alloy without pores were determined to be 4.501 The porosity and carbide area fractions in the as-sintered CP-Ti and Ti–Nb alloys and the as-HIPed Ti–22Nb alloy are presented in The dependence of porosity on Nb content may be attributed to two main factors: one is the larger average particle size of the Nb powder compared with the Ti powder; and the other is the difficulty of Nb to dissolve by diffusion of Nb atoms into the matrix. During sintering, the contribution of surface diffusion and grain boundary diffusion increases with decreasing powder size ( The observed precipitation of Ti  The tensile properties of the as-sintered and the as-HIPed alloys are summarized in To further understand the reasons for the differences in the mechanical properties of the as-sintered CP-Ti, Ti–10Nb, Ti–16Nb and Ti–22Nb alloys, the fracture surfaces of the failed tensile specimens are shown in Based on the results shown above, it can be concluded that there are three factors determining the tensile properties of the as-sintered CP-Ti and Ti–Nb alloys. The Nb content played a decisive role in reducing Young's modulus, and it also affected the tensile strength and elongation. Nb has a strong β-stabilizing effect on Ti alloys. So the decrease of Young's modulus with a higher amount of Nb addition in the as-HIPed alloys was expected. From an investigation which analyzed the influence of Nb addition on the mechanical properties of arc-melted Ti–Nb binary alloys ( The influence of porosity on the tensile properties is distinguishable by comparing the as-sintered and the as-HIPed samples. For instance, the Young's modulus of the as-sintered Ti–22Nb was about 3% to 6% lower than that of the as-HIPed Ti–22Nb, which roughly correlates with the porosity of the as-sintered Ti–22Nb alloy. Accordingly, besides the influence of the Nb content, porosity has also played an appreciable role in determining the Young's modulus of the as-sintered samples. As a result, even though the as-sintered Ti–10Nb, Ti–16Nb and Ti–22Nb alloys are α+β alloys, the specimens investigated here could exhibit comparable or lower Young's modulus compared with some β-Ti alloys, such as Ti–12Mo–6Zr–2Fe and Ti–13Nb–13Zr with lower porosity ( Ti This study aimed at the understanding of the effects of different Nb contents on the microstructure and mechanical properties of Ti–Nb binary alloys. Ti and Ti–Nb alloys with a porosity of less than 5% have been produced via the MIM process, and the shape of tensile test specimens was well preserved from the green state to the as-sintered state. Titanium carbides were found in the as-sintered Ti–Nb alloys by optical microscopy. Nevertheless, no obvious titanium carbide peaks were detected by the XRD measurements. TEM results revealed that the carbides were The increase of Nb content led to an increase of porosity and Ti The addition of Nb lowered Young's modulus and elongation but increased the strength. The Nb content, porosity and titanium carbides are the main factors to influence the mechanical properties. The higher Nb content and higher porosity resulted in a lower Young's modulus. The increase of strength was observed in both the as-sintered and the as-HIPed samples with increasing Nb content. This should correlate with not only the higher Nb content, but also the higher amount of carbide precipitates. Such a combined effect overcompensated the negative influence of porosity on the strength in the as-sintered Ti–Nb alloys. A distinct relationship between the Ti In summary, the Ti–Nb alloys fabricated by MIM showed a good combination of high strength and low Young's modulus. It is thus feasible to use MIM to fabricate Ti–Nb alloys with excellent strength and low Young's modulus by low amount of alloying elements addition. However, the unexpected precipitation of titanium carbides should be controlled to improve the ductility. This research was funded by