The present paper is focused on physico-mechanical pre-treatments of spent hydrotreating catalysts aimed at concentration of at least one of the valuable metals contained in such secondary raw material. In particular, dry Ni–Mo and Co–Mo as well as wet Ni–Mo catalysts were used. Flotation, grain size separation and attrition processes were tested. After that, a rods vibrating mill and a ball mill were used to ground the catalysts in order to understand the best mechanical pre-treatment before leaching extraction. The results showed that flotation is not able to concentrate any metals due to the presence of coke or other depressant compounds. The particle size separation produces two fractions enriched in Mo and Co when dry Co–Mo catalyst is used, whereas attrition is not suitable as metals are uniformely distributed in rings’ volume. Roasting at 550°C and vibrating grinding are the most suitable pre-treatments able to produce fractions easily leached by NaOH and H2SO4 after grain size separation.Catalysts are widely used in petroleum refining and chemical industries; hydrotreating catalysts usually consist of molybdenum (Mo) supported on an alumina or silica carrier together with promoters such as cobalt (Co) or nickel (Ni): they enhance removal of undesirable impurities such as sulphur, nitrogen and metals like vanadium (V) in feedstocks by promoting hydrodesulphurization (HDS), hydrodenitrogenation (HDN) and hydrodemetallization (HDM) reactions A summary of the most important and recent studies on recovery of metals from hydroteating catalyst is reported in Since these catalysts contain sulphur, coke and sometimes hydrocarbons like naphtha, a pre-treatment is usually required to oxidize the organic matter. The two-steps process industrially used includes roasting of catalysts in air at 600 The roasted material is leached with water at 80–90 Reactions   Several methods for separation, purification and recovery of molybdenum and vanadium from leach solutions are currently used; main techniques include sulphide precipitation, ammonium salt precipitation, carbon adsorption, ion exchange and solvent extraction Three different spent HDS catalysts were used in this study: in particular, a Ni–Mo and a Co–Mo black dry catalysts of different shapes (powder, spheres, cylinders and scraps) and a wet Ni–Mo (Lc-Finer) catalyst consisting of small pieces of cylindrical shape covered by naphtha. Catalysts were dried in oven (Mod. 780, Galli) at 105 Sulphur, carbon and hydrogen were measured by an elemental analyzer (2400 Series II, Perkin Elmer). Aluminum represents the main element when acid leaching is carried out; in fact, Al concentration can reach 18 Grain size separation tests were carried out on Ni–Mo and Co–Mo samples; 1 The dry Ni–Mo catalyst was subjected to an attrition test to investigate whether one or more metals should be recovered by removal of external layers of rings. A lab-scale attrition grinder (Wemco, 1.5 Fifteen froth flotation tests were carried out on Ni–Mo catalyst to increase concentration of one or two metals in the concentrate. In fact, flotation is a process widely used to concentrate Mo, Ni and Co sulphides from primary ores. The sample was prepared by dry grinding and the resulting material was sieved at 100 Tests of comminution were carried out using 210 Some leaching tests of unroasted catalysts by NaOH and H A1 – Non-ground feed; roasting 550 B1 – Non-ground feed; roasting 550 A2 – Ground feed; roasting 550 B2 – Ground feed; roasting 550 A3 – Non-ground feed; roasting 550 B3 – Non-ground feed; roasting 550 Leaching tests were performed in 250 Extraction yield of each metal was calculated as follows: Moisture of original samples ranged from 1 to 2% for Ni–Mo and Co–Mo. The Lc-Finer sample showed a weight loss close to 13% due to the naphtha content, whereas the amount of water is negligible. XRD spectra are characterized by low counts and this means that phases are not crystalline. The most probable compounds identified by spectra were: Ni–Mo: Al Co–Mo: Al Lc-Finer: Al The Lc-Finer's XRD analysis revealed that molybdenum is present as an oxide rather than sulphide (∼65%): this fact was confirmed by bioleaching tests by means of Fe/S oxidizing bacteria where molybdenum follows a dissolution pattern not associated to sulphides oxidation The Ni–Mo and Co–Mo elemental analysis showed the following results: Results of the grain size separation tests are listed in Around 50% of the Ni–Mo catalyst size is represented by the1 and 2 The results of the second separation test carried out on the Co–Mo catalyst are showed in As it can be noted, the material below 1 XRF analysis of fractions obained by attrition of Ni–Mo and Lc-Finer samples is reported in As it can be inferred from Results obtained in the flotation tests are shown in As previously said, the catalyst was ground and screened at 100  In general, size reduction by impact forces is predominant in the Palla vibrating mill; after 2 As regards roasting tests, XRF analyses of the resulting roasted samples are listed in Comparing the results of A1 (non-ground feed, 550 The stoichiometric amount of Na  Results of leaching tests in terms of extraction yields are shown in  In case of roasting with soda ash and leaching by NaOH ( Leaching by water (  Hence, the following conclusions are possible: Preliminary grinding before roasting is necessary for improving extraction of Mo. Roasting (550 Roasting (550 Roasting in the presence of soda ash, followed by alkaline or water leaching – in order to achieve Mo concentration of 11–12 Vanadium is not contained in Ni–Mo and Co–Mo samples at a high concentration. Maximum 1.8 Ni and Co are obviously not leached when alkaline or water leaching is carried out; maximum concentrations obtained in different acid tests were 1.43 and 1.52 As regards aluminum, non ground feed should be preferable to avoid a heavy contamination of pregnant solution in acid conditions, but it can be easily precipitated at very low pHs as ammonium alum. When using water, Al concentration is negligible but by NaOH its concentration is no greater than 6 Considering a recycling process of spent hydrotreating catalysts, wastes are generated in physico-mechanical treatments and leaching stage, depending on specific procedures: Co–Mo  As regards leaching stage, alkaline and acid leachings produce solid residues that can be landfilled or, as said above, used for production of tar cracking catalysts. In this paper several physico-mechanical tests were carried out on spent HDS catalysts with the aim to obtain concentrates before hydrometallurgical treatments. Moreover, effects of mechanical grinding and roasting on extraction of Ni, Mo, Co, Ni and Al were investigated. Results showed that flotation is not a suitable process for concentration of metals due to the presence of coke and/or other depressants. Large consumptions of both collectors (4–5 The authors sincerely acknowledge ORIM S.p.A. (Italy) for providing the catalyst samples, as well as Mr. Marcello Centofanti and Ms. Fabiola Ferrante for AAS and XRF analyses. Furthermore, authors wish to thank KHD Humboldt Wedag GmbH and the Dept. of Metallurgy, University of Aachen (Germany) for the comminution and thermal tests.