Porous hydrangea-like MnCo2O4 (h-MCO) have been prepared by simple hydrothermal and calcination methods. The stable three-dimensional (3D) structure, large specific surface area and mesoporous properties make it a huge potentiality for Li-ion batteries (LIBs) anode compared with rod-shaped MnCo2O4 (r-MCO). The discharge specific capacity of h-MCO maintained at 930 Ah/kg over 100 cycles at 0.1 A/g. Even cycling over 600 times at 1 A/g, the discharge capacity was still 678 Ah/kg, performing a good cycling performance. When the current densities gradually increased from 0.1 to 2 A/g, the average discharge capacity of h-MCO kept 1255, 1092, 969, 851, 717 and 566 Ah/kg, showing a good rate performance and promising prospects for LIBs.In the face of increasingly scarce energies, power batteries have been a research hotspot in the past decade. Li-ion batteries (LIBs) have become one of the best portable energy sources in future due to their advantages of high security and capacity, long cycle term and rapid charging/discharging [ MnCo Herein, we have prepared porous hydrangea-like MnCo In a typical synthesis, 2 mmol Co(NO The phase analysis of the two MnCo We tested the electrochemical performances of prepared MCOs by installing CR2025 half button cell in a glove box filled Ar with <0.01 ppm of moisture and oxygen content. The slurry which consisted of 10 wt% carboxymethylcellulose sodium and polymerized styrene butadiene rubber (CMC-SBR, binder), 20 wt% super P (conductive agent) and 70 wt% MCOs (active material) was coated on copper foil. After drying in vacuum and pressed the working electrode was obtained. Lithium sheet and 1 M LiPF As shown in The phase and specific surface area of the prepared MCOs were separately analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and N  The XPS spectrums of h-MCO composite are shown in Cyclic Voltammetry (CV) curves of the prepared MCOs electrodes are shown in The charging/discharging curves of the MCOs are shown in The cycling performances at 0.1 A/g of current density corresponding to the charging/discharging curves of the MCOs are shown in   The long cycling life is an important parameter of LIBs, thus the long cycling performances of the MCOs electrodes were tested at 1 A/g. The reversible specific capacities of the h-MCO electrode in To further understand the excellent electrochemical performances of h-MCO electrode above, the morphology of h-MCO electrode after cycling is shown in The excellent electrochemical reversibility, rate performance, and capacity maintenance of h-MCO electrode should be owing to the following points. First, the stable three-dimensional micron size spherical structure uneasy to damage during repeated charging and discharging instead the loose porous nanostructures are prone to agglomeration and inactivation [ The electrochemical impedance spectroscopies (EIS) of the MCOs were measured before and after cycling to illustrate the superior electrochemical behavior of h-MCO electrode. In summary, we have prepared the three-dimensional porous hydrangea-like MnCo There are no conflicts to declare. The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Fundamental Research Funds for Central Universities of