Fixation methods in distal radius fractures has been studied biomechanically, but studies evaluating clinical correlation of that data are lacking. We hypothesize that the use of unthreaded pegs and decreased screw number would correlate with an early failure of fixation. There were 50 operatively treated distal radius fractures with initial post-operative radiographs that demonstrated loss of fixation. An age, BMI, and fracture-type matched cohort of 50 non-failed distal radius fractures was used for comparison. The average number of distal screws in the failed fixation group was 5.3 compared to 4.8 in the group with no loss of fixation (p = 0.07). The average number of proximal shaft screws used in the failed fixation group was 3.2 compared to 3.2 in the control group (p = 0.60). There was no difference between the use of pegs in either group. There was a significant difference between distal screw number between constructs that failed from distal screw pullout as compared to the control group, 5.6 vs. 4.8 (p = 0.0001). In conclusion, there was no difference in the number of proximal screws used in distal radius fractures that demonstrated loss of early fixation. Additionally, having more than five screws in the distal fragment had a higher rate of failure from distal screw pullout, however this was likely confounded by the more severe intra-articular fractures that had additional fixation applied in an attempt to increase stability. Finally, using smooth pegs or screws in the distal fragment made no difference in loss of fixation.The use of plates has been well established as a reliable treatment to achieve anatomic reduction and stable fixation in unstable distal radius fractures. The past decade has seen advances in implant design and fixation technique to improve outcomes after plating of distal radius fractures. With newer volar plates that offer monoaxial fixed-angle or polyaxial variable-angle locking screw-plate design, there are many options for not only the type of plate used, but also the number and type of screws that are used for fixation. There have been a number of biomechanical studies examining optimal implant configurations, including a systematic review by Ramavath et al., that evaluated the best biomechanical outcomes of volar plating for distal radius fractures. The evidence revealed that it was not necessary to fill all available distal screw holes, and there was little data to support using two rows of distal screws over one row. However, there is currently a lack of literature examining the clinical loss of fixation of distal radius fractures treated with surgical fixation to determine the ideal screw numbers and fixation construct. Thus, the purpose of this study was to evaluate distal radius fractures complicated by early fixation failure, and to compare the fixation construct to a non-failed, matched cohort to determine if screw number or type of construct leads to early failure of fixation. We hypothesize that the use of unthreaded pegs and decreased screw number would correlate with an early failure of fixation. A query was performed of all distal radius fractures treated surgically from May 2013 through July 2019 from one institution. The first follow up post-operative radiographs were retrospectively reviewed to assess for fixation failure. Failure of fixation was determined by the agreement of the two senior authors based on maintenance of radial inclination, radial height, volar tilt, and intra-articular step-off. If there was disagreement between the two senior authors on whether there was loss of fixation, these constructs were not included. All constructs were evaluated for Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen (AO) classification of the fracture, the number of distal screws, the number of shaft screws, use of smooth pegs in the distal fragment, the number and type of plates used, and use of supplemental fixation, including Kirshner wires or interfragmentary screws. Post-operative radiographs were compared to intra-operative imaging to determine whether there was a poor intra-operative reduction or if loss of fixation occurred after leaving the operating room. Demographics were collected for all patients. An age, gender, body mass index (BMI), and AO fracture-type one to one ratio matched cohort of non-failed distal radius fractures was used to compare the failed fixation constructs to a control. A post hoc power analysis was conducted based on the average number of distal screws. With a sample size of 33 distal screw pullout cases and 49 control cases, with means of 5.58 (SD 1.09) and 4.73 (1.41), effect size was 0.67. With an assumed alpha of 0.05, the power is 0.907, which indicates this study is adequately powered. T-test and chi-squared test were performed to compare groups using SPSS (IBM, New York). A total of 741 radiographs were reviewed, of which 50 (6.7%) were found to have loss of fixation. Demographics can be seen in The mode of fixation loss can be seen in The current study examines clinical loss of fixation after surgical fixation of distal radius fractures to determine ideal screw numbers and fixation constructs. We found that the number of shaft screws used was similar between constructs that exhibited loss of fixation and those that did not. Additionally, using greater than five distal screws correlated with a higher rate of loss of fixation from distal screw pullout. There exist many biomechanical studies aimed at determining the ideal number and configuration of screws in a volar plate to optimize fixation of distal radius fractures. Jung et al. performed a biomechanical study to determine the minimum number of screws needed for sufficient stability of an unstable extra-articular distal radius fracture. With respect to the distal screw configuration, biomechanical literature supports not filling all the distal screw holes. There are limited radiographic studies evaluating the use of two distal rows versus using one. Teunis et al. performed a radiographic evaluation of distal radius fractures treated with volar plating after one year and found there was no difference in fracture position or clinical outcomes when comparing using one or two distal rows of screws. Thus, they recommend using one screw row to decrease cost, surgical time, and risk of misplaced screws. Our data is supported by the current literature; the number of distal screws did not correlate with a loss of fixation between the failure of fixation group and the control group. However when we performed a subgroup analysis comparing those constructs that failed from distal screw pullout to those that did not have loss of fixation, distal screw number was significantly different. Having greater than five screws in the distal fragment was associated with distal screw pullout and early failure of fixation. Of note, there were no differences in demographics or AO fracture type between these two cohorts. However, when we further stratified by AO fracture type, the number of distal screws were significantly different between the distal screw pullout group and the control group only in the AO type C fractures. This finding may help to explain this correlation; that surgeons tend to use more distal screws if the fracture is a more tenuous intra-articular fracture, which are more prone for failure. This provides new data on the ideal number of distal screws for a stable construct; not only are more screws more expensive, but they may not provide additional stability for particular AO type C fractures. The most common mode of failure in the loss of fixation group was distal fragment screw pullout. In a review of nine cases of mechanical failure of volar locking plates for distal radius fractures, Foo et al. found screw pullout to be the most common failure type, seen in five patients. We found no difference in fixation with the use of smooth pegs in the distal segment. Biomechanical studies comparing the use of smooth locking pegs versus locking screws have found that smooth pegs were significantly weaker than the locking screws. The present study has limitations. First, given the retrospective study design, it is subject to the bias of retrospective work and reliance on accurate data. Second, it is subject to intra-observer bias as there were multiple reviewers of radiographs to determine loss of fixation. However, this was mitigated by having the two senior authors both review the radiographs thought to have loss of fixation, and only after agreement of both authors was it counted as a loss of fixation. Despite these limitations, the current study provides novel data that adds to the clinical evaluation of distal radius fractures treated surgically. In conclusion, there was no difference in the number of proximal screws used in distal radius fractures that demonstrated loss of early fixation. Additionally, having more than five screws in the distal fragment had a higher rate of failure from distal screw pullout, however this was likely confounded by the more severe intra-articular fractures that had additional fixation applied in an attempt to increase stability. Finally, using smooth pegs or screws in the distal fragment made no difference in loss of fixation. There were no conflicts of interest or sources of funding declared for any authors. There were no conflicts of interest or sources of funding declared for any authors.