Corona-electrostatic separation is a multi-variable process that has been thoroughly studied in connection with its various applications in the recycling industry. The aim of the present paper is to point out one parasitic phenomenon that adversely affects the efficiency of the separation: the sparks generated at the passage of conductive particles through the electric field zone. The experiments were carried out on a laboratory roll-type corona electrostatic separators, and the sparks were generated by introducing 16 calibrated copper pins in 40-g samples of granular insulating material (PVC; typical granule size: 1.5 mm) that were fed at a constant rate onto the surface of the grounded rotating roll electrode. The distribution of the PVC granules in the 14 boxes of the collector was altered by the occurrence of the spark discharges, as they were accompanied by the annealing of the electric field between the electrodes. The numerical simulation of insulating granules charging and movement under the action of the electric field enabled a better understanding of the interactions between the spark discharges and the other factors that influence their trajectories and affect the efficiency of the separation: roll-speed, particle size and ambient humidity. The particle dynamics equations were solved using an iterative scheme by using the electric field calculated in any point with the commercial software TRICOMP. The good agreement between the predictions made by these simulations and the experimental findings confirms the ability of the mathematical model to reflect the complexity of the physical phenomena.The applications of electrostatic separation technologies range from recovery of metallic and insulating materials from industrial wastes The charges and forces of conducting particles, as well as their trajectories in roll-type separators, have been the object of several papers, aimed at assessing the factors that influence the efficiency of the electrostatic sorting process The experimental observations communicated in Ref. The aim of this paper is to further improve this model by taking into consideration the effect of spark discharges that might be generated at the passage of over-sized metallic particles through the electric field zone. The experiments described in the next section of the paper have shown that the distribution of the insulating granules in the boxes of the collector was altered by the occurrence of the spark discharges. The numerical simulations presented in the third section of the paper point out that the annealing of the electric field due to each spark discharge affects both the charge acquired by the granules and the electric force exerted on them. The experiments were carried out using granular materials (size: less than 3 mm) extracted from genuine electric cable wastes ( Taking into account these results, it is considered that for the three cases under study (i.e., The first set of experiments on the effect of spark discharges was carried out with samples containing 40 g of PVC, maintaining the feed rate at the value employed for the preliminary tests (i.e., 1.25 g/s), but increasing the voltage to 30 kV. In the second set of experiments, carried out under otherwise similar conditions, a well-defined number of sparks was generated at regular intervals of time, by using 16 pin-like conductive bodies like the one schematically represented in The repartitions of the PVC granules in the boxes #1 to #14 for each of the following three values of the roll speed: The effect of sparks on the purity of the conductor product collected after separation can be judged by examining the results of the calculations performed with (1) and recorded in The physical processes taking place in the roll-type corona-electrostatic separator can be described by simple mathematical models that enable the numerical computation of particle trajectories in the two situations examined in the present study: in the absence and in the presence of spark discharges. The mathematical model of particle charging is the one elaborated by Pauthenier The charging process takes place only in the space-charge zone generated by the corona discharge and concentrated in the angular interval [ The particle charging equation can be solved using the 4th order Runge–Kutta method. The saturation charge The charge After leaving the space-charge zone, the particle starts to lose its charge. As a matter of fact, as long as a particle is in contact with the grounded electrode, its charge slowly decreases, as demonstrated by the experiments described in Ref. Each spark produces the annealing of the voltage across the inter-electrode gap and hence of the electrostatic field in the active zone of the separator. In order to model the effect of a spark, it should be also taken into account the delay with which the high-voltage supply is capable to re-establish its set value (approximately 440 ms for the high voltage source supply model M583, GAMA, Ormond Beach, FL. employed in the experiments The duration of particle presence in the space-charge zone is only 0.072 s, with the roll electrode turning at a speed of 60 rev/min. This duration is definitely shorter than the above-mentioned duration of high-voltage re-establishment. Consequently, the particles do not charge if the spark occurs at the moment of their access in the space charge zone. In this situation, they are not pinned to the grounded electrode by the electric image force and will be projected by the centrifugal force toward the middling and conductor compartments. This is one explanation for the presence of insolating granules in the conductor boxes of the collector, in the experiment described in the previous section of the paper. The particles that are somewhere in the space-charge zone at the moment of the spark will get partially charged. From the moment of spark discharge to the re-establishment of the electric field at its previous value, the insulating particles cease to charge (d Eq. A charged insulating sphere of mass the electric field force: the weight: the electric image force: the centrifugal force:  After take-off, the particle is subjected to only to main forces, ( The maximum charge If the spark occurs when a particle of radius At low ambient humidity All the insulating particles that are not charged because the spark occurred at the moment of their intrusion in the space charge zone ( The spark that might occur between the electrodes of a roll-type corona-electrostatic separator at the passage of over-sized conductive particles disturbs the charging process of the insulating particles. This process is blocked by the annealing of the space charge and the electric field that accompanies any such discharge and lasts for the time the high-voltage supplies needs to re-establish the normal operating conditions. Depending on their position in the separator at the moment of the spark, some of the insulating particles may not get enough charge for the electric forces to keep them pinned to the surface of the rotating roll electrode; the centrifugal force ejects them into the collecting box for conductive particles. The spark discharges have a stronger effect on the trajectories of coarser particles and at higher values of the relative humidity of ambient air, as pointed out by the numerical simulations presented in this paper. The good agreement between the predictions made by these simulations and the experimental findings is due to the fact that the mathematical model reflects the complexity of the physical phenomena: (1) the particle charging process is described by Pauthenier's equation, in which the saturation charge is expressed in function of the numerically-computed local intensity of the electric field; (2) the particle discharging process is expressed as a function of the experimentally-determined charge-decay characteristics of corona-charged insulating particle layers; (3) the effect of the spark discharge is reflected in the equations that describe the particle charging and the particle trajectories.