Background
                  When approaching radial head and neck fractures, the decision for ORIF, resection, or arthroplasty is often performed intraoperatively. Factors that contribute include ligamentous and bony stability, cartilage injury, mechanical alignment as well as patient factors. Recent data has suggested conventional methods may not be sufficiently sensitive in detecting Essex Lopresti injuries. Here we describe an intraoperative technique that could objectively assess proximal radio-ulnar stability with subsequent disruption of the ligamentous structures.
               
                  Methods
                  Eight cadaveric specimens were used to evaluate amount of radial proximal migration between three groups of forearms. After radial head resection, proximal migration of the radial shaft was measured in three distinct groups. Group A included intact forearms, Group B included forearms with resected interosseous membranes (IOM), and Group C included forearms with resected interosseous membranes and distal radioulnar joint (DRUJ) disruptions.
               
                  Results
                  As compared to group A, group B averaged 4 mm of proximal radial migration (p < 0.01), while Group C demonstrated >6 mm of migration (p < 0.01).
               
                  Conclusion
                  In the setting of a non-repairable radial head, the RAIL test may provide a more objective means of assessing for Essex-Lopresti injuries.Essex Lopresti injuries (ELI) were initially described in 1951, by Peter Essex-Lopresti. This subtle pattern was frequently missed as the clinician simply treated the injury as an isolated radial head fracture. Failure to recognize the injury can result in ulnocarpal pain accompanied by decreased forearm range of motion due to progressive and repetitive radial shortening. The current techniques to evaluate integrity of the interosseous membrane have been met with moderate success. The current study attempts to objectively assess the incremental differences in proximal radial shaft migration after sequential resection of distal radio-ulnar stabilizers in the setting of an incompetent radial head. Eight fresh frozen cadaver arms were thawed at room temperature 24 h before testing. Cadavers were prepared using a lateral kocher approach to the elbow, between the anconeus and extensor carpi ulnaris. After exposure to the radial head, approximately a 10 mm resection of the radial head was performed with a mini sagittal saw. These specimens consisted of Group A. In Group B, the interosseous membrane was exposed and resected using an ulnar approach between the extensor carpi ulnaris and ulna, elevating the extensor compartment until reaching the central band, distal and oblique bundles of the interosseous membrane. In Group C, the distal radioulnar joint (DRUJ) was exposed using the dorsal approach to the wrist between the fourth and fifth extensor compartments. After retraction of the tendon sheaths, the distal radioulnar ligaments were isolated and resected. A description of the RAIL test is depicted below ( Statistical analysis was performed using Student’s The results of the eight cadaveric specimens are presented in Here, we have provided the first description of a dynamic test of the IOM in the full range of motion of the forearm. The results show proximal migration of the radius consistent with other tests previously published. Smith et al Although these tests are described well, the interosseous membrane is of variable anatomy. Benefits of the current test include its simplicity as clamp instrumentation is not required. Application of clamps around the radial neck may place the posterior interosseous nerve (PIN) as risk. Tornetta et al. demonstrated that the PIN lies 1.2 mm to the radial head on average. In the setting of an unrepairable radial head fracture with an intact interosseous membrane, resection has been proven to be a successful technique. Limitations to this study include the low sample size of cadaveric specimens, the lack of interobserver or intraobserver testing, lack of standardization of force applied and the lack of clinical correlation in vivo. Although our sample size is low, findings were significant between all 3 groups with even distributions. Forces applied may be difficult to estimate at 20 lb precisely, however, minimal proximal radial migration occurred with significantly greater force during practice testing phases. The current study demonstrates the potential use of the RAIL test in distinguishing the severity of radio-ulnar instability. Additionally, the RAIL test is a quick and easy test that can be performed intraoperatively to determine interosseous membrane stability and potentially necessity of radial height maintenance. Future research is needed to determine in vivo clinical application. The authors have no disclosures. Each author certifies that his institution approved or waived approval for the use of human subjects for this investigation and that all investigations were conducted in conformity with ethical principles of research.