Sodium ethyl and potassium amyl xanthates are commonly used in bulk and selective froth flotation of pentlandite ores respectively. Pulp pH plays a significant role in pentlandite flotation and xanthates are sensitive to pH. Consequently, more stable collectors have to be used in the froth flotation of pentlandite ores. The dithiocarbamates are possible replacement as they are believed to be stable in a wider range of pH and their use yields a faster flotation rates than xanthates. However, it may be uneconomical to use dithiocarbamates as pure collectors due to their cost. The present study explored feasibility of using di-C1-DTC to replace or partially replace PAX and SEX in nickel flotation. The tested molar ratios were 90:10 and 70:30; with xanthates as the abundant constituent in all the mixtures. This study showed that the using di-C1-DTC as co-collector was beneficial as the mixtures 30di-C1-DTC:70SEX and 10di-C1-DTC:90PAX improved nickel recovery and grade respectively. Furthermore, there were no significant differences in cumulative mass and water recoveries obtained with all the mixtures therefore differences in nickel recoveries were due to the differences in the selectivity properties of the collectors and not physical processes viz. physical entrapment and hydraulic entrainment.Nickel sulphide processing industry needs to be more efficient and cost effective to be sustainable as there is a growing demand for nickel, there are strict environmental constraints especially on sulphur emissions and there is a challenge posed by nickel oxide ores as primary source of nickel. Currently, nickel sulphide mineral ores amounts to more than 50% of all commercial nickel ( The use of pure PAX and SEX yielded higher nickel grades and recoveries respectively than the use of di-C1-DTC ( Xanthates adsorb to the mineral surface via charge transfer between the collector and the mineral surface while dithiocarbamates adsorb via the formation of metal-thiolate on the mineral surface. Therefore, when a xanthate and dithiocarbamate collectors are mixed, the mixtures may have improved adsorption characteristics as the mixture may encompass the adsorption characteristics of both collectors resulting in an improved mineral surface coverage ( Pentlandite (1.3%) was identified as the major form of nickel sulphide present in the ore. The other minerals present were: Sulphide gangue: Pyrrhotite (10.7%), pyrite (3%), chalcopyrite (1%). Non-sulphide gangue: Clinopyroxene (18.8%), tremolite (10.7%), chromite (9.4%), serpentine (8.8%), chlorite (6.0%). Each of the 1 The PAX; SEX and di-C1-DTC collectors used in this work were of analytical grade. The xanthates were received as powder while di-C1-DTC was received as liquid. All collectors were dosed at 80 Analytical grade calcium hydroxide was used to increase and maintain the pulp pH at 10. Calcium chloride, at 80 The frother, SAS froth 94, was dosed at 30  1 Calcium hydroxide was added to raise pH to 10 and the slurry was aerated for 5 The pulp was conditioned for 2 The frother at 30 Five concentrates were collected with, a scrape interval of 10 s, after 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 After 15 The experiments with each collector or collector mixture were repeated. The core output of this work is given in A plot of the rate of nickel recovery versus flotation time showed that the rate of nickel recoveries decreased in the following order with the collectors used: The long chained collectors have slower reaction rates on mineral surfaces than their shorter chained counterparts ( A plot of percentage cumulative nickel grade versus percentage cumulative nickel recovery showed that cumulative nickel recoveries decreased in the following order with the collectors used: The cumulative nickel recoveries obtained with these use of these collectors were 73%, 67% and 64% respectively ( The cumulative nickel grades were 3.0%, 2.5% and 2.1% respectively ( The collectors in the same class e.g. xanthates may display similar characteristics such as reactivity, selectivity and solubility ( A relationship between percentage cumulative mass recoveries and percentage cumulative water recoveries obtained with the use of pure PAX, SEX and di-C1-DTC showed that cumulative water recoveries decreased in the following order with the collectors used: The cumulative water recoveries were 61%, 48% and 40% respectively. There were no significant differences in the cumulative mass recoveries obtained with the use of pure PAX and di-C1-DTC ( PAX had a longer hydrophobic alkyl group and it formed more hydrophobic insoluble agglomerates in the flotation cell than SEX ( A plot of the rate of nickel recovery versus flotation time obtained with the use of pure di-C1-DTC and its mixtures with 90 or 70 The collector’s effectiveness in the flotation cell is a function of its concentration ( A plot of percentage cumulative nickel grade versus cumulative nickel recovery obtained with the use of The cumulative nickel recoveries were 67% and 59% respectively and the cumulative nickel grades decreased in the following order: Not all collector constituents are compatible to be mixed to improve valuable mineral recoveries or concentrate grades or rate of recovery in froth flotation ( The cumulative water recoveries were 48% and 44% respectively and the cumulative mass recovery were not significantly affected ( There were no significant differences in cumulative mass and water recoveries obtained with 30di-C1-DTC:70PAX and 10di-C1-DTC:90PAX and these results once again showed that the observed differences in cumulative nickel grades and recoveries obtained were due to the differences on the selective properties of the collectors. Furthermore, the use of mixtures 30di-C1-DTC:70PAX and 10di-C1-DTC:90PAX yielded lower water recoveries than pure di-C1-DTC ( A plot of the rate of nickel recovery versus flotation time obtained with the use of pure di-C1-DTC and its mixtures with 90 or 70 Pure di-C1-DTC yielded a lower rate of nickel recovery than SEX ( A plot of percentage cumulative nickel grade versus percentage nickel recovery obtained with use of pure di-C1-DTC and its mixtures with SEX 90% and 70% showed that cumulative nickel recoveries decreased in the following order: SEX was the abundant constituents in the mixture and more selective than di-C1-DTC ( A plot of cumulative mass recovery versus cumulative water recovery obtained with use of pure di-C1-DTC and its mixtures with SEX showed that there were no significant difference in cumulative mass and water recoveries obtained with 30di-C1-DTC:70SEX and 10di-C1-DTC:90SEX therefore, differences in nickel recoveries were due to true flotation and the contribution of hydraulic entrainment and physical entrapment was minimal. The constituents’ ratios did not affect mass recovery when using the mixtures of SEX with di-C1-DTC as mass recoveries were constant at 29% for both mixtures ( This study showed that the higher cumulative nickel grades and cumulative nickel recovery were obtained by the use of PAX and SEX respectively. Therefore, pure di-C1-DTC may not be able to fully replace the xanthates in the froth flotation of nickel sulphide ores. However, it was further shown that the using di-C1-DTC as co-collector was beneficial as the mixtures We are grateful for the role that Axis House and the staff, Mr. Jules Kitenge and Mr. Gonzalo Bernal, played in the success of this work. They provided reagents, allowed us to use their X-Ray Florescent Spectrometer for assays. The Center Mineral Research at the University of Cape Town especially Shireen Govender