Although heap leaching using sulfuric acid was introduced to the uranium industry in the 1950s, sodium carbonate–bicarbonate (alkaline) heap leaching of low-grade Ca-carbonate-rich uranium ores has recently gained popularity. This study presents the results of two column tests on a calcrete-type uranium–vanadium (carnotite) ore using a mixture of sodium carbonate and bicarbonate (Na2CO3/NaHCO3) as the leach solution. This data was kindly supplied by Toro Energy Ltd. The experimental data comprised physical–chemical leach information and two different irrigation rates (10 and 20L/h·m2). The experimental data indicated that the carnotite ore with high calcium carbonate (CaCO3) can be leached effectively using the alkaline leach solution. The increase in the irrigation rate increased the uranium and vanadium extraction and decreased their concentration in the effluent.
                  The column leach data was therefore fitted to a simplified first-order kinetic model using two approaches, a general form and a second based on the reagent consumption per unit mass of the initial valuable species (U and V). As reagent consumption is a key economic factor in the heap leaching process, having a kinetic leaching model incorporating reagent consumption would provide useful techno-economic information. In this regards a new leaching index of (β) is also introduced. Both approaches of the first order kinetic model provide a good agreement with the column testing data.Time dependent Reagent volume dependent Heap leaching is extensively applied to extract copper and gold from their respective ores. Heap leaching was introduced to the uranium industry in the 1950s by the Portuguese to extract uranium from low grade uranium ores ( Currently several new projects are progressing to recover uranium from carbonate deposits ( The objective of this study is to investigate the alkaline leaching of a uranium–vanadium ore in the course of heap leaching and evaluate two simplified first-order kinetic models—a general form and a second based on the reagent consumption per unit mass of the valuable species. In this paper, the physico-chemical dynamics during leaching in terms of pH-Eh window and irrigation rate are investigated. The leaching trials were conducted on a calcrete-hosted uranium deposit obtained from Wiluna, Western Australia. The deposit, owned by Toro Energy Ltd., is located 30 Detailed Quantitative X-ray Diffraction (QXRD) ( The smectite type clays identified were beidellite—Na The column leaching tests were conducted by a third party using subsamples from the calcrete ore type. The leaching tests were carried out in two PVC columns 100 In the beginning, column tests were irrigated in closed cycle within the columns with a mixed sodium carbonate and bicarbonate (Na When the pH value of the pregnant leach solution (PLS) increased above 10, the leach columns were operated in continuous mode. Sodium carbonate and bicarbonate were analytical-grade reagents (AR) and the solution was prepared using distilled water. A comparative summary of the column leach tests conditions is given in The leaching lasted for 190 The pH, Eh (mV), U and V concentration in the effluent solution were measured each day. All pH measurements were performed using a Metrohm 704 pH metre and probe, which was calibrated at pH Except for the small initial fluctuation in pH in response to the addition of leach reagent, the pH of the effluent in columns remained between pH The similar measured values for redox potential and pH in columns indicated that the different irrigation rates do not affect the chemical dynamics during leaching, but influences the leaching kinetic and consequently extraction rate (see As discussed earlier, the alkali leaching process is based on the ability of the hexavalent uranium to form highly soluble complexes in alkaline media. The major cations within the ore sample are Na The alkaline reactants do not react in significant amounts with silicate and alumino-silicate minerals, which commonly occur in the uranium ores, including the sample used in this study. Therefore the reagent consumption is relatively low. The other minerals that consume carbonate–bicarbonate are the sulphide minerals, sulphates (gypsum, anhydride), phosphates and organic matter. Eqs. The other economic advantage of using alkali carbonate is the viability of CO The cumulative extraction trends of uranium into the leach liquors are illustrated in The recovery curve corresponding to column B in As Although in this study two different irrigation rates were investigated, there is an optimum irrigated rate up to that, the recovery will increase, but introducing solution reagent in the rate higher than that, in fact will decrease the PLS residence time and correspondingly more of the solution will pass through the column with little or no meaningful interaction with ore particles. The percolation rate of the fluids should be slow enough to provide sufficiently long-lived contact of the lixiviant with the ore particles to affect ore dissolution. (The optimum rate will be dependent on other factors such as the mineralisation and permeability of the heap.) Higher irrigation rate in the leaching process dilutes the uranium concentration in the effluent of column tests ( The sharp and sudden decrease in uranium concentration in PLS at various times in both columns A and B ( The results presented in Comparatively, alkaline leach with carbonate and bicarbonate is much more selective for uranium than the acidic leach. Only molybdenum, if present, and vanadium in the ore could be troublesome for the uranium purification ( As can be seen from As Although the solubility of Thorium (Th) in the carbonate and bicarbonate (Na Alongside advantages of alkaline leaching, there are some limitations which include the sluggishness of the process, the suitable porosity and permeability requirement of the ore and the poor attack of the mild carbonate solutions on refractory ores. In a heap leach operation, the main problem will be swelling of some of the clays, dispersion and possibly transformation of the clays with high pH. The swelling of clay will adversely affect the solution permeability. In the sample studied in this work, the ores contain 15–16% swelling clay mineral smectite (see Although both columns were fed with the same size fractions, the residue had a size distribution containing even some fines. Evaluation of the columns leach residue indicated significant changes in the PSD. The amount of the fine fraction in the PSD of the columns residue increased marginally with increase in the solution irrigation rate with d Regeneration of the fine particle fraction in the residue of the columns leach residue could be due to the active crack network growth during the leaching. Since the surface of ore particles and their inner micro pores or cracks are damaged after reacting with reagent, some fine particles would be produced. The initial crack network in the particles increases during the leaching process, which splits each single particle into two or more new ore particles and produces a particles size distribution different to the initial reactor feed ( The leaching experiment data were fitted with two different approaches of first-order kinetic model. As presented in  A modified first kinetic model with a new variable of Q As shown in the A new leaching index of (β) is defined as the required reagent consumption per a percentage increase in the recovery of the valuable species within the ore sample with respect to different irrigation rates. As given in the The obtained result indicates that 9.7 Values of the (β) vs. time are presented in the In this study, alkaline (sodium carbonate and bicarbonate) leach data, generated from two column leach tests on a calcrete type uranium–vanadium ore from Western Australia were assessed. Leaching experiment data was fitted with a first-order kinetic model and also modelled based on the reagent consumption per mass of the initial valuable species. The column tests were performed for 142 and 190 Both approaches of the first order kinetic model provide a good agreement with the column test data. Besides the simplicity and flexibility of models used, the reagent consumption based leaching kinetic model with Q Due to the high amount of clay mineral present in the ore sample and their effect of the percolation, the ability to absorb metals from a sodium carbonate–sodium bicarbonate leach solution needs further investigations mostly with regard to including a proper agglomeration step as part of the alkaline heap leach process. Experimental data used in this report was provided by Toro Energy Ltd., and was acquired on their behalf by a third party (Ammtec). Characterization data on selected samples representative of Wiluna ore (not necessarily the specific ore used in the leaching tests) was performed by CSIRO. The authors are grateful to Toro Energy, CSIRO and our respective organizations for allowing the publication of this paper. The authors are grateful to Dr. Keith Barnard from CSIRO Australia and Dr. Angus McFarlane from