The composition of ammonium jarosite precipitated over different times, temperatures and initial pH have been determined. The mole ratio of ferric and sulfate species in the precipitates is initially higher than stoichiometric but reaches an equilibrium ratio of 3:2 after several hours. Thermogravimetric analyses (TG) and differential thermal analyses (DTA) were conducted to examine the weight losses in ammonium jarosite during its decomposition. Based on the experimental results, possible reaction mechanisms for the formation of ammonium jarosite are proposed and the possible multiple pathways by which jarosite precipitation could occur are discussed. A preliminary thermodynamic study on the iron–sulfate–water system support the proposed reaction mechanism.Over the past few years, much research has been undertaken in this laboratory on the direct low temperature leaching of copper sulfide-containing concentrates and smelter products using oxygenated acidic chloride/sulfate solutions ( Even when the sulfide is leached with hydrochloric acid or ferric chloride, there is sufficient sulfide sulfur oxidized to build up appreciable sulfate ion. Thus there is little benefit in excluding sulfate ions from leach solutions. Chloride salts are less expensive than hydrochloric acid; and when mixed with sulfuric acid at an appropriate strength the leachant properties are excellent. In the presence of chloride ions, the elemental sulfur formed during the leach reaction is crystalline and does not generate a kinetic barrier on the reaction surfaces. It is unnecessary for all the iron in a solution to be removed as the ferric/ferrous couple aids in the dissolution of copper sulfides. However, it is necessary to control the build up of iron, which is conveniently carried out by precipitation of jarosite. The aim of this study is to present a possible mechanism for the formation of ammonium jarosite in the presence of appreciable concentrations of chloride ions and low concentrations of cupric ions — conditions that would be met in the iron-sulfate control stage shown in The operating conditions used for the laboratory precipitation study are shown in Samples were withdrawn at pre-set times and were rapidly cooled to the room temperature to limit the extent of further reaction. The solids were filtered, washed and dried in an air oven at 110 °C for 24 h. The filtrate was retained for chemical analysis. While the ferric iron content in the precipitates was determined using titration, the amount of sulfate was determined using gravimetric means. Chloride ions were determined using ion chromatography, while ammonia was determined colorimetrically. The theoretical composition of ammonium jarosite, NH A series of tests was then carried out in which the ratio of ferric to sulfate was determined as a function of the reaction time keeping the temperature constant. The ratio changed significantly with time as shown in To produce ammonium jarosite, either ammonia solution or ammonium salts can be used as the ammonium ion source. The advantage of using ammonia is that it also can be used as a means of pH control. When aqueous ammonia solutions are introduced into the ferric iron-containing solution, some ferric hydroxide forms as the local pH becomes high. This occurs even with good mixing and slow ammonia addition rates. The formation of ferric hydroxide in this fashion does not cause problems since ferric hydroxide is converted into jarosite provided the retention time is sufficiently long and the other requisite ions are present in solution. Thermogravimetric analyses (TG) and differential thermal analyses (DTA) were conducted to examine the weight losses in ammonium jarosite during its decomposition. This information gives further evidence whether there is ferric hydroxide formed after the addition of ammonia. The thermal decomposition of ammonium jarosite occurs via three reaction stages: The ammonium jarosite is stable up to about 300 °C, with a weight loss occurring immediately thereafter. The first sharp weight loss takes place from about 350 to 440 °C, where the evolution of ammonia and water occurs. The second and third weight losses occur at about 600 and 680 °C, respectively, where normally the evolution of SO  Again the DTA–TG results indicate that the higher the initial pH, the greater the amount of ferric hydroxide initially formed, and a longer retention time is needed to convert it into jarosite. However, there may be still some direct formation of jarosite: If the reaction is a single step reaction, this would require the simultaneous contact of six ions species with water molecules, which has a low statistical probability. Rather, it is believed that solid ammonium jarosite is formed via a series of steps. When ammonia solution is used as the ammonium ion source, the reaction mechanism for the formation of jarosite may be different from the mechanism occurring in other circumstances, as reviewed by Since a single step formation of ammonium jarosite is statistically unlikely, basic ferric sulfates, [Fe(OH) Colloidal and precipitated ferric hydroxide, likewise could be the intermediates in the formation of ammonium jarosite, via While FeSO In addition, the reactions shown in Eqs. Further reactions between the hydroxyl ferric ions Fe(OH) Basic ferric sulfates are known to become polynuclear and hence could react to form jarosite: The overall reactions for the formation of ammonium jarosite through these possible multiple pathways are: — when the pathway starts with ferric hydroxide and where the ferric hydroxide may be either in the solution or as a condensed phase;and — when the formation starts with FeSO All reaction steps are thermodynamically favorable, and the reaction sequences such as those described are believed to be involved in the precipitation of ammonium jarosite from solutions. Based on the results obtained, a multiple pathway reaction mechanism for the formation of ammonium jarosite is proposed. The formation of ammonium jarosite is believed to start with the species FeSO