The results of an electrochemical study of the use of hydrogen peroxide in the dissolution of selected sulphide minerals in acidic sulfate solutions in the absence and presence of iron(III) are described. The behaviour of peroxide on platinum and gold electrodes has been studied in parallel. The focus has been on the effect of peroxide on the equilibrium and mixed potentials under various conditions. It has been confirmed that the measured potentials of peroxide solutions on platinum and gold electrodes are not true equilibrium potentials but mixed potentials established by simultaneous oxidation of peroxide to oxygen and reduction to water. The effect of added iron(III) ions on such potentials have been further studied. This approach has been extended to the potentials of pyrite, chalcopyrite and covellite under similar conditions. Linear sweep voltammetry has been used to elucidate and confirm the mechanisms proposed for the potential measurements. Synergism in the simultaneous reduction of peroxide and iron(III) on both metal and mineral electrodes has been observed and characterized.
                  Implications of these results to previously published leaching studies and to possible practical application of peroxide as an oxidant are discussed.Hydrogen peroxide (referred to as peroxide) is, in theory, one of the most powerful commonly available oxidising agents with a standard reduction potential of 1.76 V for the reaction. H However, despite significant laboratory research into its use in oxidative leaching of minerals, it has received very limited practical application. Aside from the cost of this reagent, there are several important aspects of the chemistry of its use that have not been fully appreciated nor understood. A brief survey of prior literature has revealed laboratory studies of the use of peroxide in the oxidative leaching of sulphide minerals in acid solutions such as sphalerite ( Peroxide can also be used as a reducing agent in, for example, the reductive leaching of cobalt ( Peroxide is an intermediate in the reduction of dissolved oxygen. O and, for example, is produced in measurable amounts during the redox-mediated oxidation of copper(I) in chloride and ammoniacal solutions. ( The emphasis in this paper will be on the understanding of the mechanisms of the oxidative dissolution of minerals in acid solutions with peroxide as an oxidant. A second paper will focus on the role of peroxide in the dissolution of metals and minerals in basic solutions. Mineral electrodes were prepared from natural samples of high purity that were cut into small cubes of side 5-10 mm. XRD analysis was used to confirm the purity of the samples. In the case of covellite, a synthetic sample was used as natural samples are invariably contaminated by chalcocite. The samples were fabricated as electrodes using silver epoxy as the contact of one face to a stainless steel stud that was encased in epoxy resin and machined to a cylindrical shape that was attached to the end of a rotating shaft whose speed was controlled. Platinum and gold electrodes were fabricated in a similar way using 99.99% pure metal rods of 3 mm diameter. Electrochemical measurements were carried out using a standard three-electrode system with rotating working mineral or metal electrodes. Potentials and currents were measured and controlled by a Solartron potentiostat operated with corrosion measurement software. The silver/silver chloride (3 mol/L potassium chloride) reference electrode (0.210 V versus SHE) was separated by a Luggin capillary from the solution in the cell and the potentials were measured and controlled relative to this electrode at room temperature (23 °C). Electrolytes were prepared using AR grade reagents in Millipore pure water. Unless stated otherwise, all experiments were carried out in 0.2 M sulfuric acid solutions. Electrochemical measurements were carried out using the following procedure. 25 cm The formal potential of the iron(III)/iron(II) couple in 0.2 M H The thermodynamics of the oxygen/peroxide/water system are relevant in any discussion of the mechanisms and rate-determining steps involved in the use of peroxide as an oxidant. As has been previously discussed the reduction and oxidation of peroxide will occur in a number of single electron steps. This follows from the theory for electron transfer that suggests that complimentary reactions involving single-electron steps are generally more rapid than those involving multiple electron transfers in the rate-determining step. The successive single electron transfer reactions together with the standard electrode potentials ( O HO H OH + H Limited scale Eh/pH lines of the calculated potentials using published standard potentials ( There are several important aspects of the positions of the lines on this diagram that relate to the use of peroxide. The equilibrium constant for the disproportion reaction 2H is independent of pH and can be calculated as 6 × 10 Although peroxide is thermodynamically a powerful oxidant for iron(II) because the line for reaction (1) lies about 1 V above that for the oxidation of iron(II), the transfer of the first electron to. OH is significantly less favourable as shown by the position of the line for reaction (5). At a high iron(III)/iron(II) concentration ratio, the line for the reduction of iron(III) crosses and is higher than that for the oxidation of peroxide at about pH 1. Thus, at higher pH values iron(III) can thermodynamically oxidise peroxide to oxygen. However, peroxide can also oxidise iron(II) to iron(III) as described in (2) above. Thus, both reactions are possible under these conditions and the observed net reaction of iron(II)/iron(III) with peroxide will depend on the kinetics. This phenomenon can be used to explain the catalysis of peroxide disproportionation in the presence of dissolved iron. As a result of (3) above, the actual role of peroxide in the presence of various redox couples will depend on the nature and formal potential of the couple. Thus, permanganate acts an oxidising agent for peroxide and the permanganate/peroxide reaction is used routinely in the volumetric analysis of peroxide. Similarly, peroxide will oxidise iodide to iodine (E A consequence of the fact that peroxide can act both as an oxidising and reducing agent is that the measured potential of a platinum electrode (i.e. the so-called ORP), in an acidic solution (pH 1) of 0.01 M peroxide saturated with oxygen could be between 0.77 V and 1.65 V. As will be shown below, the actual measured value is a mixed potential and is closer to the lower value.  In the case of platinum, the potential is close to that for reaction (1) but is independent of peroxide concentration-in fact the potential decreased slightly with increasing concentration. If the potential is a true equilibrium potential, it should increase by 0.060/2 V for each ten-fold increase in peroxide concentration. This observation agrees with that previously published ( E = 0.84–0.059 pH In a subsequent publication ( After measurement of the potential in 0.5 M peroxide, 0.025 M Fe(III) was added and the platinum potential increased by 30 mV to 0.792 V. This increase is consistent with a mixed potential system in which an additional cathodic reaction of reduction of iron(III) to iron(II) will result in a positive shift of the mixed potential. In the case of pyrite, the potential at low peroxide concentrations is lower than that on platinum. This is probably due to the fact that the additional anodic reaction involving the oxidation of the mineral will result in a negative shift of the mixed potential compared to platinum. The increase in potential with increasing peroxide concentrations suggests that the rate of oxidation of pyrite by peroxide should increase with increasing peroxide concentration. At higher peroxide concentrations, the anodic contribution from the oxidation of the mineral becomes small relative to the peroxide reactions and the mixed potential increases and approaches that of platinum. The pyrite potential did not change on addition of iron(III) after measurement in 0.5 M peroxide. This confirms that the rate of oxidation of pyrite under these conditions is greater with peroxide than with iron(III) as the oxidant. In the case of chalcopyrite, the potential increases only slightly with increasing peroxide concentration suggesting that peroxide would not be an effective oxidant under these conditions. The potential increased by about 20 mV on addition of 0.25 M Fe(III) for the same reason as that observed with pyrite. Covellite behaved in a similar fashion but the increases in potential were greater with peroxide than with pyrite and chalcopyrite suggesting that peroxide is likely to be a more effective oxidant for this mineral. On addition of iron(III), the potential increased by 77 mV confirming the effectiveness of iron(III) as an oxidant for covellite. An important implication of these measurements is that the use of peroxide to control the potential in oxidative leaching studies must be conducted with considerable care. Thus, it is possible to add excessive amounts of peroxide in attempts to increase the potential that cannot exceed about 0.8 V even at high peroxide concentrations. In the case of control of the potential by peroxide addition during leaching with iron(III) as the oxidant, it is possible to incorrectly add large amounts of peroxide to achieve the desired potential (particularly at potentials above about 0.7 V) with the result that the rate of leaching becomes controlled by peroxide and not iron(III). Voltammetric measurements were made on various electrodes in acidic peroxide solutions. Given the importance of iron(III) as an oxidising agent under these conditions, the well-known catalysis of peroxide disproportionation by iron(III) and preliminary observations on platinum electrodes that revealed a hitherto unknown synergistic phenomenon involving peroxide and iron(III), it was decided to include iron(III) in these measurements. Cyclic voltammograms obtained at 1 mV/s on a rotating platinum electrode in 0.2 M H In the absence of peroxide or iron(III) the currents are negligibly small in this potential range. As expected, reduction of iron(III) is relatively reversible and no anodic currents were observed. Note that the limiting current density for the reduction of iron(III) can be estimated from the Levich equation to be approximately 18 mA/cm Similar experiments were conducted with gold, pyrite (Py), chalcopyrite (Cpy) and covellite (Cv) electrodes and the results summarized in The increased reactivity of the solution containing both peroxide and iron(III) is more pronounced on a gold electrode ( The voltammograms obtained with the various minerals all exhibit the same trends, i.e. the reactivity of iron(III) is greater than that of peroxide and the combination of iron(III) and peroxide results in increased cathodic reactivity that is greater than the sum of each contribution. The reactivity of the minerals decreases from covellite to pyrite to chalcopyrite. As a result of the apparent synergism of currents observed in the voltammetry and the positive hysteresis observed in the cathodic voltammograms particularly in the presence of both iron(III) and peroxide, it was decided to undertake a limited potentiostatic (chronoamperometric) study using each electrode. In each case the potential was set to a convenient value about 100 mV negative of the rest potential and the cathodic current recorded as a function of time. At various times, either iron(III) or peroxide was added as small volumes from concentrated solutions. The effect of changing mass transport was also noted by changing the rotation speed of the electrode. The results for two such experiments using a platinum electrode are shown in In the first experiment (solid line), iron(III) was added after 300 s to give a concentration of 0.024 M. The cathodic current increased (in absolute terms) and a further addition of the same amount after 1000 s produced a similar increase in current. Variation of the rotation speed of the electrode from 100 to 1600 rev/min in several steps showed that the current increased with increasing agitation despite the fact that the current is 100 times less than the limiting current for the reduction of iron(III) as calculated from the Levich equation. However, this variation is expected for a reversible couple in which no iron(II) is initially present in that iron(II) produced by the reduction of iron(III) can undergo oxidation at potentials close to the equilibrium potential where both reactions are possible at the same potential. The net cathodic current is therefore less than would be recorded in the absence of the oxidation of iron(II). Increasing mass transport removes iron(II) from the electrode surface and therefore reduces the anodic current component and increases the net cathodic current. This can be verified by adding iron(II) (not shown) to the solution after addition of iron(III) whereupon the current can be observed to decrease. After 2400 s, peroxide was added as shown to give a concentration of 0.045 M. The cathodic current increased immediately to about −0.55 mA cm A similar experiment was carried (dotted line) out in which peroxide was first added to give a concentration of 0.045 M at about 900 s. The current increased immediately to −0.4 mA cm The results with covellite are shown in In this case, the cathodic currents at 0.65 V were recorded in two experiments with peroxide initially added in the first (dotted line) and iron(III) initially in the second (solid line). Thus, on addition of peroxide (dotted line), the current is very low but increases on addition of iron(III) after 1700s. A subsequent slow increase in cathodic current to 3.5 mA cm Similar results were obtained with all electrodes suggesting that the slow effects observed in In acidic solutions, peroxide is reasonably stable in the absence of homo- or heterogenous catalysts. However, in the presence of trace amounts of specific inorganic cations, the decomposition can be quite rapid. In particular, in oxidative leaching systems, the presence of iron or copper in solution results in relatively rapid disproportionation. This instability, of course, is a major drawback to the use of peroxide in leaching systems. In the case of iron(III), the most accepted pathway proceeds through the formation of hydroxy and hydroperoxyl radicals. ( Finally, it is possible that Fenton-like reactions are possible in the peroxide‑iron system. The data in In a study of the dissolution of chalcopyrite in iron(III) solutions ( It has been confirmed that the measured potentials of peroxide solutions on platinum and gold electrodes are not true equilibrium potentials but mixed potentials established by simultaneous oxidation of peroxide to oxygen and reduction to water. This has been shown to also apply in the presence of iron(III ions that introduce an additional cathodic reaction and to the potentials of pyrite, chalcopyrite and covellite for which anodic dissolution of the minerals is an additional half-reaction. Linear sweep voltammetry has been used to establish that the reduction of iron(III) is more reversible than that for the reduction of peroxide on all the electrodes. Synergism in the simultaneous reduction of peroxide and iron(III) on both metal and mineral electrodes has been observed. Potentiostatic current-time transients in the presence of iron(III) and/or peroxide have confirmed the relative reactivities of iron(III) and peroxide. The relatively slow increase in cathodic currents observed on all electrodes in the presence of both iron(III) and peroxide is not understood at the present time and requires further study. The implications of these results to previously published leaching studies and to the practical direct application of peroxide as an oxidant have been discussed. Possible problems associated with the use of peroxide to control the solution potential in leaching studies have been highlighted. It is unlikely that peroxide will find application as an oxidant (or reductant) in the large scale leaching of minerals given its instability, relatively poor reactivity except at high concentrations and its cost. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The author wishes to acknowledge the contribution of Angel Ruiz Sanchez for pointing out the paper by Bockris and Oldfield that provided the background to this paper.