We present a discussion of the state-of-the-art on the use of discrete fracture networks (DFNs) for modelling geometrical characteristics, geomechanical evolution and hydromechanical (HM) behaviour of natural fracture networks in rock. The DFN models considered include those based on geological mapping, stochastic generation and geomechanical simulation. Different types of continuum, discontinuum and hybrid geomechanical models that integrate DFN information are summarised. Numerical studies aiming at investigating geomechanical effects on fluid flow in DFNs are reviewed. The paper finally provides recommendations for advancing the modelling of coupled HM processes in fractured rocks through more physically-based DFN generation and geomechanical simulation.Preservation of geological realisms. Deterministic description of a fracture system. Limited feasibility for application to deep rocks. Difficulty in building 3D structures. Constraints from measurement scale and resolution. Simplicity and convenience. Efficient generation. Applicability for both 2D and 3D. Applicability for various scales. Oversimplification of fracture geometries and topologies. Uncertainties in statistical parameters. Requirement of multiple realisations. Negligence of physical processes. Linking geometry with physical mechanisms. Correlation between different fracture attributes. Uncertainties in input properties and tectonic conditions. Large computational time. Negligence of hydrological, thermal and chemical processes. Simplicity of geometries. Efficient calculation. Suitability for large-scale industrial applications. No consideration of fracture interaction, block displacement/interlocking/rotation. Complexity in deriving equivalent material parameters and constitutive laws. Valid only if an REV exists. Explicit integration of DFNs. Simple particle/grain bonding logic. Integrated constitutive laws for rocks/fractures. Capturing the interaction of multiple fractures. Limited data on joint stiffness parameters. Calibration of input particle bonding properties. No fracture mechanics principle. Large computational time. Explicit integration of DFNs. Fracture propagation is based on both the strength criterion and fracture mechanics principles. Integrated constitutive laws for rocks/fractures. Capturing the interaction of multiple fractures. Limited data on joint stiffness parameters. Calibration of fracture energy release rates. Large computational time. Fractures such as joints, faults, veins and bedding planes are ubiquitous in crustal rocks. These naturally occurring discontinuities often comprise complex networks and dominate the geomechanical and hydrological behaviour of subsurface rocks The first difficulty in modelling fractured rocks is the geometrical representation of complex three-dimensional (3D) discontinuity systems. Natural fractures form under certain mechanically self-organised dynamics, where breakage and fragmentation can occur at all scales The second fundamental issue in modelling fractured rocks is to solve the fracture and solid mechanics problems of the discontinuous geological media under complex boundary conditions, i.e. the fractured rock mass mechanical response to boundary stresses or displacements. When the spacing of natural fractures is comparable to the scale of interest of the problem to be modelled, the conventional continuum approach may not be adequate to capture some important mechanical behaviour of fractured rocks Another important question is about the hydrological behaviour of fractured rocks under geomechanical conditions. Fractured rocks may deform in response to geological and/or man-made perturbations (e.g. tectonic events, underground excavations), resulting in changes of bulk permeability and fluid migration The objective of this paper is to review the current state-of-the-art of fracture network models and to provide some discussions and recommendations for HM modelling of fractured rocks. In this context, the issues arising in the aforementioned three key subject areas (i.e. geometry, geomechanics and hydromechanics) will be examined progressively. The paper will present a summary of various approaches used in developing fracture network models that represent natural fracture geometries often with different degrees of simplification, and different numerical frameworks that integrate discrete fracture representations for modelling geomechanical and HM behaviour of fractured rocks. One important focus of this work is to discuss the features or characteristics of a fracture network model needed to properly simulate coupled HM processes in fractured rocks. The rest of the paper is organised as follows. Section A “discrete fracture network” (DFN) refers to a computational model that explicitly represents the geometrical properties of each individual fracture (e.g. orientation, size, position, shape and aperture), and the topological relationships between individual fractures and fracture sets. Unlike the conventional definition of DFNs that corresponds to stochastic fracture networks, the term DFN here represents a much broader concept of any explicit fracture network model. A DFN can be generated from geological mapping, stochastic realisation or geomechanical simulation to represent different types of rock fractures including joints, faults, veins and bedding planes. Fracture patterns can be mapped from the exposure of rock outcrops or man-made excavations (e.g. borehole, quarry, tunnel and roadcut). These geologically-mapped fracture networks were widely used to understand the process of fracture formation Advantages of such an outcrop-based DFN model include preservation of natural fracture features (e.g. curvature and segmentation) and unbiased characterisation of complex topologies (e.g. intersection, truncation, arrest, spacing, clustering and hierarchy). However, it is often constrained to 2D analysis and may not be applicable for general 3D problems involving obliquely dipping fractures. The LIDAR survey combined with assumptions of fracture shape/persistence Due to the difficulty of performing a complete measurement of 3D natural fracture systems, stochastic approaches using statistics from limited sampling have been developed and widely used The general stochastic DFN approach assumes fractures to be straight lines (in 2D) or planar discs/polygons (in 3D), and treats the other geometrical properties (e.g. position, frequency, size, orientation, aperture) as independent random variables obeying certain probability distributions However, the conventional Poisson DFN model tends to have large uncertainties due to its assumption of a homogeneous spatial distribution, simplification of fracture shape using linear/planar geometries, and negligence of the correlations between different geometrical properties as well as disregard of the diverse topological relations (e.g. “T” type intersections). Several researchers have examined the conventional Poisson DFN model by comparing it with an original natural fracture network with respect to geometrical, geomechanical and hydrological properties, and significant discrepancies were observed A more systematic characterisation of the hierarchy, clustering and scaling of natural fracture systems may involve the methods of fractal geometry and power law models The assumption of a linear/planar fracture shape in the Poisson model and fractal DFN model may be simplistic. Many field observations have shown that natural fracture geometries can be curved and irregular The stochastic DFN method, in essence, treats problems in a probabilistic framework and regards the real physical system as one possibility among simulated realisations sharing the same statistics. Hence, a sufficient number of realisations based on a Monte Carlo process are necessary to predict a bounded range. In practice, a balance exists between the benefits of collecting detailed information to create more representative DFNs and the increased cost of field measurements. The uncertainty can be reduced by constraining the random process with deterministic data, e.g. forcing the 3D DFN generator to reproduce a 2D trace pattern such as one exposed on tunnel walls Extensive studies have been conducted to interpret the geological history and the formation mechanism behind field observations of natural fracture systems (e.g. patterns, statistics and minerals) In the LEFM model, fracture patterns can be simulated by four main steps in an iterative fashion The development of fracture networks is a sophisticated feedback-loop process, in which the complexity of growth dynamics is directly related to the complexity of the developing structures. Specifically, the propagation of a fracture is influenced by the mechanical interaction with others, and the propagated fracture geometries can conversely generate stress perturbations into the system. The mechanical interaction of fractures was found strongly dependent on the velocity exponent Apart from the LEFM approach, fracture patterns can also be simulated using other numerical methods. Cowie et al. The geomechanically-grown DFN model, as a process-oriented approach, has the advantage of linking the geometry and topology of fracture networks with the conditions and physics of their formation. Another merit is the automatic correlation between the geometrical attributes of individual fractures (e.g. length, orientation, aperture and shear displacement) linked by the governing physics. To solve practical problems, such a DFN generator can be constrained by the measurement of rock properties (e.g. the subcritical index measured from core samples) and the information of geological conditions (e.g. stress, strain, pore pressure and diagenesis) to achieve rational predictions The three types of DFN models have each its own strength and also suffer from some limitations, as listed in The created DFN geometries can serve as important inputs for modelling the geomechanical and/or hydrological behaviour of fractured rocks. To reduce the numerical difficulties induced by DFN complexities whilst capturing the key characteristics, simplifications may be applied. In conventional hydrological studies, inactive fractures (i.e. dead-end or isolated fractures) and very small fractures are often removed from original DFNs based on an assumption of their negligible contribution to the overall connectivity and permeability The numerical methods for geomechanical modelling of fractured rocks can be categorised as continuum and discontinuum approaches with the classification based on their treatment of displacement compatibility The conventional continuum approach treats a rock domain as a continuous body that can be solved by the finite element method (FEM) or finite difference method (FDM). It may be applicable to a fractured rock with only a few or a large number of fractures To more explicitly capture the effects of discrete fractures, an extended-continuum model has been developed by assuming fractures to have certain numerical width (for connectivity preservation) and representing them as arrays of grid elements with softening and weakening properties based on a very fine finite difference mesh ( The block-type discontinuum models include the distinct element method (DEM) with an explicit solution scheme and the discontinuous deformation analysis (DDA) method with an implicit solution form. In this discontinuum modelling framework, the fractured rock is represented as an assemblage of blocks (i.e. discrete elements) bounded by a number of intersecting discontinuities. The geometry of the interlocking block structures can be identified first by e.g. employing the techniques of combinatorial topology The DEM method was originated by Cundall The DEM approach is able to capture the stress-strain characteristics of intact rocks, the opening/shearing of pre-existing fractures and the interaction between multiple blocks and fractures. Combined with DFN models, it has been widely applied to study the mechanical behaviour of fractured rocks. Zhang and Sanderson The classic DEM formulation cannot simulate the propagation of new fractures in intact rocks driven by stress concentrations, although plastic yielding can capture some aspects of the rock mass failure process The DDA method was proposed by Shi and Goodman The particle-based discontinuum model was originally introduced by Cundall and Strack The BPM representation using particles with idealised circular/spherical shapes can introduce unphysical asperities on discontinuity surfaces, resulting in an additional resistance to frictional sliding. To suppress such an artificial roughness effect, a smooth-joint contact model (SJM) was proposed to simulate fracture wall behaviour based on the actual geometry and morphology of discontinuities and independent of the arrangement of local particles in contact An open source particle-based modelling platform named YADE The hybrid finite-discrete element method (FEMDEM or FDEM) combines the finite element analysis of stress/deformation evolution with the discrete element solutions of transient dynamics, contact detection and interaction. In such a discontinuum modelling scheme, the internal stress field of each discrete matrix block is calculated by the FEM solver, while the translation, rotation and interaction of multiple rock blocks are traced by the DEM algorithms. Pre-existing fractures in rocks are treated as the internal boundaries of rock volumes. The FEMDEM approach also provides a natural solution route to modelling the transitional behaviour of brittle/quasi-brittle materials from continuum to discontinuum (i.e. fracturing processes) by integrating fracture mechanics principles into the formulation. This section will review the two most commonly used FEMDEM models, i.e. the commercial software ELFEN The ELFEN code models the degradation of an initial continuous domain into discrete bodies by inserting cracks into a finite element mesh. A nodal fracture scheme was introduced by constructing a non-local failure map for the whole system The combined FEMDEM-DFN model has been applied to tackle the geomechanical problems for various engineering applications During the 1990s, many algorithmic solutions for 2D and 3D FEMDEM simulation were developed by Munjiza et al. In the Y-code, the fractured rock is represented by a discontinuous discretisation of the model domain using three-noded triangular (in 2D) or four-noded tetrahedral (in 3D) finite elements and four-noded (in 2D) or six-noded (in 3D) joint elements embedded at the interface between finite elements. An important difference with the ELFEN code is that the joint elements are inserted for all edges (in 2D) or surfaces (in 3D) of finite elements. The deformation of the bulk material is captured by the linear-elastic constant-strain finite elements with the impenetrability enforced by a penalty function and the continuity constrained by a constitutive relation The advantage of the FEMDEM model for simulating the degradation of continuum into discrete pieces promoted the application to tackle various engineering problems, such as rock blasting As can be seen from above, geomechanical modelling of fractured rocks can be achieved by continuum or discontinuum approaches, which have important differences in the conceptualisation of geological media and the treatment of displacement compatibility In the conventional block-type DEM and DDA modelling, the rock mass is dissected into blocks through topological identifications, during which the dead-ends and isolated fractures are usually removed for simplicity The presence of fractures can generate stress perturbations in the rock, such as rotation of stress fields, stress shadows around discontinuities and stress concentration at fracture tips Fracture networks usually serve as the major pathways for fluid transport in subsurface rocks, especially if the matrix is almost impermeable compared to the fractures Zhang et al. There are two different notions of rock mass permeability, i.e. equivalent permeability and effective permeability. The equivalent permeability is defined as a constant tensor in Darcy’s law to represent flow in a heterogeneous medium, while the effective permeability is an intrinsic material property based on the existence of an REV at a large homogenisation scale The permeability tensor was observed to be highly dependent on both the geometrical attributes of fracture networks (e.g. density, lengths and orientations) and the in-situ stress conditions (e.g. direction, magnitude and ratio of the principal stresses) Mass transport in fractured rocks is governed by various mechanisms including advection, dispersion, matrix diffusion, interface sorption and chemical reaction Zhao et al. The geomechanical effects on fluid flow in fractured rocks as observed in numerical simulations demonstrate the importance of using appropriate fracture network representations and conducting systematic geomechanical computations for characterising the coupled HM behaviour of fractured geological formations. Simulation results rely strongly on the suitability and accuracy of the constructed DFNs and the geomechanical models of rocks and fractures. Natural fracture networks have been observed to exhibit fractal characteristics and long-range correlations It can be noted that this section is focused on the research of modelling geomechanical impacts on the hydrological behaviour of fractured rocks. The reverse effect of fluid flow on rock mass deformations is also a very important issue which is relevant to many engineering problems such as hydraulic fracturing, CO2 sequestration and reservoir compaction. Recent developments in exploitation of shale gas resources have highlighted the demand for a better understanding of the interaction between hydraulic fractures and natural fractures. Several studies have been done to develop coupled HM models to simulate fluid-driven fracture propagations in pre-existing DFN networks Modelling the geomechanical evolution and the resulting hydrological characteristics of fractured rocks is a challenging issue. The previous HM simulation results have shown consistency with field measurements: (i) only a small portion of fractures are conductive The development of calibration and validation procedures for DFN models based on field measurements is a crucial issue if the numerical models are to be used for practical applications. The DFN model can be examined by comparing the geometrical properties of a simulated 2D trace network with those of the trace pattern exposed on an outcrop or excavation wall In summary, the present paper began by presenting an overview of various discrete fracture network (DFN) models for simulating the geometry and topology of natural discontinuity systems. Different continuum and discontinuum approaches that integrate DFN geometries to model the geomechanical behaviour of fractured rocks were then surveyed. Numerical results of the fracture-dependent mechanical response and stress-dependent hydrological characteristics of fractured rocks suggest that it is important to use appropriate DFN representations and conduct geomechanical computations to better characterise the bulk behaviour (e.g. strength, deformation, permeability and mass transport) of highly disordered geological media embedded with naturally occurring discontinuities. Some of the outstanding issues that need to be addressed in the near future will be those related to generation of more realistic DFNs, improvement of computational efficiency, study of coupled multiphysics processes, calibration and validation of numerical models as well as upscaling for large-scale practical applications. We thank the industry consortium for supporting part of the lead author's PhD research on the project of “Improved simulation of faulted and fractured reservoirs, itf-ISF Phase 3: gravity assisted recovery processes”. The lead author also acknowledges the Janet Watson scholarship awarded by the Department of Earth Science and Engineering, Imperial College London. The second author is grateful for the NERC RATE HYDROFRAME project of “Hydromechanical and biogeochemical processes in fractured rock masses in the vicinity of a geological disposal facility for radioactive waste” and the EU H2020-SURE project of “Novel productivity enhancement concept for a sustainable utilization of a geothermal resource”. The third author gratefully acknowledges the support of the Swedish Geological Survey (SGU) through its grant, number 1724, to Uppsala University.