Synthetic polymers, mostly polyacrylamides (PAMs), are frequently used in the water industry to improve the performance of clarification. However, synthetic polymers may increase headloss in granular media filters, biodegrade slowly, and are potentially toxic. Alternatively, bio-sourced starch-based polymers may eliminate the drawbacks of synthetic flocculants. Similarly to poly(acrylamide‐co‐acrylic acid), carboxymethylated starch is expected to adsorb on metal hydroxides via hydrogen bonding on carboxyl groups. However, it is already known that starch, like many other polysaccharide flocculants, is required in higher dosages for its performance to be comparable to PAM. This study identified the conditions favorable to the use of an activated starch polymer as an alternative to PAM during ballasted flocculation: mixing intensity and time, coagulation pH, ballast size and chemical composition, and polymer charge density. Ultimately, under optimal conditions, only 0.66 mg of activated starch/L was required to reach the settled water turbidity objective of 1 NTU.Synthetic polymers, mostly polyacrylamides (PAMs), are frequently used in the water industry to improve the performance of conventional clarification [ Due to the aforementioned constraints, there is a growing interest in eliminating or drastically reducing the use of synthetic polyelectrolytes. Although polysaccharides-based flocculants have been recognized to offer fairly good flocculation performance [ The general objective of this study was to identify all of the conditions favorable to the use of an activated starch polymer as an alternative to PAM during ballasted flocculation. It is known that activated starch flocculation benefits from a lower shear mixing to reduce floc breakage. As mixing conditions during ballasted flocculation are intimately linked with the BM characteristics (size and density), we investigated the interdependence of these two factors with regard to ballasted flocculation and settling performance. More specifically, assays were conducted under variable mixing conditions using various BM sizes and chemical compositions ( All jar tests experiments were performed at the laboratory scale (21 ± 1 °C) using surface water from the Pont-Viau drinking water treatment plant (turbidity of 6 ± 1 NTU; pH of 6.8 ± 0.1; UV absorbance at 254 nm of 0.25 ± 0.1 cm Water samples were first flash-mixed ( Hydrex™ 3511, 3551, 3553 (anionic), and Hydrex™ 3613 (cationic) polymers (Veolia Water Technologies Canada), very high molecular weight PAM (˜ 10 Both polymers were subjected to comparative jar tests to determine their capacity to form ballasted floc and remove turbidity. Among the critical factors for the coagulation-flocculation process, the following were separately tested: pH, coagulant types (aluminum or ferric based coagulant), polymer charge density, flocculation time, mixing intensity, mineral composition of the BM, the BM adsorption surface (expressed as m Two different types of silica sand with a specific gravity between 2.64 ± 0.03 were tested in this study. To avoid the effect of size during the media comparison, both media grain size distributions were adjusted to obtain a d A non-intrusive camera (FlocCAM™; time exposure: 1/500 s) was directly installed on a jar test beaker to measure the floc size growth and breakage during flocculation [ The current knowledge about organic polyelectrolytes suggests that the aggregation kinetic is primarily controlled by the polymer molecular weight and its charge density [ When a ferric coagulant was used, both polymers reached the lowest turbidity for a pH between 6.0–6.5 ( The difference in turbidity removal between activated starch and PAM is likely attributable primarily to the polymer molecular weight. Previous studies have reported the importance of this factor on the aggregation kinetic, floc size, floc stability, and resistance to shearing [ The aggregation kinetic between the polymer chain and a given particle can be expressed as a second-order reaction ( In this section, the impact of velocity gradient on turbidity removal was evaluated to confirm the optimal mixing conditions ( Besides the previously mentioned factors, the BM mineral composition may have an impact on the floc-BM interactions and adsorption affinities. To evaluate this effect, the performance of ballasted flocculation was assessed for two types of sand with different origins but identical size distribution (d The influence of the BM size on turbidity removal using starch is examined in this section. The initial raw media material was sieved to collect three different sizes with mean diameters of 72, 90, and 143 μm. For both types of sand, a smaller BM achieved lower settled turbidity, the latter being inversely proportional to the grain size. When sand No 2 was used as BM (shown in This study addressed the impact of coagulation-flocculation conditions on the optimization of starch-based polymers. By combining the appropriate coagulation pH, flocculation time and mixing intensity, ballast size and mineral composition, and polymer charge density, starch is proposed as a potential alternative to the use of PAM in ballasted flocculation processes. This alternative could potentially eliminate many of the drawbacks related to the use of PAM including toxicity and carcinogenicity, the clogging effect on the media filter, non-biodegradability, and its production from non-renewable, oil-based materials, etc. In this study, the following observations about starch polymers were considered to be of importance to water treatment specialists aiming to improve process performance: A coagulation pH above 6.5 was detrimental for both polymers, but more drastically for starch polymers. Therefore, optimizing coagulation is the first step needed prior to optimizing flocculation. A slightly anionic charge density between 2.4 and 0.4 mEq/g was established as optimal for coagulation at a pH of 6.5. The optimal charge density, which is anticipated to be water-specific, was not found to be the most important variable for optimization. With a similar anionic charge density, starch required longer flocculation time to complete aggregation and to reach 1 NTU after settling. This is probably attributable to the effective length of the polymer chain. Nevertheless, the flocculation time was short and compatible with a ballasted flocculation process. The optimal velocity gradient for starch polymers was fixed at 165 s The BM characteristics were shown to have an important impact on floc size and turbidity removal. In the case of starch, smaller BM containing almost exclusively SiO More work is needed to elucidate the interactions between metal hydroxide complexes, polymers, and inorganic oxide-based BM. Finally, a full-scale comparison between starch and PAM should also consider the benefits of using starch for other downstream processes such as membrane granular media filters. These experiments were conducted as part of the Industrial-NSERC Chair in Drinking Water (Polytechnique Montreal) research program, which benefits from the financial support of the