Crystallization of Al(OH)3 from caustic soda solutions is an important part of the Bayer process for alumina production. Nucleation, agglomeration and crystal growth processes occur simultaneously during crystallization of Al(OH)3 and have different effects on the final product.
                  In this study, we have investigated the influence of oxalic acid on the kinetics of Al(OH)3 crystal growth. The results have shown that the overall growth rate of Al(OH)3 crystals increased with increase of temperature of crystallization and decreased with caustic soda concentration, both in the presence and absence of oxalic acid. However, the presence of oxalic acid reduces the overall growth rate of Al(OH)3 compared to the overall crystal growth rate from the pure caustic soda solutions, and the reduction is greater as the concentration of oxalic acid increased. In other words, the oxalic acid has the inhibitory influence on Al(OH)3 crystal growth. The effectiveness of the oxalic acid on the Al(OH)3 growth can be represented through a modified Langmuir adsorption isotherm, and adsorption of admixture on the surface of growing Al(OH)3 crystals is favoured with a decrease in temperature and with an increase in oxalic acid concentration.
                  Relatively high crystal growth rates (between 8 and 22 μm/h) result from an agglomeration process that could not be prevented because of the presence of small seed Al(OH)3 particles and the newly formed Al(OH)3 particles through the nucleation process. Investigation of agglomeration and nucleation processes has shown that agglomeration increased with increasing temperature and decreasing caustic soda concentration, while the nucleation process can be increased with decreasing temperature and caustic soda concentration.The crystallization process of Al(OH) One of the major industrial requirements is a suitable grain size of the precipitated Al(OH) The kinetics of Al(OH) One of the most important factors is the presence of impurities in the solution. Some impurities can reduce or stop the crystal growth while the others can favour the crystal growth process. Besides, some may exert a highly selective effect, acting only on certain crystallographic faces and thus modifying the crystal habit such that the crystal morphology is changed The surface of a growing crystal consists of steps and kinks which are preferential sites for the capture of impurity particles migrating across the growing surface. The adsorption of impurity particles on the surface of a growing crystal can be divided into: adsorption of impurities on the kinks along the ledge of step (Kubota–Mulin) in the case of mobile impurities, and on the steps (Cabrera–Vermilyea model) in the case of immobile impurities In this study, we have investigated the influence of oxalic acid on the kinetics of growth of Al(OH) Crystallization of Al(OH) The equilibrium concentration of Al(OH) Experiments were carried out using industrial seed (obtained from the alumina plant in Podgorica) screened to 63–75 μm and <32 μm. It was not possible to remove all small particles (which undergo agglomeration) from the 63 to 75 μm fraction. Therefore, it was necessary to investigate the agglomeration process. The larger seed particles were used to investigate growth kinetics of Al(OH) All experiments were carried from the pure caustic soda solutions and from the solutions that contained 20, 30 or 40 mM oxalic acid. The crystalliser was filled with 25 ml of prepared caustic soda solution (and oxalic acid, where required) warmed to the required temperature. The seed charge was poured in the solution and stirring using air agitation which was just sufficient to prevent settling of the seed; the residence time was 120 min. Air agitation was used to minimize the breaking of Al(OH) After each experiment, product particle size distribution and microstructural analysis were determined. Particle size analysis was performed using a Malvern 3600 laser sizer and growth parameters determined using the method of Randolph and Larson [12]. The number of Al(OH) From Relatively high growth rates of Al(OH) Investigation of the agglomeration of the larger seed grains (63–75 μm) was not possible because the particles were too big to be agglomerated, so the investigation of this process was carried out with grain size seed below 32 μm. The relative change in agglomeration and nucleation processes can be expressed by a change in the relative number of Al(OH) The results have shown that the relative number of particles of Al(OH) However, oxalic acid has been shown to have a positive influence on the agglomeration. Thus, if agglomeration is the only process affecting the overall crystal growth rate, it may be expected that the overall crystal growth be increased with the increase of oxalic acid concentration. However, the results have shown that the overall growth rate of Al(OH) The influence of the oxalic acid on the overall growth rate of Al(OH) The effectiveness of adsorption of impurities can be expressed by a modified Langmuir adsorption isotherm: According to the assumption that the overall growth rate of crystal, at the given supersaturation, is proportional to the fraction of crystal surface coverage by impurities, i.e., The changes of effectiveness of adsorption of impurities on the surface of growing Al(OH) It is evident that the effectiveness of adsorption of impurities is increased with increasing concentration of oxalic acid and with a decrease in the temperature of Al(OH) From the results shown in However, the adsorption effectiveness of impurities on the surface of growing crystal increases with an increase in the caustic soda concentration The microstructure of Al(OH) On the basis of the above results we can conclude the following: Investigations of the influence of parameters on the crystallization of Al(OH) Relatively high values of overall growth rate of Al(OH) Results obtained by investigation of agglomeration and nucleation processes have shown that the agglomeration process increased with increased temperature and with decreased caustic soda concentration. The nucleation process increased with decreases in temperature and in caustic soda concentration. Increase of oxalic acid concentration caused an increase in both agglomeration and nucleation processes. The presence of oxalic acid decreases the overall growth rate of Al(OH) Nucleation was the dominant process when the seed grain size was large, 63–75 μm, and therefore, had the primary influence on the overall crystal growth rate. The decrease in overall crystal growth rate with increasing oxalic acid may be due to a change in the nucleation process causing formation of new small Al(OH) Inhibition of the growth rate of Al(OH) The SEM microstructure investigations were done at the National Center for Electron Microscopy, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, University of California at Berkeley.