Blends of calcium, magnesium and potassium chloride were used to partially replace sodium chloride (50–75%) in reduced-fat mortadella formulations. The presence of calcium chloride reduced the emulsion stability, cooking yield, elasticity and cohesiveness and increased hardness; however, it yielded the best sensory acceptance when 50% NaCl was replaced by 25% CaCl2 and 25% KCl. There was no effect of the salt substitutes on mortadella color, appearance and aroma. All salt combinations studied showed stable lipid oxidation during its shelf life. The use of a blend with 1% NaCl, 0.5% KCl and 0.5% MgCl2 resulted in the best emulsion stability, but the worst scores for flavor. This study suggests that it is possible to reduce the sodium chloride concentration by 50% in reduced-fat mortadella using the studied salt combinations with necessary adjustments to optimize the sensory properties (MgCl2 25%; KCl 25%) or emulsion stability (CaCl2 25%; KCl 25%).The positive correlation between diet and chronic diseases has led health agencies around the world to control the intake of certain food components that are thought to promote these disorders. Reducing sodium intake is among the most pressing challenges because of its proven role in the development of hypertension, one of the most important risk factors for cardiovascular disease ( Meat and meat products are important sources of protein and essential amino acids, fat, iron, zinc, conjugated linoleic acid (especially materials derived from ruminants) and vitamins B Emulsified meat products such as mortadella require specific concentrations of NaCl in the original formulations to promote the extraction of myofibrillar proteins, especially complex actomyosin, which are soluble only in solutions of high ionic strength. Myofibrillar proteins extracted in the comminution process in the presence of NaCl are responsible for the water-holding capacity, emulsification and fat-binding properties in the batter and the formation of stable gels in the cooking stage ( Other salt substitutes such as calcium chloride and magnesium chloride can be used to reduce the sodium content in meat products ( Mortadella is a product that is consumed and enjoyed worldwide. In many regions of Brazil, mortadella is commonly served as a side dish and has an important nutritional role in the Brazilian diet; it therefore constitutes a significant source of sodium for the population. Thus, from a public health perspective, reformulation studies of mortadella are necessary. The objective of this research was to study the physico-chemical and sensory characteristics of reduced-fat mortadella formulations with 50% and 75% reduction in sodium chloride by its partial substitution with blends of potassium, magnesium, and calcium chloride salts. Six reduced-fat mortadella formulations were prepared with partial sodium chloride reduction (50 or 75%) followed by substitution with combinations of potassium chloride (KCl, 25 or 50%), magnesium chloride (MgCl Mortadellas were prepared using lean beef ( All mortadella formulations were processed in a pilot plant (New Max, Ltda.) on the same day according to industrial procedures. Batter formulations are shown in The moisture, protein, and ash contents were determined according to the Association of Official Analytical Chemists ( Lipid oxidation was determined using the thiobarbituric acid reactive substances test (TBARS) as described for cured meats by The emulsion stability of the different formulations shown in The loss due to cooking in a steam oven for each treatment was determined in five replicates with samples marked immediately after embedding and weighed after cooling in an ice bath. The conditions of the steam oven for the measurement of cooking yields were the same as described in the mortadella processing. The cooking yield was calculated as the cooked weight of the mortadella samples divided by the weight of the pre-cooked mortadella multiplied by 100 ( The texture profile analysis of mortadellas produced with a mix of potassium, calcium and magnesium chlorides as partial substitutes for sodium chloride was performed with a TA-xT2i texture analyzer (Texture Technologies Corp., Scarsdale, NY.) All samples were compressed to 30% of their original weight. Six 20-mm thick and 20-mm long portions were used for each treatment. A P-35 probe was used (long shaft, regular base). Measurements were made after the mortadella pieces reached room temperature. The following parameters were determined: hardness (N/cm Color was measured using a Hunter Lab colorimeter (Colourquest-II, Hunter Associates Laboratory Inc., Virginia, USA) with a 20-mm port size, illuminant D The sensory analysis protocol for the mortadellas developed in the experiments was previously approved by the Ethics in Research Committee of the State University of Campinas, SP, Brazil, under protocol number 370/2009. The sensory analysis was conducted by 112 panelists recruited among students, faculty and staff on campus, aged from 19–42 The data were evaluated through variance analysis (ANOVA). The averages were compared by Tukey's test at a confidence level of 5% (p Data on the proximate composition of the formulations are presented in The sodium contents were compatible with the levels of NaCl reduction achieved, considering that the other sources of sodium from the additives and ingredients were kept constant in all batters. The F4 and F5 formulations, containing the lowest levels of NaCl (0.5%), were not significantly different (p F2 (1.0%, 0.5% KCl, 0.5% CaCl In studies of sodium chloride reduction in meat products, emulsion stability is an important parameter that influences the sensory properties and shelf life of the product. According to The formulations containing CaCl The most stable emulsions with low values for the percentage of liquid released were F1 (2% NaCl) and F6 (1% NaCl, 1% KCl), which are composed only of monovalent cations. The substitution of 50% NaCl by KCl (F6) did not significantly differ from the control formulation (CF) with 2% NaCl, confirming other studies ( With respect to the percentage of lipids extracted, the F6 formulation (1% NaCl, 1% KCl) did not differ from the control formulation (2% NaCl). All other formulations (F2, F3, F4, F5 and F7) had levels of released lipids above the CF (p The high cooking-yields could thus create economically profitable products. The F2 (1% NaCl, 0.5% KCl, 0.5% CaCl Lipid oxidation was evaluated by the levels of TBARS that developed during refrigerated storage ( The F4 (0.5% NaCl, 1% KCl, 0.5% CaCl Despite the significant differences (p At the end of 60 In emulsified meat products, texture is related to the ability to bind water and fat that should develop during batter preparation and be maintained after heat treatment. Ionic strength is a key factor influencing these properties ( The reduction of NaCl influenced the texture properties of mortadella after processing and during storage. The variation in hardness in comminuted meat products may be related to the reduction of the water-holding capacity. The F4 (0.5% NaCl, 1% KCl, 0.5% CaCl A negative contribution of CaCl There was no difference in hardness among the CF (p Springiness refers to the degree of recovery of sliced mortadella height ( Cohesiveness is a measure of the degree of difficulty of breaking down the internal structure of the sausages. The cohesiveness of samples varied with the blend of substitute salts used to replace NaCl. The lowest value for cohesiveness was observed for the F2 formulation (1% NaCl, 0.5% KCl, 0.5% CaCl The interpretation of chewiness values is similar to that of the previously mentioned attributes. Once more, the presence of CaCl During 60 The formulations containing 0.5% CaCl The presence of MgCl The results for color determination are given in The results obtained for the sensory evaluation (consumer test) of the appearance, aroma, flavor and texture by 112 consumers are presented in There were no significant differences (p Although the F7 sample produced a sensory acceptance similar to that of the control, it is worth highlighting its limitation with regards to lower microbial stability by having the lowest salt content (1% NaCl) of all treatments. Potassium chloride is the most-used substitute in the preparation of low-sodium meat products, but as observed in this study, depending on the level of substitution, it results in sensory rejection because it produces a bitter and metallic taste ( The partial replacement of NaCl by blends of KCl, CaCl Thus, it is necessary to optimize these formulations with the use of other ingredients and additives capable of stabilizing the emulsion, such as starches or others thickeners and bitter-masking compounds such as yeast extract or a mix of natural herbs.