The Pindos ophiolite complex, located in northern Greece, hosts small podiform chromitites characterized by very low platinum group element (PGE) grades. PGE (excluding Os) analyses from four chromitite samples, collected for this study, are below 400ppb. Consequently, we used the technique of hydroseparation to concentrate PGM from Pindos chromitites. More specifically, we investigated two separate composite samples from Pefki and Milia chromitites.
                  The Pefki concentrate contains 67 PGM that include secondary Ru-bearing minerals, ruarsite (RuAsS), laurite (Ru,Os)S2, irarsite (Ir,Ru,Rh,Pt)AsS, alloys of Os–Ir–Ru, hollingworthite (Rh,Pt,Pd)AsS, paolovite (Pd2Sn), braggite (Pd,Pt,Ni)S, sperrylite (PtAs2) and four unnamed PGM, electrum (Au,Ag) and native silver. The investigation of the Milia concentrate yields fifty one grains of PGM including primary laurite, Os–Ir alloys, erlichmanite, secondary Ru-bearing minerals, irarsite, Ru-alloys, ruarsite and Ru-based metals sulphides. PGM occur as both single and polyphase particles in both concentrates. The bulk of mineralization for grains between 5 and 15μm is finer-grained in Milia (64.7%) than in Pefki (41.8%). The latter concentrate hosts considerably more altered PGM grains than the former.
                  The hydroseparation process has recovered significantly more, as well as novel, PGM grains than the in situ mineralogical examination of single chromitite samples from the neighboring Korydallos occurrence. Although, most of the PGM occur as free particles and in situ textural information is lost, single grain textural evidence is observed. The mineralogical and grain size differences between the two samples may reflect styles of mineralization and indicate significant remobilization of PGE in Pefki. The latter possibility is suggested by the presence of secondary PGM, which may be related to the different alteration processes that affect the Pefki and Milia chromitites. In summary, this study provides significant information on the particles, grain size and associations of PGM, which are critical with respect to the petrogenesis and mineral processing of these minerals.The study of accessory minerals in rocks is limited by the low abundance and small grain size of the target minerals. Research commonly relies on Podiform chromitites are important hosts for platinum group elements (PGE), sometimes being strongly enriched in these elements, especially Os, Ir and Ru, (e.g., Ten samples were collected from two different areas (Pefki and Milia) from the Pindos ophiolite complex representing various chromitite types. Five polished sections from each area were prepared and examined with optical and scanning electron microscopy using a Super Jeol electron microscope at the University of Patras. The Following initial homogenization, approximately 1 PGM were concentrated by a hydroseparation technique carried out at NATI Research JSC, St. Petersburg, Russia. The technique ( Previous studies had reported that the grain size of PGM in the Pindos chromitites (Korydallos area) ranged from 10 One polished section was prepared from each of the size fractions from the concentrates for mineralogical examination. We studied the distribution of the PGM on the two different size fractions from each sample, but we present the results from each sample as a whole for comparative purposes (see below). The concentrates were completely scanned The technique of hydroseparation is a powerful tool in discovering rare mineral species that could otherwise go undetected ( The Pindos ophiolite complex is located in the western part of northern Greece ( The chromitites at Pefki are generally small (a few m long and tens of dm in thickness) and massive in texture ( The only PGM occurrence of the Pindos chromitites has been described from the Korydallos area ( The dominant minerals in the sample by surface area are summarized in Representative back scattered images (BSE) of the various phases are shown in In this sample, the dominant mineral by surface area include, laurite (64.2%) followed by Os–Ir alloys (18.4%), Ru alloys (7.9%), irarsite (5.2%), whereas secondary Ru (2%), ruarsite (1.3%), erlichmanite (0.6%) and Ru-base metal sulphides (0.3%) constitute minor phases. These findings are summarized in The vast majority of the grains (33) represent 64.7% of the total are between 5 and 15 In this study, a primary and a secondary PGM assemblage have been identified in both concentrates. The primary minerals include unaltered euhedral to anhedral grains. The secondary minerals are observed to replace primary magmatic minerals, but also occur as independent grains. This secondary nature of the minerals was established based on distinctive textural and chemical features. Textural features include variable morphology, e.g., rounded, semi-rounded or irregular grains, rugged surface, intergrowths with secondary silicates (e.g., chlorite, serpentine) and possibly porous internal structures replacive blebs, zoning due to progressive loss of S. The primary PGM assemblage of the Pefki chromitites consists mainly of Ru, Ir, Rh, Pd and Pt phases, that occur both as single and polyphase mineral associations, forming either euhedral or anhedral grains and ranging in size from a few microns to scarcely 43 The Ru-based alloys occur mainly as euhedral grains of less than 10 Rhodium is carried in solid solution in the majority of the minerals taking part in Pefki’s primary PGM assemblage. It also forms hollingworthite that occurs as grains less than 10 The secondary PGM grains vary in size between 1 and 34 The primary PGM assemblage of the Milia chromitites consists mainly of Ru, Os and Ir phases, including laurite, and Os–Ir alloys. These phases ( The secondary PGM grains vary in size between 5 Except for the secondary Ru based alloys, in the post-magmatic assemblage of the Milia chromitites BMS are associated with primary PGM. Sulfides, mainly pentlandite and covellite, are observed as attachments and rims around euhedral laurite, respectively. The small number of secondary PGM in the Milia chromitites is in direct contrast with the predominance of the altered PGM in the Pefki chromitites. It is possible that low temperature processes, like serpentinization and weathering, have affected the Milia chromitites at a lower degree, or that distinct processes caused the remobilization of the PGE that led to the formation of the secondary PGM assemblage. The data presented here are important for both petrogenetic studies and for mineral processing purposes. Depending how the data are collected, it would appear that the mineralogical and paragenetic character of the PGM in low-grade samples may not adequately reflect the bulk PGM mineralogy. This can easily take place when the samples selected for the mineralogical study are of assay values well above the average, which may be done in order to increase the probability of encountering PGM in any given polished section. In contrast, the mode of occurrence of PGM in concentrated samples is more representative than that by studying field samples of non-concentrated material. In comparison with previous studies ( This study confirms the existence of two different PGM assemblages. A primary PGM assemblage that is considered to be of magmatic origin, that has formed at the early stages of magma crystallization. A secondary PGM assemblage that is in apparent disequilibrium with magmatic conditions. This is suggestive of a low-temperature origin by The scarcity of the PGM associated with base metal sulfides (BMS) and the extremely low presence of interstitial sulfides in examined chromitites, suggests that possibly a small portion of PGE-rich immiscible sulfide liquid has been exsolved from the magma during the initial stages of crystallization. PGM data combined with compositional data of the host chromitites provide stratigraphic insights to determine the exact location of the PGE-bearing chromitites in the ultramafic sequence of the Pindos ophiolite complex. The abundance of sulfarsenides and sulfides in the PGM assemblage of the Pefki area, indicates that their host chromitites came from the ultramafic transition zone, more widely known as petrological Moho. In contrast, the PGM assemblage of the chromitites of the Milia area, which is mainly dominated by sulfides and alloys, is indicative of chromitite from deeper parts of the upper mantle section of the Pindos ophiolite complex. However, further petrological study needs to be carried out to determine the petrogenetic context of the PGM assemblage and the host chromitites. The origin of the primary PGM associated with chromitites is generally controlled by the physicochemical factors of sulfur fugacity and temperature in the magma as was suggested for the adjacent Vourinos PGM assemblages ( The extremely low abundance of the IPGE-alloys in the concentrates (i.e., in Pefki) combined with the high abundance of laurite and sulfarsenides indicates initial PGM crystallization under relatively high The present data also have metallurgical and economic implications. Most of the PGM are liberated and hence their beneficiation by gravity methods may be an option, especially for higher grade samples. It appears that PGM grains break along grain boundaries of the host minerals (primarily chromite) despite their small size, and are also highly concentrated (>10 Many of the minerals which take part in the PGM assemblage of the Pefki chromitites are interpreted to have formed at a post-magmatic stage, during low-temperature serpentinization and weathering, and further work needs to be carried in order to establish the mineralogical context of their formation. Detailed mineral chemistry, in combination with existing previous work, and the petrogenetic significance have implications in the mineralization and evolution of the PGE and PGM, a topic that will be dealt in detail elsewhere. Furthermore, mineralogical studies are underway to determine the composition of the PGM in a comparative study between some of the main chromitite occurrences of the Pindos ophiolite complex. This study has shown that the PGM data observed Single grain textural information (replacement, alteration, relics-pseudomorphs), composite grains and aggregates, as well as mineral statistical information, can provide valuable information on the petrology and subsequently the geological process. There is strong evidence, as shown by the single grain textural features, that the secondary Ru-rich minerals are replacement products of sulfarsenides, and especially of ruarsite ( In the past, chromitites in the Pindos complex have been exploited for their Cr (Pefki, Dako’s Mine) but never for their PGE content. Although the recovery of the low levels of PGM by hydroseparation may not be of a high economic value in this case, the information obtained may be critical for future, and similar, mineral processing projects. In conclusion, further studies are necessary to determine the possibility of recovering PGM from podiform chromitites on a larger, industrial scale. We would like to express our gratitude to two anonymous reviewers for their comments that helped to improve the content of this manuscript. We are also thankful to Dr. V. Knauf for his valuable comments on processing of the samples, and Bill Kotsopoulos at University of Patras for his help with the scanning electron microscope. Research was partly supported by the University of Patras, Karatheodoris Project B097, to TAG. Kapsiotis was also supported by the State Scholarship Foundation of Greece.