The present research investigates sodium hypochlorite, hydrogen peroxide, sodium metabisulfite and copper sulfate as activators to lessen the depressant effect of cyanide. The results indicate that the zinc recovery exceeded 93%, 90%, 85% and 95% at the dosages: sodium hypochlorite 1.5ml/L, hydrogen peroxide 2ml/L, sodium metabisulfite 1.67×10−3
                     mol/L and copper sulfate 2×10−3
                     mol/L, respectively. According to the results of FTIR spectrum and zeta potential, it is suggested that the studied marmatite was depressed due to the adsorption of CN− on the surfaces of marmatite by chemical bonds, and moreover the afore enhanced activators can present 
                        
                           ZnCN
                        
                      bonds on the surfaces of depressed marmatite by oxidation or ionic adsorption, respectively, and hence activate the depressed marmatite for flotation.Cyanidation tailings are produced from gold plants that use sodium cyanide as solvent to extract gold ( Mineral compositions differ across different gold plants, but the total iron content in most cyanide tailings is relatively high. These tailings can be readily recycled using: magnetizing roasting–magnetic separation ( This work focuses on the recovery of zinc which mainly exists in the form of marmatite in cyanide tailings. Currently the depression mechanism is not well understood. Some researchers believe that the marmatite surface become coated with an insoluble hydrophilic Zn(CN) In this study, depressed fully liberated marmatite was chosen as the feed to investigate the elimination of depression using the specified activators at different dosages, including sodium hypochlorite, hydrogen peroxide, sodium metabisulfite and copper sulfate. Moreover, the activation mechanisms were investigated by FTIR measurements and zeta potential measurements. All reagents used in this study were of analytical grade and locally procured. Pure marmatite was obtained from Zijin Mining Industry Co., Ltd. in Fujian Province, China. The chemical composition of the marmatite is shown in Marmatite depressed by free cyanide was made in the laboratory by simulating the gold cyanide leaching process. Marmatite and sodium cyanide 0.4% were added into sealed beaker and stirred at the speed of 1000 All experiments were carried out in a flotation machine equipped with a mechanical stirrer and 40 The recovery of zinc was calculated, as follows: To examine the purity of the monomineral, the sample was analyzed using a Philips X-ray diffractometry with Cu Kα radiation generated at 40 Four activators, including sodium hypochlorite, hydrogen peroxide, sodium metabisulfite and copper sulfate, were used to activate depressed marmatite. These reagents were expected to alter the chemical nature of depressed marmatite surfaces so that they became hydrophobic due to the action of the collector. The effect of sodium hypochlorite on zinc recovery was tested using sodium hydroxide as regulator to make the pH of pulp 9.5–10, 5.32 This is attributed to the fact that sodium hypochlorite can inhibit the cyanide adsorption on marmatite by the conversation of cyanide into cyanate ( Until cyanide has been completely converted to cyanate, excess sodium hypochlorite can continue to oxidize divalent sulfur ions on the surface of depressed marmatite into elemental sulfur or a hydrophilic higher valence state sulfur. The reactions and Gibbs free energies of reaction are −423.62 The activation of sodium hypochlorite was discussed from the viewpoint of electrochemistry. Half reactions are shown in Eqs. In addition, the oxidation of ferrous ions to ferric ions by sodium hypochlorite and dissolved oxygen takes place according to Eq. Therefore, dixanthogen is responsible for the flotation of re-activated marmatite with xanthate. Moreover, according to the Eh–pH diagrams (  Hydrogen peroxide, like sodium hypochlorite, is a strong oxidant. It can oxidize divalent sulfur ions on the surfaces of depressed marmatite to elemental sulfur, which makes the depressed marmatite surfaces hydrophobic. However, with an increase in hydrogen peroxide dosage, elemental sulfur is oxidized further to a high-valence state sulfur, which is hydrophilic. The results can also be explained from the thermodynamics and electrochemistry angle with reactions as follows: It can be inferred from these Gibbs free energy data that hydrogen peroxide can destroy cyanide adsorption on marmatite by the conversation of cyanide to cyanate. Moreover, it can oxidize divalent sulfur ions on the surfaces of depressed marmatite to elemental sulfur and sulfate. From an electrochemistry standpoint, the half reaction of hydrogen peroxide is shown in Eq. The effect of sodium metabisulfite on zinc recovery was investigated using sodium hydroxide as a regulator to achieve a pulp pH of 9.5–10, 5.32 In aqueous solutions, metabisulfite can form The The generated elemental sulfur covers the mineral surfaces. Moreover, the Once the depressions effect of cyanide is removed and fresh surfaces appear, both dixanthogen and hydroxy xanthate complexes are responsible for the flotation of re-activated marmatite with xanthate. The effect of copper sulfate on zinc recovery was investigated using sodium hydroxide as a regulator to achieve a pulp pH of 9.5–10, 5.32 The stability constants of The cyanide in the depressed marmatite surfaces is removed and fresh surfaces appear. Due to the uptake of free copper ions on fresh surfaces the surface copper sulfide species form and activate depressed marmatite ( The activation effect of copper sulfate is best among these activators. However, if the cyanide tailings contain chalcopyrite, it is difficult to separate chalcopyrite and marmatite. Mineral surfaces contain broken bonds, which can react with polar water molecules to cause mineral ion dissolution and dissociation, and hydrogen or hydroxyl ion adsorption on the mineral surfaces. Therefore, the mineral surfaces are charged. The surface electrical behavior has a close relationship with floatability. The ionic radii of S The blue line in The pink line in The variation in zeta potential on the marmatite surfaces with pH after simultaneous sodium cyanide and butyl xanthate addition is shown by a black line in  The pink line in The green line in The influence of copper sulfate on zeta potential with pH is shown by the dark blue line in FTIR measurements were used to investigate the activation mechanism by changes in functional groups on the marmatite surfaces before and after reagent addition.  The FTIR spectrum of activated marmatite is shown in  Sodium hypochlorite, hydrogen peroxide, sodium metabisulfite and copper sulfate are effective activators, but the dosage range is small for sodium hypochlorite and hydrogen peroxide. It is important to strictly control the dosage of sodium hypochlorite and hydrogen peroxide to obtain good activation results. Therefore, these activators have wide application prospect to process cyanide tailings in gold plants. The addition of activators changed the isoelectric point and zeta potential. Compared with the zeta potential of depressed marmatite, because of the oxidation of CN Marmatite was depressed because of the adsorption of CN This work was financially supported by the Project of