Standard particle size reduction techniques such as high pressure homogenization or wet bead milling are frequently used in the production of nanosuspensions. The need for micronized starting material and long process times are their evident disadvantages. Combinative particle size reduction technologies have been developed to overcome the drawbacks of the standard techniques. The H 42 combinative technology consists of a drug pre-treatment by means of spray-drying followed by standard high pressure homogenization. In the present paper, spray-drying process parameters influencing the diminution effectiveness, such as drug and surfactant concentration, were systematically analyzed. Subsequently, the untreated and pre-treated drug powders were homogenized for 20 cycles at 1500bar. For untreated, micronized glibenclamide, the particle size analysis revealed a mean particle size of 772nm and volume-based size distribution values of 2.686μm (d50%) and 14.423μm (d90%). The use of pre-treated material (10:1 glibenclamide/docusate sodium salt ratio spray-dried as ethanolic solution) resulted in a mean particle size of 236nm and volume-based size distribution values of 0.131μm (d50%) and 0.285μm (d90%). These results were markedly improved compared to the standard process. The nanosuspensions were further transferred into tablet formulations. Wet granulation, freeze-drying and spray-drying were investigated as downstream methods to produce dry intermediates. Regarding the dissolution rate, the rank order of the downstream processes was as follows: Spray-drying>freeze-drying>wet granulation. The best drug release (90% within 10min) was obtained for tablets produced with spray-dried nanosuspension containing 2% mannitol as matrix former. In comparison, the tablets processed with micronized glibenclamide showed a drug release of only 26% after 10min. The H 42 combinative technology could be successfully applied in the production of small drug nanocrystals. A nanosuspension transfer to tablets that maintained the fast dissolution properties of the drug nanocrystals was successfully achieved.Nanosizing can be regarded as an established formulation approach to increase the bioavailability of poorly water-soluble compounds if they show a dissolution rate dependent absorption ( Micronized active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) are required in order to prevent a blockage of the equipment. Micronization itself (with, for example, jet mills or colloid mills) produces drug powders with a mean particle size in the range of 2–5 Combinative methods have been developed in order to overcome the limitations and to improve the particle size reduction effectiveness of the standard comminution techniques ( The drug crystals become imperfect, weak, more breakable and sometimes even amorphous by pre-treating the drug powders with a precipitation step such as spray-drying or freeze-drying. The particle size reduction effectiveness of the subsequent top-down step is thereby markedly improved ( The work presented here is focused on the H 42 technology. The H 42 technology is a combination of spray-drying followed by high pressure homogenization. The spray-drying step yields fine drug particles, which are an ideal starting material for the subsequent high pressure homogenization step. Due to the special characteristics of the modified starting material, the risk of clogging of the homogenizer is significantly reduced ( The first process step, spray-drying, is usually employed to obtain dry APIs, excipients or liquid formulations in order to produce dry products or intermediates. However, this technique can also be used to modify on purpose the crystal habit of APIs. By spray-drying drug solutions it is possible to obtain drug powders in either crystalline or amorphous form, depending on the process parameters and additives employed ( The spray-drying process starts with the selection of a proper solvent. Organic solvents are usually needed to dissolve poorly water-soluble drugs. Important criteria for the solvent selection are, for example, dissolving properties, boiling point, toxicity and cost. The selected solvent has to dissolve all the compounds being processed. Additives can be added to the drug solution to improve the characteristics of the powders, such as flow properties, millability and particle size. An example of this is the use of surfactants such as poloxamer ( In an earlier study conducted with hydrocortisone acetate as a model drug, the superior particle size reduction effectiveness of the H 42 method was shown. The effect of the surfactant concentration (poloxamer 188) during the evaporation process on the particle size reduction effectiveness of the comminution step was analyzed. It was found that small amounts of the surfactant improved the millability as well as improving the flow properties of the spray-dried powders, thus enhancing the particle size reduction effectiveness of the homogenization step. The optimal process parameters for the spray-drying process were established at a 9:1 drug/surfactant ratio, which modified the morphology of the drug. These process parameters resulted in a much more homogeneous nanosuspension compared to the standard process. Only one cycle at 1500 In a further study glibenclamide was used as model compound to compare the particle size reduction of two combinative technologies, H 42 and H 96, with standard high pressure homogenization. In both cases the size reduction effectiveness was improved compared to the standard method ( The transfer of a liquid nanosuspension to a solid oral dosage form is an important factor for, for example, stability, compliance and marketing aspects. Usually, the nanosuspensions need to be dried before being further processed into a solid dosage form (tablets or capsules). The drug has to be released from the solid form as fine, non-aggregated crystals. Otherwise, the dissolution rate and the bioavailability enhancement would be negatively affected ( Downstream unit operations such as wet granulation, freeze-drying or spray-drying can be employed to transform the liquid nanosuspensions to a powder suitable for tableting ( This study focuses on a detailed investigation of the usefulness of the novel combinative H 42 technology when used in the production of fast-dissolving glibenclamide tablets. The influence of the drug concentration and the drug/surfactant ratio during the spray-drying process on the solid-state characteristics of the pre-treated material as well as the performance of the subsequent top-down step was systematically analyzed. Furthermore, the transfer of the liquid nanosuspensions to a tablet form, which is a critical and challenging aspect of the formulation of poorly soluble drugs, was investigated. Wet granulation as well as aqueous freeze-drying and spray-drying were employed to downstream the nanosuspensions. The influence of mannitol as matrix former on the drug release of the tablets was further analyzed during freeze-drying and spray-drying. Finally, the dissolution rate improvement due to the drug nanonization was tested employing a dissolution test. The drug release of the tablets containing the drug nanocrystals was compared to the drug release of tablets containing micronized glibenclamide. The jet-milled, micronized glibenclamide and the surfactants docusate sodium salt (DSS) and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) were obtained from Sigma Aldrich, Germany. The solvents ethanol, methanol, isopropanol and acetone were purchased from Merck KGaA, Germany. A Millipore A drug amount of 10 The drug concentration of the supernatants, as well as the drug concentration in the dissolution medium (drug release of the tablets), was determined by HPLC. The column was a 250–3 A lab-scale Mini Spray Dryer B-290 coupled to an Inert Loop B-295 (Büchi Labortechnik AG, Switzerland) was employed for the SD step. Nitrogen was used as the spraying gas and the gas flow was 246 Transfer of the drug nanocrystals to tablets: The best spray-dried drug powder obtained from the experiments was produced in larger amounts by SD 10 The morphology of the spray-dried powders was analyzed in a Hitachi S-520 (Hitachi Ltd., Japan) field emission gun. The drug samples were fixed on double-sided conductive carbon tape and then coated with gold (layer thickness: 25 A DSC equipment model 821e (Mettler Toledo AG, Germany) was employed to analyze the thermal behavior of the spray-dried powders. The drug samples were weighed (1–2 PXRD was employed using wide-angle X-ray scattering (WAXS). The diffraction patterns of the different drug powders were characterized by employing a Philips X-ray generator PW 1830 equipped with a copper cathode ( The different suspensions were prepared by dispersing 1% (w/w) micronized or spray-dried drug in a DSS 0.2% (w/v) aqueous solution. In the case of the spray dried-powders processed together with the surfactant, demineralized water was added as a dispersant. The suspensions were pre-homogenized for 1 Transfer of the drug nanocrystals to tablets: For larger production, the same procedure was employed to produce 10 nanosuspensions with 1% drug load using 4 PCS was employed to determine the mean particle size ( The equipment used was a Mastersizer 2000 (Malvern Instruments, Germany), which yielded the particle size and volume-based size distribution of the nanosuspensions. The samples were lowered directly into the equipment that was filled with demineralized water until the obscuration range (i.e., the proper measurement-level) was reached. Five measurements were made for each sample to determine the volume-based diameters d50% and d90%. The data presented in this study are the averages of five individual measurements. The real refractive index was 1.616 and the imaginary refractive index was 0.001. The downstream unit operations of wet granulation, SD or freeze-drying (FD) were employed to transfer the nanocrystals from liquid nanosupension to a tableting-suitable powder. See WG was performed by mixing 10 A spray-dryer model B-191 (Büchi Labortechnik AG, Switzerland) was employed to transfer the nanosuspensions into dry powders. The inlet temperature was 120 A freeze-dryer model Alpha I-5 (Martin Christ GmbH, Germany) was employed to lyophilize the nanosuspensions, which had previously been snap-frozen with liquid nitrogen. The FD time was three days, the condenser temperature was −80 An eccentric single punch press machine type EK0 (Korsch AG, Germany) was employed for tableting to produce 7 The dissolution tests were performed according to the United States Pharmacopeia (USP) general method 711 (dissolution) using the USP apparatus 2 (paddle method) ( The H 42 process starts with the modification of the starting material by means of organic SD. Therefore, it is important to select the optimal organic solvent first. One key aspect is the API concentration in the solvent, as it determines the duration of the SD process. The saturation solubilities determined by the HPLC method were (in decreasing order) 5.58, 3.08, 2.63 and 1.79 Irrespective of the toxicity class, it is desirable to obtain a product free of any solvent. Therefore, the vapor pressure of the solvent should be high enough to achieve a proper elimination of the residual amounts of solvent, which is important for patient safety, product quality and regulatory aspects ( Ethanol was the most suitable solvent for this study. It has a suitable boiling point (78.5 The SEM technique was employed in this research to visualize the change of the morphologic appearance of the drug material due to such SD process conditions as drug and surfactant concentration. The SEM pictures of the fifteen spray-dried powders are shown in The structural difference is tremendous between the micronized glibenclamide and the best spray-dried powder (i.e., spray-dried with 2% drug and 0.2% DSS concentrations). Unmodified drug presented a rough and fragmented morphology while the spray-dried modified powder presented rounded and subtle particles. Under optimized conditions, the H 42 process produced very fine micronized drug powders, which are a suitable starting material for the homogenization step. The DSC technique was employed to characterize the thermal behavior of the drug powders and their modification due to the precipitation process. Additionally, the DC was calculated for each powder. This is very helpful to assess the extent of the crystallinity modification due to the fast evaporation process, which can result in amorphous compounds ( The reduction of the crystalline peak is particularly observed in the samples 9, 10 and 11. These samples were processed using 2% drug, 0.2% DSS; 2% drug, 0.3% DSS and 2% drug, 0.4% DSS, respectively. These samples showed an earlier melting-onset (at around 160 Samples 4, 5 and 6 showed an even earlier melting-onset at 157 In Most drug powders presented DCs between 15% and 38% after SD the drug solutions. These DCs were markedly lower than the 100% DC of micronized glibenclamide. However, two drug powders had extremely reduced DCs: 8.1% and 8.3%. These drug powders were produced by SD with 2% and 3% drug concentration (w/v), respectively. Interestingly, both samples were spray-dried using 0.2% DSS (w/v), which resulted in drug/surfactant ratios of 10:1 and 15:1, respectively. It was found that this DSS concentration (within the mentioned drug/surfactant ratios) produced the best SD performance, which resulted in fine micronized powders (as confirmed by the SEM analysis). Under these conditions the process turned the crystalline glibenclamide into an amorphous compound, which was expected to be beneficial for the top-down step. PXRD was employed to characterize the solid-state behavior of the samples and as a confirmation method for the DSC results. The X-ray diffraction patterns of micronized, untreated glibenclamide and of all spray-dried modified drug powders are shown in All other spray-dried drug powders have shown clearly different X-ray patterns compared to the untreated drug. They showed strongly diminished peak intensities and halos instead of diffraction peaks. However, some samples still showed a reduced number of low-intensity diffraction peaks (such as the sample 15) but were not comparable to the X-ray pattern of unmodified drug. The samples 9 (2% API, 0.2% DSS) and 14 (3% API, 0.2% DSS) showed clean patterns or halos without diffraction peaks. Consequently, these samples showed the lowest DC (8.1% and 8.3%, respectively) during the DSC analysis, which was confirmed by the X-ray characterization. The change in crystal behavior from high crystallinity to a reduced-crystallinity state affected all the spray-dried samples. The explanation of this feature relies on the very fast evaporation due to the SD process ( The nanosuspensions were further produced by homogenizing all the modified and unmodified glibenclamide powders in an aqueous media with DSS 0.2% (w/v) as stabilizing agent. First, the unmodified drug was used as starting material for the homogenization process. The resulting nanosuspension was characterized as follows: 772 The results generated with the H 42 technology are presented in The homogenized spray-dried drug powders led to nanosuspensions with particle sizes of approximately 300 All spray-dried powders showed smaller particle sizes and narrower size distributions after HPH compared to the untreated material. The particle size reduction effectiveness using glibenclamide as model compound was markedly enhanced due to the H 42 technology. The size of the larger drug crystals (d90% values) was reduced from 14.423  In addition, the maximum dispersity of the process was analyzed. The drug crystals get smaller and become more perfect as the homogenization process advances. At a certain point (maximum dispersity), the homogenization pressure (power density) of the homogenizer can no longer overcome the hardness (i.e., the internal forces) of the drug crystals. The power density is the relationship between the homogenization pressure and the homogenization volume where the particle size reduction forces interact with the drug crystals ( The maximum dispersity using the H 42 technology at 1500 The reproducibility of a process is another important aspect for the industrial applicability of a new technology. Therefore, the reproducibility of the H 42 technology was tested by conducting a threefold version of the complete procedure (SD followed by HPH). The drug powder that led to the best particle size after the HPH process (2% glibenclamide, 0.2% DSS) was spray-dried three times and further processed to nanosuspensions. The characterization results are listed in The best nanosuspension produced in the course of this study (2% drug, 0.2% DSS during SD) was produced in larger amounts (200 The downstream techniques WG, SD and FD were employed to eliminate the water content of the nanosuspensions. These are critical steps in the process to produce dry intermediates for further tablet compression. The challenge is to avoid particle agglomeration during the process, which could cause the loss of their fast dissolution properties. See Section The WG was performed by manually mixing the nanosuspension and the filler (α-lactose monohydrate) with a spatula in a plastic recipient to achieve the proper contact of the nanocrystals with the excipient. The mixture was then gently oven-dried (60 Separately, the nanosuspensions were dried by SD as well as by FD. In both cases the nanosuspensions were processed with and without mannitol as matrix former. The mannitol-containing nanosuspensions were dried employing mannitol concentrations of 2%, 4% and 6% (w/v). The matrix former dissolved easily in the nanosuspensions irrespective of the employed concentration. In the case of SD, the addition of mannitol markedly improved the drying process. When the nanosuspension was processed without mannitol, the yield was rather poor (less than 50%). It could be improved by adding mannitol as bulking agent. More product could be collected by increasing the mannitol concentration. Another important aspect of the addition of mannitol is the reduction of the thermal stress. As discussed by Chaubal, the thermal stress product of the SD process could lead to undesirable particle agglomeration ( When FD was used as downstream technique, the yield for all processed nanosuspensions was nearly 100%. The volume of the yield was markedly and directly enhanced by increasing the mannitol concentration. In particular, the mannitol concentrations of 4% and 6% produced freeze-dried cakes that were extremely fluffy and presented very high volumes. These characteristics could make the further processing of these powders difficult. The FD technique is clearly the most time- and resource-consuming, making FD a rather expensive process. However, this downstream procedure can lead to very fine, micronized powders with high yields. This is especially important in the case of expensive new drugs. The powders obtained by the drying of the nanosuspensions using different downstream procedures were mixed with the excipients and processed into tablets by direct compression (tablet batch: 20 units). The only exceptions were the tablets produced by WG. In this case, the nanosuspension was first mixed with the filler α-lactose monohydrate (Flowlac®) for WG and then the mixture was dried. It was later mixed with the other excipients and processed to tablets. The filler employed in tablet production is intended for direct compression. However, it was also used in the case of the WG to maintain a homogeneous formulation among the tablets and to ensure the comparability of the samples. Each tablet had a weight of about 100 As the mannitol concentration increases during the downstream procedures, the mannitol load in the tablet increases as well. Thus, the lactose load of the tablets decreases by increasing the mannitol load. Mannitol and lactose have different compressibility properties, the latter being a more suitable filler for immediate release tablets ( Another situation in which mannitol was employed occurred during FD as a downstream procedure. The dried drug powders became extremely bulky and fluffy when processed with mannitol concentrations of 4% and 6% (w/v). This problem made the further tableting process difficult (e.g., properly filling the die of the tableting machine). All the tablets produced from a nanosuspension contained 1% DSS. The surfactant is only a part of the formulation because it is already present in the nanosuspension. It is necessary to stabilize the nanocrystals in the liquid. However, the surfactant load is very low (1% or 1 A dissolution test was employed to investigate the dissolution rate enhancement of the glibenclamide nanocrystals compared to the micronized drug. This technique is also utilized to screen to what degree the downstream procedures maintain the drug nanocrystals‘ stability without losing their fast dissolution properties. Glibenclamide is a weak acid (pKa: 5.3) and its solubility is pH (and particle size) dependent, being insoluble at pHs of 1–2 and improving at higher pHs of about 8 or 9, although the latter pH values have little physiological relevance ( The surfactant SDS was added to the dissolution medium. The addition of surfactants is usually employed to facilitate the dissolution and the drug release of poorly soluble drugs. This surfactant was selected for the dissolution medium due to the similar characteristics it shares with the surfactant employed for nanosuspension stabilization (DSS). As both are anionic sodium salts, a possible interaction leading to undesired agglomeration can be prevented ( The tablet formulation was intended for immediate release, as any other tablet formulation approach would not benefit from the rapid dissolution characteristics of the drug nanocrystals ( The best drug release performance was achieved by the tablets formulated with spray-dried nanosuspension using 2% mannitol (73% lactose/10% mannitol load in the tablet). This drug release was 90% after 10 The second best dissolution profile was achieved by the tablets formulated with freeze-dried nanosuspension without mannitol during the lyophilization process (83% lactose load in the tablet). This drug release was 89% after 10 Another remarkable result was the drug release achieved by the tablets produced by WG. Only 75% of glibenclamide was released after 10 The drug releases obtained by the tablets formulated with the spray-dried intermediates are shown in The mannitol concentration during SD is important as well. The mannitol concentration of 2% during SD achieved the best drug release results. By increasing it to 4% (63% lactose/20% mannitol load in the tablet) and 6% (53% lactose/30% mannitol load in the tablet), the drug release decreases to 82% and 71% after 10 The drug releases obtained by the tablets formulated with the freeze-dried intermediates are shown in The use of mannitol during the lyophilization process was not necessary. FD is a much gentler process when treating nanosuspensions, as it protects the nanocrystal stabilization-system. This is an advantage of down streaming nanosuspensions using low temperatures, or of snap-freezing the samples with liquid nitrogen. The drug release for all tablets after 10 The H 42 technology proved to be an effective particle size reduction method to produce highly homogeneous, low nanometer-sized nanosuspensions. The conditions during the SD step affected the solid-state behavior and the morphology of the drug as well as the particle size reduction effectiveness of the HPH process. The drug concentration appears not to influence the drug structure when SD without surfactant. The optimal settings for the H 42 process in the case of glibenclamide as model drug were high drug concentrations (2–3% w/v) and standard surfactant concentration (0.2% w/v) during SD (or 10:1 and 15:1 drug/surfactant ratio) in order to achieve the smallest particle sizes after the homogenization step. These process conditions turned the crystalline drug into an amorphous compound, which was beneficial for the comminution process. Then, after only one cycle of HPH, the particle size was already smaller than after 20 cycles using the standard process with micronized glibenclamide. Due to the drug modification, the particle size reduction effectiveness of the top-down step was significantly improved compared to the untreated drug. The nanosuspension transfer to a solid dosage form was successfully achieved. A drug release of 90% within 10 This work was financially supported by the DAAD (Deutscher Akademischer Austausch Dienst, German Academic Exchange Service). The authors would like to thank Mrs. Inge Volz for the HPLC analysis.