Hard magnetic ferrites or Hexa ferrites (AB12O19, A-Ba, Sr, Ca, Pb) are widely used as permanent magnets, in refrigerator seal gaskets, microphones, and speaker gaskets. They can also be used in small motors for cordless appliances and portable magnetic storage devices. In the present research, Al and Ce doped hexaferrites (AB12O19) were chosen and synthesized by combustion technique using the precursors (Sr(NO3)2, Ba(NO3)2, Ca(NO3)2, Fe(NO3)3, Al(NO3)3, Ce(NO3)3) and fuels (C6H8O7, C12H22O11). The prepared powder was calcined at different temperature (800 °C, 900 °C, 1100 °C) for 12 h. Phase identification was done by using X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) technique by which phases were confirmed and also the morphological behavior was studied by using Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). Elemental analysis was done by using Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy. The intrinsic magnetic properties were studied by using Vibrating Sample Magnetometer, and the hexaferrites are found to be affected by partial substitution of Sr and Fe sites by rare earth elements (RE3+) and non-magnetic trivalent Al3+ ions respectively, and it is same in case of BaFe12O19 and CaFe12O19. The insertion of Ce3+ and Al3+ into hexagonal lattice enhances the coercivity due to increase in magneto-crystalline anisotropy or grain refinement. Thus, the hexaferrites are doped by Ce and Al to achieve Sr0.9Ce0.1Fe10Al2O19, Ba0.9Ce0.1Fe10Al12O19, Ca0.9Ce0.1Fe10Al12O19.The most common hard ferrites used are SrFe The method used for the preparation of the hexaferrites is solution combustion synthesis. Solution combustion synthesis (SCS) is a versatile, simple, and rapid process, which allows the active synthesis of a variety of nano-size materials. This process involves a self-stimulated reaction in a homogeneous solution of different oxidizers (metal nitrates) and fuels (citric acid, sucrose). Depending on the type of the precursors and the process conditions, the SCS may occur as either volume or layer-by-layer propagating combustion modes. The strontium hexaferrite, barium hexaferrite, and calcium hexaferrite powders are prepared using solution combustion synthesis. The Al and Ce substituted SrFe The calcined powders were characterized using X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku Smart lab X-ray Diffractometer) with Cu K  where k is constant (0.94), λ is the wavelength of the X-ray radiation, θ is the diffraction angle, and β is the full width at half maxima. X-ray diffraction analysis was carried out for the calcined samples of Barium Hexaferrite, and Calcium Hexaferrite and XRD pattern obtained for 800 °C, 900 °C, 1100 °C calcined samples of Barium Hexaferrite samples is shown in A shift in peak position to larger 2θ values is observable on Al and Ce substitution in SrFe The particle morphology and particle size are determined using Field Emission-Scanning Electron Microscope, and the elemental composition is identified using energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS). The SEM micrograph of Al and Ce doped Strontium Hexaferrite calcined at 800 °C is shown in The SEM micrograph of Al and Ce doped Calcium Hexaferrite calcined at 800 °C in The EDX spectra of powders obtained by calcination at 900 °C is shown in The magnetic measurement of the samples was carried out using Squid based Vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM). The M-T curves are plotted with a maximum applied field of 5 KOe in the temperature range of 5 to 350 K, and the M-H curves are plotted for both room temperature (300 K) and low temperature (5 K) for all calcined samples. From M-T plots, the ferrimagnetic behavior of the samples is inferred, and the derivative of the zero-field cooling (ZFC) and field cooling (FC) curves were obtained at room temperature. Hence the M-H curves are plotted at room temperature. From the hysteresis loop obtained the magnetic parameters like coercivity, saturation magnetization, remanent magnetization, magnetron number and squareness ratio (SQR) were determined. The room temperature and low-temperature values of magnetic parameters like coercivity, saturation magnetization, remanent magnetization, magneton number, and squareness ratio (SQR) of Sr  The room temperature and low-temperature values of magnetic parameters like coercivity, saturation magnetization, remanent magnetization, magnetron number, and squareness ratio (SQR) of Ba  The room temperature and low-temperature values of magnetic parameters like coercivity, saturation magnetization, remanent magnetization, magneton number, and squareness ratio (SQR) of Ca Calculated values of magnetic parameters like coercivity, saturation magnetization, remanent magnetization of SrFe It was found that Al and Ce doped hexaferrite samples show an overall decrease in the value of saturation magnetization, magnetic moment, magneton number and an increase in the value of coercive field compared to that of base compound AB The decrease in the value of magnetron number is attributed to the following reasons: Substitution of non-magnetic Al Ce Also, a valence change of Fe The decrease in the magnetic moment and saturation magnetization of the hexaferrite powders is attributed to the following reasons: Fe On substituting Al The increase in coercivity of the hexaferrite powders is attributed to the following reasons: Particle size being smaller than the magnetic domain size since particle size obtained is in nano range According to the Stoner-Wohlfarth theory, the intrinsic coercivity (H According to the above equation, the decrease in M For Ba From magnetic measurements, the value of magnetic parameters obtained for Sr  Aluminium-Cerium doped hexaferrites AB The calcined powder was characterized by X-Ray Diffraction (XRD), Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) and Vibrating Sample Magnetometer (VSM). X-Ray Diffraction Analysis of Al and Ce doped Hexaferrites shows a distinct pattern of hexagonal crystal and matched with PDF file with the space group of P6 The value of lattice parameters (a and c) of Al and Ce doped hexaferrites are found to be lower than that of base compound MFe The SEM micrograph shows the presence of hexagonal platelet like structure with an irregular form of powder. Both as homogeneous and nonhomogeneous shapes and sizes. The value of magneton number and remanent magnetization decreases upon addition of Al and Ce in SrFe The value of coercivity increases upon Al and Ce substitution for SrFe Finally, the prepared hexaferrites of Ca, Ba, Sr upon investigating the magnetic properties it can be said as the value of magnetic parameters obtained for Sr The authors are thankful to Principal and Management ,PSG College of Technology,Coimbatore,India for extending their facilities towards successful completion of this research work.