As one of the most important auxiliary collectors, alcohol is commonly used together with amine collectors in the flotation of oxide minerals to improve their grade and recovery. As important factors in the flotation process, the surface activity and self-aggregation behavior of DDA/alcohol mixtures at the water/air interface were investigated using molecular dynamics simulation and surface tension measurement. Four alcohol surfactants with different chain lengths, octanol (OCT), decanol (DEC), dodecanol (DOD), and tetradecanol (TER), were chosen to investigate the influence of the alkyl chain length on the surface activity and aggregation behavior. Molecular dynamics simulations show that DDA/alcohol mixtures exhibit strong synergism at the air/water interface and form compact packed hydrophobic films, compared to pure DDA at the same concentration. The mixtures appear to aggregate more easily due to the weakening of the electrostatic DDA headgroup repulsion. Among these four alcohols with different chain lengths, DDA/DOD and DDA/TER mixtures show good compatibility between surfactants tails, therefore, they can form the most tightly packed films at the air/water interface. Our simulation is in good agreement with previously reported data and surface tension results from this work. Therefore, this research on the molecular scale provides vital information on the surface behaviors of mixed surfactants at the air/water interface.Surfactants have been widely used in industrial applications and products such as detergents, emulsions, paints, cosmetics, pipelines, paper coatings and laxatives. In addition, they act as collectors and foaming reagents in mineral processing and oil recovery Collectors are generally used in combination with nonionic surfactants such as ether and alcohol The surface tension and adsorption behavior of mixed surfactants at the air/water interface are important physical properties that must be known since they determine the hydrodynamics and froth characteristics, including froth formation and stability. These properties play an important role in improved bubble mineralization and mineral recovery in the process of froth flotation In the flotation of oxide minerals, alcohols are the most common auxiliary collectors used together with amine as the main collector In this work, the influence of the alkyl chain lengths of alcohols on the surface properties of mixed DDA/alcohol surfactants at the air/water interface was studied. Four nonionic surfactants (octanol (OCT), decanol (DEC), dodecanol (DOD), and tetradecanol (TER)) with different length of the alkyl chain and the same-sized polar group were mixed with the same cationic surfactant (dodecylamine). Molecular dynamics simulation and surface tension measurement were used to investigate their surface properties and self-aggregation. The research is expected to provide additional insight into the surface activity of mixed cationic/nonionic surfactants at the air/water interface. Dodecylamine, octanol, decanol, dodecanol and tetradecanol were obtained from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Hydrochloric acid was purchased from Honghui Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. (Changsha, China). Sulfide acid and sodium hydroxide were used for pH adjustment. Deionized water was used in all the experimental procedures. The coordinate pdb files of dodecylamine, octanol, decanol, dodecanol, tetradecanol and water were generated with the Material Studio software 6.0. Their topology files used for Gromacs were generated with the PRODRG program followed by manual adjustment according to the analogue structures in the force field library. The Gromacs 96-53a6 united atom force field was used for the molecules in our simulation The initial configurations are constructed as follows: first, the surface area per surfactant molecule was set to 8.1 MD simulations were performed in the NVT ensemble using the Gromacs 5.0.2 software. The temperature of the system was maintained at 300 Surface tension measurements were carried out to assess the interfacial activity of pure cationic surfactants and the mixtures. Kruss K100 tensiometer (Krüss GmbH, Germany) was used based on Wilhelmy plate method. The experiments were performed at 20  The equilibrium snapshots of the adsorbed DDA/alcohol mixtures monolayer at the air/water interface are shown in We also analyzed the density distributions of different components along the z-axis in mixture systems and show them in The compatibility of alkyl chains plays an important role in the surface properties. As mentioned above, the distribution of the mixture at the air/water interface is not as uniform compared to the pure DDA. To investigate the array and aggregation of DDA/alcohol mixtures at the interface, we calculated their density profiles of carbon atoms along the x-axis, which are shown in The positions of the first and last carbon atoms of DDA and the alkyl chains of alcohols along the z-axis were calculated and are shown in The radial direction function (RDF) is a useful way to illustrate the interactions between different parts of the systems. The correlations of DDA headgroups and alcohol headgroups are calculated in The RDFs of N atoms in the As shown in Surface tension measurements were conducted in various concentrations to validate the results obtained using molecular dynamics simulation. From It is clearly seen that the alkyl chain length of the alcohol component has a great influence on the The maximum surface excess concentration ( The value of the minimum area per molecule Surfactants orient and assemble at the air/liquid interface and decrease the surface tension. The The surface activity and adsorption aggregation behaviors of DDA and DDA/alcohol mixtures at the air/water interface were investigated using molecular dynamics simulation and surface tension measurements. Results show that there is a strong synergism of DDA/alcohol mixtures at the air/water interface. Molecular dynamics simulation shows that with the increase of the alkyl chain length of alcohols, the surfactants in the mixture at the air/water interface tend to be close to each other and hence the aggregation of the mixtures is tight. The results of the radial direction function show that the distance between the DDA headgroup and the alcohol headgroup is much shorter than that between DDA headgroups themselves, and even shorter than that between alcohol headgroups themselves. The observed behavior demonstrates well that in the presence of pure DDA, the distance between headgroups is far due to their electrostatic repulsion. In this case, the headgroups of alcohol surfactants can just enter the gap between these headgroups of DDA surfactants. Meanwhile, DDA/DOD and DDA/TER mixtures show good compatibility of surfactants tails; therefore, they can form a rigid film at the air/water interface because of the hydrophobic interaction between alkyl chains. As a result, the rigidity of the adsorbed monolayer and adsorption amount at the air/water interface can be enhanced, which is beneficial to reducing the surface tension of water. The presence of alcohol does not affect the interaction between water and DDA or ions and DDA. Our simulation is in good agreement with previously reported data and surface tension results from this work. The simulation results confirm that compared with the pure DDA, the DDA/alcohol mixtures show better surface activity. The simulations may provide some insight into the adsorption mechanism of mixed ions/nonionic surfactants, as well as the reason why alcohol can be used as an auxiliary DDA/alcohol mixture in mineral processing. We gratefully appreciate the financial support from the