Unwanted agglomeration of submicron and nanoscale particles is an important problem. For many applications in particle technology, the desired form of particle products (produced from wet grinding or precipitation processes) is a stable primary particle suspension. Prior to use, a redispersion of agglomerated or aggregated (connected by solid bridges) particles is often necessary.
                  Spontaneous agglomeration and reagglomeration processes happen for not sufficiently stabilized nano- and submicron scale particles. A successful redispersion into primary particles requires that the primary particle surfaces be stabilized simultaneously against reagglomeration by surfactants or surface charges.
                  The redispersion of micron-sized agglomerates in a turbulent shear field of an annular-gap disperser is described in this investigation. The redispersion kinetic and the maximum agglomerate size were measured and used to find a function for the agglomerate strength in shear fields.Redispersion of nanoparticle and submicron particle agglomerates and aggregates (bound by solid bridges) is an important problem. Unwanted agglomeration processes often prevent taking advantage of the product properties of nanoparticles like reactivity, permeability, and bioavailability, thus making redispersion of the formed agglomerates, often in micron scales, necessary. Redispersion of agglomerates and aggregates is an energy and time consuming process. A variety of methods and devices can be used for agglomerate redispersion, as shown in previous investigations Fluid induced stress is the dominant stressing mechanism of annular-gap disperser, used in this investigation. The sheared fluid induces stress on the agglomerate surfaces in the suspension, which can cause agglomerate fragmentation and thus redispersion into primary particles. As agglomeration and reagglomeration are spontaneous processes taking place for not sufficiently stabilized nano- and submicron scale particles, a successful redispersion into primary particles requires that the primary particle surfaces are stabilized against reagglomeration. This can be achieved by the adsorption of ions on the particle surface, thus creating a repelling charge on the particle surface. Another method to stabilize submicron and nanoparticles is the adsorption of surfactants on the particle surface In this investigation a method to redisperse micron-sized agglomerates in a turbulent shear field of an annular-gap disperser is described. The redispersion takes place in the presence of a stabilization agent to prevent reagglomeration of the fragmented agglomerates. Theoretical approaches to agglomerate strength were described by Rumpf For the disintegration of an agglomerate four different cases are possible: Mother agglomerate breakage into a number of daughter agglomerates and/or primary particles (non-binary breakage) Mother agglomerate breakage into 2 daughter agglomerates (binary breakage) Mother agglomerate breakage into 1 daughter agglomerate and one primary daughter particle (binary breakage) Mother agglomerate (dimer) breakage into 2 daughter primary particles (binary breakage). The disintegration can be caused by the shear stresses in the suspension medium acting on the particle surfaces (for smaller particles with low inertia following the fluid) and by particle-wall collisions (for bigger particles with high inertia) causing the agglomerates to break at the contact points between the primary particles. For soft agglomerates (absence of solid bridges) this means that the van-der-Waals forces must be overcome. The suspension hydrodynamics characterize the stressing conditions during redispersion. Typical characteristics are the Reynolds number, the mean shear rate, energy dissipation rate and the suspension viscosity. The Reynolds number is derived from the fluid velocity v If the Reynolds number is applied to a rotor stator system with the following geometry, the Reynolds number for an annular-gap cuette-flow is, according to For narrow gaps The transition point from laminar to turbulent flow for a rotating outer cylinder was found to be Re The shear rate in a stirred suspension is the velocity gradient along the coordinate r. As the shear rate is varying in the annular gap (turbulence, wall effects) in turbulent flow a mean geometric mean shear rate can be calculated according to The velocity difference The turbulent shear field dissipates energy into the suspension. The dissipated energy is supplied by the power input of the rotor which is dissipated in the fluid mass of the process chamber m The dissipation rate can be used to compare the efficiency and energy consumption of different comminution and redispersion processes. Also the Kolmogorov scale can be calculated Suspensions with solid particles have a higher relative viscosity compared to pure liquids. This can be explained by particle–particle interactions which increase with increasing particle concentrations. For dilute suspensions (volume content c This equation does not use empirical constants and assumes that the particles in the suspension are rigid spheres. It can be used to estimate the suspension viscosity which can be compared to experimental data. However the applicability limit for c Rumpf The tensile strength For soft agglomerates the sticking (adhesion) force can be calculated as a van-der-Waals force, while the particle porosity can be found from analyzing the fractal dimension of the agglomerates. The process was run as a classical grinding circuit with a stirred buffer tank, a peristaltic pump to avoid contact of pump with the suspension and the annular gap redisperser, see The actual redispersion of the agglomerates takes place between the rotor surface rotating at high speeds and the stationary stator wall due to shear forces. The non-usage of grinding balls prevents grinding media abrasion and thus product contamination. To prevent particle–particle collisions and thus further agglomeration and reagglomeration, a stabilization agent (Melpers, BASF) was added to the agglomerated solution prior to the start of the grinding process. During the redispersion process, the suspension was pumped to the lower part (level of lower rotor edge) of the process chamber and exited at the upper part of the process chamber (level of upper rotor edge) to decrease dead volume where the suspension was not stressed. The suspension was cooled during redispersion using the stator jacket to prevent heating up and save isothermic conditions. The used disperser was a prototype annular-gap system build for this project (in cooperation with CONTEC Engineering GmbH, Magdeburg, Germany) with smooth rotor and stator surfaces. Important machine data are shown below in These device parameters allowed the application of high intensity shear stress on the suspension for the redispersion of existing agglomerates. The mean circulation time for the suspension The materials used were the agglomerates, a stabilization agent and deionized water which formed the suspension medium. The barium sulfate agglomerates were produced by a continuous precipitation reaction in a T-mixer. The primary particle size was adjustable by changing the reaction conditions. For a detailed description of the process see The agglomerates were separated from their background solution (dissolved KCl remaining from the precipitation reaction) by sedimentation and then diluted in deionized water. The dispersing agent Melpers (BASF) was used. The dispersing agent is a branched polyether carboxylate in aqueous solution. Only the surfactant content of the solution was taken into account for the calculations. The stabilization agent was added prior to the redispersion process to the stirred buffer tank ( The primary particle size could be measured using dynamic light (used device: Zetasizer Nano ZS) scattering. This method is suitable for nanoscale to low submicron size ranges. However, the agglomerates encountered were of μm size. Thus the agglomerate size during redispersion was measured using static light scattering (device: Mastersizer 2000). This method is suitable for submicron particles (> As grinding and desagglomeration processes are energy consuming processes, the specific power input is of interest. This enables a comparison of processes and devices. Therefore the shaft side torque was measured and, after taking into account the friction losses during idling without suspension, the net torque is calculated. The torque was measured while the redisperser was filled with water. The results are depicted in The power input of the dilute suspension was similar to that of water, which can be explained due to the low concentration (c The conditions clearly show that turbulent flow conditions are dominant within the annular-gap redisperser. In order to enable redispersion of the existing agglomerates in the suspension, a stabilization agent (Melpers) was used. In order to study its effect a suspension of Barium sulfate agglomerates with a median primary particle size of d It can be seen that the dispersing agent is effective in preventing reagglomeration. It enables the effective redispersion of agglomerates in the suspension into primary particles and smaller agglomerates. An insufficient amount of dispersing agent prevents the process from redispersing under the submicron range. The kinetic of the redispersion process was investigated while redispersing an agglomerated suspension (primary particle size d The redispersion kinetic shows a fast redispersion after increasing the applied shear rate (represented by the rotor tip speed) which then slowly reaches an apparent limit where no redispersion takes place anymore. When the rotor tip speed is then increased, this pattern is repeated. This can be explained by the fact that an increase of shear rate and thus stress on the agglomerate surface allows agglomerates to break which were stable at lower shear rates. When these agglomerates are redispersed the process reaches a limit until the shear rate is further increased. The measurements were repeated 2 times and the mean value was calculated. The maximum observed deviation to the mean value was 12%.  The application of shear stress on the suspension with simultaneous stabilization with a dispersing agent can effectively redisperse the agglomerates in the suspension, visible by the comparison of agglomerate and primary particle size, indicated by the green line. A complete redispersion cannot be reached, probably due to the presence of hard aggregates bound by solid bridges which cannot be redispersed by the applied shear stresses. This is further indicated by comparing the frequency distributions (volume basis) shown in The suspension which was stressed with a mean shear rate of The measurement data showed that for each shear rate a decreasing maximum stable agglomerate size existed. Agglomerates above this size were redispersed, while those of smaller size were stable at the applied shear rate. The maximum stable agglomerate size in dependence of the applied shear stress was thus closely approximated by As a simplification the mean shear rate is used here The agglomerate strength can be approximated using the Rumpf model according to The primary particle size d Different fractal dimensions were derived in previous investigations, depending on the agglomeration mechanism. The fractal dimension of sedimentation induced agglomeration was chosen as the unstabilized suspension was repeatedly sedimented after precipitation. The adhesion force Apart from the Hamaker constant (C The results for the maximum stable agglomerate size both theoretically and experimentally are shown in Although this model relies on diverse simplifications, it was possible to depict the trend of the maximum agglomerated size using only the interaction distance a Agglomerates of primary particles of known size were produced and redispersed by shear forces in a high shear annular gap disperser. To enable redispersion and prevent reagglomeration a sterical stabilization agent was used. The redispersion kinetic was found to be dependent on the applied shear rate. Generally the redispersion decreased along with decreasing general particle size (primary particles and agglomerates) reaching a lower limit. This is caused by the inability of the applied shear field to break the smaller agglomerates in the shear field. To redisperse the remaining agglomerates in the suspension a higher shear rate must be applied. Maximum stable agglomerate sizes for various shear rates were found. This was theoretically explained by the application of the Rumpf model in combination with applying the fractal dimension.  This project is funded by the