The nasal bony–cartilaginous framework provides support to the nose and maintains airway patency. The cartilaginous and bony components are both susceptible to fracture. Nasal fractures are one of the most common facial injuries, occurring across a broad spectrum of age groups. Inadequate acute injury treatment can lead to persistent airway obstruction and nasal deformities that are subsequently more difficult to correct. Herein we discuss common presentations of nasal fractures, classifications, and options for treatment.The nasal pyramid is composed of thin bone that projects prominently from the midface. Epidemiologic studies indicate that nasal fractures represent more than half of all facial fractures and are the most commonly fractured facial bone. The nasal bony–cartilaginous framework includes the paired immobile bony pyramid, the semirigid attached upper lateral cartilages, and the nasal septum ( A thorough history can provide insight into the type of injury that was sustained. Depending on the mechanism, direction, and force of injury, attention can be focused on the nasal bones, upper lateral cartilages, and septum. Additionally, suspicion of intracranial injury or other facial fractures necessitates a complete trauma workup. The patient should be asked about any perceived changes in nasal form that resulted from the trauma. The presence and degree of nasal airway obstruction before and after the injury should be determined. Any history of previous trauma and surgeries also should be obtained. Evaluating the external nasal skeletal structure involves visual analysis and palpation. The nasal bones should be evaluated for asymmetries, protuberances, depressions, deviations, and step-off deformities. Comparison with photographs of the patient's nose taken before injury may be beneficial. Intranasal examination should be undertaken to evaluate the septum for septal hematomas and airway obstruction. The presence of hematoma requires immediate drainage. Drainage can be accomplished by incising the septal mucosa in a horizontal direction at the inferior edge of the hematoma. Any clots can be suctioned and evacuated. The septal flap is left unsutured to allow residual blood to drain. The patient is then treated with a course of antibiotics. Routine imaging is not necessary for isolated nasal injuries. Nasal fracture treatment principles were first described by the Egyptians, followed by the Greeks, and have undergone few modifications. Long-standing traumatic nasal deformities require formal septorhinoplasty. A detailed discussion of surgery for the crooked nose is beyond the scope of this review. The treatment of the crooked nose involves management of the external bony-cartilaginous framework as well as the septum. Closed and open approaches have been described in the literature for acute nasal fracture treatment. Closed reduction of nasal fractures combines the most straightforward approach with the least morbidity, with success rates ranging from 60% to 90%. Management of acute nasal fractures can be performed with local anesthesia in the office or under general anesthesia in the operating room. Studies have demonstrated the safety and efficacy of closed reduction under local anesthesia. Injection consists of 1% lidocaine with 1:100,000 epinephrine along the lateral aspect of the nasal bones, the premaxilla, and intranasally along the septum. Additional injections of key nerves, including the infraorbital nerve and nasociliary nerve of the first branch of the trigeminal nerve, can provide adequate field block ( Depressed segments of nasal bone can usually be reduced with Boies or Freer elevators ( All closed reductions receive a dorsal splint for 7 days (malleable metal or thermoplastic polymer). Intranasal splints are placed for 7 to 10 days if there is significant nasal bone comminution, segments do not remain reduced, the septum is severely dislocated, or there are significant intranasal mucosal lacerations. Doyle splints placed upside down into the nasal cavity can help maintain nasal bones in their appropriately reduced position. Silastic splints can hold the septum in place and prevent synechiae formation. Patients should be made aware that even with closed reduction treatment, a formal septorhinoplasty might still be indicated if persistent nasal obstruction or deformity exists. A formal septorhinoplasty can be performed 6-9 months after injury to allow for adequate nasal bone healing. Epistaxis, septal hematomas, and cerebrospinal fluid leaks after acute nasal trauma can occur. The occurrence of epistaxis after closed reduction is rare and usually self-limited. Septal hematomas should be drained immediately to prevent permanent septal deformities. Antibiotic coverage should be initiated if intranasal packing or splints are used. Nasal fractures occur commonly in both children and adults. Closed reduction with local anesthesia in the office setting is an appropriate method for treating uncomplicated nasal fractures in the cooperative patient. Closed reduction provides an acceptable result in 60-90% of patients. Some patients will request open septorhinoplasty to address persistent nasal deformity or airway obstruction.