The paper under discussion presents the results of an interesting study of the concentrating behavior of the pinched sluice. This simple device exploits the stratification that occurs in all naturally flowing particle beds when the dominant force is due to gravity and the particles move relative to each other due to random collision and Bagnold bed expansion forces. The performance of the pinched sluice is governed by two physical processes that are largely independent: the stratification in the flowing stream bed and the flow splitting process after stratification has taken place. The authors present the results of 130 carefully conducted experiments using a synthetic silica–magnetite mixture containing 5% magnetite by mass as the test material. The densities reported for the two minerals were 2640 and 5170 kg/m Unfortunately, in their analysis, the authors paid virtually no attention to the stratification process, and present their data in a series of graphs that show large scatter and trends that are impossible to justify or explain. Not surprisingly, the authors found multi-linear regression analysis to be worthless under the circumstances, and they were able to advance no useful quantitative insights that could be useful in understanding the operation of flowing bed stratification and separation devices and certainly no possible extension of the data to other feed concentrations and other feed materials, particularly those containing particles of several densities as would be commonly found in practical applications. The authors end their paper with a list of seven conclusions that are couched in such vague and generalized terms that the reader is left with the feeling that the research was perhaps not really of much practical significance. It is the purpose of this communication to suggest that this rather pessimistic message is far from the truth and that the data presented contain a wealth of useful information that can be revealed by viewing the processes that occur on the sluice tray from the point of view of the physical processes that actually occur during stratification and stream splitting. The analysis of stratification processes has a long history particularly by geologists, sedimentologists, and hydrologists, and the process is reasonably well understood at least in situations as clearly defined as an experimental sluice. The mathematical analysis of stratification of solids in flowing streams goes back at least to the early 1930s when the balance between gravitational and dispersive forces was used to describe sedimentological observations ( In a stratified bed consisting of two particle types (magnetite and silica), the concentration of magnetite varies in the vertical direction according to If the cutter on the end of the pinched sluice skims a fraction It is not the purpose of this communication to analyze all the data presented by the authors in detail, and their entire collection of 130 data points is summarized by plotting according to the stratification model in The model that is proposed here has two additional practical advantages over purely empirical multi-linear regression models. The stratification model can be used to predict performance of the pinched sluice when radically different feed materials are processed. Since all autogenous gravity separators depend on the composition of the bed to effect separation by stratification, their performance is always strongly feed specific. The amount of heavy mineral and density differences among the particles in the feed material will affect the performance radically. Since all of the reported experiments were undertaken with feed containing 5% by mass of completely liberated magnetite, a purely empirical model could never be extrapolated to other feed materials containing different amounts of magnetite or other feed material. Also extrapolation to imperfectly liberated feed material, which would be the norm in most practical applications, would not be possible. However, the equilibrium stratification model does permit such extrapolations provided that the specific stratification constant remains constant which is an entirely reasonable assumption. Predictions of performance with feed containing 25% magnetite by mass for example are shown in To show the effect of the density differential in the feed, the expected performance when treating a feed containing 5% completely liberated magnesite (density 3100 kg/m The scattered variations in the authors’ data that is clearly evident in A final speculation about the extrapolation of experimental data from the pinched sluice to the industrially important Reichert cone would be that any model for the specific stratification constant could be carried over to the Reichert cone but any model for the flow split at the slot will be radically different because of the significantly different geometrical design of the slots in each case. It is interesting to use the data that was collected by the authors on the sluice to calculate the likely performance of the magnetite–silica mixture on stacks of Reichert cones configured in the 4DSV and 2DSVSVD. SV configurations that are often used in industry (