The most important factors related to the manufacture of phase inversion bitumen in water emulsions are discussed in this paper. The distribution and average droplet diameter of an emulsion depends on formulation variables such as the volume fraction, the concentration and type of surfactant and the temperature of the dispersed phase employed, the type of bitumen used, and mechanical variables as the rotational speed and time used. The emulsions for this study are prepared according to the High Internal Phase Ratio (HIPR) procedure, which requires that the initial dispersion is conducted with internal phase fractions higher than the critical packing (φ>0.74). The bitumen used in this paper are 15/25, 35/50, 50/70 and 70/100. This procedure allows the manufacture of high concentration emulsions, with a small average droplet size, and narrow particle size distribution. Results show that both the droplet size and the particle size distribution obtained can be controlled by changing the parameters of the formulation. Specially one of the most important parameters to consider in the emulsion formulation if we want to obtain the smallest mean droplet size is the penetration grade bitumen used, such as the results presented in this paper.The world production of bitumen emulsion was around 8MTn in 2013 and continues growing year by year The free energy change, ΔG The term ΔH represents the work that needs to be given to the system to expand the interface during emulsification. Therefore, the lower H the lower is the energy to give to the system for a given interfacial area. Consequently, the use of surfactant in the formulation, which reduces substantially ΔH, helps considerably the emulsion formation process. The term T·ΔS For macroemulsions (considered when droplets size is higher than 1 Bitumen emulsions are a way to use bitumen at low temperatures. The pure bitumen is used for manufacturing at high temperatures, 140 There are different procedures for preparing bitumen in water emulsions. The most widely used method in the industrial process is the one that uses colloid mills for its manufacture. This works with high temperatures, 140–170 Another manufacturing system used to disperse two immiscible phases is the HIPR procedure (High Internal Phase Ratio) The highly concentrated emulsions are characterized by volume fractions of the dispersed phase (bitumen) higher than 0.74, which corresponds to maximum packing of monodisperse spheres. Therefore dispersed droplets are very close to each other, separated by a very thin film continuous phase formed at each point where the drops touched each other Each interfacial film is subjected to a compression pressure, which is counteracted by a disjoining pressure In emulsions, it is critical to control the storage stability By careful control of the nature and magnitude of the interaction forces between drops, properties of these systems can be controlled. The stability of an emulsion can be measured by determining the time between their formation and the complete separation of the phases. Ideally, the concentrated emulsions (with more than 70% of internal phase) consist of an agglomeration of polyhedral droplets separated by a very thin film continuous phase of water plus surfactant ( The objective of this paper is to study the control of the droplet size of bituminous emulsions prepared by High Internal Phase Ratio (HIPR) to ensure storage stability of the emulsions and good workability. For this study a 50/70 penetration bitumen was used. Its main characteristics and the standards used for the characterization are shown in Concentrated emulsions were formulated and stabilized with cationic commercial surfactants. In this paper, an n-alkyl propylene diamine long chain, N-Tallow-1,3-propyldiamine (S1), and a propylenic alkyl polyamine, ethanol,2,2′-[[3-[(2-hydroxyethy)amino]propyl]imino]bis (S2), with medium/fast break and with alkyl propylene diamine long chain were prepared at 50 Particle size distribution (PSD) analysis to measure the emulsion average droplet size was carried out with a laser diffractometer Malvern Mastersizer 2000 The High Internal Phase Ratio (HIPR) procedure was used for emulsion preparation The HIPR procedure is base in the following criteria: The emulsion is produced in an initial volume fraction, ø, 0.75–0.95. The volume fraction is the proportion of the bitumen respect the volume of surfactant diluted in water at pH A high viscosity for the dispersed phase (bitumen) is used, 1–5000 The mixing rotational speed is low, 800–1200 The addition of the aqueous phase to the oily phase is performed adding the entire amount of water at once, with the helix stopped, and then the mixing process starts. The emulsion obtained in the first few seconds is a phase inversion emulsion (W/O) changes very quickly to a direct emulsion (O/W) when in contact with the aqueous phase. Phase inversion is a process in which an emulsion changes its morphology from water-in-oil (W/O) to oil-in-water (O/W), or vice versa The emulsion is obtained in a few seconds. Once the emulsion is formed, a viscoelastic paste, which is diluted in water to obtain the desired relationship bitumen/water, is obtained. The emulsions should be stored at the required temperature, 40–60 The procedure to prepare the emulsions was the following: The necessary quantity of bitumen 50/70 Pen was heated up at 100 The helix used is a helix type turbine stirring rod ( The influence of mixing speed on the average size of the end droplet using two different surfactants, an n-alkyl propylene diamine long chain (S1) and a propylenic alkyl polyamine (S2), was assessed. The manufacturing procedure described in Section To evaluate the influence of the mixing time on the mean droplet size, n-alkyl propylene diamine long chain S1 was used at a concentration of 4000 To evaluate the influence of the surfactant concentration on the final mean droplet size, a constant rotational speed of 1000 The different penetration grade bitumen influence in the final mean droplet size is presented in The harder the bitumen is the lower mean droplet size obtained. In the both cases, when the concentration of surfactant S1 is 6500 or 10400  The emulsions process formation of bitumen in water involves creating a large interfacial area. To generate this interfacial area it is necessary to decrease the interfacial free energy with the aid of a surfactant Gutierrez et al. According to the results obtained up to this point, the mean droplet size can be controlled by the rotational speed, the surfactant concentration, the penetration grade bitumen and the mixing time. To close the study, the influence of the initial volume fraction used in manufacture of the emulsion in the final mean droplet size and distribution was studied. Three emulsions were prepared with a fixed concentration of surfactant of 6000 Taking into account the results shown in Gutierrez et al. The control of the droplet size of bituminous emulsions prepared by High Internal Phase Ratio (HIPR) to ensure storage stability of the emulsions and good workability was studied in this paper. The droplet size and the particle size distribution obtained can be controlled by changing the parameters of the formulation: rotational speed, mixing time, and surfactant concentration. The most influential parameter in controlling the final drop size is the volume fraction used in the time of manufacture and the bitumen penetration grade used. Moreover, it is possible to emulsify hard penetration bitumen residue until 15/25 Many authors like Gutierrez et al. In this sense we introduced a common bitumen used in the asphalt pavement, a 15/25, 35/50, 50/70 and 70/100 penetration grade, to formulate our studies, and we have studied the influence of this type of bitumen in the mean droplet size. We could demonstrate that the harder the bitumen is, the lower mean diameter size we obtained. So, the procedure presented in the paper is favorable for hard penetration grade bitumen emulsion residue. The results obtained in this paper focuses the objectives in the formulation of bitumen emulsion with any kind of penetration grade bitumen, even though the harder once which were until today very difficult to use in the formulation. The procedure studied in this paper allows the manufacture of high concentration emulsions, with a small average droplet size, and narrow particle size distribution. The emulsification process is directly related to the type and concentration of surfactant used, by the presence of electrolytes, the relationship bitumen/water and the time and the mixing speed among other factors. But the parameter that influences more in the droplet diameter size and its viscosity is the bitumen ratio used in the formulation and its bitumen penetration grade used. For a fixed surfactant concentration while keeping time and the mixing speed, the average drop diameter decreases with increasing ratio bitumen/water. A higher concentration of narrower internal phase is the droplet diameter distribution, whereby the polydispersity for such emulsions decreases. Average droplet diameter size and distribution change significant and uniformly with stirring time and mixing speed. It is conceivable that for this type of emulsions formation interfacial area occurs in a controlled manner which allows the production of emulsions with a given average droplet and a fairly narrow distribution diameter with a high degree of monodispersity and therefore reproducibility in their properties. The emulsion stability is greatly affected by the type and concentration of surfactant, as the factors can modify the pressure disjoining and stability of liquid interfacial film. Finally, the concentrated emulsions are excellent binders for the formulation of half warm asphalt mixes when dealing with emulsions having very little water is removed almost entirely during the manufacturing process. In future work, the possibility to use any bitumen in the manufacture of high internal phase ratio emulsions and to be able to control the mean diameter size, opens the door to the use of this emulsion as a binder in the formulation of warm mix asphalt or half-warm mix asphalt because it will be possible to equal the results obtained in hot mix asphalt mixes, where bitumen with the warm mix asphalt replacing bitumen for concentrated emulsion is used. The authors would like to thank the Catalan Government for the quality accreditation given to their research group GREA (2014 SGR 123). Dr. Camila Barreneche would like to thank Ministerio de Economia y Competitividad de España for Grant Juan de la Cierva, FJCI-2014-22886. And Núria Querol would like to thank Sorigue Company for giving her the opportunity to develop this study using its manufacture production plant equipped with the most advanced technology to develop this kind of emulsions.