Sawdust has been proven to be a good bulking agent for sludge composting; however, studies on the most suitable ratio of sludge:sawdust for sludge composting and on the influence of the sludge nature (aerobic or anaerobic) on the composting reaction rate are scarce. In this study two different sewage sludges (aerobic, AS, and anaerobic, ANS) were composted with wood sawdust (WS) as bulking agent at two different ratios (1:1 and 1:3 sludge:sawdust, v:v). Aerobic sludge piles showed significantly higher microbial activity than those of anaerobic sludge, organic matter mineralization rates being higher in the AS mixtures. The lowest thermophilic temperatures during composting were registered when the anaerobic sludge was mixed with sawdust at 1:1 ratio, suggesting the presence of substances toxic to microorganisms. This mixture also showed the lowest decreases of ammonium during composting. All this matched with the inhibitory effect on the germination of Lepidium sativum seeds of this mixture at the first stages of composting, and with its low values of microbial basal respiration. However, the ANS+WS 1:3 compost developed in a suitable way; the higher proportion of bulking agent in this mixture appeared to have a diluting effect on these toxic compounds. Both the proportions assayed allowed composting to develop adequately in the case of the aerobic sludge mixture, yielding suitable composts for agricultural use. However, the ratio 1:1 seems more suitable because it is more economical than the 1:3 ratio and has a lower dilution effect on the nutritional components of the composts. In the case of the anaerobic sludge with its high electrical conductivity and ammonium content, and likely presence of other toxic and phytotoxic substances, the 1:3 ratio is to be recommended because of the dilution effect.Urban organic wastes constitute an alternative source of organic matter for soils ( Sewage sludges from municipal treatment plants are good candidates for composting and for agricultural purposes ( During composting, organic compounds are transformed through successive activities of different microbes to more stable and complex organic matter ( Results from the study of bulking agents have not been consistent. Sawdust has been proven to bee a good bulking agent for sludge composting and it has been used in studies on composting process performance; however, studies aimed to determine the most suitable ratio of sludge:sawdust for optimizing the sludge composting performance are very scarce. The ratios of sludge:sawdust found in the literature in composting studies are diverse. Nowadays compost producers and municipalities have developed a ratio of sludge:wood wastes that they like. To establish scientifically the use of a particular sludge:sawdust ratio, and to see if this ratio should differ depending on the type of sludge (aerobic or anaerobic), would help to fill the existing gap in this field. The objective of this study was (i) to compare the performance during composting of two sewage sludges from different treatment plants, which had been processed in different ways (aerobically and anaerobically); and (ii) to determine the influence of using different proportions of bulking agent (1:1 and 1:3 sludge:sawdust) on the development of the composting process and on different chemical and microbiological parameters, in order to establish the most suitable ratio of sludge:sawdust. An aerobic sewage sludge (AS) and an anaerobic sewage sludge (ANS) from two urban wastewater treatment plants in Southeast Spain, as well as wood sawdust (WS) as bulking agent, were used in this study. The aerobic wastewater treatment plant received domestic wastewater, whereas the influent of the anaerobic plant had a more industrial component (mineral treatment for Zn extraction). The main characteristics of the sludges and sawdust are shown in Piles of about 3 Electrical conductivity and pH were measured in 1:5 (w:v) aqueous extract. The percent organic matter content in the composting piles was determined by gravimetric loss-on-ignition of oven-dried (at 105 Basal respiration was determined in compost samples taken 1, 30, 60 and 90 days after the beginning of composting. A portion (2 For bacteriological determinations, the solid samples were suspended in a liquid, allowing the bacteria to distribute themselves evenly throughout the samples. The samples were then diluted (1:10) with 100 The germination experiment (in quintuplicate) was carried out on filter paper in Petri dishes. Two milliliter of the corresponding aqueous extract (1/10, w/v) from the composts were introduced into dishes, with distilled water used as control in other dishes. Ten seeds of watercress ( Statistical analysis (ANOVA analysis, and the least significant difference (LSD) for mean at 95% level) was performed with the Statgraph program on data obtained in the composts at the different composting times. The mean values of the average temperatures reached in the triplicate compost piles of each mixture of sludge:sawdust are shown in Differences as regards temperature were observed in the 1:1 piles. Whereas the maxima thermophilic temperatures reached in the aerobic sludge piles were similar at the two sludge:sawdust ratios assayed, the anaerobic sludge showed significantly lower thermophilic temperatures in the 1:1 piles than in the 1:3. This particular behavior of the ANS Temperature profiles were similar for both sludges when mixed with sawdust at the 1:3 ratio ( The organic matter (OM) content of the pile gradually decreased over time during the composting process due to mineralization processes ( The anaerobic sludge showed a slower OM mineralization rate than the aerobic sludge, decreases in OM concentration with composting being 12.69% and 6.30% for AS Although the higher proportion of sawdust in the 1:3 pile will favor aeration, the high stability of the bulking agent, due to its lignocellulosic character, leads to a lower decrease in the pile OM concentration. Organic matter biodegradation influences weight reduction during composting. A mass balance was calculated assuming that fixed solids (ash content) were conserved during the composting process, and that the degradation of sawdust organic matter during the process was negligible. The aerobic sludge piles experienced higher weight losses (36.6%, and 26.21% for 1:1 and 1:3 piles, respectively, on dry weight basis) than the anaerobic sludge piles (17.66% and 19.29% for 1:1 and 1:3 piles, respectively), which is in agreement with the more stable nature of the organic matter of the anaerobic sludge, with a lower content of compound easily degradable by microorganisms. Although the total amount of OM degraded during composting was higher in the AS The water-soluble carbon fraction (WSOC), composed of sugars, aminoacids, polyphenols, peptides and fulvic acids ( The aerobic sludge mixtures showed a significantly higher WSOC content than the anaerobic sludge mixture, which can be explained by the increased stability of the organic matter in the latter following its anaerobic treatment. This higher stability of the anaerobic sludge is also responsible for the slower WSOC mineralization observed in the ANS piles with respect to the AS piles ( The addition of bulking agent reduced significantly the proportion of WSOC, WSCh and phenolic compounds, with the 1:3 mixtures showing the lowest values for both types of sludge, meaning that the bulking agent used had a smaller content of these compounds than the biosolids being composted. However, the higher or lower proportion of bulking agent in the mixtures did not seem to influence how this carbon fraction evolved during composting. In all of the mixtures, the WSOC and particularly the water-soluble carbohydrate contents fluctuated during composting, especially in the aerobic sludge mixtures. These fluctuations can be due to the fact that these fractions are dynamic and there is a constant formation and destruction of these types of C substances during composting. The hemicellulose and cellulose fractions are known to diminish during composting, sometimes giving rise to new, more biodegradable substrates as they decompose ( The evolution of the nitrogen content during composting would be conditioned not only by the quantity of total nitrogen and its mineralization rate, but also by the loss of this element through volatilization, denitrification, leaching and several immobilization processes that may occur in the compost ( The N The mixtures destined for composting did not initially contain nitrates but, as composting progressed, the different piles became enriched in nitrates because the ammonium formed during the first phases of organic matter degradation was oxidized to nitrate by the action of nitrifying bacteria ( Nitrification processes were favored in the AS piles with respect to the ANS piles, nitrate contents in the final AS composts being significantly higher than in the respective ANS composts ( Basal respiration provides information on the state of microbial populations and their capacity to decompose organic compounds, together with information concerning which populations are metabolically active. For this reason, basal respiration is widely used to monitor microbial activity and organic matter decomposition ( Basal respiration in our experiment decreased during composting to reach more or less stable values by 60 days ( The 1:1 mixture containing aerobic sludge showed the highest basal respiration rates, underlining its richness in biodegradable C fractions from the organic matter used compared with the anaerobic sludge. The mixture of the same sludge with bulking agent in a proportion of 1:3 increased the mass of more stable organic matter because of the lignocellulosic character of the sawdust used, resulting in lower microbial activity and basal respiration rate. This suggests that the aerobic sludge used did not contain substances toxic to the microorganisms, so that the 1:1 mixture, with its higher sludge content and therefore greater quantity of poorly stabilized organic mater, stimulated the activity of the microorganisms present in the mass and their respiration. The anaerobic sludge in the two mixtures studied, on the other hand, showed lower basal respiration values than the aerobic 1:1 mixture ( Unlike in the aerobic sludge, the basal respiration values observed in the anaerobic sludge at the beginning of composting and after 30 days were lower in the 1:1 mixture than in the corresponding 1:3 mixture probably because the sludge, after its anaerobic treatment, contained reducing substances that were toxic to the microorganisms present. In the 1:1 mixture, with its higher proportion of sludge, microbial activity would have slowed down due to the inhibitory action of these reducing compounds. The high EC value of this mixture ( One of the problems posed by the direct use of sewage sludges in agriculture is the risk of plant and human contamination by pathogens. Fresh sludges showed a high density of fecal coliforms ( According to During the composting process,    It should be noted that the uncomposted sewage sludges contain a great amount of pathogenic microorganisms ( Electrical conductivity and pH are two important parameters to be considered when a material is to be used as organic amendment since the physical–chemical and microbiological reactions taking part in the soil are influenced by them. Compost pH values decreased significantly throughout composting ( Several authors have pointed to the existence of changes in pH during the first days of composting ( Compost EC is of great importance from an agricultural point of view since it can be a limiting factor of plant growth and seed germination. EC increased significantly throughout the composting process ( The seed germination test helps us to establish the efficacy of the composting process for eliminating phytotoxic substances. This test revealed that the fresh aerobic sludge contained lower amount of phytotoxic substances than the anaerobic fresh sludge, the inhibitory effect on seed germination of the immature AS The 1:1 AS The GI values for the 1:1 ANS The 1:3 ANS Several authors ( It can be concluded that sawdust can be considered a good bulking agent for use with sewage sludges. Both the proportions assayed allowed composting to develop adequately in the case of the aerobic sludge mixture. However, the 1:1 proportion seems more suitable for aerobic sludges, with its low concentration of phytotoxic substances, since it has a lower dilution effect on the nutritional components of the compost and is more economical (less expenses in transport and bulking agent). In the case of more problematic sludges, such as the anaerobic sludge mixture studied, with its higher conductivity and the presence of other toxic and phytotoxic substances, a 1:3 proportion is to be recommended because of the dilution effect on these parameters which are so harmful to microbial activity and plants. This work has been undertaken thanks to a Project supported by the Council of Education and Science (Fundación Seneca) of the Murcia Regional Government, Spain.