The ever-increasing electromagnetic wave (EMW) energy and its reflections may impair human health and information security. An ordinary EMW-absorbing structure usually exhibits limited EMW-reflecting capacity given its ungraded structure in both the micro and macro scales. In this study, four nano-sized graded absorbents are explored by wrapping carbonyl-iron powder with nano-sized silicon dioxide. The micro-scale wrapping effects are assessed via a scanning electron microscopy experiment to identify the best sample, including a 5 wt% coupling agent and a 10 wt% dispersant in CIP ethanol. The 10 mm thick concrete matching layer containing the graded absorbent is built using spraying methodology, and the 15 mm thick absorption layer is fabricated using extruding methodology. The mercury intrusion porosimetry experiments show that the sprayed matching layer incurs maximum porosity at 19.8% while the 3D extruded layer ensures the minimum porosity at 11.13%, strengthening the laminar grading effect to improve the EMW impedance matching. The Naval Research Laboratory experiments corroborate that double-layer structures improve the EMW-reflecting capacity compared to their single-absorption-layer counterparts and that the double-layer element containing the best wrapping effect absorbent yields the best reflection loss value, with a minimum of −14.7 dB and a 9.72 GHz effective bandwidth. The EMW-reflecting mechanism for the novel graded double-layer structure containing the graded nano-sized absorbent is then summarized. Theoretical calculations using the transform line theory suggest that a 15 mm absorbing layer and a 15 mm impedance matching layer is specified as the most optimized configuration, with −10.47 dB in average reflection, −15.18 dB in maximum RL, and 9.56 GHz in effective bandwidth.The general application of electronic products has led to ubiquitous electromagnetic wave (EMW) pollution Single-phase or simply mixed multi-phase absorbents exhibit ungraded permeability and permittivity, which lead to inefficient EMW-absorbing capacity. The graded absorbent and corresponding coating technology are popular research solutions in the micro as well as nano-scales. For example, chemical vapor infiltration (CVI) technology is utilized to treat short carbon fibers to improve EMW-absorbing performance significantly On top of the graded absorbent, the multi-layer concrete element can also combine impedance matching and energy exhaustion in a graded manner at the structural level Despite intensive EMW-absorbing material research, the current conventional casting methodology faces challenges such as low manufactory automation, low cost efficiency, insufficient construction accuracy, inferior design flexibility, and inherent heterogeneity, all of which hinder general practical applications of EMW-absorbing concrete This research focuses on the preparation of a graded nano-sized absorbent for 3D extruded and sprayed graded double-layer EMW-absorbing structures. First, the CIP is wrapped by nano-sized SiO Based on the study of Ma et al.  After trial and error, the open time for the cementitious material was determined as 7 min to diminish cold joints or weak interfaces along the printing routes and to derive synthesized deformation behavior, layer-bonding performance, and early age toughness. The absorbing layer specimens were printed up to three layers (15 mm of total height) and were later cut into 220 × 220 mm sheets. For comparison purposes, one additional absorbing layer sample was prepared as a counterpart. An intelligent ultrasonic processor was utilized from Bueno Biotech (BEM-650A), which supplies ultrasonic vibration in the 20–25 kHz frequency range of up to 400 W intensity through the amplitude transformer. The instrument enabled a 100 mL crushing procedure with an up to 70% powder ratio at a working temperature range of 0℃–40℃. In the preparation procedure, the amplitude transformer (probe diameter of ¼“) was soaked in an ethanol-raw material solution at ¼” total probe length. The CIP from Xingrongyuan Ltd. (Beijing, China) was employed as the cone component of the nano-sized graded absorbent, and the physical characteristics are given in Apart from the raw materials, chemical admixtures comprising a silane coupling agent (γ-aminopropyltriethoxysilane, KH-550) from Xuyang Ltd. (Nanjing, China) and a dispersant (water-based graphene, HD2008) from Houheng Ltd. (Guangzhou, China) were added given their significant influence on wrapping effect. The silane coupling agent wrapped the CIP material to modify the electromagnetic characteristics, including breaking down voltage capacity, insulation performance, and electric volume degree Four preparation designs were proposed, denoted as D1, D2, D3, and D4. All the designs utilized similar quantities of CIP and nano-sized SiO  For the D2 absorbent, the only difference from D1 was the addition of a dispersant (10 wt% of CIP) in a separate coupling treatment. In D3, nano-sized SiO The specifications of raw materials for matching layers are listed in The impedance matching composite utilized wet processing methodology in accordance with sprayed concrete standard JGJ/T372-2016 The impedance matching layer was sprayed to a sheet 10 mm in height, 220 mm in length, and 220 mm in width above the absorbing layer. After a sufficient hardening process, the double-layer structure was cut into a 180 × 180 mm plate to comply with EMW-absorbing experiment standard GJB 2038-94  The surface texture is significant for the grading capacity because a heterogeneous surface interrupts structural impedance distribution and the designed reflection route to impair the grading characteristics. The void ratio and density are crucial to the cement’s EMW-absorbing capacity and mechanical performance. Higher void fraction or lower density decreases the dielectric constant to promote impedance matching, multiple reflections, and the scattering effect. Simultaneously, a compact microstructure or high density promotes a prolonged microwave pathway and EMW loss efficiency. The 3D extruded absorbing layer fulfilled a density of 2,410 kg/m The influence of the graded nano-sized absorbent and the graded structure upon the EMW-absorbing capacity is depicted in The coupling treatment for the graded absorbent has been proved to improve EMW-reflecting performance in different degrees. The separate coupling methodology (D1) sample only containing the coupling agent yields a −8.62 dB mean RL value, a 4.42 GHz bandwidth, and a −10.45 dB absorption peak at 14.36 GHz. The mutual coupling treatment in the nano absorbent (D3) demonstrates a similar development tendency, creating a −7.42 dB mean reflection capacity and a −9.15 dB maximum. Compared to their single-layer counterpart, the two proposed elements promote EMW-absorbing capacity, especially in the low-frequency range below 10 GHz, with more uniform distribution. Despite similar coupling agent amounts, the separate coupling methodology (D1) behaves better than the mutual coupling methodology (D3), with an enhanced uniform degree in the ultrasonic vibrating procedure, incurring a 0.6 dB mean RL value and a 4.42 GHz bandwidth. Among all the proposed samples, D2 uses separate coupling treatment to add the compound coupling agent (5 wt%) and the dispersant (10 wt%) to achieve the best EMW reflection, exceeding that of its single absorbing layer counterpart and all the graded double-layer elements. The RL shows a smooth downward trend with an ideal impedance matching characteristic from –7.6 dB to a peak –14.77 dB (15.11 GHz) and then shifts around to –14 dB. The sample obtains a mean RL value of −10.85 dB, which is 2.8 dB lower than that of its single-layer counterpart, and a 9.7 GHz effective bandwidth, 5.24 GHz broader than the printed sheet element.   The overall impedance matching layer exhibits a porous texture with less ferrite fraction that imposes restrictions on instant surface EMW reflection and simultaneously promotes downward incident wave dissipation to the bottom absorbing layer. As a result, within the matching layer structure, the proposed nano-sized absorbent, ferrite particle, cementitious material, along with its ITZs and massive air voids (porosity at 19.8%), can be combined as a graded interface system. It avails multiple microwave reflection and absorption between adjacent interfaces, contributing to the higher RL of the multi-phase and multi-layer element The double-layer EMW-absorbing structure containing a nano-sized absorbent enables enhanced impedance matching and EMW exhaustion efficiency because of its graded electromagnetic configuration. Moreover, exploring and optimizing the structural thickness’s influence upon microwave-reflecting capacity is also critical because structural thickness governs the microwave propagation–exhaustion path length. This significant effect is attributed to the impedance matching frequency and absorption peak value, especially in the lower frequency range. The influence of structural thickness upon EMW frequency and reflectivity peaks can be explicated by the following equation Based on the optimized D2 absorbent, along with the experimental configuration (10 mm for the impedance matching layer and 15 mm for the absorbing layer), the electromagnetic parameters for the individual layers are obtained as fundamental design elements. A batch of nine orthogonal combinations is also proposed, with three thickness parameters for each layer, as shown in   The calculated RL comparison for samples S7, S8, and S9 is given in This paper proposes a 3D extruded and sprayed graded double-layer EMW-absorbing structure containing a graded nano-sized absorbent. The separate coupling treatment for the D2 sample using a dispersant (10 wt% of CIP) and a coupling agent (5 wt% of total weight) exhibits the best wrapping effect. The extruded layer contains few voids along the printing route and uniformly distributed heave textures, while the sprayed layer is smooth without visible heterogeneous bubbles. The sprayed layer presents high porous microstructures with a 19.8% porosity ratio. The extruded layer exhibits a compact porosity ratio of 11.13%. The D2 specimen obtains the best EMW-absorbing capacity, yielding an average RL of −10.85 dB, 2.8 dB lower than that from its single-layer counterpart, and a 9.7 GHz effective bandwidth, 5.24 GHz broader than that from the printed sheet element. Compared to other structures, the proposed structure demonstrates outstanding high-frequency EMW-absorbing capacity and uniformly distributed RL values. The nano-sized absorbent exhibits graded electromagnetic parameter distribution to consume microwave energy. The impedance matching layer incurs a porous texture, less ferrite fraction, and a ferrite-absorbent cement-ITZ air impedance system to reduce surface reflection and promote wave propagation. The absorbing layer has a compact microstructure to improve EMW exhausting efficiency, and its inter-laminar interface with an impedance matching layer improves EMW absorption. The theoretical optimized design induces a similar EMW reflection capacity to that of the experiment design but with varying absorption peak positions. The optimized structure, comprising a 15 mm impedance matching layer and a 15 mm absorbing layer, is recommended, with an average RL of −10.47 dB, a maximum RL of −15.18 dB, and an effective bandwidth of 9.56 GHz.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research is financially supported by the