The composition and physical properties of martian regolith are dramatically better understood compared to just a decade ago, particularly through the use of X-ray diffraction by the Curiosity rover. Because there are no samples of this regolith on Earth, researchers and engineers rely on terrestrial simulants to test future hardware and address fundamental science and engineering questions. Even with eventual sample return, the amount of material brought back would not be enough for bulk studies. Many existing Mars simulants were designed 10 or 20 years ago based on a more rudimentary understanding of martian surface materials. Here, we describe the Mars Global Simulant (MGS-1), a new open standard designed as a high fidelity mineralogical analog to global basaltic regolith on Mars, as represented by the Rocknest windblown deposit at Gale crater. We developed prototype simulants using the MGS-1 standard and characterized their basic physical properties, bulk chemistry, spectral properties, and volatile content. The MGS-1 based simulant compares favorably to rover and remote sensing observations from Mars, and offers dramatic improvements over past simulants in many areas. Modest amounts of simulant will be produced by the Center for Lunar & Asteroid Surface Science (CLASS) Exolith Lab to distribute to other researchers. By publishing the mineral recipe and production methods, we anticipate that other groups can re-create the simulant and modify it as they see fit, leading to a more sustainable model for simulant production and the possibility of extending the simulant for different regions on Mars or for different applications.Planetary materials available for laboratory study come from a handful of sample return missions, as well as a large meteorite collection dominated by ordinary chondrites. Because actual planetary samples tend to be rare and often expensive, various groups have produced synthetic planetary materials, or “simulants”, that aim to replicate one or more features of a reference sample. These features commonly include the geomechanical and compositional characteristics of rocks, regolith or fine dust. Simulants have been used to test engineering hardware (e.g., Simulants for martian regolith (informally, soil) are prone to these same issues, and the most cited martian simulants are no longer publically available. The most prominent Mars simulant is Johnson Space Center JSC Mars-1 ( The goal of this work is to develop an open standard for a martian regolith simulant (Mars Global Simulant, MGS-1) with high fidelity in mineral, chemical, volatile, and spectral properties compared to an appropriate reference material, in this case the windblown soil Rocknest at Gale crater ( JSC Mars-1 and MMS have been used in a variety of laboratory studies as “soil simulants” (e.g., MMS was designed as a geotechnical simulant and was sourced from the Saddleback Basalt near the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory: it consists of crystalline plagioclase, pyroxene, magnetite, and hematite, with trace ilmenite and olivine ( There are a number of important differences between these older Mars simulants and new in-situ measurements of martian regolith. In terms of crystallinity, JSC Mars-1 is mostly X-ray amorphous, while MMS, MMS-1 and MMS-2 are nearly 100% crystalline. In contrast, martian soils are a subequal mixture of crystalline and amorphous phases, as revealed by the CheMin instrument on the Mars Science Laboratory (MSL) Curiosity rover ( Other Mars simulants have also been developed based on terrestrial basalts, natural weathering profiles, and commercial sand products. The surface of Mars is covered by an unconsolidated regolith produced by the combined action of impact comminution, physical erosion by wind, water, and lava, and chemical weathering by fluids and oxidants (mostly early in the history of Mars) ( Martian soils have been examined in-situ at seven locations by landers and rovers, with supplemental information from orbital remote sensing. Soil major element chemistry and mineralogy are quite similar at the Spirit, Opportunity, and Curiosity landing sites ( Our general approach to designing asteroid and planetary simulants is to start from the mineralogy, because minerals are the basic building blocks of planetary materials. By starting with the correct mineral constituents, many of the derived properties (spectral, volatile, etc.) should closely match the reference material, with adjustments made as necessary based on analyzing initial prototypes. Geomechanical properties are important for simulant behavior, and these can be adjusted easily by developers or end users through careful sieving (e.g., The crystalline fraction of Rocknest is well constrained by XRD ( Poorly crystalline and/or X-ray amorphous material makes up at least 21–22% of the Rocknest soil sample by weight ( Despite this inherent uncertainty, we chose to adopt the amorphous phases from Oxychlorine species are present in martian soil and could include (per)chlorate salts ( Because MGS-1 is a mineralogical standard, the bulk chemistry of simulants created from the standard will change based on the crystal chemistry of the minerals used. Perfect simulants do not exist, and there are almost certainly trace mineral species present in martian soil that aren't represented in MGS-1: these could include phosphates, sulfides, chromates, oxalates, and other rare species. Additional phases may be present in an amorphous or poorly-crystalline state, as discussed above. As well, silicate minerals are likely shocked to various degrees on Mars, whereas the basic MGS-1 standard does not account for this. Some phases are detected only in localized regions on Mars like clays (e.g., Using the MGS-1 mineral standard, we created prototype regolith simulants and analyzed them using a variety of instrumental techniques. The production methods and results are described below. We have built up a large library of source materials as part of ongoing work developing high-fidelity asteroid simulants (Britt et al., Simulated asteroid materials based on carbonaceous chondrite mineralogies, The crystal chemistry of the major silicates (plagioclase, pyroxene and olivine) differs between the prototype simulants and actual Rocknest measurements. Unit cell parameters for Rocknest minerals indicate An To create simulants using the MGS-1 standard, we mixed mineral components in the proportions listed in The prototype simulants were analyzed using a variety of bulk techniques. Results from these analyses were compared to relevant datasets from various in-situ and orbital Mars spacecraft measurements as appropriate. In terms of physical/grain properties, bulk density was measured by gently pouring a known mass of simulant into a graduated cylinder to measure its volume, and the particle size distribution was measured in triplicate at the Johnson Space Center ARES facilities using a Microtrac S3500 particle size analyzer with isopropyl alcohol as the medium. Bulk elemental chemistry of the simulant prototypes was measured at the UCF Materials Characterization Facility using a PANalytical Epsilion XRF operating in oxides mode. Spectral properties of the simulants were measured at UCF using an Analytical Spectrum Devices FieldSpec spectroradiometer from 320 to 2550 nm. This range covers typical measurements made by rovers and orbital remote sensing platforms at Mars. The JSC Mars-1, MMS-1 and MMS-2 simulants were measured at the same time for comparison. All the simulants were ground and dry-sieved to the same 45–75 μm size fraction. Combined thermogravimetry (TG) and evolved gas analysis (EGA) was measured at the ARES facilities using a Labsys EVO differential scanning calorimeter/thermal gravimeter connected to a ThermoStar quadrupole mass spectrometer configured to operate similarly to the MSL Sample Analysis at Mars (SAM) instrument. Analyses were done under a 30 mbar helium atmosphere, and the sample was heated from ambient to 1000 A photograph of the MGS-1 based simulant is shown in The basic physical properties of the MGS-1 prototypes are consistent with the limited data available from Mars rovers and landers. The bulk density of the prototype simulant is 1.29 g/cm   The other Mars simulants measured, JSC Mars-1, MMS-1 and MMS-2, are not close matches to Rocknest or low albedo terrains measured by OMEGA. All these simulants have dramatically higher albedos than the remote measurements, with strong H The MGS-1 prototype lost 3.9% relative mass between 30 and 500 The volatile release pattern of MGS-1 is consistent with soils measured on Mars. The Thermal and Evolved Gas Analyzer instrument did not detect a low temperature water release in soil samples at the Phoenix landing site ( Simulants created using the MGS-1 standard are superior to previous martian simulants, and accurately capture advances in the understanding of real martian regolith in the 10 years since MMS was described ( Simulants based on MGS-1 are appropriate to use for a variety of scientific and engineering-based investigations, as well as for testing flight hardware and developing in-situ resource utilization (ISRU) technology. For lunar simulants, NASA developed the concept of a fit-to-use matrix ( MGS-1 simulants are most recommended in applications where mineralogy and volatile contents are important controlling factors. These include ISRU technology development, plant growth and astrobiology studies, human health assessments, and recurring slope lineae experiments, among others. JSC Mars-1 is not recommended for these applications because it has virtually none of the same minerals as actual Mars soil, and its volatile content (>20 wt.% H MGS-1 simulants are also recommended in applications for testing flight hardware such as drilling, where geomechanical properties are important. MGS-1 is appropriate for these cases because the synthesis method produces a “regolith” of polymineralic grains with an adjustable particle size distribution, instead of simply mixing dry powders together. However, the geomechanical properties of actual martian regolith are poorly constrained compared to returned lunar regolith that has been studied extensively on Earth. As well, in the prototypes we did not control for detailed aspects like particle shape that can be important in influencing geomechanical behavior, and our initial physical properties measurements in this study are limited. Other simulants, particularly lunar ones, have benefitted from detailed crushing protocols to replicate lunar geomechanical properties (e.g., We do not recommend using MGS-1 simulants for detailed geochemical studies such as aqueous alteration experiments. This is due to the uncertainty in the exact amount and nature of the amorphous component in martian soils, and the difficulty in sourcing silicates on Earth with crystal chemistries appropriate for Mars. For these types of studies it may be better to use pure minerals in experiments, synthesize silicates from raw oxides, and/or to rely on geochemical modeling based on primary volcanic compositions from martian meteorites or rover measurements. In theory it is possible to create a small amount of extremely high fidelity regolith simulant that satisfies both mineral and chemical constraints simultaneously, but it is cost-prohibitive to make this kind of simulant in large quantities accessible to the community. We hope to avoid some of the pitfalls of past simulant production and move toward a more open and sustainable model. This starts with the general philosophy of the standard: MGS-1 essentially means any simulant created based on the mineralogy of average basaltic regolith on Mars, as captured by the mineral recipe in NASA developed the concept of “root” and “branch” simulants for the Moon, where the root is a basic, well-characterized version of the simulant. Specialized branch versions can be derived from the root, either by the original developer or by end users. MGS-1 will benefit from the same scheme, where the recipe in We developed a new standard for a Mars simulant, the MGS-1 Mars Global Simulant, based on the Rocknest soil examined by the Curiosity rover. Unlike previous simulants sourced from landscaping material, Mars Global is meant to be assembled ab initio from individual components to provide an accurate match to the mineralogy of martian regolith. The physical, chemical, spectral and volatile properties of prototype simulants based on MGS-1 are similar to measurements of Rocknest and other soils on Mars, and are an improvement over previous simulants. MGS-1 based simulants are recommended for a variety of applications including ISRU development, agriculture/astrobiology studies, and testing flight hardware. Modest amounts of simulant will be produced and made available to the community, but through an open source philosophy we encourage end users to freely replicate and modify the MGS-1 standard using the recipe and procedure described here. The authors would like to thank Richard Blair and Katerina Chagoya for help with ferrihydrite synthesis, Valerie Tu, Joanna Hogancamp and Elizabeth Rampe for running EGA and particle size analyses, and the MCF facility staff for help with instrumental analyses. Reviews from Elizabeth Rampe and an anonymous reviewer were constructive, helpful, and greatly improved the final manuscript. Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 