A straightforward, highly efficient, and low-cost biological route was introduced for the synthesis of magnetic nanoparticles. Three urease-positive bacteria namely, Bacillus subtilis, B. pasteurii, and B. licheniformis were used to biosynthesize ammonia and biosurfactants required for the nanoparticle production. Also, the features of the applied biological approach was compared with a chemical co-precipitation method. X-ray diffraction (XRD), field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), dynamic light scattering (DLS), vibrating-sample magnetometer (VSM), and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) were applied to characterize the synthesized nanoparticles. Results indicated that the biologically fabricated powders had a single domain structure, and their mean particle size was in the range of 37 to 97 nm. The production capacity of the biological processes was double the chemical method, and the biosynthesized superparamagnetic nanoparticles had higher saturation magnetization up to 132 emu/g. Finally, the removal of Cr(VI) from a synthetic solution was investigated using the four products. The maximum elimination of chromium (over 99%) was achieved by the particles synthesized by B. pasteurii, with the adsorption capacity of 190 mg/g.Iron boring scraps are recyclable materials produced from rusty equipment, devices, and any other iron-containing materials. According to the statistics provided by the USGS, iron and steel scraps generated in 2016 was about 12 million metric tons. Recycling these scarps into value-added products like magnetic nanoparticles is an economically profitable process. Magnetic nanoparticles in the range of 30 to 50 nm are single domain particles which exhibit superparamagnetic behavior. Although, one of the most common magnetic nanoparticles is magnetite (Fe Chemical methods are divided into two branches based on the reaction media [ Chemical co-precipitation is able to produce nanoparticles in a large-scale due to its simplicity and high efficiency. Ammonia is the most common precipitating agent in this method [ Biosynthesis is another way of producing magnetic nanoparticles without accumulation due to the surface coating by biosurfactants [ Intracellular biosynthesis of the magnetic nanoparticles is reported using microaerophilic gram-negative microorganisms, called magnetotactic bacteria [ Urease-positive bacteria generate urease enzyme which catalyzes the hydrolysis of urea to ammonia and carbamate. Then, carbamate may degrade into carbonic acid or carbon dioxide. However, in the presence of calcium ions, it causes calcite precipitation [ The present study introduces a low-cost biosynthesis method for the fabrication of magnetite nanoparticles from iron boring scarps with a high yield and production rate. This approach makes use of the urease-positive bacteria to biologically produce ammonia and biosurfactants. On the other hand, ammonia and oleic acid with a chemical origin are used as precipitating and coating agents, respectively in the chemical co-precipitation method. Finally, the properties of the biologically and chemically synthesized powders are compared, and their ability to remove Cr(VI) from a solution is investigated. A mixture of FeCl Chemical co-precipitation method was used to synthesize magnetic nanoparticles according to the following procedure. 0.3 ml of oleic acid was added to 100 ml of iron solution at 80 ℃ while stirring. Then 38.4 ml of ammonium solution (25 wt%) was added dropwise till the solution color turned to black. The produced magnetic nanoparticles were collected by centrifuging the obtained solution at 3857 ×g for 10 min using a Hettich centrifuge (universal 320R, Germany), and thoroughly washed with distilled water and ethanol several times to remove the chloride ions and excess oleic acid. Finally, the magnetic nanoparticles dried in a vacuum oven (Yaran YVO 500-64, Iran) at 50 ℃ for 24 h. In the biological section, production of ammonia and biosurfactants were performed by To determine the crystalline structure of the synthesized nanoparticles, an X-ray diffractometer (Asenware AW/XDM 300, China) with Cuk-kalpha radiation source was used in the 2θ range between 10˚ to 100˚, scan speed of 3°/min, and scan step of 0.05°. Also, the Rietveld method A dynamic light scattering device (VASCO Flex TM, Corduan, France) was employed to find the size distribution of the nanoparticles at the wavelength of 675 nm. Magnetic properties of the synthesized powders were studied by vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM, Meghnatis Daghigh Kavir Co., Iran) under 8000 G magnetic field strength at room temperature. The squareness ratio SQR, and the switching field distribution SFD were calculated by the following equations (Eqs. ( The morphological structure of the magnetic nanoparticles was examined by transmission electron microscope (TEM, Philips, CM-120, Netherlands), and field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, Mira 3-XMU, Czech). Finally, Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectrometer (BRUKER, Tensor 27, USA) with a wave-number range of 4000-400 cm A synthetic Cr(VI) solution was prepared by dissolving potassium dichromate in distilled water. Adsorption of hexavalent chromium was conducted under fixed condition as follows. The initial Cr(VI) concentration of 23 mg/l, pH = 5.8, temperature of 40 ℃, agitation rate of 300 rpm, and the adsorbent dose of 120 mg/l. After 11 min of adsorption under the abovementioned condition, magnetic nanoparticles were separated from the synthetic solution by centrifugation at 3857 ×g for 10 min. All the adsorption tests were carried out in duplicate. Hexavalent chromium concentration was determined by 1,5-diphenilcarbazid, and the color intensity was measured by the spectrophotometer at 540 nm [ Ammonia was produced by the urease-positive bacteria in the presence of urea and calcium chloride. Results showed that the ammonia concentration in the media containing After the generation of the initial seed crystals, oleic acid or biologically produced surfactants are adsorbed on their surface and stabilize nanoparticles in the solution. The formation of a protective layer on the nanocrystals prevents them from further growth, oxidation, and agglomeration. Both chemically and biologically produced powders underwent XRD characterization to investigate the influence of synthesis approach and bacterial species on the crystal structure of the products. As According to the Eqs. (4)–(8), the carbonate ions react with Ca The quantity of each detected phases was estimated by Rietveld method [ Furthermore, the crystal size of the synthesized magnetic nanoparticles was determined using Scherer’s equation (Eq. (9)) based on the results of the X-ray diffraction analysis. The FE-SEM images of the nanoparticles obtained from the chemical co-precipitation and Additionally, The size distribution and the mean size of the particles synthesized by different approaches were compared using diagrams obtained by DLS analysis and presented in The particle size distribution diagrams indicate that the synthesized magnetic nanoparticles have a small and narrow size range. Also, the calculated mean size of the magnetic nanoparticles are 42, 37.4, 53.5 and 98.17 nm for the chemical co-precipitation, Since the average crystal and particle sizes of the particles were derived using XRD and DLS analysis, it is possible to calculate the average number of crystals which forms a particle. So, each particle generated by the chemical co-precipitation, Yet, the applicable part of the magnetic nanoparticles is the domain structure which is different from the number of crystals in a particle [ Remanence magnetization (M The magnetic parameters (M According to the explanation of each parameter, the magnetic nanoparticles with the smallest M Therefore, considering the outputs of the particle size measurements, TEM pictures, and VSM analyses, the magnetic nanoparticles synthesized by all of the four methods have single domain structures. The FT-IR spectra of the magnetic nanoparticles synthesized by the chemical co-precipitation and For bacterially synthesized magnetic nanoparticles, the peaks at 422 and 638 cm Chromium ions have two stable species in nature, Cr(III) and Cr(VI). Cr(III) plays an important role in the metabolism of organisms, but it can be easily oxidized to Cr(VI) [ Adsorption of hexavalent chromium ions by all the four products was investigated to determine the ability of the synthesized magnetic nanoparticles for the removal of heavy metal ions from industrial wastewaters. The recovery of Cr(VI) and the adsorption capacity of all the synthesized magnetic nanoparticles are reported in The results show that the nanoparticles synthesized by The iron boring scraps can be exploited to synthesize magnetic nanoparticles through chemical co-precipitation and biological methods. Employing iron scraps not only decreases the cost of production and increases the economic efficiency of the applied processes but also alleviates the environmental consequences of the waste disposal. Characterization of the magnetic nanoparticles synthesized by the urease-positive bacteria demonstrated that the introduced biological approach could produce nanoparticles with higher saturation magnetization, and finer diameters in contrast to the conventional co-precipitation technique. Also, the biological method is flexible and can be optimized to produce magnetic nanoparticles with desired properties and dimensions. Removal of Cr(VI) using the synthesized nanoparticles showed the higher adsorption capacity of the biological magnetic nanoparticles compared to the chemically produced ones. In future, the biosynthesis method may be used to produce other nanoparticles which exploit ammonia as the oxidant in their manufacturing process with probably lower cost and higher efficiency than the current chemical co-precipitation method. None