Studies of fault rock permeabilities advance the understanding of fluid migration patterns around faults and contribute to predictions of fault stability. In this study a new model is proposed combining brittle deformation structures formed during faulting, with fluid flow through pores. It assesses the impact of faulting on the permeability anisotropy of porous sandstone, hypothesising that the formation of fault related micro-scale deformation structures will alter the host rock porosity organisation and create new permeability pathways. Core plugs and thin sections were sampled around a normal fault and oriented with respect to the fault plane. Anisotropy of permeability was determined in three orientations to the fault plane at ambient and confining pressures. Results show that permeabilities measured parallel to fault dip were up to 10 times higher than along fault strike permeability. Analysis of corresponding thin sections shows elongate pores oriented at a low angle to the maximum principal palaeo-stress (σ
                     1) and parallel to fault dip, indicating that permeability anisotropy is produced by grain scale deformation mechanisms associated with faulting. Using a soil mechanics ‘void cell model’ this study shows how elongate pores could be produced in faulted porous sandstone by compaction and reorganisation of grains through shearing and cataclasis.Fluid flow around faults is controlled by geometrically complex structures at a variety of scales. Studies aimed at quantifying the geometry of these fault generated micro-structures in relation to fault induced permeability anisotropy have been carried out in low porosity protolith fault rocks ( Previous studies using core plug permeabilities have shown that fault rocks can have a significant degree of permeability anisotropy ( A rock is considered to show anisotropy of permeability when the measured permeability varies depending on the direction of fluid flow through the sample ( Undeformed host rock permeability anisotropy is documented in a range of sandstone facies and is attributed to preferential fluid pathways produced by grain scale porosity heterogeneities formed by depositional sedimentary fabrics such as lamination ( Changes in porosity due to deformation are controlled by alterations in grain size and grain size distributions and by the production of microstructures which can modify pore connectivity. Increases in porosity can occur through formation of microfractures and dilatancy associated with cataclasis. Secondary porosity can also be formed through dissolution of grains associated with increased fluid flow. Decreases in porosity can occur due to grain size rearrangement (pore collapse), reduction (cataclasis) and cementation. This study aims to assess the impact of normal faulting on the permeability anisotropy of porous aeolian sandstone, hypothesising that the formation of fault related micro-scale deformation structures will alter the host rock depositional porosity organisation and create new permeability pathways measurable on core scale samples. Experimental studies on deformed rocks have identified permeability anisotropy ( The results of experimental tests are not directly comparable with the permeability structure around a natural fault. Permeability measurements collected from the same core while in extension and then compression ( Direct quantitative studies of permeability anisotropy (using confined/closed system permeability tests) on oriented core plugs taken from natural faults in any lithology are uncommon ( These studies all link preferential fluid flow pathways to fault rock microstructure, concluding that permeability anisotropy is controlled by microstructures and/or fabrics developed during faulting. The main control on permeability identified in each study varies depending on the composition of the original protolith. In crystalline granites, enhanced porosity formed by fracturing and cataclasis is identified as the dominant control on permeability anisotropy ( Samples in this study were collected from a normal fault in aeolian dune facies, porous sandstone protolith. In contrast to protoliths of graphitic mica schist, low porosity, arkosic sandstone or crystalline granite, porous aeolian sandstones have a pre-existing porosity of >20% that is made up of pore network arrangements formed during deposition which produce pre-existing permeability anisotropy. Unlike the phyllosilicate rich protolith of the Carboneras fault and Median Tectonic Line or the arkosic, phyllosilicate rich sandstone of the Grés D’Annot, aeolian sandstones do not have any significant clay content to form anisotropic foliations during deformation. However, the quartz grains in deformed sandstones are commonly cataclased, altering grain size and grain distribution thereby transforming the depositional porosity to construct a new pore network. Following the methodology of previous studies, this deformation-related porosity may be recognised as anisotropy in permeability that can be measured relative to the normal fault plane. Assuming the orientation of principal stresses and subsequent fault kinematics influences the development of permeability anisotropy, the permeability anisotropy around a normal fault may be characterised by three principal directions. As the maximum permeability orientation for a strike-slip fault is normal to the direction of transport ( In this study, permeabilities of oriented core plugs from 12 cataclasite samples collected around a normal fault were measured at ambient and reservoir simulating confining pressures (10–100 MPa). Core orientations relative to the fault plane were; normal to the fault (x), along fault strike (y) and parallel to fault dip (z). The results are interpreted in the context of permeability anisotropy around a normal fault in porous sandstone as a product of microstructures produced during extensional faulting. It also examines how these preferential flow pathways could impact on the distribution of fluids around a normal fault. Lastly, we assess the potential significance of an improved understanding of permeability anisotropy and its evolution during faulting. The North Sea has two main areas of subsidence associated with Permo-Triassic tectonics named the northern and southern Permian basins ( The Clashach Fault is a seismic scale normal fault with the Hopeman Sandstone Formation in both the hanging wall and footwall ( Auxiliary field data was collected to contextualise samples in a framework of qualitative and quantitative changes in the sedimentology and structure. Field data collected includes the orientations of tectonic features and descriptions of structural styles, and sedimentary analysis of centimetre scale logs at six locations. Oriented samples were collected from three localities with good exposure of the fault core, hanging wall and footwall: Clashach quarry, Clashach Cove east and Clashach Cove west ( At each locality a number of different fracture types are visible including, high and low angle joints, iron stained fractures and individual and composite cataclastic deformation bands, at varying spatial intensities extending up to 50 m either side of the main fault slip face. Fracture intensities were measured using the circular scanline method ( Twelve 20 × 20 cm oriented samples of relatively homogeneous cataclastic fault rock were collected to examine the heterogeneity of petrophysical properties around the fault ( Single phase permeability was measured along the axial direction of core plugs using nitrogen (N A total of 45 core plugs 2.54 cm in diameter and of varying lengths between 2.54 and 5.08 cm were made from the 12 field sample blocks of cataclased sandstone. Each block was cored in three orientations: normal to the fault (x), along fault strike (y) and parallel to fault dip (z) ( An appraisal of core quality was made to identify chipped or disfigured cores and detect any notable structural features, e.g. deformation bands, which may affect the permeability. Before measurement, all samples were washed and then dried for 24 h in an oven at 40 °C to eliminate pore water. The permeability of undeformed host rock samples was also measured in the framework of core plugs oriented in three orientations, one orthogonal to the fault plane using field orientation relationships of lamination to the fault plane mapped at Clashach cove ( Steady state permeabilities from 45 cores were measured using a permeameter at ambient pressures. Tests were run at room temperatures, 18–20 °C. Ambient pressure permeability is calculated using a modified Darcy equation – which normalises changes in pressure by mean pressure – expressed as, An average gas pressure ( Permeabilities from 12 core plugs from four samples were measured at confining pressures between 10 and 100 MPa. In the confining pressure permeameter, core plugs are wrapped in heat shrink polyolefin tubing and confined in a pressure vessel by oil pressurised using a hand pump. A 5 min interval was allocated to allow core plugs to relax at each confining pressure before permeability was measured. Following precedent tests, three core plugs of variable orientations were left at high confining pressures (100 MPa) overnight to assess the influence of time dependent compaction on permeability ( Using these methods permeability is not measured directly but through the measurements of pressure, flow rate, viscosity and porosity, and therefore uncertainties about permeability results must be analysed considering variable uncertainties. Length and cross sectional area of each core plug is recorded from a mean of 10 caliper measurements accurate to 0.01 mm. Time (flow rate) is measured using a hand held stopwatch with human precision calculated as ±0.2 s. Pressure measurement uncertainty is ±0.1 psi, accuracy of viscosity ±0.2% (0.00034 cp calculated across a range of room temperatures), accuracy of gauges 0.1% of full scale accuracy 0–60 psig. Core plug porosity was measured using a helium injection porosimeter. The core plug is put into a tight compartment and a known volume of He gas is injected from a different chamber at a defined pressure and the equilibrium pressure of the two chambers is recorded. This method uses the bulk volume of a core plug calculated from caliper dimensions to calculate grain volume and hence porosity. Steady state permeabilities of all 45 core plugs were measured in a low-pressure permeameter. Permeability results from core plugs in three orientations x, y and z are plotted on three corresponding graphs ( All three graphs show that core plug permeabilities around the fault are considerably more heterogeneous than host rock permeabilities and range across five orders of magnitude ( Twelve cataclastic fault rock samples, each comprising of a set of three core plugs, show anisotropy of permeability in three orientations. The magnitude of anisotropy in each sample varies from less than 1 to more than 3 orders of magnitude (from 0.02 mD to 300 mD) with samples closer to the fault plane tending to show permeabilities ranging over 2 orders of magnitude. The orientation of the anisotropy is also variable, with 6 samples showing maximum permeability ( Spatial patterns of preferential permeability orientations are highlighted by comparing core plug permeabilities in the two directions with respect to the fault kinematics: along fault strike (y) and parallel to the fault dip direction (z) ( Seven samples located close to the fault plane (<20 cm) in both the hanging wall and footwall show maximum permeability ( Four cataclastic rock samples were selected for permeability measurement under reservoir pressures. Samples 1 and 2 were taken less than 10 cm into the footwall and hanging wall (measured from the fault plane), respectively and Samples 6 (footwall) and 11 (hanging wall) are from further away from the fault plane ( Correlation of permeabilities from ambient pressure ( Trends of permeability across a range of confining pressures also vary depending on sample distance to the fault plane. As confining pressures are increased from 10 to 100 MPa permeabilities decrease by around half an order of magnitude in cores from samples taken less than 10 cm from the fault plane ( Confining pressure permeability tests confirm permeability anisotropy in three orthogonal orientations in all four samples ( Permeability anisotropy in the two fault plane parallel orientations, show that z-oriented permeability is higher than y-oriented permeability in all four samples and at all confining pressures. The degree of anisotropy in two orientations is nearly 3 orders of magnitude close to the fault plane in the footwall ( Repeat core plugs were taken from 25% of samples to investigate the heterogeneity of permeability in fault rocks ( Porosities of all 45 core plugs were measured using helium and are calculated as percentage porosity of the core plug volume. Porosities were also quantified from 36 corresponding thin sections using image analysis software. Porosities from core plugs oriented in x, y and z directions are represented graphically with distance from the fault and also as Three polished thin sections were prepared orthogonal to the axis of each core plug ( High resolution image analysis of microstructural features has been carried out on images derived from BSEM (Back-Scatter Electron Microscopy) and SEM-CL (Scanning Electron Microscope-Cathodoluminescence). Microstructural analysis has identified four main mechanisms which may alter porosity and in turn influence permeability. These microstructures include tectonic mechanisms of cataclasis ( The porosities of 45 core plugs from 12 samples vary between 4% and 22% ( The development of anisotropic pores and connected pore networks oriented at a low angle to the maximum principal stress ( Pervasive, distributed cataclasis identified in the samples used in this study is evidenced by grain comminution in thin sections. These cataclasites are visibly homogeneous in hand sample and have no sedimentary lamination as it has been destroyed by cataclasis. Distribution of localised cataclasis can also be observed around the Clashach fault on a meso scale as cemented cataclastic deformation bands. As the spatial intensity of localised cataclastic deformation bands increases towards the fault plane ( Previous studies have shown that fault-related microfractures form with their long axes parallel to the principal maximum stress ( In this study laboratory based measurements of permeability in samples of cataclasite from around a normal fault have provided an improved understanding of permeability anisotropy (magnitude and orientation) and permeability heterogeneity within the framework of the fault zone. In comparison with previous studies of fault rock permeability anisotropy in sandstones ( An objective of this study was to investigate permeability anisotropy of porous fault rocks in the context of the fault kinematics and to consider whether structures controlling the properties of permeability are repeatable in other porous sandstone hosted faults in extensional or other structural settings. It should be noted, in this study only three core orientations have been cored – within a reference frame of the fault – therefore permeabilities outside this reference frame may vary. Previous theoretical work has suggested that the direction of maximum permeability (K Variations in the direction of maximum permeability in the context of fault kinematics may also be influenced by the age of the fault and development of structures throughout the duration of active faulting. Older and/or more active faults will likely have a complex history of healing stages that could transform preferential permeability pathways operating during and after faulting. Previous work has suggested that this complexity of healing could account for variable fluid flow patterns observed around faults with different displacements ( Results from this study show the degree of permeability anisotropy at ambient pressures is between 1 and 3 orders of magnitude from all samples, with anisotropies of 2 orders of magnitude in the majority of samples taken within 10 cm of the fault plane. The application of confining pressure to close microfractures reduces the overall magnitude of permeability, but it also enhances the magnitude of permeability anisotropy by 100–1000 times (4 and 5 orders of magnitude in samples collected < 10 cm from the fault plane). These findings support the interpretation that permeability pathways in down fault dip (z) oriented cores are dominantly controlled by a less compressible network of pores oriented along the core plug axis (z) while much of the permeability in normal to fault plane (x) and along fault strike (y) oriented cores is dominantly controlled by elastically compliant microfractures. The increase in permeability anisotropy with confining pressure cannot be compared with previous studies due to the incompleteness of the various data sets, however it is noted that there is bigger decrease in permeability of low permeability protolith samples compared to high permeability faulted samples in crystalline granite ( In this study core plugs oriented normal to the fault plane display the maximum permeability orientation in three samples (two < 20 cm from the fault plane). These results are in contrast to the findings of previous studies around thrusts, strike-slip and normal faults that identify minimum permeabilities from cores oriented normal to the fault plane (x) ( The use of 25.7 cm The results of this study show that permeability anisotropy persists at high confining pressures representative of reservoir conditions, therefore these results are considered relevant to analogous faults in reservoir settings. Permeabilities measured from a 25.7 cm It is commonly assumed that porosity and permeability will decrease with increased deformation in porous sandstone. However, deformation can have a permeability enhancing effect on fault rocks as the creation of permeability anisotropy can form permeability contrasts which – although bulk permeability is reduced – will enhance flow ( In summary, we show that the formation of fault related micro-scale deformation structures can alter the host rock depositional porosity organisation supporting our hypothesis that this will create new permeability pathways measurable on core scale samples. Thank you to