In order to study the structural properties of coal macerals in-depth, the proximate analysis, ultimate analysis, 13C solid nuclear magnetic resonance (13C NMR), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) were employed to analyze the vitrinite and inertinite properties of Shanghaimiao bituminous coal. The results show that the vitrinite contains more hydrocarbon, nitrogen and sulfur elements than the inertinite while the inertinite contains more oxygen elements than the vitrinite. The 13C NMR results show that the vitrinite has more side chains of aliphatic hydrocarbons than the inertinite while the inertinite has more aromatic rings and more oxygen-aliphatic structures than the vitrinite. The FTIR results show that the contents of alcohol hydroxyl, phenol hydroxyl and ether in the vitrinite is similar to that in the inertinite. However, the inertinite contains more carboxyl groups than the vitrinite. The XPS results show that the nitrogen element is mostly in the form of pyridine, and the sulfur element is mostly in the form of mercaptan and sulfoether in the coal. Based on the above-mentioned analysis, we constructed the molecular structure models of the vitrinite and inertinite. The molecular formula of vitrinite is C126H99O12N3S2 while the molecular formula of inertinite is C131H98O17.Coal is a kind of complicated mixture composed with macerals and minerals. The macerals are the main organic components in coal, which consist of liptinite, vitrinite and inertinite. The minerals include quartz, kaolinite, pyrite and so on. With the development of coal industry, more and more attention has been paid to the influence of different macerals in coal processing and utilization. It is found that the vitrinite has higher content of aliphatic chain and lower aromaticity, which is easier to be cracked in coal conversion compared with the inertinite. However, the inertinite is characterized by larger aromatization degree, fewer branches and better thermal stability, which is relatively more stable in coal conversion compared with the vitrinite The primary separation methods of macerals include gravity separation The macerals were separated from the clean coal of Shanghaimiao Coal Preparation Plant. In order to fully dissociate the macerals, the coal was crushed and ground to −0.045 mm by using ball mill. Referring to the research findings of Dyrkacz et al. The samples of vitrinite and inertinite were analyzed and tested by a high-resolution Bruker advance III 400 WB spectrometer. The standard CPMAS three resonance probe was used in the tests. A linear narrowing method of magic angle spinning (MAS) and a signal/ noise enhancing technique of cross-polarization (CP) can provide better quantitative measurement results. The test frequency is 100.63 MHz; CP contact time is 2 ms, the relaxation delay time is 3 s, and the spinning frequency is kept at 8 kHz. The FTIR analysis of vitrinite and inertinite was carried out on a Nicolet is5 infrared spectrometer. The sample (about 1 mg) was fully ground in a mortar with KBr (100 mg), which was further placed in a sample presser at 20 MPa for 1 min to obtain the slices of samples. The sample slices were examined in the chamber of the spectrometer. The FTIR spectrum was scanned 16 times in the range of 4000−400 cm The XPS testing of samples were carried out at room temperature in an ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) system with the surface analysis system (ESCALAB250 Xi, USA) XPS experiments were performed on an ESCALAB 250Xi.USA. The main C 1 s peak (284.8 eV) was employed to calibrate the binding energy position. The models of vitrinite and inertinite was constructed by MestReNova, and the Material Studio forcite module was used to adjust the spatial structure of models. Geometric optimization is carried out first. This step used the geometry optimization function and the purpose is to initially relax the models. The parameter settings were following, the algorithm is a smart method, and the maximum iteration steps is 500. The calculation quality is fine, and the force field adopts compass II. The charge type is force-field assigned, and the summation method adopts the atom based. The cutoff distance is 15.5 Å. Then, in order to make the models overcome the energy barrier and transform into the minimum energy structure, the annealing function was used. The single annealing parameter settings were following, the initial temperature of annealing program is 300 K, mid cycle temperature is 600 K and the calculation quality is fine. The geometry optimization is carried out after each cycle, and the parameter are the same as before. Annealing program cycle annealing 40 times, each cycle will give structure, the lowest energy of the 40 configuration is the minimum energy structure. The content of vitrinite and inertinite in the two samples were shown in The ultimate analysis show that the vitrinite contains more carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen and sulfur elements, compared to the inertinite, because the vitrinite was mainly transformed from the roots, stems and leaves of ancient plants The From the original spectrum, two main peaks were found, which respectively represent 0–50 ppm aliphatic carbons and 100–160 ppm aromatic carbon It can be seen from the peak separation results that aromatic carbon is the main structure of coal The content of protonated aromatic carbon is more than 40%, which shows that the protonated aromatic carbon constitutes the basic skeleton structure of coal. More bridged carbon indicates that most of aromatic carbon exists in the form of naphthalene and anthracene It is of great significance to know the properties of coal by calculating the structural parameters based on the results of From the parameter calculation results, it can be seen that the aliphatic carbon is primarily in the form of methylene methine. The value of FTIR can be used to analyze the functional groups and chemical bonds on coal surface. The FTIR spectrum of the two macerals is shown in In general, the peak zone at 3700–2980 cm Hydroxyl is divided into OH-free / hydration water, self-associated hydroxyl, phenol hydroxyl and alcohol hydroxyl. The OH-free / hydration water represents the hydroxyl group in the combined water in coal [ The peaks at 2980–2800 cm The peaks at 1800–950 cm I Peak area of corresponding group. In this paper, XPS was used to analyze the existence of nitrogen and sulfur forms in the two macerals. The energy spectrum of N1s is divided into four peaks Before the construction of molecular model, the content of the elements determined was normalized. Because the coal sample in this investigation belongs to low sulfur and low ash coal, all sulfur elements were treated as organic sulfur. The relative contents of C, H, N, S and O in the vitrinite were 80.71%, 5.27%, 1.54%, 2.96% and 9.52%, respectively. Assuming the weight of the molecular model is about 2000 The content of nitrogen and sulfur in the inertinite is less than 1%, so the two elements are not considered during the model building. After the normalization, the contents of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen in the inertinite were 79.76%, 3.99% and 16.25%, respectively. The molecular weight of the inertinite model is about 2000, too. The results show that there are about 96 aromatic carbon and 20 oxygen atoms in the inertinite. The ratio of alcohol hydroxyl, phenol hydroxyl and ether are about 5:6:6. In view of the large aromatic condensation degree and more carboxyl groups in the inertinite, there are one anthracene, seven naphthalene, three benzene rings, six alcohol hydroxy, seven phenol hydroxy, six ether and one carboxyl group in the initial model construction. The molecular model is constructed by MestRaNova, and each part is placed randomly during the construction process. The It is generally believed that coal molecules have three-dimensional structure Through a series of analysis and investigation on the macerals from Shanghai Miao bituminous coal, the structure and functional group information are obtained. The following conclusion were obtained from this paper. The carbon and hydrogen content of vitrinite is slightly higher than that of inertinite, but the oxygen content of inertinite is higher than that of vitrinite. Vitrinite contains a certain amount of nitrogen and sulfur elements, while inertinite contains very low content of these two elements. The inertinite also contains more minerals, which may be related to the coal formation process. The The FTIR results showed that the content of alcohol hydroxyl, phenol hydroxyl and ether in vitrinite were close to that in inertinite. The side chain of vitrinite aliphatic hydrocarbon is longer than that of inertinite, while the inertinite has slightly more hydroxyl group content than vitrinite and contains more carboxylic acid structure. The XPS spectrum shows the low content of nitrogen and sulfur element in inertinite. The analysis focuses on the existing state of nitrogen and sulfur elements in vitrinite. The results show that nitrogen element mainly exists in the form of pyridine, while sulfur element mainly exists in the form of mercaptan and thioether. According to the above analysis results, three-dimensional molecular models of vitrinite and inertinite were constructed, and their molecular formulas are C  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.