Numerous studies have shown that the efficacy of ultraviolet (UV) disinfection can be hindered by the presence of particles that can shield microorganisms. The main objective of this study was to determine to what extent natural particulate matter can shield indigenous spores of aerobic spore-forming bacteria (ASFB) from UV rays. The extent of the protective shielding was assessed by comparing the inactivation rates in three water fractions (untreated, dispersed and filtered on an 8μm membrane) using a collimated beam apparatus with a low-pressure lamp emitting at 254nm. Levels of inactivation were then related to the distribution and abundance of particles as measured by microflow imaging. Disinfection assays were completed on two source waters of different quality and particle content. A protocol was developed to break down particles and disperse aggregates (addition of 100mg/L of Zwittergent 3–12 and blending at 8000rpm for 4min). Particle size distribution (PSD) analysis confirmed a statistically significant decrease in the number of particles for diameter ranges above 5μm following the dispersion protocol and 8μm filtration. The fluence required to reach 1-log inactivation of ASFB spores was independent of particle concentration, while that required to reach 2-log inactivation or more was correlated with the concentration of particles larger than 8μm (R
                     2>0.61). Results suggest that natural particulate matter can protect indigenous organisms from UV radiation in waters with elevated particle content, while source water with low particle counts may not be subject to this interference.Ultraviolet (UV) treatment is considered to be the silver bullet for drinking water disinfection. Pioneer work has shown that the oocysts of Water quality is known to significantly influence the transmitted fluence and the resulting level of inactivation ( Since turbidity is a regulated, easy to use and widely used particle indicator in water treatment plants, attempts have been made to determine the threshold turbidity value under which no significant interference with UV disinfection can be anticipated. Various experimental approaches have relied on seeded microorganisms and added natural or synthetic turbidity (inorganic, organic and chemical flocs), either combined by simple mixing or by forming particles to embed the microorganisms. Results provide insight into the effects of the dispersion of UV light by particles of various compositions, the adsorption of organisms onto particles in drinking water sources and the inclusion of microorganisms in chemical flocs. In general, results suggest that the impact on the inactivation of mineral or organic turbidity under 10 UV disinfection studies suggest that the number, size distribution and chemical nature of particles are better predictors of the potential for shielding microorganisms (    When investigating the impact of particles on UV disinfection of unfiltered water, the impact of natural particles found in the source water can be assessed by measuring the inactivation of particle-associated indigenous organisms such as spores of aerobic spore-forming bacteria (ASFB). ASFB spores are naturally present in surface water, and enumerating them is easy, fast, economical and reliable ( The primary objective of this project is to study the inactivation of indigenous ASFB spores in two source waters, in order to evaluate whether or not either their natural state of aggregation or their association with particles provides significant protection from 254 Two surface water sources were tested during this project: the Mille Îles River (intake of the Régie Intermunicipale des Moulins Water Treatment Plant (WTP)) and the St. Lawrence River (intake of the Charles-DesBaillets WTP), both of which are in the Montreal area, in the province of Québec, Canada. The former is characterized by a high organic content (TOC≈6 Five water samples were collected at each site from October 2005 to February 2006. Samples were collected, shipped on ice, maintained at 4 The protocol used in this study is a modified version of the one proposed by A dispersion protocol was first developed to induce particle breakdown and the dispersion of aggregated ASFB spores. The final procedure selected was derived from two sets of trials conducted using various surfactant solutions and different blending intensities and durations. The surfactant solutions tested were Camper's solution, which was first proposed for the extraction of Blending was performed on a volume of 300 Once optimal conditions had been identified, dispersion was achieved by adding 100 To remove particles by filtration, samples were filtered under vacuum on 47 Particle size distribution (PSD) analysis was carried out with a Brightwell Dynamic Particle Analyzer (DPA) (Brightwell Technologies, Ottawa, Ont.) based on direct magnified photographic image analysis. A volume of 2 The UV collimated beam apparatus was equipped with two low-pressure UV lamps emitting at 254 Indigenous spores of ASFB were enumerated using the Spore counts resulting from various dispersion protocols are presented in the form of a release ratio normalized relative to the initial counts of a given control sample: blended with no chemicals to determine the best chemical mix, and not blended with the addition of the chemical mix for the trials on the optimization of the blending conditions. The use of a ratio allows the waters from experiments repeated over several sampling dates, during which the initial indigenous ASFB spore concentrations varied, to be compared. Release ratios are calculated from each daily untreated control sample. Inactivation data are presented as the log function of The efficacy of various dispersion procedures was compared using water from the Mille Îles River, because of the abundance of ASFB spores and particulate matter found in that source water. Results for the selection of the chemical dispersant trials are displayed in The results of our effort to determine the optimal blending speed are consistent in terms of range of release (from under 1 to 3), and their variability in terms of published results on the release of coliform bacteria from wastewater flocs. Although the results are not consistent for all rotational speeds tested, a blending duration of 4 The effect of blending on PSD in water fractions was investigated using Microflow DPA (Brightwell Technologies Inc.). The effects of filtration and dispersion are presented in Blending had a more pronounced impact on large particles in the St. Lawrence River source, with reductions greater than 85% for particles larger than 10 According to Ormeci and Linden (2005), two phenomena occur simultaneously during physical extraction: detachment as a result of shear stress, which increases the counts, and the disturbance of bacteria, which reduces the viable counts. Of primary importance is verification of the impact of the dispersion procedure on the viability of the spores, and also on their susceptibility to UV. A suspension of  Differences between treatments were not significant for the St. Lawrence water, and the inactivation rates for this water varied from 0.034 to 0.040 They report values between nil for the St. Lawrence River water and an average of 3%, with maximum values of 9%, for the Mille Îles River water. These values may correspond to a level of association estimated through a disinfection model if the lowered ASFB spore inactivation rate is a direct consequence of its association with particles. While this may be true, not all associated spores will be equally protected from the UV rays; a spore located on the surface of a larger particle that is rotating during exposure will be partially protected, as opposed to a spore that is completely inserted into a particle. These values are lower than the 3–24% values in particles (mean diameter 11–80  An identical analysis was performed using the required fluence for 1-log inactivation (instead of 2 In this experiment, indigenous ASFB spores were used as surrogates for The level of association of the organisms with the particulate matter and the likelihood of this association. This information appears critical to evaluating the potential health risks associated with shielding by particles in unfiltered water. The level of association probably varies from one source water to another, as well as among microorganisms. A significant impact of particles was observed for waters originating in the polluted Mille Îles River. A water source with such an elevated particle content would necessarily be coagulated and filtered before UV disinfection. Thus, the issue of particles protecting oocysts would not apply. However, particles from unfiltered protected sources are less likely to be significantly colonized by pathogenic organisms when compared with those from surface waters receiving wastewater discharges. Available results on the attachment of The spores of ASFB are very resistant to UV, making the investigation of a subtle but significant shielding effect possible over a wide range of fluences. However, Based on our findings, these conclusions can be inferred: A combination of low-speed mechanical blending (8000 The dispersion protocol and the filtration step on 8 μm membranes significantly decreased the number of natural particles of all size ranges larger than 5 The proposed dispersion protocol did not have an effect on the survival of Particulate matter and aggregates significantly lowered the fluence-based inactivation rate of indigenous spores of ASFB in the source water with elevated particle content. When the desired level of inactivation of indigenous spores of ASFB exceeds 1 The results bear some relevance to the inactivation of The authors would like to acknowledge the scientific contributions of Jacinthe Mailly at the NSERC Chair on Drinking Water and Dr. Bernard Clément, professor at the École Polytechnique de Montreal, for their support in the laboratory work and statistical analyses. They would also like to thank the staff of the Régie Intermunicipale Des Moulins municipal WTP and the Charles-DesBaillets WTP in Montreal, who provided the water samples. The project was funded by the NSERC Industrial Chair on Drinking Water and the Canadian Water Network. Chair partners included the City of Montreal, the City of Laval, John Meunier Inc. and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Council (NSERC).