The effect of different types of diluents on the extraction of neodymium(III) from a chloride aqueous feed solution by the acidic extractant bis(2-ethylhexylphosphoric) acid (D2EHPA) was investigated. A total of 11 aliphatic, mixed aliphatic-aromatic and aromatic diluents were considered. D2EHPA was very well miscible with all diluents, even at 90% (v/v) of extractant. Aliphatic diluents gave the highest extraction efficiencies, while aromatic diluents did suppress the formation of emulsions or gels. Although a good separation of Dy(III) over Nd(III) was observed at 0.5 mol/L D2EHPA in all diluents, aromatic diluents were found to yield the highest separation factors. This study shows that the effect of the diluent on the extraction behaviour of Nd(III) is primarily determined by the aliphatic/aromatic content of the diluent. Diluents with the same concentration of aromatics show very similar behaviour. The choice of a diluent can be based on factors other than the extraction behaviour, for instance price and volatility.Solvent extraction is an important separation technique for mixtures of metals ( It is often assumed that the diluent merely acts as a solvent for the extractant and that it has no active role in the extraction process. However, the diluent can have a large effect on the distribution ratios ( In many cases, the distribution ratios cannot be correlated to the physical properties of the diluent, even though many attempts have been made to do so. Taube tried to correlate the extraction efficiency of uranium, plutonium and neptunium with the dipole moment and the dielectric constant of the solvent (  The objective of this paper is to study the effect of different diluents on the extraction behaviour of neodymium(III) from chloride aqueous solutions by the acidic extractant bis(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) ( NdCl A benchtop total-reflection X-ray fluorescence (TXRF) spectrometer (S2 Picofox model, Bruker) was used to determine the metal concentrations before and after solvent extraction. Batch-mode extraction experiments were carried out by mixing two phases using a flat magnetic stirrer (MIX 15 eco model, 2mag). Extraction experiments were performed with the extractant bis(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) diluted in the different diluents. For the extraction experiments of Nd(III) from chloride solutions, an initial stock solution (0.069 mol/L) was prepared by dissolving NdCl The An overview of the diluents used in this study is provided in In order to find the maximum concentration that can be prepared in the investigated diluents, the solubility of bis(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) was tested in all commercial diluents and pure solvents ( In a first series of extraction experiments, the effect of the equilibrium pH on the extraction of Nd(III) was investigated. Using an aqueous HCl solution, the equilibrium pH was varied from 1.6 to 1.0 for FTS-A, MS-B and 1.8 to 1.0 for A150 diluents. The equilibration time was 30 min. The distribution ratios of Nd(III) increased with increasing equilibrium pH, using 1 mol/L D2EHPA ( Taking into account that the extraction kinetics are an important parameter in the optimisation of a solvent extraction process, the effect of the equilibration time on the extraction of Nd(III) using 0.05 mol/L D2EHPA was studied. Equilibrium was reached within 5 min for all diluents tested. The results for selected diluents (FTS-A, MS-B, A150) are shown in The phase disengagement time was measured during the solvent extraction experiments by varying the Nd(III) concentration between 0.035 mol/L and 0.69 mol/L. The data provided in Concurrently, the effect of the chloride ion on the extraction of Nd(III) was studied by varying the chloride ion concentration from 1 to 5 mol/L, using NaCl at fixed pH and extractant concentration in all diluents. In The effect of the D2EHPA concentration in the different diluents on the extraction of Nd(III) from the chloride solution containing 6.93 × 10 The effect of the metal concentration on the loading of 1 mol/L D2EHPA was investigated for different feed solutions with distinct concentrations of Nd(III): 0.035, 0.069, 0.35, 0.69 mol/L ( The effect of the D2EHPA concentration on the separation of Dy(III) and Nd(III) from chloride solutions was studied in the range of 0.1 to 1 mol/L ( The objective of this study was to compare the performance of 11 different diluents for the solvent extraction of neodymium(III) from chloride aqueous feed solutions by bis(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid (D2EHPA). The diluents included different aliphatic, mixed aliphatic-aromatic and aromatic diluents. D2EHPA is very well miscible with all diluents, even at 90% (v/v) of extractant. Aliphatic diluents provided higher extraction efficiencies, while aromatic diluents can suppress the formation of emulsions or gels. A good separation of Dy(III) over Nd(III) was observed at 0.5 mol/L D2EHPA in all diluents. The aromatic diluent A150 was found to be the most performant diluent for the separation of Dy(III) from Nd(III). This study highlights that the effect of the diluent on the extraction behaviour of the system is primarily determined by the aliphatic/aromatic content of the diluent. Diluents with the same concentration of aromatics exhibit very similar behaviour. The authors acknowledge