Selection of an appropriate excavating machine and equipment for excavation of tunnels directly influences the economics of the project. The most important parameters in the selection of excavating machines are the geomechanical properties of the rock mass on the tunneling route. There are many publications in the rock mechanics literature about selection of excavating machine by considering geotechnical parameters of the rock mass. For this purpose, various empirical approaches have been proposed. One of the widely used parameters in the empirical equations is the uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) of the rock material. Hammer type excavators are extensively preferred for excavations performed in soft rock. For prediction of the performances of this type of excavators, some in-situ and laboratory experiments should be carried out on the rock samples taken from the tunneling sites. Sampling and preparation of the cores for determination of UCS in laboratory in accordance with ISRM In this study, a new empirical equation is developed by employing the BPI and geological strength index (GSI) together. High prediction performances have been obtained by using the equation proposed in this study for hammer type excavators during the excavation of very weak rock masses having low RQD values (0–20%), laminated yellowish brown flysch and gray black flysch, located within the section of 5.2 Studies performed so far have revealed the fact that geomechanical properties of the rock material are very important in the prediction of excavator performance Recently, the models proposed to predict the machine performance are based on specific energy (SE). Farmer and Garrity The most widely used method for the prediction of roadheader performance has been based on specific energy obtained from ‘core cutting tests’ As can be seen from the equations given above, the prediction performances are generally based on the geomechanical properties of rocks material and masses, such as In this study, in order to evaluate the prediction performance of the proposed equation for hammer type excavators, the results of BPI tests considered for the weak rocks of yellowish brown flysch, grayish black flysch with an RQD of 0–20%, taken from the excavation site of the second stage of Great İzmir Metro, providing a contribution to the study proposed by Bilgin et al. The The number of the studies on the use of BPI test for determination of uniaxial strength of rock material increase in last 10 years. The historical development of the BPI test and its use is given by Sonmez and Tunusluoglu Although the conversion factor to obtain Tunnel construction route of the second stage of İzmir Metro Project, which will be integrated to the first one, follows the line in the southwest of İzmir Gulf between Ucyol and Fahrettin Altay. Excavations in the tunnel have been underway through five service shafts. Dominating rock units in the route of tunnel are low to medium altered andesites known as Yamanlar Volcanics; agglomerate–sandstone–siltstone–mudstone sequence known as Altındag formation; yellowish brown flysch and grayish black flysch known as Bornova Melange The Bornova Melange which occupies 70% of the units in the tunnel route is evaluated as highly weak rock mass. Existence of ground water has enhanced the alteration in this formation. Grayish black flysch within this complex contains laminated surfaces. The As explained before, selection of an adequate type of excavator is performed based on the geomechanical properties of the rock material and rock masses. The GSI was used in this study to represent the rock mass. This study has produced satisfactory outcome for the performances of excavators of similar features in rock masses formed of various geological units as in the tunnel route of this particular study. Type of specific properties of excavator and the lithological remarks of the locations, where the excavator used, are summarized in In the frame of this study, a total of 2161 data including The The studied part route of the tunnel composed of the geological units of low-to-medium altered andesites known as Yamanlar Volcanics; agglomerate–sandstone–siltstone–mudstone sequence known as Altındag formation; yellowish brown flysch and grayish black flysch known as Bornova Melange. Among these units, particularly Bornova Melange having low The relationship between measured The impact hammer type of excavators is extensively used for the construction of the tunnels driven in extremely weak rock masses. The determination of UCS of weak rock material, which is widely used as an input parameter for predicting of the excavator performance, obtained from weak rock masses having low This study was conducted under the scientific project numbered 108M151 of TUBITAK (The Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey) and 2005384 of Dokuz Eylul University of Scientific Research Bureau, and the protocol made with Bozoğlu Construction Inc. The author would like to thank Metin Eris and Levent Nuray from STFA (consulting firm), and Mustafa Attaroglou and Yalçın Yilmaz from Bozoglu Group Construction Inc., for their collaboration. The author also thanks Reşat Ulusay for his valuable comments.