Particle design in recent years has attempted to overcome solubility limitations in drug development. In this work, the particle microstructures of itraconazole (ITZ) were designed by a supercritical anti-solvent (SAS) process, with or without hydroxypropyl methylcellulose (HPMC) as the dispersing material, where the processing-microstructure-solubility relationship was investigated. The results showed that ITZ particles with different shapes and crystal forms were obtained, which enhanced the ITZ solubility from 4.4 μg/mL to 108.5 μg/mL. For the optimal sample, ITZ crystal transformed into amorphous state, resulting in high solubility and fast dissolution rate. Moreover, hydrogen bond interaction was formed between HPMC and ITZ, which could hinder the recrystallization of dissolved ITZ, resulting in its complete dissolution. Also, the production efficiency was increased to 38.5 mg ITZ/min, which laid a foundation for the scale-up. These results show the great potential of SAS process on the particle design of poorly soluble drugs for solubility enhancement.Poor solubility of drugs is an industry wide problem for pharmaceutical researchers [ The drug solubility is an equilibrium measure, but the dissolution rate at which the solid drug passes into solution is critically important when the dissolution time is limited [ There are two major categories for particle preparation, i.e., top‐down approaches and bottom‐up approaches [ Itraconazole (ITZ), a well-tolerated triazole antifungal agent, belongs to Class II of Biopharmaceutical Classification System with an extremely low aqueous solubility (∼1 ng/mL) [ In this study, a proprietary SAS process is developed for the particle design of ITZ, with emphasis on the processing-microstructure-solubility relationship. Hydroxypropyl methylcellulose (HPMC) is used as the hydrophilic dispersing material for further modification of ITZ particles, because HPMC can form strong secondary interaction with ITZ [ The raw ITZ was provided by Honz Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. (Haikou, China), dichloromethane (DCM, analytical grade) and methanol (MeOH, analytical grade) were purchased from Guangzhou Chemical Reagent Factory (Guangzhou, China), hydrochloric acid (HCl, analytical grade) was purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China), CO A proprietary supercritical fluid particle design (SCF PD)-Lab apparatus in Honz Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. (Haikou, China) was employed to design the ITZ particles. The flow diagram is illustrated in For the SAS process, there is a limitation in the choice of solvents, because of the drug and polymers must be soluble in a suitable organic solvent that is miscible with the supercritical CO The microstructures of ITZ particles were tailored by controlling the SAS operating parameters, including mass ratio of ITZ/HPMC ( The morphology of ITZ particles was observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, TM3030, HITACHI, Japan). The particles were dispersed on conductive tape prior to SEM imaging. The size of ITZ particles was measured by a laser diffraction particle size analyzer (Mastersizer 2000, Malvern, UK). The analysis was performed using dry method. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of ITZ particles were attained by an X-ray diffractometer (D2 PHASER, Bruker AXS, German) with Cu-Kα radiation generated at 10 mA and 30 kV. All samples were scanned between 5° and 45° (2θ). Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) analysis of ITZ particles was performed using a thermal analyzer (DSC 200 F3 Maia®, Netzsch, German) in N Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra of ITZ particles were obtained by using a FT-IR spectrophotometer (Nicolet iS5, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Samples were prepared by dispersing the particles in KBr and pressing the mixture into disc form. The scanning range was 400–4000 cm Materials studio (Accelrys, Inc., USA) was selected to calculate the crystal structures of ITZ particles. The procedure is similar to our previous work [ The saturation solubility (S) of ITZ particles in 0.1 N HCl were experimentally measured as follows. Weighted sample (equivalent to 6 mg ITZ) was added into a tube with 10 mL 0.1 N HCl. The tube was kept at 37 °C using a thermostat water bath (THD 0506, Ningbo Tianheng Co., CHN) and stirred at 100 rpm. After 24 h, the solution was withdrawn and filtered through a syringe filter with a pore size of 0.22 μm. The dissolved amount of ITZ in the dissolution medium was detected at 255 nm using a UV/vis spectrophotometer (UV-2450, Shimadzu, Japan). Each measurement was repeated three times, and the average value was calculated. The dissolution test was performed using a dissolution tester (SYSTEM 860BDL-12, Logan Instruments Corp., USA) according to the Chinese Pharmacopoeia, with the paddle apparatus. ITZ particles equivalent to 50 mg ITZ were immersed into 900 mL of dissolution medium (0.1 N HCl), which was thermostatically maintained at 37 °C and stirred at 50 rpm. Aliquots of samples (10 mL) were withdrawn at different time intervals (10 min, 20 min, 30 min, 45 min, 60 min. and 90 min) and filtered through a 0.45 μm membrane. The filtrate was then analyzed with UV/vis spectrophotometer (UV-2450, Shimadzu, Japan) at 255 nm. Measurements were conducted in triplicate. The orthogonal experimental table and corresponding results are showed in The SEM images of typical samples are showed in It is worth mentioning that, only ﬂaky ITZ microcrystals were obtained in the study of Sathigari et al. [ Three ITZ crystalline forms (Form I, Form II and Form III) have been reported in the published literatures and patents [ Computer simulation is then applied to study the crystal structures, and the calculated and experimental XRD patterns, as well as their differences, are showed in The relative calculated crystal lattice parameters are listed in More interestingly, XRD patterns of ITZ particles are of more diversity in the presence of HPMC. As shown in The above results confirmed that the microstructures of ITZ particles can be well tailored by controlling the SAS operating parameters. Rational explanations and influence mechanisms of operating parameters on particle microstructures have been reported in many published works [ The formation mechanisms of amorphous nano/ microparticles can be well analyzed and well understood based on the time scale approach proposed by Reverchon et al. [ In this study, a wide range of operating parameters was applied to produce ITZ particles with various microstructures. The selected parameters can directly influence the interactions among high-pressure vapor-liquid equilibria, surface tension variations, jet ﬂuid dynamics, mass transfer, nucleation and growth. For example, temperature and pressure decide the phase behavior and process path; flow rate and nozzle diameter decide the Reynolds and Weber numbers, which relate to the jet hydrodynamic; mass ratio of drug/polymer and solution concentration decide the saturation solubility, which relates to the nucleation and crystal growth. As expected, ITZ particles with different shapes and crystal forms were obtained under the selected operating parameters. Numerous studies have shown that particle microstructures have a close relationship with solubility for poorly water-soluble drugs [ As shown in High solubility of is set as the target to optimize the operating conditions firstly. Range ( According to the values of On the other hand, production efficiency is an important index for the scale-up and industrialization, where mass ratio of ITZ/HPMC ( The particle microstructures and solubility of optimal sample (OP) were characterized in detail. As a reference, a physical mixture (PM) was prepared by mixing of raw ITZ and raw HPMC with SEM images of OP and particle size distribution patterns of raw ITZ, HPMC, PM and OP are showed in The XRD patterns and DSC curves of raw ITZ, raw HPMC, physical mixture (PM) and optimal sample (OP) are showed in The FT-IR spectra of raw ITZ, raw HPMC, physical mixture (PM) and optimal sample (OP) have been depicted in The dissolution proﬁles of raw ITZ, optimal sample (OP) and Sporanox® in 0.1 N HCl are showed in Sporanox®, one of the commercial products of ITZ, shows significant efficacy because of its high solubility and rapid dissolution rate of ITZ. However, it involves a complex procedure, i.e., the spraying solution containing ITZ and HPMC is sprayed on sugar spheres at first, after drying, the seal-coating spraying solution containing DCM and polyethylene glycol 20,000 is sprayed on the coated spheres. In this study, the solubility and dissolution rate of ITZ is improved by a one-step procedure, showing the advantages of SAS in particle design. Moreover, given the fact that the in vitro dissolution rate is considered similar to the in vivo dissolution rate for class II drugs, the SAS processed ITZ particles present an opportunity to increase the efficacy of ITZ and decrease the dose-related adverse effects. ITZ particles were well designed by SAS process with or without HPMC as dispersing material in this study. That is ITZ particles with different shapes and crystal forms were obtained by controlling the SAS operating parameters. Compared with the blocky raw ITZ, needlelike, scale-like, flaky, and spherical ITZ particles with smaller particle size are observed from the SEM images. XRD, DSC and FT-IR results demonstrate that novel ITZ polymorphs are probably generated after the SAS process, while ITZ can exist in different crystal forms or become amorphous in ITZ-HPMC samples. The influence of particle design on solubility was investigated and operating parameters were optimized via an OA  The authors declare no conflict of interest. Financial support from the Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: