The effect of current density, temperature, diffusion layer thickness (δ), deposition time, Guarfloc66 (Guar) and activated polyacrylamide (APAM) on the topography (surface roughness) of electrodeposited copper was studied. The level of these variables approximates current commercial copper electrowinning (EW) and electrorefining (ER) operating conditions. The effect of Guar and APAM on surface roughness and number of Peaks-per-Centimeter was assessed both in combination and alone using a rotating cylinder electrode (RCE) for up to 6-hour EW time. Observed effects on surface roughness indicate that a more uniform surface and lower roughness/smoother copper deposits were obtained using the additive APAM rather than Guar. Regression models indicate APAM has a significant effect on reducing surface roughness at 65 °C.
                  Bench-scale continuous electrowinning tests were carried out at 50 °C for 44.6 h using parallel plate electrodes into which APAM and Guar were dosed continuously and independently. These tests also indicated that APAM produces smoother deposits than Guar. The cross sections of the copper deposits from these tests showed that APAM exhibits a slightly columnar copper deposit and Guar produced a porous copper deposit. The copper deposit produced with additive APAM was brighter and produced greater amounts of both smaller and larger crystallite sizes than those obtained with Guar. This infers that APAM favours higher nucleation rates and greater 3D crystallite growth and coalescence than Guar.In the copper deposition industry in general, organic additives and chloride ions need to be dosed to produce smooth deposits, free of voids or porosity. It is also known that organic additives significantly influence the current–potential relationship due to their competition for surface coverage with the components of the electrolyte system including chloride ions. Therefore these organic additives must be carefully selected according to their role at the metal/electrolyte interface to control the nucleation and growth during the deposition process. The first step of metal deposition is the formation of nuclei of the depositing metal on a foreign substrate and on a substrate of the same metal. The structure of the first monolayer(s), has an impact on the deposition of further layers and therefore on the morphology of the deposited metal. The competition between nucleation and growth determines the smoothness of the deposit: the higher the nucleation rate; the finer the crystal size ( It has been shown elsewhere ( Guar is a naturally occurring galacto-mannan polymer, a polysaccharide, used as flocculant and coagulant with typical molecular weights ranging from 200,000 to 500,000 Da. Guar is a linear  In this paper the results of fractional factorial experimental designs are presented which aims to compare the efficacy of APAM and Guar in controlling surface roughness and dendrite formation. Fractional factorial experimental designs are a variation of a basic experimental design in which only a subset of runs are systematically selected and conducted to minimize the number of experiments but include all the process variables ( The variables in commercial copper EW and ER are the flow rate of the feed electrolyte into the electrolytic cells containing fresh additives, electrolyte temperature, current density, and copper, sulfuric acid and chloride ion concentrations. Increasing the electrolyte flow rate into the electrolytic cell increases the velocity of the bulk electrolyte near the metal electrode/electrolyte interface and therefore may increase the forced convection and decrease the diffusion layer thickness, The testwork described below was designed to evaluate the effectiveness of APAM and Guar to control dendrite formation using the rotating cylinder electrode (RCE) and parallel plate electrodes (PPE) described by The electrolyte was prepared using AR grade copper sulfate and sulfuric acid and its composition throughout the testwork was as follows: Cu  The surface roughness was measured using a Mahr Perthometer M1 ( The cross-section of the copper deposits was prepared for SEM examination. The samples were embedded in an epoxy resin and the cross-section cut with 600 grit silicon carbide powder. It was then sequentially polished with 3, 1 and 0.25 μm diamond paste. It was finally etched with a solution of 5 g of ferric chloride and 5 mL hydrochloric acid in 90 mL ethanol for 20–25 s. XRD data were collected from the copper deposits produced using a Siemens/Bruker General Area Detector Diffraction Solution, GADDS diffractometer and interpreted using the Scherrer equation ( Guar was dosed The comparison between Guar and APAM was also carried out using parallel plate electrodes at current-industry standard copper electrowinning operating conditions — except for current density which was increased to 340 A/m A 316L 2B finish stainless steel cathode with a surface roughness of 0.25   It can be seen that the surface roughness is strongly influenced by the current density The effect of APAM was insignificant in this temperature range possibly due to the kinetics of its ageing in the electrolyte. The rationale for this conclusion is as follows. Cyclic voltammetry results (  It can be seen from this model that APAM ( This test was conducted to continue evaluating the effectiveness of Guar or APAM, either alone or in combination, on surface roughness and on the number of Peaks-per Centimetre (PPC) over 6 h of EW. PPC is defined as the number of roughness profile elements per centimetre which consecutively intersect at a specified upper profile section level and a lower profile section ( The Model The number of PPC reported in It is concluded from these results that APAM significantly reduced surface roughness and increased the number of PPC. In contrast, Guar increased the surface roughness and decreased the number of PPC similar to the copper deposit produced without additives. Bench scale testwork was aimed at verifying the effectiveness of Guar and APAM in controlling dendrite growth in a continuous copper EW system using  Crystallite size was also determined using an XRD technique, General Area Diffraction Detector Solution (GADDS), according to the technique described elsewhere (  Bench-scale continuous electrowinning tests using parallel plate electrodes where APAM and Guar were dosed continuously and independently also indicated that APAM produces smoother deposits than Guar. The overall results suggest that APAM is more specifically adsorbed than Guar at the metal electrode/electrolyte interface where high electrical fields are convergent. This behaviour can therefore inhibit the formation of protrusions/dendrites. The covalent bonding that polyacrylamide block polymer confers at the metal/electrolyte interface ( The adsorption properties for Guar were not found in the literature. The difference on inhibition (polarization) and adsorption produced by Guar and APAM has been studied by us using Cyclic Voltammetry and Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy ( It was found that when 14,000 C were applied in the fractional factorial experimental design that the effect of APAM was significant in reducing surface roughness at 65 °C but insignificant at 45 °C. This difference is attributed to stronger adsorption and enhanced polarization of APAM at 65 °C. The regression models from this experimental design indicated that APAM and Guar are not aliased and that APAM acts truly independently of Guar. It was also found that current density and Guar were aliased but decreases in significance with increasing temperature consistent with the faster degradation of Guar. Therefore, the role of Guar and APAM was concluded to be independent. In the 6-hour EW tests, APAM significantly reduced surface roughness and increased the number of Peaks-per-Centimetre. Bench-scale continuous electrowinning tests where APAM and Guar were dosed continuously and independently indicated that APAM produces smoother deposits than Guar. SEM examination of cross sections of the copper deposits showed that Guar produced porous deposits and APAM produced slightly columnar deposits. Furthermore, the copper deposit with APAM is brighter and has greater amounts of both smaller and larger crystallite sizes than those with Guar. We infer that presence of APAM favours higher nucleation rates and greater 3D crystallite growth and coalescence than Guar and that APAM can produce purer copper deposits since voids and porosity can be reduced by smaller crystallites. The overall results of this work indicate that APAM produces smoother, brighter and more compact copper electrodeposits than Guar. Therefore APAM can be viewed as a potential new levelling and brightening agent for copper electrometallurgy. We wish to thank Mount Gordon Operations of Western Metals Copper Ltd. and to the Australian Research Council for funding this study.