Objectives
                  Understanding morphological changes and mineral content of tooth hard tissues may influence dental treatment. In this study, the effect of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus (T1DM) on tooth structure was examined.
               
                  Methods
                  Experimental T1DM was induced in 3-week old male Wistar rats (n
                     =10) by a single dose of 60mg/kg body weight of Streprozotocin. All rats were injected with calcein twice during the experiment and sacrificed at the age of 7 weeks old. Micro-computed tomography (micro-CT) was used to determine the mineral density and thickness of enamel and dentine. Also, a histomorphometery study was conducted to detect the rates of dentine mineral apposition and formation. The examined area was in the crown analogue of the rat mandibular incisor parallel to the long axis of the mesial surface of the first molar. All results were compared using Students’ t-test (p
                     <0.05).
               
                  Results
                  Results showed that the enamel and dentine thickness were significantly reduced (hypoplasia) and there was a significant reduction of the rate of dentine mineral apposition and formation, while there was no significant effect of the T1DM condition on the mineral density of enamel and dentine.
               
                  Conclusions
                  T1DM has a detrimental influence on the formation of enamel and dentine in the early growth stage.
               
                  Clinical significance
                  T1DM condition may alter treatment planning of orthodontic treatment as it is associated with decreased enamel and dentin thickness that may affect teeth size and their resistance to caries.Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus (T1DM) is a chronic condition in which the pancreas produces little or no insulin necessary for glucose metabolism. It is one of the most prevalent systemic disorders affecting an increasing number of individuals globally. This disease exhibits various detrimental alterations on bones, and mineral metabolism. Understanding the factors contributing to the increased caries susceptibility in young patients suffering from the diabetic condition, especially young orthodontic patients who have high probability for the development of caries during their orthodontic treatment may help dentists to plan suitable strategies for protecting such patients against the expected caries challenges. Moreover, it is of prime importance for dentists and orthodontists to explore any factors that might affect the dental tissues growth and thus the size of the teeth, which has a strong impact on the orthodontic treatment planning. In this study, non-destructive micro-computed tomography (micro-CT) was used to examine the influence of induced T1DM on enamel and dentine mineral density and thickness using an experimental rat model. Micro-CT uses a focused beam to provide higher resolution on small samples Animal protocols were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of King AbdulAziz University and Tokyo Medical and Dental University, and the experiment was carried out under the control of the University's Guidelines for Animal Experimentation. Twenty 3-week old male Wistar rats were used for this study. They were randomly divided into two groups, the control group and the T1DM group; each group consisted of ten rats. The rats in the control group were injected intra-peritoneally with a single dose of 0.1 T1DM condition was diagnosed by the presence of glucose in urine and elevated blood glucose concentration. The urine was tested using reagent strips (Uriace Ga; TERUMO). All rats were subcutaneously injected with 50 Dentine formation indices in control and T1DM groups were determined in the crown analogue area parallel to the long axis of the mesial surface of the first molar. A digitizing morphometry system was used to measure the dentine formation indices. The system consisted of a confocal laser scanning microscope (LSM510, Carl Zeiss Co. Ltd., Jena, Germany), and a morphometry program (LSM Image Browser, Carl Zeiss Co. Ltd., Germany). Dentine formation indices included dentine mineral apposition rate (μm/day) and dentine formation rate (μm All of the left mandibles were mounted on a computer-controlled turntable of a micro-CT (inspeXio SMX-100CT; Shimadzu Science, Kyoto, Japan), which synchronized the rotation and axial shift. A 0.2-mm-thick brass (Cu–Zn) filter was installed in the beam path to reduce beam-hardening effect. Specimens were scanned using a 360° rotation with a step rotation of 0.3°. The nominal isotropic resolution of the setup was 20.3 For the purpose of mineral density calibration, a series of mineral reference phantoms (Phantoms, Ratoc System Engineering, Tokyo, Japan) were scanned prior to specimen scanning. Three phantoms were used; four hydroxyapatite disks (0.30, 0.40, 0.60 and 0.80 3D image analysis software (TRI/3D-BON; Ratoc), originally developed for bone morphometry, The mean mineral density of enamel and dentine within the volume of interest was calculated and visualized between the range 1.25 and 3.20 The assessment of the incisor enamel and dentine thickness was done by observing the various 2D sections obtained from the micro CT observation and obtaining the section showing the two mesial canals of the mesial roots and two mesial pulp horns of the first molar. The digitized image was analyzed using ImageJ software (v. 1.42, NIH) in three zones as shown in ( Student's The weights of the rats in both groups are shown in ( Results showed that there was no significant difference in the enamel and dentine mineral densities between the two groups ( Green fluorescent lines labelled with calcein fluorescent marker at two different time points showed that dentine formation took place between day 21 and day 28 in the control and T1DM groups ( Many investigations in medicine explored the various detrimental effects exerted by the T1DM on different body organs; however, less attention was focused on the effect of this condition on teeth. A previous study In the current experiment, rats’ incisors were examined because they grow continuously and can exhibit all stages of tooth formation at any time which render them ideal models for the study of tooth development. STZ was used to induce hyperglycemia in the T1DM group of this experiment. Previous studies showed that the streptozotocin-induced rat model is capable of demonstrating various detrimental effects induced by T1DM condition on the different organs and tissues of the body. Micro-CT was used in this study as a non-destructive method to compare the mineral contents of both control and diabetic rat teeth using a modified method of applying filters in the beam path to avoid the beam hardening phenomenon. A recent report This study demonstrated that the T1DM condition induced detrimental changes on the thickness of enamel and dentine. Thus, it is speculated that the metabolic functions of the ameloblasts and the odontoblasts may be hindered by the elevated blood glucose level associated with the T1DM condition. It was previously suggested that the T1DM condition affect ameloblasts and odontoblasts by a mechanism similar to the well documented mechanism exerted by the T1DM condition on osteoblasts bone-forming cells due to the similarities between the process of dentine, enamel and bone development. It was previously demonstrated that a glucose concentration similar to those observed in poorly controlled diabetic patients inhibited the osteoblast cells from depositing calcium during the mineralization process of the bone matrix. Another mechanism that might explain the negative effects exerted by the T1DM condition on odontoblasts and ameloblasts activities may be attributed to the increase of blood glucose level that interferes with the maturation and the proper mineralization of the dentine collagen matrix during the dentine development stages. Previous research work showed that the histological features of the ameloblast and its function might be affected by the increased glucose level associated with the T1DM condition. All possible attempts were done during the experimental procedures of the current experiment to standardize the area of observation of the specimens by the micro CT and the confocal laser microscope however, the current results should be cautiously interpreted and further confirmatory studies should be followed as the current experiment is limited by reporting the thickness of enamel and dentine using 2D images In conclusion, within the limitation of this animal model study, the results showed that the T1DM condition suppressed the enamel and dentine formation, however, the enamel and dentine densities were not affected. This indicates that diabetic patients may be more susceptible to dental caries and teeth size discrepancies. T1DM patients’ dental problems should be handled carefully and their diabetic condition monitoring is of prime importance, especially during early stage of tooth development. This project was supported by the