Rock response to confining pressure and strain rate can change dramatically from very brittle to ductile. Capturing this transition is crucial for a correct prediction of rock mass failure due to blasting, explosion or drilling in mining. In this work, a new constitutive model that accounts for the effects of both confining pressure and strain rate on the nominal strength and post peak behaviour is proposed for dry intact rocks and other similar geological materials. The key features of the proposed constitutive model are the employment of a single loading function that evolves from initial yielding to ultimate failure during damaging and the rate-dependent enhancement so that the strain rate effects can be faithfully described at different confining pressures. The model can adequately capture both the brittle and ductile responses as well as the brittle-ductile transition as a result of both strain rate and confining pressure.Time increment Plastic-damage potential Local or specific fracture energy Strain rate parameter Hydrostatic stress Pressures at initial yield under isotropic compression and tension, respectively Shear stress Yield function Material parameters controlling damage evolution Secant elastic stiffness tensor Elasto-plastic-damage tangent stiffness tensor Secant compliance tensor Damage parameter Shear modulus Fracture energy Heaviside function of hydrostatic pressure First invariant of the stress tensor Second invariant of the deviatoric stress tensor Bulk modulus Material constant controlling the shape of the yield surface Stress ratio at failure Deviatoric stress Material constant controlling the shape of the yield surface Parameter controlling the dilational response Material constant controlling the shape of the yield surface Total strain tensor Plastic strain tensor Total shear and volumetric strains, respectively Plastic shear and volumetric strains, respectively Accumulated plastic strain Viscosity parameter Damage-plastic multiplier Stress tensor Major, intermediate and minor principal stresses, respectively Tensile strength Elastic energy potential Understanding and modelling the behaviour of rocks would pave the way towards a safe and economical design in geotechnical and mining engineering. Like any other geological material, rock behaviour depends on both strain rate and pressure, that is, its response can change from very brittle to ductile under significantly high confining pressure Inelastic rock deformation at microscopic scale involves a series of micro-mechanical processes leading to degradation of the material micro-structure. These processes usually begin with initiation of micro-cracks within the material matrix (at low pressures) and/or grains (at high pressures), followed by localization of micro-cracks with a band of certain thickness where micro-cracks finally coalesce to form the macroscopic fracture. Throughout the entire course of inelastic deformation, frictional sliding between the two faces of micro-cracks, asperity interlocking, granular and/or diffusional flow, crystal plasticity, and other processes may accompany micro-cracking and fracturing Phenomenological coupled damage-plasticity models with different levels of complexity and applicability have been proposed for modelling the mechanical behaviour of rocks A new formulation is developed in this study by employing a combined yield-failure function, which eliminates the need for multiple loading surfaces, while facilitating both the implementation and applications of the model to cover a wide range of responses under different pressures and strain rates. In this formulation, an initial yield surface evolves, with the evolution of the damage variable, defined as a function of the rate of accumulated plastic strain, into a linear frictional failure envelope The paper is organised as follows; at first the model formulation is described, while providing links between the model formulation and the rock behaviour under different confining pressures and strain rates. Numerical implementation algorithms are then described and numerical examples of rock behaviour under different confining pressures and strain rates are given to demonstrate promising features of the new model. In the present study, the tensile stresses are assumed to be positive and the compressive stresses are considered as negative. However, in order to be consistent with the rock mechanics convention, the stress-strain signs will be switched when presenting the model predictions at the material level. The principal stresses are assumed to satisfy the condition The proposed constitutive model for intact rock has been formulated within the framework of continuum damage mechanics and plasticity theory. In addition to the compressive response, the model accounts for the tensile regime and includes micro-crack closure effects when switching from tension to compression modes. Such effects are indirectly modelled by considering an enhanced elastic stiffness under compressive loading. Instead of introducing an isotropic damage parameter, the unilateral behaviour of rock due to crack closure has been described by coupling the damage parameter In the above expression, The generalised stress-strain relation and secant elastic stiffness The damage-plasticity model assumes an evolving yield-failure function which is a function of stresses and the scalar damage variable Following Mir et al. In the above expression, In order to describe the dilation behaviour with the proposed constitutive model, a non-associative flow rule has been adopted. A plastic-damage potential has been introduced which allows us to calibrate the dilational behaviour against experimental data. The plastic-damage potential takes the following form: The non-dimensional parameter Since even intact rocks contain microscopic flaws (micro-cracks and micro voids), frictional sliding between the two faces of pre-existing micro-cracks as well as initiation of new micro-cracks can take place at microscopic scale during the inelastic loading of rocks. At the macroscopic level these mechanisms are described as softening/hardening phenomena in terms of strength and stiffness reduction/enhancement. In regard to a damage plasticity model, such macroscopic behaviour can be modelled through a plastic strain tensor and a damage variable. For a coupled approach, further characterisation is required to identify the inter-dependence of these two internal variables. An exponential relationship between damage ( A brief summary of the model is provided here before the formulation of the tangent stiffness and stress update algorithms. The constitutive equations governing the behaviour of the model include the stress-strain-damage relationship ( The formulation of the tangent stiffness tensor for the proposed damage-plasticity model is presented in this section. The tangent stiffness tensor is necessary for localisation analysis and for solving boundary value problems (BVP) where the constitutive models are implemented within a numerical framework. The following form of the stress rate tensor can be derived from The rate of damage variable can be calculated from The consistency condition for the yield function results in: Furthermore, substitution of The incremental stress-strain relation can now be reduced to: The rate constitutive equations presented in the previous section are numerically integrated in order to give the stress update for a given strain increment. At any time step, the stress tensor can be represented in the following incremental form: In the above expression, The semi-implicit stress return algorithm is a simplified form of the fully implicit backward Euler In addition, by virtue of Substitution of the flow rule and incremental damage variable into At each time step, In this section, the proposed material model is calibrated and validated against experimental data from triaxial tests on Augig Granite Model parameters associated with initial yield surface, The dilation (  The behaviour in uniaxial tension predicted for Gosford Sandstone and Augig Granite is illustrated in Strain rate is another important aspect that can significantly influence the rock behaviour. Such rate-dependent response of rock is of utmost importance for designing against dynamic loading, such as rock blast. Existing literature suggests that both compressive and tensile strength of dry intact rock increase significantly with increase in the strain rate A viscoplastic framework is often employed in order to model the behaviour of rate sensitive materials It is important to note that, unlike conventional viscosity parameter, the parameter Unlike the consistency condition in rate-independent formulations, the Perzyna type framework provides an explicit form of the non-negative plastic multiplier which for the present model can be expressed as follows:  The rate-dependent enhancement of the proposed damage model has been calibrated against the triaxial compression data available for Indian Granite at varying strain rates The rate parameters are calibrated against the same data set (10 The mechanical response of rock can change significantly when the applied strain rate goes beyond 10/sec. The influence of strain rate on brittle-ductile transition of rock has been further explored numerically using the parameter set calibrated for Indian Granite and the simulation results are presented in A parametric study has been carried out employing the proposed constitutive model to further explore the combined influence of confinement and strain rate on the rock behaviour qualitatively. The stress-strain data of Gosford Sandstone (from We have proposed a new model taking into account the effects of both confining pressure and strain rate on the behaviour of rock. The proposed model is simple while versatile enough to capture a wide range of behaviour under the combined effects of confining pressure and strain rate. Its evolving yield function allows the description of both brittle and ductile responses, together with their transition, without requiring explicit softening/hardening law, while the rate-dependent enhancement relies on a single viscosity parameter and is effective for a wide range of confining pressures. Tests against experiments show promising features of the model in predicting complex behaviour of rocks under different loading conditions. This is essential for the analysis of large scale failure in mining and resource engineering. On the other hand, the present model still needs improvements to take into account the rate dependency induced by pore pressures in moist rocks. This work was supported by the The explicit form of the stress and damage derivatives of the yield surface and plastic potential have been discussed here. The stress derivatives are as follows: The derivative of yield surface with respect to damage variable is given below: