Introduction
                  Management of the intraarticular calcaneal fracture is a challenge. The optimal method of treatment remains controversial. This study evaluates the anatomical and functional postoperative outcomes of displaced intraarticular calcaneal fractures that have been treated using three different techniques of ORIF.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  Between 2004 and 2011 we treated 143 patients with calcaneal fractures, 40 of these patients (28%) were treated conservatively. This is a retrospective study of the remaining 103 patients (72%) who were operated on consecutively, mainly by one surgeon (NG). Calcaneal fractures were classified according to the Sanders classification. Three types of osteosynthesis were used: standard anatomical plate (SP), locking anatomical plate (LCP) and standard anatomical plate with autologous bone graft (SP+ABG). Clinical outcome was assessed one year after the operation: anatomical reduction was evaluated according to the analysis of Bohler's angle at final follow-up, and functional assessment was conducted using the Maryland Foot Score (MFS).
               
                  Results
                  The fractures were classified as follows: 35 (34%) Sanders type II, 47 (45.6%) Sanders type III and 21 (20.4%) Sanders type IV. The SP was used in 67 (65%) fractures, LCP in 16 (15.5%) and SP+ABH in 20 (19.4%). The correlation test showed a weak association between the Sanders fracture type and the operation technique (Pearson correlation coefficient r
                     =0.26). The non-parametric tests showed that the fracture type did not significantly influence the postoperative Bohler's angle outcome (p
                     =0.132), or the type of operation (p
                     =0.664). Excellent or good reduction of the posterior calcaneal facet was achieved in all operated fractures. One year after the operation, the distribution of Bohler's angle was normal with a mean 31.9° (SD 4.84) in all three groups. There was no significant difference in the functional postoperative outcome in terms of MFS in the three groups (p
                     =0.601), but the Sanders fracture type had significant influence on the functional postoperative outcome in terms of MFS (p
                     =0.001).
               
                  Conclusion
                  In the representative sample of 103 operatively treated intraarticular calcaneal fractures, anatomical and functional postoperative efficacy outcomes appeared to be similar in all three treatment groups. High-grade displaced intraarticular calcaneal fractures (Sanders IV) had worse functional results irrespective of the type of operation. The optimal method for management of intraarticular calcaneal fracture is operative, using the standard anatomic calcaneal plate. Autologous bone grafting is not required. Large sample comparative studies are still needed.Calcaneal fractures represent 1–2% of all fractures in humans. In most cases these fractures are the result of a fall from a great height. The question of treatment choice still remains open The timing of open surgery might be urgent in cases of open fracture or compartment syndrome; otherwise surgery may be early (within 6 This article presents calcaneal fractures treated operatively at the General Hospital of Pula between 2004 and 2011. The aim of the study was to analyse whether there is a difference in postoperative outcome between three different operative techniques. Between 2004 and 2011, 143 patients with a fracture of the calcaneus were admitted to the Trauma and Orthopaedic Department of the General Hospital of Pula; 40 of these patients (28%) were treated conservatively and are excluded from this study. The remaining 103 patients (72%) were treated operatively and had a mean age of 45.8 years (range 19–62 years), and 82 patients (79.6%) were male. Concomitant injuries were present in 18 patients (17.5%): contralateral foot fractures in two patients (1.9%), spinal fractures in 12 patients (11.6%) and soft tissue damage in four patients (3.9%). Calcaneal fractures were classified according to the Sanders classification. X-rays in three planes and axial plus coroneal or three-dimensional CT were used regularly for accurate assessment. According to the Sanders classification, 35 fractures (34%) were Sanders II, 47 (46%) were Sanders III and 21 (20%) were Sanders IV. The patients in this study were assigned to one of three groups according to the type of osteosynthesis applied: 1. standard anatomical plate (SP), 2. locking anatomical plate (LCP) and 3. standard anatomical plate with autologous bone graft (SP Twenty patients (19%) underwent surgery involving bone grafting. The other 83 patients (81%) were operated on without bone grafting and of these, 67 patients received SP and the remaining 16 received LCP. The operation was performed on day 7 on average after the trauma (range day 5 to day 15) via the Zwipp extended lateral approach. The return of skin wrinkles to the lateral foot at the surgical incision site was used as a guide for timing surgery. Tourniquet (200–300 Antibiotic prophylaxis and thromboprophylaxis were administered to all patients. Range of motion exercises started from the second postoperative day. Partial weight bearing was delayed for 6–8 weeks, depending on the degree of comminution and the adequacy of the fixation. Activity progressed depending on the symptoms. Full weight-bearing was mainly achieved after four months. Study follow-up was one year. The results were measured for each patient one year after the operation by two expert trauma surgeons who used the radiographic analysis of Bohler's angle at the final follow-up for anatomical reduction, and Maryland Foot Score (MFS) for functional assessment ( The SP was used in 67 patients (65%), LCP in 16 (15.5%) and SP The non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis test showed that fracture type had no significant influence on postoperative anatomical Bohler's angle outcome ( The anatomical and functional results were the same in all three groups. Joint congruence was achieved in 86% of patients. According to the MFS, the functional result was excellent or good in 73% of all operated patients (80–97 points) with no difference between the groups ( There were four reported complications in the study: marginal wound necrosis occurred in four patients and wound infection developed in two patients. Wound healing was similar in all three groups. Full weight-bearing was achieved mainly after four months in all three groups. The only difference between treatment groups was in the occurrence of postoperative pain, which was greater in the patients who underwent bone grafting as there was extended pain at the site of bone grafting. The management of displaced intraarticular calcaneal fractures remains controversial Operative treatment of calcaneal fractures should meet the following principal aims: restoration of height, length and width of the calcaneus, and anatomical reconstruction of the subtalar and calcaneocuboid joint surfaces. Minimal fixation has been reported in recent comparative studies to be associated with a substantial collapse of Bohler's angle In our study, an excellent or good anatomical result was achieved in all operated fractures. One year after the operation the mean Bohler's angle was 31.9° (SD 4.84) in all three groups. The functional result also relates to the anatomical result and was excellent or good in 73% of all operated patients (80–97 points) according to the MFS, with no difference between groups The efficacy of cancellous autologous bone grafting and internal plate fixation is a matter of discussion This study presents a very low incidence of wound complications after ORIF of closed fractures of calcaneus Sanders type II, III and IV. This low incidence may be related to the correct timing of surgery, respecting the local soft tissue conditions, careful preoperative planning and meticulous surgical technique. Based on the representative sample of 103 operatively treated intraarticular calcaneal fractures we found that anatomical and functional postoperative efficacy outcomes appear to be similar in all three treatment groups. High-grade displaced intraarticular calcaneal fractures (Sanders IV), irrespective of the type of operation, had worse functional results. The optimal method for displaced intraarticular calcaneal fracture management is operative, using the standard calcaneal anatomical plate. Autologous bone grafting is not required. Large sample comparative studies are still needed. None declared.