Coating of AZ31B, AE 42 and ZRE1 wrought magnesium alloys was carried out using electroless Ni plating technique in a solution of nickel sulphate, sodium hypophosphite, ammonium hydrogen fluoride and glycine with a zinc immersion pre-treatment.
                  The results of SEM/EDX investigations and X-ray diffraction indicate that the coat exhibit a typical surface morphology with compact nodules with good adherence to the substrate. The coat was composed of amorphous structure, which transformed to a mixture of crystalline Ni and Ni3P precipitates after heat treatment at 673°K for 1 h. The phosphorous (P) content increased gradually from the substrate towards the surface reaching a maximum of 10 wt.% to 18 wt.% on the surface depending on the substrate alloy and the thickness of deposit. The hardness of the coat was found to increase with the P content and also after heat treatment. The electrochemical corrosion test in NaCl solution indicated a great improvement in the corrosion resistance of the Mg substrates and that a noble behaviour of Ni–P was obtained regardless of the heat treatment process. The forming ability test indicates that hot rolling of the coated substrate does not succeed to keep a continuous coat due to cracking of the coat in both as-coated and heat treated specimens.Magnesium alloys have several attractive properties which make them promising for several industrial applications based on their low density. They also have the advantage of high specific strength and modulus and excellent anti-shock resistance. Therefore, they are attractive in aerospace and automotive industries, in manufacturing electrical equipment such as cellular phones, television, and in sporting industries like golf heads However, magnesium has a drawback which is its poor atmospheric corrosion resistance. It is also a difficult metal for electrochemical treatment because of its high chemical affinity to aqueous solutions. Furthermore, the presence of alloying elements introduces an electrochemical heterogeneity which makes the situation even more complex Therefore, surface treatment of magnesium alloys is important for many applications. A wide variety of coating techniques and surface modification for magnesium is present in the literature Electroless Ni–P coats are being increasingly used as a protective layer against wear and corrosion, and a uniform coat is formed on the product surface with no restriction on the shape Electroless plating involves the deposition of coatings from non electrolyte solutions of metallic salts and reducing agents through the application of moderate heat In general, the application of electroless Ni–P on Mg alloys surfaces is a promising process. Therefore, it is the purpose of this work to investigate the possibility of application of electroless Ni–P coating on several magnesium alloys, namely AZ31, AE42 and ZRE1, keeping the plating bath and procedure constant. The study includes the surface roughness, morphology, hardness, adhesion, formability and corrosion resistance of the as-coated surfaces as well as the effect of post heat treatment on these characteristics. The magnesium alloys AZ31B, AE42 and ZRE1 were received as rolled sheets of different thicknesses up to 2.0 mm. The chemical composition of the alloys is given in The use of nickel sulphate solution in electroless plating has been selected as it was successfully used for plating steel and aluminium surfaces In the present work, the process steps, the solutions and plating conditions are given in AZ31 coated samples were investigated with X-ray diffractometry using a Siemens D 5000/Kristalloflex diffractometer in the In order to study the adhesion and thickness of the coat, all samples were carefully cut across the section using a thin diamond cutter. The samples were mounted, ground and polished and the cross sections were studied by Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM). The hardness of the coated samples was measured using a micro-hardness tester Wolpert Diatestor using 16.5 g for 15 s. More than 15 indentations were made on each sample on the cross sections. Only the readings corresponding to full indentation away from the Mg substrate were taken into consideration. For potentiodynamic polarisation tests, the samples were tied to copper wires and coated with lacquer for exposing a free test surface of 1 cm Potentiodynamic polarisation experiments were carried out using a Wenking LB 94 L Laboratory Potentiostat. The specimens were immersed in 3% NaCl solution for 15 min. prior to polarisation, by which time the open circuit potential (OCP) was monitored. With reference to saturated calomel electrode, the polarisation was obtained by scanning from about 500 mV more negative than the OCP at a rate of 1 mV/s. In general, from the appearance point of view, the coating caused some slight darkening of the surface due to the deposition of the nickel alloy, while further colouring was obtained after the heat treatment process due to formation of the nickel oxides The surface roughness was measured using the Tencor Surface Profiler Alpha-Step 500. The results given in The surface morphology of the present samples was studied using the SEM, After heat treatment( HT), the deposit was similar in shape and quality, but with a smaller amount of cauliflower nodules (  After HT, sharp peaks were obtained, curve (2) in In a previous work For illustration of the coat characteristics, the micrographs of the sections for AZ31, AE42, and ZRE1 samples are given in The coat thickness was measured from SEM photomicrographs and the results given indicate that the coat thickness ranged between 8 and 9.5 μm. The average coat thickness was somewhat different depending on the alloy type, being maximum for AE42 and minimum for ZRE1. The coat thickness is usually function of the rate of deposition which depends on the bath and plating conditions The chemical analysis of the coat is one of the parameters that determine its chemical, physical and mechanical properties. The EDX elemental analysis on the cross section of the coat was made at three positions: on top, in the center and close to the magnesium substrate, as represented by points X1, X2 and X3 in The concentration of P in the coat and across the interface is plotted in Magnesium is also detected in the coat, ranging from 1 to 2% on the surface, and its content increases towards the substrate. This is due to the dissolution during fluoride activation and further co-deposition with the Ni. In order to exclude the effect of the substrate on the results of EDX analysis, the composition of coat was measured separately by etching away the substrate for a coated and not heat treated AZ31 specimen. Three points in the cross section of coat, in the same arrangement in The P content in the deposit depends on bath temperature, composition and plating conditions. Deposits with different P contents were obtained by varying the concentration of complexing agents and reductants and pH of the bath Previous work has indicated that the alloy composition of the substrate and its structure had an effect on the structure of the deposit by affecting the nucleation and growth mechanisms The results of hardness, listed in The results in Other additives to the bath give higher hardness The results in Further increase in hardness could be obtained in the Ni–P deposits by the addition of other elements, such as tungsten  The post heat treatment has no effect on the porosity, if found, even though it influences the corrosion morphology. Consequently, it can be stated that the electrochemical polarisation test can be used for indication of the presence of porosity in the coated Mg alloys. In recommendation, further work should be directed to apply a surface modification process for Mg alloys, e.g. conversion coating, prior to electroless plating to verify high corrosion resistance against aggressive aqueous solutions. Nevertheless, the coat layer is resistant for atmospheric corrosion, e.g. humidity test, as previously examined by the authors In order to investigate the possibility to deform the coated alloys, strips of AZ31 were hot rolled in the as-coated condition at 350 °C, and in the HT condition at 500 °C. No defects were observed with the naked eye. However, SEM investigations indicate the formation of very fine cracks in the coat after the first pass with 14% reduction in the as-coated condition and with 17% reduction (pass 2) in the HT condition. This is due to the low ductility of Ni–P-phase. Some magnesium oxide was also formed under the cracked coat due to heating at 500 °C. However, no separation between the coat and substrate was observed. These results indicate that a redesign of the coat material is necessary, if the coated strips are to be further formed.  The results indicate that it is possible to coat different wrought magnesium alloys, namely AZ31, AE42 and ZRE1, by electroless Ni–P plating using a nickel sulphate bath after a prior zincating pre-treatment. The resulting coat is uniform in thickness and produces no residual stresses after coating due to the low temperature involved in the electroless plating technique. After a plating time of 35 min, the thickness of the coat reaches 8 to 9.5 mm, indicating a good rate of deposition. The deposit surface morphology reveals the presence of ultrafine nodules which are gathered in a micro-scale cauliflower shape. They are compact, uniform in size, without detectable defects or porosity and with excellent adhesion to the substrates, before and after heat treatment (HT). The deposited coat contains amorphous Ni and Ni–P mixture, while after heat treatment crystalline Ni–P compounds are precipitated. The P wt.% increases gradually in the coat from the substrate towards the surface before and after HT which affects the surface micro-hardness of the deposit. The hardness increases continuously with P content and reaches between 420 and 512 HV while it increases to 700 to 760 HV after HT. A tremendous improvement in the corrosion resistance of the Mg substrate is obtained after Ni–P coating especially after HT. The potentiodynamic measurements indicate that some coats exhibit the corrosion characteristics of the noble Ni–P layer. Forming tests by hot rolling result in cracking of the coat due to its low ductility. Therefore, a redesign of the coat material is necessary if the coated material has to be formed.