In this work, we report the crystallization of cholesterol in ethanol solution and in three different hydrogel media: tetramethyl orthosilane, sodium metasilicate, and poly(vinyl)alcohol, whose structures are similar to the gel-like polymer structure of mucin, which is found in the mucus present in bile stone formation. The monohydrated triclinic phase was identified in all the samples by means of X-ray powder diffraction. The characteristic polymorphic crystalline transition of the anhydrous cholesterol was detected by differential thermal analysis and modulated differential scanning calorimetry only in crystals grown in ethanol, sodium silicate, and tetramethyl orthosilane. Finally, hysteresis of the phase transition temperature was measured by modulated differential scanning calorimetry in crystals grown in ethanol. The biological implications of the crystallization of cholesterol for bile stones formation are discussed in the last part of this contribution.Nowadays, the challenge within the pathological aspects of biomineralization processes is to understand and to comprehend the physicochemical mechanisms of many of the diseases in which biominerals are involved. These mineralization processes are cardiovascular precipitation of hydroxyapatite From the structural point of view, cholesterol crystals have a monohydrate triclinic structure with a space group P1, having eight-unit-formula per cell, at room temperature with cell parameters The reported crystal habit for the monohydrate phase is the plate-like one, which is structurally generated by the assembly of filaments that developed gradually in needles, helical and tubular microstructures to yield finally the plates It is known that cholesterol crystals undergo several phase transitions in the anhydrous phase such as the polymorphic transition at 39 In this work, we present the results of the crystallization of cholesterol in three different types of hydrogels: tetramethyl orthosilane, sodium metasilicate, and poly(vinyl)alcohol, whose structures are similar to the gel-like polymer structure of mucin, which is a glycoprotein commonly observed in bile. Mucin is found in the mucus present in bile stone formation in humans. Crystallization of cholesterol was also done in ethanol solution as a control experiment. In addition, we present the results of cholesterol characterization by X-ray powder diffraction, polarized light microscopy, differential thermal analysis, and modulated differential scanning calorimetry. In the final part, the biological implications of the crystallization of cholesterol in bile stones formation are discussed. Cholesterol crystals were obtained in ethanol by dissolving 0.125 For X-ray powder diffraction experiments an Empyrean diffractometer system (PANalytical, Netherlands) was used, with Cu Kα radiation, a double monochromator, a Soller slit=0.04, and an XCelerator detector. Step size=0.004° in 2 Transparent plate-like crystals were grown in all cases. Crystals were selected and harvested after 2 weeks of growing ( The mean size of cholesterol crystals grown in ethanol was in the order of millimeters, whereas for crystals grown in sodium silicate (SS), poly(vinyl)alcohol (PVA), and TMOS gels this value was in the order of microns ( The phase identified in all these crystals corresponded to the monohydrated triclinic phase (PDF 7-742). This phase can be distinguished from the anhydrous phase by the absence of peaks at 2 The peak at 2 The results of cholesterol crystals grown in TMOS gel could be related to the arrangement of planes found in helical ribbon crystals The DTA/TGA data show the characteristic isosymmetric polymorphic phase transition of the anhydrous phase observed around 40 We pursued further research into the coexistence of the triclinic phases of cholesterol in the crystals grown in different media, based on the signature associated with the polymorphic transition. This was performed by means of modulated differential scanning calorimetry (MDSC). The latter provides information about the reversing (heat capacity effects) and the non-reversing (kinetic effects) characteristics of thermal events, in addition to the standard DSC heat flow and temperature information  Our results agree with those found about the hysteresis of the polymorphic transition in anhydrous cholesterol crystals and mixtures of cholesterol with phosphatidylserine observed by DSC The phase transition for cholesterol, observed by thermal methods, could help in understanding the molecular mechanisms involved in the cholesterol crystallization Finally, the crystallization of cholesterol in different types of hydrogels and its final characterization by thermal methods and X-ray diffraction could help in understanding the chemical mechanism of cholesterol precipitation The X-ray powder diffraction characterization of cholesterol crystals grown in hydrogels suggests that only a monohydrate triclinic phase can be obtained. However, thermal analysis experiments proved that the anhydrous triclinic phase could also be obtained for crystals grown in sodium silicate gel and in ethanol medium (control). This last result may indicate that cholesterol crystals grow as intergrowths of monohydrate and anhydrous phases. In this contribution, we present the results of the crystallization of cholesterol in three different types of hydrogels, whose structures are similar to the gel-like polymer structure of mucin. Mucin is found in the mucus present in bile stone formation in living organisms. In addition, we present the results of cholesterol characterization by different methods: X-ray powder diffraction, polarized light microscopy, differential thermal analysis and modulated differential scanning calorimetry. In the last section of our manuscript we discuss the biological implications of the crystallization of cholesterol in bile stones formation. This manuscript is the authors’ original work and has not been published nor has it been submitted simultaneously elsewhere. All authors have checked the manuscript and have agreed to the submission. JMBA thanks