Delamination of La0.8Sr0.2MnO3-δ (LSM) in solid oxide electrolysis cells (SOECs) is usually associated with the high oxygen partial pressure build-up at the LSM-YSZ (yttria-stabilized zirconia) interface. Here we sandwich a porous YSZ layer between the LSM electrode and YSZ electrolyte to release this oxygen pressure. Symmetric cells with and without the porous YSZ layers are prepared and tested in air at 800 °C under the current densities of 0.5 and 1 A cm−2 for 100 h. Voltage change is continuously monitored, and impedance spectrum studies have been carried out before and after testing. No delamination has been observed for the samples with the porous YSZ layer even after 100 h. The improved performance for these samples is due to the shift of oxygen evolution reaction from the dense YSZ-LSM interface to a porous YSZ-LSM interface. This shift also helps the oxygen to be easily released instead of going into the pores or grain boundaries of the electrolyte. On the other hand, for the sample without the porous YSZ layer, the LSM is totally delaminated from the electrolyte just after 70 h.During the recent years, there has been an increasing interest in the development of hydrogen economy to decrease our dependence on fossil fuels and reduce the greenhouse emissions. High-temperature water electrolysis is a highly efficient method to produce hydrogen as it can effectively utilize the high-temperature waste heat (e.g. from coal or nuclear power plants) and electricity from renewable energy resources (solar, tidal or wind) Solid oxide electrolysis cells (SOECs) are electrochemical devices for high-temperature electrolysis of water. Similar to solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs), La To reduce the high oxygen partial pressure and overcome delamination, different techniques have been developed over the past few years. These include the utilization of mixed ionic-electronic conductors, an addition of oxygen promoters such as palladium (Pd) and infiltration In this study, we propose a more simple method to overcome the delamination, by introducing a uniform porous YSZ layer between the electrolyte and air electrode. It is hypothesized that this porous layer can shift the sites for oxygen evolution reaction away from the dense YSZ electrolyte-air electrode interface to a porous YSZ electrolyte-air electrode interface. The oxygen will be produced away from the dense YSZ-LSM interface. Therefore, no or much smaller accumulation of O 10 and 20 wt % graphite was added to the YSZ powder, and ball milled with ethanol and the binder for 2 h. The slurry was then spray-coated on a dense YSZ support and sintered at 1200 °C for 2 h to have sufficient porosity. LSM (La A four-wire resistance measurement method was used to characterize the polarization behavior of cells. All of the cells were tested at 800 °C in air under a current density of 0.5 A cm The polarization behavior for traditional LSM electrode (LSM-0G) under a current density of 0.5 A cm The voltage increase of LSM-0G can be explained by the EIS patterns shown in SEM images for the LSM-0G before and after the operation are shown in XRD patterns for the LSM-0G before and after testing at 0.5 A cm The cell voltage for the newly developed electrodes (LSM-10G and LSM-20G) under 0.5 and 1 A cm The continuous voltage decrease for the newly developed LSM electrodes observed in SEM cross-sectional images for the newly developed electrodes before and after the test are shown in XRD patterns for the newly developed LSM electrodes are shown in From SEM images, it is difficult to distinguish between the porous YSZ and LSM layers. The EDS analysis, therefore, was carried out at three different points of the sample (LSM-20G). It is know that when an SOEC cell is biased, it produces oxygen on the air electrode side. Associated with this oxygen production is an increase in oxygen partial pressure at the air electrode-electrolyte interface in accordance with the Nernst equation. The air electrode overpotential is a product of the air electrode polarization resistance and the current density. As such, as the current density increases, the air electrode overpotential increases and the oxygen partial pressure at the air electrode-electrolyte interface increases. It has been reported previously that under SOEC conditions, the performance of the cell initially increases due to the activation of LSM For the newly developed air electrodes (LSM-10G and LSM-20G), the cell continuously stays in the activation phase. There is a decrease in both R A new microstructural design has been developed to overcome the delamination of the LSM air electrode during the solid oxide electrolysis operation. The results show that this design helps to reduce the oxygen partial pressure at the air electrode-electrolyte interface by shifting the oxygen evolution reaction sites from the dense YSZ-LSM interface to a porous YSZ-LSM interface. This shift helps to alleviate the oxygen partial pressure accumulation within the pores and grain boundaries of the electrolyte and eliminate the delamination. We acknowledge the support of an