To explore the reaction mechanism of spontaneous coal combustion and the indicators for forecasting this risk, reaction characteristics of free radicals and functional groups during low-temperature oxidation of coal with different ranks were analyzed by electron spin resonance (ESR) and Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy. Combined with gas chromatography of CO, other indicators besides the main indicator gas CO were researched to forecast spontaneous coal combustion. The results showed that with increasing oxidizing temperature in the range of 30°C–230°C, the production of free radicals changed from slow to rapid after being oxidized and heated above characteristic temperatures, depending on the coal grade. The oxygen-containing functional groups in coal of all ranks mainly include OH, CO, CO and COOH, whose reaction trends varied widely. The concentration and production rate of free radicals and the CO functional group in coal can be regarded as the leading indicators.Risk forecasting refers to a method that can predict the occurrence of accidents and prevent them. In China, coal reservoirs in 47% of state-owned major mines are prone to spontaneous combustion, and the disasters caused by spontaneous coal combustion make up 70% of the mine fire disasters ( Spontaneous coal combustion is simply the combined oxidation reactions of active groups, including free radicals and functional groups. Many researchers have studied these aspects. In research on free radicals, Liu et al. analyzed the nature of different free radicals in coal during the process of comminution, pyrolysis and ultraviolet irradiation by measuring ESR spectra ( Through the analysis of ESR and FTIR spectra, the researchers mentioned above verified that there are numerous active groups in coal and concluded that low-temperature oxidation is directly correlated with the reactions of free radicals and functional groups. The results obtained from ESR experiment were mixed concentration of all free radicals in coal, which demonstrated the reaction activity of coal oxidation but cannot distinguish the specific functional groups that easily reacted with oxygen. However, the free radicals were generated by electron gain or loss of the functional groups and the specific structure can be obtained from FTIR spectra. So spontaneous coal combustion can be analyzed by combining free radicals and functional groups, enhancing a further understanding of the oxidation reactions on the coal surface structure. However, the researchers have not investigated the reaction differences of active groups during low-temperature oxidation of coal with different ranks, analyzed the oxidation process based on free radicals and functional groups reaction, or explored the critical temperature at which oxidation develops into a runaway reaction. Therefore, using a custom simulator test rig for the low-temperature oxidation of coal, this work analyzed the reactions of free radicals and oxygen-containing functional groups of coal of various ranks (lignite, bituminous coal and anthracite) by using ESR and FTIR. Combining these with the gas chromatography results of products generated in low-temperature oxidation, the study explored the critical temperature at which spontaneous combustion transitions into an oxidation stage by analyzing the evolution of CO, the free radical concentration, and the presence of oxygen-containing functional groups. This provides theoretical guidance for forecasting spontaneous coal combustion and taking measures in time to inhibit coal heating in the coal mines prone to spontaneous combustion or under spontaneous combustion and control the oxidation of left-over coal in the goaf. Coal at three ranks was chosen for use as specimens according to their metamorphic grades and spontaneous combustion tendency. Lignitous coal (LC) was obtained from Shengli Coalfield in Inner Mongolia, China; bituminous coal (BC) was from Hongliulin Coal Mine in Shaanxi province, China; and anthracitic coal (AC) came from Linhua Coal Mine in Guizhou province, China. The proximate and ultimate analysis of the three coal specimens are displayed in The test procedure and experimental testing parameters of all coal samples were identical. As shown in As shown in As displayed in  As coal is mined and used, the chemical structure is damaged and numerous free radicals are produced due to the rupture of covalent bonds. These are highly active and may easily react with oxygen from air to release heat. As a result, spontaneous coal combustion appears under appropriate oxygen-supply and heat-storage conditions (  As shown in The oxygen-containing functional groups are the major active groups during low-temperature oxidation ( As The relative intensity of C There are numerous gaseous products formed during the spontaneous combustion of coal. CO first appears and exhibits a sensitive increase with the rise of oxidizing temperature( As shown in Based on electron spin resonance (ESR) and Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) technology, the reaction characteristics of free radicals and functional groups during low-temperature oxidation of coal of different ranks was studied. On the basis of gas chromatography of CO produced during oxidation, prediction tools were developed for spontaneous coal combustion by utilizing the change in production and oxidation rate trends of free radicals and functional groups. The oxygen-containing functional groups in coal of all ranks mainly include This work was supported by the