In this paper, we consider the nonstationary magnetohydrodynamic coupled heat equation through the well-known Boussinesq approximation. The Crank-Nicolson extrapolation scheme is used for time derivative terms, and the mixed finite method is used for spatial discretization. We employ the Taylor-Hood finite elements to approximate Navier-Stokes equations, Nédélec edge element for the magnetic induction and the equal order Lagrange elements for the thermal equation. This fully discrete scheme only needs to solve a linear system at each time step, and the system is unique solvable. We prove the proposed scheme is unconditionally energy stable. Under a weak regularity hypothesis on the exact solution, we present optimal error estimates for the velocity, magnetic induction and temperature. Finally, several numerical examples are performed to demonstrate both accuracy and efficiency of our proposed scheme.The incompressible magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) describe the dynamic behavior of an electrically conducting fluid under the influence of a magnetic field. It consists of a viscous, incompressible fluid which has the property of electric current conduction and interacting with electromagnetic inductions. There are lots of applications in astronomy and geophysics as well as engineering problems, such as metallurgical engineering, electromagnetic pumping, stirring of liquid metals, liquid metal cooling of nuclear reactors, see In this work, we consider the following transient incompressible Navier-Stokes equations and Maxwell's equations coupled to the heat equation by the well-known Boussinesq approximation in The velocity In recent years, as a powerful tool in numerical simulation for the incompressible MHD system, various finite element methods (FEM) have been extensively studied in the literature. When the domain is convex or has We discretize the model by the Crank-Nicolson extrapolation scheme in temporal and by the mixed finite element in spatial, in which the generalized Taylor-Hood elements are used to approximate Navier-Stokes equations, Nédélec edge element is used to approximate the magnetic equation and continuous element is used to approximate the thermal equation. The second-order discrete scheme for the MHD system has also been studied by We conclude this section with some notations that will be used throughout the paper. For all The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section For problem It is well known that the following Poincar é type and embedding inequalities are valid in bounded polyhedral domains (see Chapter 3 of For any Throughout this paper, we make the following assumption for problem  The initial data   Next, we establish some energy estimates for problem   Choosing  Under the external forces In this section, we proposed a fully discrete finite element method for problem The domain Ω is assumed to be polyhedral and partitioned into a mesh The discrete kernel space of the divergence operator can be defined by The space Note that the above definition is the first family Setting Before proceeding, we first introduce some notations about the Crank-Nicolson extrapolation scheme. Let Now, we introduce the Crank-Nicolson extrapolation scheme based on finite element Galerkin approximation of With the initial values in  The fully discrete scheme (3.2) satisfies the weakly divergence free property. For any In this section, we mainly state the main results of this work. First, we establish some stability estimates of the solution to  Taking The following embedding result helps us to prove the well-posedness of the numerical solution to  Now, we are well prepared to give the conclusion that the fully discrete Crank-Nicolson extrapolation scheme has a unique solution and give its detailed proof in section   To facilitate the subsequent error estimates, we make the following regularity assumption for the weak solution of  The exact solution of  Considering that Ω is a general polyhedral domain with Lipschitz boundary, the regularity for the exact solution by By virtue of   In this section, we mainly prove some of the conclusions presented in section The link between the spaces From the Fortin criterion, the discrete inf-sup condition (see, e.g. Chapter 2 of We recall the following inverse estimate from Theorem 3.2.6 of We are well prepared to prove  From (3.3), we know that From now on, let In order to give the error estimate, we now define some useful Galerkin and Ritz projections: given In order to better analyze the error of Crank-Nicolson extrapolation scheme, we need to average the left and right sides of For future convenience, we define here and hereafter, Taking For the case We are going to employ the following equality to give the error equations of the second step and beyond For the case In the next step, we estimate the residual terms   From the definition of Similarly, We now proceed to estimate the residual terms   From the definition of By virtue of the properties of projection, we show that the exact solution of  Let Now, we will recall a discrete version of the Gronwall inequality in a slightly more general form than usually found in the literature. Its detailed proof can be found in  Next, we are in a position to prove the convergence result of We divide this proof into two stages: Stage 1: Taking Stage 2: Taking In this section, we perform three numerical experiments to verify the convergence properties of the fully finite element discretization for the magneto-thermal coupling model  This example is to validate the convergence order of the Crank-Nicolson extrapolated scheme, when  This example is to test the convergence rate for the Crank-Nicolson extrapolated scheme when both the timestep and the meshwidth are refined at the same time. Setting the parameters   This example simulates the benchmark problem of driven cavity flow driven by an initial transverse magnetic filed and a simple heating distribution. The right-hand side of the momentum equation is given by     In this paper, we give a convergence analysis of Crank-Nicolson extrapolated fully discrete finite element method for thermally coupled incompressible magnetohydrodynamic system. We employ the equal order Taylor-Hood elements to approximate Navier-Stokes equations, Nédélec edge element to the magnetic induction and the Lagrange finite elements to the thermal equation. Under a weak regularity hypothesis on the exact solution, we prove the unconditional convergence and optimal error estimate for the velocity, magnetic variable and temperature unknowns. That is to say, for all The authors appreciate many valuable suggestions and comments from the anonymous referees. The research was supported by the