Introduction
                  Immediate total hip replacement (THR) in patients with acetabular fractures is controversial because of concerns about high complication rates. The current article is a systematic review of the literature on the use of acute THR for the treatment of acetabular fractures.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  This systematic review included studies published in English between 1992 and 2012 of subjects with acetabular fracture undergoing immediate THR. Outcomes of interest included indications; clinical assessment, including walking ability; comparison with control group; associated procedures, and rate of complications, such as loosening or revision surgery.
               
                  Results
                  This review identified six studies, of which only one included a control group. Acute THR was associated with satisfying outcomes with regard to clinical assessment and walking ability. The comparative study assessed the difference between acute THR and delayed THR in acetabular fractures: improved outcomes were observed in the delayed THR group, although the differences between the two groups were not statistically significant.
               
                  Discussion
                  According to data reported in the literature, acute primary THR can be successful in patients with poor bone quality, combined acetabular and femoral neck fractures, or pathological fractures and concurrent osteoarthritis of the hip. Relative indications include old age, delayed presentation, substantial medical comorbidities, and pathologic obesity. Clinical outcomes with acute THR were similar to those with delayed THR. Although the results reported in the six studies reviewed here were satisfying overall, there is limited evidence in this area in the existing literature and future prospective investigations are required.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Data reported in the literature indicate that immediate THR can be successful in appropriately selected elderly patients or patients with extensive osteoporosis, combined acetabular and femoral neck fractures or pathological fractures. There is currently a limited evidence base for THR in patients with acetabular fractures; therefore, physicians’ practice and expertise are the most useful tools in clinical practice.The incidence of acetabular fractures is increasing, particularly in the elderly population Non-surgical management comprising prolonged rest represents a treatment option for minimally displaced fractures, or in patients who are unable to tolerate surgical treatment Currently, ORIF is the treatment of choice for displaced acetabular fractures Acute THR has been proposed for the treatment of patients with acetabular fractures because it enables immediate full weight-bearing and reduces the occurrence of delayed surgery for post-traumatic onset of osteoarthritis This systematic review included studies published in English of subjects with acetabular fracture undergoing immediate THR. Date limits were set to between 1992 and 2012 to enable a review of recent data. Comparison groups were included (either control or alternative surgical intervention). Case reports, review articles and expert opinion or editorial pieces were excluded from the review. Searches were conducted using the following databases: Pubmed/MEDLINE, CINAHL, SCOPUS, Embase and Ovid. The following keywords were used: ‘acetabular fracture’, AND ‘surgical treatment’ OR ‘operative treatment’, AND ‘primary’ OR ‘acute’, AND ‘total hip replacement’ OR ‘total hip arthroplasty’. The abstracts of all hits were reviewed, duplicates were eliminated and references were hand screened for relevant citations. Study characteristics, such as year of publication, study population, mean age, level of evidence, type of acetabular fracture, type of surgical technique and duration of follow-up, were extracted and collected by two reviewers, and checked by a third. An electronic database was created. The Oxford Centre for Evidence Based Medicine (CEBM) hierarchy of evidence was used to determine the level of evidence of studies Outcomes of interest included indications; clinical assessment, including walking ability; comparison with control group; associated procedures, and rate of complications, such as loosening or revision surgery. The database search retrieved 811 possible articles. Six studies met all the inclusion criteria for this review ( Most of the studies indicate that combined acute THR (alone or in combination with ORIF) is the treatment of choice in patients with complex fractures according to Letournel and Judet, concurrent osteoarthritis of the hip, associated femoral head fractures, pathological fractures, significant poor bone quality because of osteopaenia or osteoporosis, or non-reconstructable fractures Mouhsine et al. Tidemark et al. Prosthesis alone was used for the management of acetabular fractures in one of the studies in this review Sermon et al. Overall, the following major complications were reported: four deep vein thromboses The most important finding of the present study is that acute primary THR can be successful in appropriately selected elderly patients, according to data reported in the literature. Selection criteria must be strict to maximise the outcome. Common indications include poor bone quality, combined acetabular and femoral neck fractures or pathological fractures and concurrent osteoarthritis of the hip. Relative indications include old age, delayed presentation, substantial medical comorbidities, and pathologic obesity. Among the papers considered in the present review, the preferred surgical technique was the association of THR and cable fixation Acute THR was associated with satisfying outcomes with regard to clinical assessment and walking ability, with an average HHS ranging from 74 to 89. In the comparative study that assessed the difference in outcomes between acute THR and delayed THR in acetabular fractures, improved outcomes were observed in the delayed THR group although the differences were not statistically significant Dislocations are a major problem during THR surgery, particularly in patients with cognitive impairment A disadvantage of the use of THR in acute treatment of acetabular fractures is the difficulty of achieving effective stability of the acetabular fracture to minimise the risk of aseptic cup loosening Tidemark et al. The highest radiographic loosening rate (21%) was reported by Sarkar et al. In summary, ORIF is widely considered to be the standard treatment for young and middle-aged patients with an acetabular fracture; however, primary THR could be a more suitable approach in elderly patients with concomitant chronic systemic diseases or local disorders that may prevent anatomic reconstruction of a functioning hip joint. Indications for primary THR include bone quality, concomitant femoral neck fractures or pathological fractures and concurrent osteoarthritis of the hip. Advanced age, delayed presentation, substantial medical comorbidities, and pathologic obesity are relative indications. Problems related to the combined ORIF and THR procedure included high transfusion rates, lengthy anaesthetic times, and technical difficulties The main limit of this systematic review is the considerable lack of high level studies supporting primary THR for acetabular fractures. Only one study provided a subgroup analysis to compare outcomes in patients with immediate THR and delayed arthroplasty for failed primary non-operative or operative treatment. Further randomised trials and comparative studies are required to enable surgeons to determine the correct therapeutic approach for patients with fracture of the acetabulum. There is currently a limited evidence base for THR in patients with acetabular fractures; therefore, physicians’ practice and expertise are the most useful tools in clinical practice.