To improve efficiency of adsorption process, magnetically modified medicinal stones (MMS) were developed by means of entrapment method with iron oxide and urethane. The MMS have the maximum uptake capacity of about 13.6mg/g-dry mass for copper ions at pH 6. The adsorption mechanism can be explained as ion exchange between alkali earth metals and copper ions. The surface condition and adsorption of copper ions onto MMS were confirmed by ESEM and EDAX. MMS could remove copper ions of about 93% with 1.5g and the adsorption equilibrium of MMS was faster than that of commercial ion exchange resin (IR-120 plus resin) by about 50min.The concentrations of heavy metals must be reduced to very low levels prior to release of the wastewater, because of the toxicity of many heavy metals. Although many processes for heavy metals treatment exist and studied, more efficient removal processes for heavy metals are needed for recycling of water, strict regulation for the effluent concentration of heavy metals, and reducing operation cost of the process for recycling of precious metals. For many years, precipitation has been widely used for their simplicity but this method need to be replaced by other processes due to large amount of sludge requiring treatment, which, in turn, may contain toxic compounds that may be difficult to treat. These disadvantages can be surmounted by the use of ion exchange if the concentrations of the heavy metals are low. Among many ion exchange materials, inorganic materials such as zeolites, bentonite, etc., have been used as adsorbents for hazardous metals or strategically important metals in recent years Among them, the concern on medicinal stones gradually increased. Medicinal stones have been widely used as the effective medicine in China. Therefore, “Medicinal stones” are generally called as a drugs or commercial name among mineral stones Although it is an excellent material as a sorbent, it is very difficult to separate from metal solutions. Suspended solids often encountered in wastewater treatment system can be a problem and for this reason, the use of magnetic resins in reactor may be a beneficial, as pre-clarification of the wastewater is not necessary and high level of suspended solid can be tolerated Until now, there was no study on heavy metal removal using magnetically modified medicinal stones, unfortunately. Therefore, in this study, by adsorbing copper ions onto medicinal stones and enhancing the magnetic susceptibility of adsorbents, the metals can be sequestered from wastewater effluents including high concentrations of suspended solids, without having to pre-clarify to effluent. Medicinal stones used in this study were obtained from a Korea Company and all the reagents were of analytical grade and distilled water was used to prepare all the solutions. The cost of medicinal stones is very cheap as $30/ton Preparation of magnetically modified medicinal stones was as follows. Some mineral stones were mixed with iron oxide powder (from Bayferrox, Bayer) and urethane (from UT578, Kumgang Korea Chemical Co.) which has the mass of 1:1 ratio in distilled water. It was placed at a vacuum oven dryer, which was controlled as 50 The sorption experiment for copper ions was performed by batch-type in a shaking incubator at room temperature for some hours. All working volume of copper ion solution was fixed as 100 To confirm surface condition of MMS, SEM (scanning electron microscopy) photograph of before and after sorption of copper ions was taken on a Hitachi model S-4100. Also, the existence of heavy metal ions on the surface of MMS was checked by means of EDX (Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy). The uptake capacities for lead, copper, and cadmium ions using natural medicinal stones (NMS) and magnetic medicinal stones (MMS) were investigated, respectively. As shown  A study on the effect of pH on uptake capacity of copper ions using magnetic medicinal stones (MMS) was carried out. The experiment was not performed above pH 8 to avoid precipitation of copper ions   It is also very important to investigate the kinetics, especially, in batch process. As shown in Magnetically modified medicinal stones (MMS) were synthesized to improve efficiency of adsorption processes. The MMS had the maximum uptake capacity of about 13.6