The abundance and activity of gulls at sewage outfalls in South Wales and southern England was studied between 1972 and 1999. In winter, the black-headed gull was the most abundant species, followed by herring, common and lesser black-backed gulls. The abundance of black-headed gulls and herring gulls was significantly correlated with the volume of sewage discharged. Sewers supported only a small portion of the gull populations present in both areas, and a higher proportion of juvenile birds were present than at other feeding sites. Sewage comminution increased the numbers of black-headed gulls feeding, but infrequent intermittent discharge reduced them by over a half. Gulls selectively consumed waste foodstuffs from sewage and thus helped recycle some of its organic constituents. However, some individuals carried bacterial pathogens, and could thus have contaminated nearby bodies of freshwater, or grassland, by washing and roosting there. Full sewage treatment, as planned for most of the discharges in both study areas is likely to provide the most effective means of gull control.Gulls have been observed feeding at coastal sewage outfalls since at least the end of the last century ( The main South Wales study area extended along ca. 150 km of coast from Porthcawl (Vale of Glamorgan) in the west, to Newport (Gwent) in the east ( The 24 outfalls in the two study areas varied considerably in their average flow rates and their patterns of discharge ( On all occasions, separate counts were made of feeding and non-feeding gulls. Most feeding birds were stationed near the mouth of the outfall, but some also occurred at leaks in the pipe and along the tide edge. Gulls that were close to the outfall, but which were feeding on intertidal invertebrates, were excluded. Gull age was recorded as first winter (juvenile) or adult in the cases of black-headed gulls The birds’ diet was determined by analysing the gut contents of 10 black-headed gulls (eight adults and two juveniles) shot under licence at outfall no. 19 in November 1976, and a further 24 black-headed gulls (nine adults and 16 juveniles) at outfall nos 13 and 15 between December 1976 and March 1977. The number of guts containing different food items was counted after sorting, and the percentage volume occupied by each category estimated by eye. Black-headed gull droppings were collected at low tide from the vicinity of outfalls nos 13 and 15 in July 1976, January 1989 and February 1994. A total of 780 individual fresh droppings were analysed for Gull counts were transformed to logarithms if this was necessary to achieve normality. If normality could not be achieved, resampling statistical methods were used. Repeated measures ANOVA was used when analysing series of counts made at the same sewer during the course of single days ( During winter in the 1970s, a maximum of about 15,500 gulls was observed feeding at 21 of the outfalls (nos 5, 6 and 24 were not counted), of which 87% were black-headed gulls. Average counts during discharge were much lower, amounting to 6288 (84% black-headed gulls). By the 1990s, the only significant change in numbers was in lesser black-backed gulls On average, throughout this period of nearly three decades, 84% of the gulls at sewers in South Wales were black-headed, compared with 79% in southern England. The equivalent figures for herring gulls The relative importance of sewers to gulls in comparison with other feeding sites is indicated by the proportion of the total populations of each study area feeding there ( A greater proportion of juvenile gulls was consistently recorded at sewage outfalls than at other feeding sites or at roosts ( The numbers of black-headed gulls were much lower during the summer months (April–August), but the numbers of larger gulls increased. For example, between April and July, there were on average 238±86 (mean±SD) herring gulls at outfalls nos 1, 15 and 16 (the only ones counted regularly in summer), compared with 120±64 in winter. Lesser black-backed gulls increased even more markedly, with 72±31 recorded in summer and only 9±8 in winter. Although large breeding colonies of both these species were situated in Gwent and Glamorgan, most of the birds at sewers were juveniles (39% of herring gulls and 22% of lesser black-backed gulls were second and third summer birds), and were therefore non-breeders. In the case of continuously discharging sewers, there were usually morning and/or evening peaks of feeding activity (e.g. The average flow rates in During the trial designed to determine the effects of comminution, the number of black-headed gulls feeding at outfall no. 18 between 1000 and 1400 h was 23±7 (mean±SE) on control days and 29±5 on comminuted days. They then rose to an evening peak ( Relatively small numbers of black-headed gulls were present when no sewage was flowing during the intermittent discharge trial (13±3). There was no significant difference between the average numbers of black-headed gulls present on days of continuous flow and those present when sewage flowed for 52% of the time, but there were significantly fewer on the other days ( There were no significant differences in the gizzard and oesophageal contents of adult and juvenile gulls shot at sewers and so these age categories have been combined ( When only digestible items are considered, the most important component of the diet of black-headed gulls was plant seeds (27% by volume), followed by meat (15%). Rice grains, melon seeds and grape pips were all taken, but the commonest seed was peanuts. A peanut packaging company discharged its waste into outfall no. 15. Potato peelings were the commonest type of vegetable peelings encountered. In the case of seeds, bread, meat and fat, the particle size was small (generally<0.5 cm diameter), but vegetable peelings were usually larger than this. Salmonellae were isolated from 49 of the 780 samples of black-headed gull droppings, giving an overall occurrence rate of 6.3%. Identified serotypes (number of isolates in brackets) included Despite the fact that it has a coastline that is only 65% as long, the South Wales study area supported many more gulls than the English one. This may be one reason for the higher intercept of the regression line relating black-headed gull numbers to sewage flow in Wales. Another may be the fact that the English sewers discharged into relatively deep water where less food is made available to gulls than is the case with sewers discharging into shallower estuarine waters (and at three sewers across the intertidal area). The fact that there was little change in gull abundance at sewers during the 27 years of this survey reflects the stability of both the food supply and gull populations during this period. The increase in lesser black-backed gulls between the 1970s and 1980s was broadly in line with that recorded nationally at winter roosts during approximately the same period ( While 11% of the wintering population of black-headed gulls in South Wales fed at sewers, this compares with about 5% at refuse tips, 12% on the shore and 70% on fields. Refuse tips are of greater importance to herring, lesser black-backed and great black-backed gulls, supporting 43–75% of their populations. Only 1.3% by volume of the foods taken by herring gulls to their chicks on Steep Holm consisted of material derived from sewers. None was fed to chicks at other colonies by this species or by lesser and great black-backed gulls (  Comminution increased black-headed gull numbers by 55% in this study. This is probably because it increased the amount of sewage solids in the size range consumed by black-headed gulls (<0.5 cm diameter) from 53 to 72% (measured at outfall no. 18). Smaller particles may also be swept to the surface more readily and may spread out over a wider area. Intermittent discharge reduced numbers by more than half when the discharge period was less than 1 h, and the interval between discharges lasted at least The gizzard and oesophagus contents of gulls at sewers showed that many of them also fed on intertidal or inland invertebrates. This was most marked in black-headed gulls in southern England, where 9% of the diet consisted of invertebrates which could have been obtained inland. There was no evidence from this examination of gut contents, or from direct observations of feeding birds, that gulls consumed material derived from human faeces. This is despite the fact that other species have been observed consuming animal faeces, notably glaucous gulls Gulls appear to be opportunist feeders at sewers, just as they are at other sites, choosing whatever waste foods happen to be available. The average particle size of food items available at sewers was very small and presumably does not often provide an adequate return for the larger species. This helps to explain why black-headed gulls are the commonest gulls at outfalls even though larger species, such as herring and lesser black-backed gulls, are capable of displacing them from the best feeding positions. Food processing wastes, such as the peanuts at outfall no. 15, can be of considerable importance and such wastes are known to be exploited by other species. For example, wintering ducks in Scotland fed on spent barley discharged by distilleries in the 1970s ( The overall rate of occurrence of salmonellae in the black-headed gull droppings we collected near sewers (6.3%) was lower than that recorded for herring gulls in both Dyfed (22.2%) ( Gulls represent a potential route for the transmission of pathogens and parasites by gulls to playing fields, pastures and reservoirs. For example, gulls have been implicated in the transmission of the eggs of the human tapeworm Even if it were desirable to do so, there is no easy way of preventing gulls from feeding at sewage outfalls, short of complete effluent treatment. In both study areas, considerable changes in sewage disposal are already taking place. For example, full treatment for all the South Wales outfalls should be in place by 2002, though the existing outfalls will still have to be used during storm conditions. In southern England, a large storage tank has been constructed at Hengistbury Head, and a membrane treatment plant has just been completed at Swanage. Welsh Water Plc has indicated that all coastal and estuarine discharges will eventually receive at least secondary treatment. This will not necessarily remove all faecal indicators from such coastal waters, since birds (including gulls, waders and wildfowl) which excrete faecal coliforms, streptococci and perhaps The early surveys in South Wales were commissioned by the Nature Conservancy Council (South Wales Region) and in southern England by D.A.F. Coney and Sons Ltd. GPM was in receipt of a NERC studentship during part of this work. We are grateful to Welsh Water Plc for supplying details of all the sewers in South Wales, and to Wessex Water Plc for their cooperation during the experiments in southern England. We would also like to thank M. K. Brummage, G. P. Green, J. M. Hope, C. Prescott, J. Rees, I. S. Robertson, J. B. A. Rochard, D. Roscoe, A. G. J. Tacon, K. Thomas, W. A. Venables and J. Woodworth for help with various aspects of the fieldwork and S. A. Hinsley and C. Johnson for commenting upon drafts of this paper.