In strain-softening rock mass, it is widely accepted that the confining stress in the plastic zone around a circular opening varies with the radial distance. The variable confining stress gives rise to a variable critical plastic softening parameter (η∗
                     ). This paper aims to take the variable η∗
                      into account in the development of elasto-plastic solutions for stress and strain states around a circular opening. First, a variable confining stress model (VCSM) is recommended to account for the effect of the variable η∗
                     ; a criterion is presented for judging whether or not the rock mass transfers from the plastic softening state to the residual state. Then, a new numerical procedure for the implementation of VCSM is proposed on the basis of Hoek–Brown failure criterion and the non-associated flow rule. In the proposed procedure, the plastic softening and residual zones are divided into a set of concentric rings by an assigned radial stress increment. The increments of stress and strain for each ring can be calculated in a successive manner by the finite difference method. Finally, by using the proposed procedure, a series of parametric studies is conducted to compare VCSM and existing constant confining stress models (CCSM), and also to investigate the variation of the stress components, strain-softening parameter, and strength parameters in the plastic softening zone. The results indicate that CCSM tends to underestimate the deformation of surrounding rock mass with poor quality. The effect of the critical plastic softening parameter on the stability of a circular opening in strain-softening rock mass includes two different aspects: one is to govern the strength parameters of the plastic zone, the other is to control the radii of the plastic softening and residual zones.critical plastic softening parameter variable confining stress model constant confining stress model confining stress at the elasto-plastic boundary peak strength in the stress-strain curve with a certain confining stress radial stress tangential stress confining stress; minor principal stress major principal stress hydrostatic stress radial stress at the elasto-plastic boundary tangential stress at elasto-plastic boundary radial stress at the plastic softening-residual boundary tangential stress at plastic softening-residual boundary radius of the opening radius of the plastic softening zone radius of the plastic residual zone support pressure support pressure for the occurrence of plastic softening zone support pressure for the occurrence of plastic residual zone failure criterion plastic potential stress tensor plastic softening parameter uniaxial compression strength of rock mass in the intact state strength parameters of H–B failure criterion major principal plastic strain minor principal plastic strain one of strength parameters ( Young’s modulus dilatancy coefficient of rock mass dilatancy angle peak value of residual value of drop modulus of post peak stage Geological Strength Index peak value of Geological Strength Index, representing rock mass strength in the elastic zone radial displacement of the rock mass radial displacement of the rock mass at the circular opening radial distance to the centre of the opening. radial stress in the elastic zone tangential stress in the elastic zone radial displacement in the elastic zone radii of inner and outer boundaries of the initial value of radial stress, equal to initial value of tangential stress, equal to constant radial stress increment tangential stress increment radial stresses at critical plastic softening parameter at plastic softening parameter at radial strains at tangential strains at tangential plastic strain increment radial plastic strain increment tangential elastic strain increment radial elastic strain increment increment of plastic softening parameter average value of radial displacement at increment of radial displacement at number of the annulus immediately outside the plastic softening-residual boundary value of Elasto-plastic analysis of stress and displacement around a circular opening in isotropic rock mass is a fundamental problem in tunnel engineering. It is of important value in the evaluation of stability and the design of support structure. According to previous studies ( The critical plastic softening parameter The objective of this paper is to develop a new numerical procedure to account for the variable confining stress in the strain-softening model. To be specific, this paper mainly covers four parts: (1) to propose a variable confining stress model (VCSM), and a modified criterion to judge whether the rock mass resides into the plastic residual state; (2) to present the implementation procedure for VCSM based on the finite difference method (FDM); (3) to validate the proposed VCSM and its implementation procedure via several examples; and (4) to conduct a series of parametric studies to compare CCSM and VCSM. Following assumptions are to be employed in the development of VCSM. The opening is circular. Rock mass is isotropic, continuous, infinite and initially elastic; and it shows strain-softening behaviour obeying Hoek–Brown (H–B) criterion. The opening is excavated in a hydrostatic stress field. The stress distribution around the opening is axisymmetric. Plane strain condition is postulated. In accordance with above assumptions, the excavation problem can be described in Although Alejano’s model ( According to the theory of plasticity ( The latest H–B failure criterion ( For the strain-softening rock mass surrounding a circular opening, H–B failure criterion can be written as: According to Referring to the assumption of axial symmetric condition, Eq. By studying the experimental and numerical data ( During the plastic softening and residual stages, Eq. Previous laboratory and field test results indicated that the drop modulus Incorporating Eqs. In Alejano’s model (  For the case of plane strain, the equilibrium equation is In terms of small strain case, the displacement compatibility is In the elastic zone, the radial stress Substituting Eq. However, the stress and displacement within the elastic zone (not including the elasto-plastic boundary) remain unsolved because Closed-form solutions are derived for both elastic-perfectly plastic and elastic–brittle–plastic rock masses following the linear M–C ( A criterion to judge whether or not the rock mass transfers from the plastic softening state to the residual state is proposed in If the unloading path of rock mass is considered, there should exist the increment of the elastic strain. The plastic strain is then expressed as: According to Hooke’s law, the elastic strain increments can be correlated to the stress increments ( Based on Eq. In accordance with non-associated flow rule, the following equation is formulated Integrating Eq. In each annulus, Eq. Incorporating Eq. In order to solve the strain components, Eq. By combining Eqs. In the plastic residual zone, by incorporating Eq. Eq. In the calculation process, it is found that Eq. Eqs. In order to validate the linear relations, 5 tunnel cases in Due to the fact that the focus here is on the relations among For VCSM, the calculation method can be summarised as follows: Calculate Solve Calculate Calculate Judge whether or not In the plastic residual zone, calculate  These linear relations are fairly useful in solving aforementioned equations. To be specific, the constant To sum up, the calculation process can be divided into two stages. For the first stage (with the unidentified value of  Note that all the studies mentioned above (  In this section, both the VCSM and CCSM are used to carry out some parametric studies, in an effort to identify the necessity to consider the variable confining stress in the plastic zone.  In addition, it should be mentioned that On the whole, it can be concluded that both the variation of   To conclude, values of For analysis conditions A1–E1, The differences of In summary, compared to VCSM, CCSM underestimates the displacement Based on the relation between the confining stress The critical plastic softening parameter The difference in the radial displacement between VCSM and CCSM is more obvious for lower GSI In the plastic zone, radial stress The authors acknowledge the financial support provided by the