The present work reports the effect of carbide volume fraction on erosive wear behaviour of hardfacing cast irons. Five different grades of weld hardfacing cast irons were selected for the present investigation. The solid particle erosion experiments were carried out with blast furnace sinter, silica sand and alumina particles under mild (53–75μm, 25ms−1), moderately severe (125–150μm/100–150μm, 50ms−1) and under severe erosion conditions (300–425μm, 90ms−1) at impingement angles of 30 and 90°. The variation in erosion rate with carbide volume fraction was observed to be strong function of the erodent particle hardness, impingement angle and the impact velocity. Under mild erosion conditions, erosion rate decreased with increasing carbide volume fraction (CVF), whereas erosion rate increased with CVF under moderately severe erosion condition with alumina particles. With silica sand particles under moderately severe erosion conditions the beneficial effect of large volume fraction of carbides could only be observed at 30°, whereas at normal impact erosion rate increased with increasing CVF. The erosion rate showed power law relationship with ratio of hardness of erodent particle to that of the target material (H
                     e/H
                     t) and expressed as E=c(H
                     e/H
                     t)
                        p
                     .
                  With increasing severity of erosion conditions erosion rate showed stronger dependence on H
                     e/H
                     t as compared to those under mild and moderately severe erosion conditions. The mechanism of materials removal from the carbides involved Hertzian fracture with softer sinter particles, whereas harder alumina particles could plastically indent and cause gross fracture of the carbides.constant in equation erodent particle size hardness of erodent particle hardness of the target material constant in equation exponent of CVF in exponent of constant in equation exponent of impingement velocity Ceramic materials exhibit superior abrasion and erosion resistance as compared to metals, especially when the abrasive particles were softer than the target material. The dispersion of a ceramic phase in a more ductile matrix to improve the toughness has been successfully employed in abrasion but with a little success in erosion. For example, WC–Co alloys and high chromium iron alloys containing a dispersion of hard carbides exhibit excellent abrasion resistance. The effect of carbide volume fraction on abrasive wear behaviour of high chromium irons under low stress and high stress abrasion conditions has been well documented in the literature Given the similarities between abrasion and erosion processes, the erosion behaviour of materials containing dispersion of hard second phase particles is quite different from that under abrasion. The available literature on erosion of white irons, suggest that the angular dependence of erosion rate, in general, is quite weak and peak in erosion occurs at impingement angles in the range of 45–90°. Aptekar and Kosel Kosel and Ahmed Thus it can be concluded that not many studies were carried out on erosion of weld hardfacing high chromium irons. The earlier investigations on erosion of high chromium irons were performed under a narrow range of erosion conditions. No quantitative study has been made on the effect of microstructure parameter, e.g. carbide volume fraction, on erosion rate of white irons. The contribution of the edge effect to erosion mechanism in other dual phase alloys (Cu–Al The objective of the present investigation is to examine the effects of microstructure parameters such as carbide volume fraction and carbide size on the erosion behaviour of weld hardfacing high chromium iron alloys under wide range of erosion conditions. An attempt is made to obtain quantitative correlation between erosion rate and ratio of hardness of erodent particle to that of the target material ( The weld hardfacing alloys selected for the present investigation were high chromium cast irons. Five different grades of hardfacing high chromium cast iron alloys were deposited on mild steel plates typically 10 Weld hardfacing alloys used in the present investigation were characterised by scanning electron microscope (SEM), including the use of energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX) and image analysis (IA). The specimens measuring Alloy F1 showed, microstructure consisting of carbides (size of the order of 1–2 The image analysis of hardfacing high chromium white irons was carried out on Leica Image Analysis system at Electron Microscopy Division, Defence Metallurgical Research Laboratory, Hyderabad. The polished and etched specimens of hardfacing deposits, measuring For bulk hardness and microhardness measurement the specimens measuring In the present investigation blast furnace sinter (125–150 and 300–425 The erosion experiments were performed using air blast type erosion test rig as shown in The erosion experiments were performed with 125–150 Incremental erosion tests, with a fixed amount of erodent particles weighing between 25 and 100 The eroded specimens were subjected to ultrasonic cleaning before performing SEM studies. The SEM investigations, with the use of back-scattered imaging and EDX analysis, were carried out to study the morphology of the worn surfaces. In addition, short duration erosion tests were also performed on polished and etched specimens of hardfacing high chromium iron alloys for observation of isolated individual impact events. The polished and etched specimens of hardfacing alloys were exposed to low doses of erodent particles, which were subsequently observed under SEM to study the response of individual microconstituents to the solid particle erosion.  With blast furnace sinter particles a decreasing trend in erosion rate with CVF was observed at both 30 and 90° impingement angles under moderately severe (125–150 With silica sand particles under mild erosion conditions both at 30 and 90° impingement angles, erosion rate showed decreasing trend with increasing CVF. At 90° angle, the decrease was however 30% more than that observed at 30° impingement angle. Under moderately severe erosion conditions with silica sand particles (100–150 With alumina particles, under mild erosion conditions (53–75  It can be observed from  The higher values of exponent, An ideally ductile and a brittle material show different dependence of erosion rate on impingement angle; ductile materials show peak in erosion at 20–30° impingement angle, whereas maximum in erosion rate occur at normal impact angle in case of brittle materials. The erosion behaviour of a two-phase material containing a ductile matrix and hard second phase particles might be expected to be intermediate between that of an ideally ductile material and a brittle material. In case of high chromium iron alloys it would not be incorrect if it is assumed that the total erosion is the sum of erosion by the matrix phase and hard second phase, i.e. carbides. The majority of the hardfacing alloys used in the present investigation consisted of primary carbides and a matrix, which itself is a mixture of eutectic carbides and austenite. Hence it is expected that erosion rate of hardfacing alloys in the present work is controlled by one or the both, the matrix and the carbides depending upon the hardness of the erodent particles and the erosion conditions. The erosion rate versus CVF plots for hardfacing alloys showed quite different trends under mild, moderately severe and severe erosion conditions. The largest difference in erosion rates with CVF, although not more than 40–50%, were observed under mild erosion conditions with silica sand and alumina particles. Under these erosion conditions erosion rate showed relatively stronger dependence on CVF with relatively higher values of exponents as shown in These results cannot be directly compared with earlier work by Aptekar and Kosel No appreciable difference in the exponents of The relative hardness of erodent particles is one of the important parameter, which decides erosion rates of white irons. It can concluded from The decreasing trend in erosion rate with CVF under moderately severe conditions (125–150 The response of the large primary carbides to erosion can be easily observed under SEM. However, it is rather difficult to identify thin eutectic carbides in the worn surfaces of eroded alloys. These eutectic carbides might be removed either by their through thickness fracture or removed within the volume of material by microploughing/micromachining or cut by the impacting particles Silica sand particles have hardness intermediate between that of the carbides and the matrix. With silica sand particles significant protrusion of carbides was observed in eroded surface of hardfacing alloys under mild erosion conditions (53–75  Alumina particles were having hardness more than that of the carbides and the matrix. SEM observations of the worn surface of alloy F3 when eroded with alumina particles under mild erosion conditions at normal impact revealed that some of the carbides were elevated above the surface with edge rounding due to edge chipping, as shown in  The erosion rates of weld hardfacing cast irons showed quite different trends depending on erodent particle hardness and the erosion conditions. Under mild erosion conditions, erosion rate decreased with increasing CVF in case of all the erodent particles. With silica sand particles the erosion rate increased with CVF under severe erosion conditions, whereas under moderately severe erosion conditions the beneficial effect of large volume fraction of carbides could only be observed at 30°. With alumina particles large volume fraction of carbides proved detrimental to the erosion resistance of hardfacing white iron alloys under moderately severe erosion conditions. The erosion rates of the weld hardfacing cast irons were explained in terms of protrusion and depression of carbide particles and the edge effect. Under mild erosion conditions carbides stand in relief, whereas carbides were seen depressed under severe erosion conditions. Alumina particles were able to plastically indent and cause lateral fracture of carbide particles. Gross fracture of carbides was observed with silica sand particles at normal impact angle, whereas at lower angles material from the carbides was removed by small scale chipping induced by microfracture. With increasing severity of erosion conditions, erosion rate showed stronger dependence on ratio of hardness of erodent particle and that of the target material ( The authors are grateful to the Director, VNIT for providing necessary facilities in carrying out this investigation. The authors are also thankful to M/s Diffusion Engineers Ltd., Nagpur for supplying the samples for present investigation. The authors are grateful to Mr. Rajshekar Rao, JNARDDC, Nagpur for assistance during SEM work.