A modified alkaline dissolution route of monazite was used to separate the hydrous oxide cake containing uranium, thorium, and rare earth elements from the phosphate matrix. It was found that uranium can be selectively leached by a mixture of sodium carbonate, sodium hydroxide, and hydrogen peroxide leaving thorium and rare earth elements as insoluble hydrous oxides. The factors affecting the extraction of uranium from the alkaline solution containing sodium carbonate and hydrogen peroxide were separately studied. Experimental results showed that tricarbonato uranium complexes are selectively extracted by Aliquat-336 diluted in kerosene from alkaline leach solution. Based on these results, uranium was purified from the leach solutions by extraction with Aliquat-336 diluted in kerosene with purity not less than 99%.The Egyptian beach sand deposits usually contain about 15% heavy economic minerals (ilmenite, rutile, magnetite, zircon, and monazite). The mean relative frequency of monazite in the beach deposits in some samples collected from Demietta and Rosetta (Egypt) attains 0.3 to 1.5%.   Monazite is very stable chemically and can be attacked by strong acid (usually sulphuric acid), which essentially transforms the metal phosphate ion to di-hydrogen phosphate salt and phosphoric acid and leaving the metal ions as water soluble salts, or by strong alkali (sodium hydroxide), which transforms the insoluble phosphates to insoluble metal hydroxides that can easily be dissolved in the acid after removal from the supernatant solution of alkali phosphates (  Egyptian monazite (purity 97%) has been analyzed and was found to assay 5.9% ThO The chemicals and reagents in the present work were used as received. Uranyl nitrate and thorium nitrate of analytical reagent grade (AR) were Fluka products, while sodium carbonate and hydrogen peroxide were obtained from Winlab. Methyl trioctyl ammonium chloride (Aliquat-336) and sodium hydroxide were Merck products. Kerosene (non-aromatic) was supplied by Misr Petrol Ltd., Egypt, while 1-octanol was obtained from BDH. The monazite was supplied by the Nuclear Materials Authority, Egypt, as 88% concentrate. The particle size was measured using Laser light scattering instrument (Mastersizer X, Malvern Instruments). This instrument covers the size range from 0.1 μm to 2000 μm using different lenses, with resolution size discrimination of 100 size bands on any lens range. Uranium and thorium concentrations were spectrophotometrically determined by Arsenazo-I method ( Extraction of uranium from alkaline carbonate medium has been carried out at 25 °C±1 °C (except when studying the effect of temperature). In this concern, equal volumes (5 ml) of the aqueous solution containing 1 mg/ml of uranium in the used dissolving alkaline medium under investigation and an organic solution containing a known concentration of Aliquat-336 dissolved in kerosene or other diluents used were equilibrated by shaking for 1 h. To determine the uranium concentration, known aliquot volumes were taken from the aqueous phase before and after extraction for spectrophotometric assay. The distribution ratio, Assuming that, Prior to this study, two monazite samples were ground, sieved, and the particle size of both was measured. The particle size of the ground sample was found to be of 16.81±0.28 μm whereas the non-ground is 106.44±0.61 μm. In order to follow the chemical treatment of the samples, the monazite samples (10 g each) were treated with sodium hydroxide (50 wt.%) solution and boiled for 4 h at 140 °C. The solution was diluted up to 20 wt.% NaOH concentration and boiled again for another hour then filtered at 80 °C. The solid residue was washed several times with water, dried, and treated with alkaline carbonate solution composed of alkaline carbonate at 60 °C in order to separate the maximum content of uranium selectively by forming tricarbonato complex. It was found that 40 vol.% 1 M Na The leached carbonate solutions (50 ml for the first five steps followed by 25 ml for the last two) which treated the monazite samples (10 g) were diluted, and uranium was measured spectrophotometrically. The data given in After carbonate leaching, the precipitate was carefully washed with water and finally treated with nitric acid three times (100 ml each) with heating to dissolve the hydroxides (hydrous oxides) of the elements included. As found previously, more than 80% of uranium was leached with alkaline carbonate solution containing H In this concern, variable concentrations of Aliquat-336 in different diluents (containing 5 vol.% octanol as a modifier) were utilized to extract a constant weight of 1 mg/ml of uranium using alkaline medium which consists of 20 vol.% 1 M Na Investigations of the carbonate concentration effect on the extraction of 1 and 5 mg/ml uranium (equivalent to 0.004 and 0.02 M, respectively) by 5 vol.% Aliquat-336 in kerosene were made using different concentrations of sodium carbonate together with a constant concentration of 50 vol.% 1 M NaOH and 10 vol.% (30%) H To investigate the effect of NaOH concentration on the extraction process, samples containing 1 mg/ml of uranium were prepared in different concentrations of sodium hydroxide and constant concentration of 40 vol.% Na The mixture of Na In alkaline medium containing carbonate, uranium tends to form di- and tri-carbonato complexes ( Based on the results obtained on the effect of Na At high carbonate concentration, a large amount of carbonate is bound to the uranyl ion and the major complex is [UO Taking log of the two sides of Eq. From this equation, the extraction constant is calculated under the different investigated extraction parameters. The total average value obtained for The effect of temperature on the extraction of uranium was studied by varying the extraction temperature in the range 10–60 °C. In this concern, the aqueous phase employed is composed of 20 vol.% Na The temperature effect on the complex extraction could be evaluated in terms of their thermodynamic values calculated from the following relations: From Eq. Among the different stripping agents, high concentration of sodium carbonate was chosen for stripping of U(VI) from the loaded organic phase because of its ability to form a highly strong complex with uranium. In this respect, different concentrations of sodium carbonate in the range 0.1–2.0 M were used and it was found that a concentration of 1 M is quite efficient for the stripping of uranium. The process of monazite opening and processing could be represented as shown schematically in A sample from the resulted uranium precipitate was dried, dissolved in nitric acid, and analyzed spectrophotometrically. The results showed that the precipitate is composed of 99.85% uranium and less than 0.01% of each of thorium and rare earths indicating the efficiency and purity of the suggested method of monazite treatment for separation of uranium. Therefore, this method selectively leads to get uranium product in almost a pure form. Based on the above experimental results, we can conclude the work in the following: Alkaline carbonate solution dissolves uranium selectively. Aliquat-336 in kerosene extracts uranium from alkaline carbonate medium. Decreasing alkalinity (pH) increases the extraction. It was found that the main extracted species is [ Increasing temperature enhances the extraction of uranium. Sodium carbonate strip uranium efficiently from alkaline medium. Aliquat-336 poorly extracts rare earth elements from nitric acid medium.