If you are anything like me, you have become increasingly frustrated with the poor quality of the literature reviews of many of the manuscripts you have been reviewing for journals and the need to repeat the same comments ad nauseum. In my experience, many literature reviews nowadays consist of pseudo-random lists of papers related to the problem domain of interest, followed by a statement of what was done in the current paper. No direction. No critical analysis of the literature. No identification of knowledge gaps. No linking of the purpose of the current paper to these gaps. So why is this a big deal? In order to answer this question, we have to consider what the purpose of research is. To my way of thinking, the purpose of research is to discover something new and useful. This could be a new modelling technique, an advancement of an existing modelling technique or new insight into a particular modelling approach, environmental problem or physical process. However, in order to know if our research is new and adds something to the existing body of knowledge, we need to determine what the current state of knowledge is. This requires the identification of knowledge gaps in the problem domain being considered, as depicted in the simplified conceptual “Swiss cheese” model in The first step in the process of identifying and articulating the knowledge gaps is the identification of the problem domain, which is the research field in which the paper is making a contribution. This step is vitally important, as different lines of argument can often be developed in relation to the novelty and significance of a particular body of research (e.g. the contribution can be related to an advancement in the modelling approach or in relation to the particular environmental problem considered). However, in many manuscripts, there is no well-defined line of argument and the problem domain in which the paper aims to make a contribution is not defined clearly. This makes it extremely difficult to identify knowledge gaps and hence the novelty and significance of the contribution of the paper. Once the problem domain has been defined, a As the research needs and gaps identified in the literature review have a direct effect on the research objectives, the quality of the literature review also has a significant impact on the quality of the remainder of the paper, including the Methodology, Results and Conclusions, as illustrated in In conclusion, the quality of the literature review is extremely important, as its purpose is to identify knowledge gaps/research needs in the problem domain/research area in which the paper is intended to make a contribution to knowledge. This requires clear specification of the problem domain and a The author would like to thank the three reviewers and Editor for their comments, which have improved the quality of this paper.