The effect of phenol and resorcinol on hydrochloric acid leaching of Ti-rich slag is investigated. The leaching rate is exponentially proportional to acid and phenol concentrations. Any metal–phenol complexes decomposed by chloride ions should considerably increase the leaching rate by playing a role of active transport. Furthermore, phenols are expected to have a synergistic effect on the hydrochloric acid leaching of metal oxides. The additives such as methyl alcohol, ethyl alcohol and ethylene glycol improve the leaching efficiency in a chloride medium. It is observed that resorcinol with ethylene glycol acts as a better additive in the leaching of Ti-rich slag. The results will have significant impact on the production of upgraded feed stock (Synthetic Rutile) from Ti-rich slag.The direct ilmenite leaching processes employ both sulfuric and hydrochloric acid. However, the kinetics of dissolution of ilmenite in sulfuric acid is slow, costly and the by product is less economical and poses an environmental hazard [ The ethylene glycol with hydrochloric acid solutions has improved the leaching rate of Ti-rich slag [ In this paper, the effect of phenols and resorcinol on the dissolution rate of leaching both on titanium and iron from Ti-rich slag is investigated. These analyses were performed by considering the effect of phenol and resorcinol on HCl–CH The dissolution experiments were performed in 250 All the leach solutions were analyzed for Fe and Ti by atomic absorption spectroscopy. Saturated solutions of methanol, ethanol and ethylene glycol were analyzed for chloride using the micro titration method with EDTA. The dissolution efficiency was defined as a percentage of the curve at maximum dissolution (i.e. 100% dissolved) over the same time period. The pre-treated ilmenite treated with only hydrochloric acid without any additive resulted in 49.91% Fe leached. The leaching rate was enhanced by the addition of methyl alcohol, ethyl alcohol and ethylene glycol. The leaching efficiency of the Ti-rich slag was examined by the effect of phenol and resorcinol on the behavior of the leached solution. The chemical composition of Ti-rich slag is shown in The effect of phenol and resorcinol on leaching of titania rich slag with HCl–CH According to Girgin [ Phenol enhances the reaction kinetics and results in dissolution higher percentage of iron leached out from the solution. Phenol forms a complex ion on the surface of the particle after long duration of reaction. This complex ion hinders the leaching reaction until it stops. The effect of resorcinol showed the percentage of iron leached out has increased up to 78% from the slag. Upgraded feed stock was prepared from the leaching residue. The product becomes enriched with titanium content after leaching out the iron. With the optimized condition, upgraded feed stock was prepared from leached product. The chemical composition of the upgraded feed stock (synthetic rutile) is given in Assume that various metal–chloride and metal–chloride–phenol complexes are formed in the outer layer prior to diffusion into the internal layer. The diffusion concentration of the interphase layer can be defined as follows [ It is concluded that resorcinol is a better leaching reagent compared to phenol in the solvent system. The ethylene glycol [C The author is thankful to Inha University for publication of this work.