Imidazolium nitrate functional groups (Im–NO3) were anchored onto a polystyrene–divinylbenzene resin matrix, and investigated for the extraction of palladium (II) from nitric acid medium. The rate of extraction and distribution coefficient, K
                     d, mL/g, of palladium (II) were measured as a function of extent of functionalization, and concentrations of nitric acid, sodium nitrate and palladium nitrate. K
                     d values of palladium (II) show a maximum in 3.0 M–4.0 M nitric acid. Slope analysis of the distribution data obtained at various aqueous phase nitrate concentrations and resin phase exchanging capacity suggest the involvement of anion exchange mechanism for the extraction of palladium (II) from nitric acid medium. The ion exchange isotherm was fitted using Langmuir adsorption model and the apparent ion exchange capacity (b
                     =88 mg/g) was determined. The performance of the resin under dynamic conditions was evaluated by following a breakthrough curve and the data was fitted using Thomas model.The concept of by-product utilization arising from nuclear industry evolved in the 1950s. Potentially useful and strategic by-products are produced during fission of fissile elements ( Most of the fission palladium isotopes in the spent nuclear fuel are non-radioactive or very weakly radioactive. It comprises of stable isotopes Recovery of valuable PGMs from HLLW has been extensively studied in the last two decades ( All the reagents used in the present study were of analytical reagent grade. Chloromethylated polystyrene–divinylbenzene (4.5 mmol/g; 4% cross linkage) copolymer was purchased from M/s. Thermax (India) Pvt. Ltd., Pune, India. The chloromethylated resin was washed with methanol and acetone to remove monomers and dried in air. 1-methylimidazole was procured from Lancaster UK. Palladium (II) nitrate was procured from M/s. Otto Chemie., Mumbai. The reaction scheme adopted for the preparation of Im–NO The amount of methylimidazole anchored on the resin was estimated by eluting the chloride ion present in the resin. Sodium nitrate solution (0.1 M, 100 mL) was passed into a column packed with 0.5 g of the anchored resin. The effluent and water washings were collected in a 250 mL standard flask and the chloride content in the solution was measured by Mohr's method. The entire quantity of resin was converted to nitrate form by passing sodium nitrate solution in to a column packed with the resin until the effluent is free from chloride ion (tested with acidified silver nitrate). This nitrate form of imidazolium anchored resin, Im–NO All the experiments were carried out at 298 K. Extraction of palladium as a function of nitric acid concentration was studied by equilibrating resin with solution containing 6.2 The kinetics of extraction were determined by sampling the above solutions at various times. The effect of nitrate ion concentration on the extraction of palladium was studied by equilibrating 0.05 g of Im–NO The influence of concentration of exchanging nitrate in the resin on the distribution coefficient of palladium was studied by equilibrating the Im–NO The extraction isotherm of palladium was constructed from the results of the experiments that involved equilibration of 0.05 g of the resin with aqueous phase containing desired concentration of nitric acid (3.0 M) and palladium nitrate(10 The performance of the sorbent under dynamic condition was assessed by column breakthrough experiments. In this experiment 1.0 g (= The results of ion exchange capacity obtained for anchoring of 1-methylimidazole on chloromethylated resin are shown in When the mole ratio of chloromethylated resin to 1-methylimidazole is 1 The rate of uptake of palladium by Im–NO Substituting Eq. Integration of Eq. Non-linear regression of the kinetic data using Eq. The distribution coefficient of palladium (II) as a function of nitric acid concentration on Im–NO It should be noted that the distribution coefficients obtained in the case of Im–NO The distribution trend observed in the present study indicates that palladium (II) may be forming a series of anionic complexes with nitrate ions in aqueous solution, which are likely to be extracted by Im–NO The total concentration of palladium ( Using Eqs. If the mechanism of extraction involves the ion exchange of [Pd(H Substituting the value of [Pd(H At low nitrate ion concentrations, At high nitrate ion concentrations, the denominator term tends towards the fourth power of nitrate ion concentration as shown in Eq. Thus, depending upon the nitrate ion concentration used in the study the slope of the plot of log A plot log At constant nitrate ion concentration, a plot of log At all nitric acid concentrations, log The variation of palladium loading in Im–NO The performance of the resin under dynamic loading conditions can be evaluated by following a breakthrough curve ( Various simple models have been developed to describe the dynamic behavior of extraction of metal ions in a fixed bed column ( The extracted palladium was quantitatively eluted using 25 mL of 0.05 M thiourea in 0.1 M nitric acid. The kinetics of anchoring of 1-methylimidazole on chloromethylated polystyrene–divinylbenzene is rapid and leads to 80% anchoring of methylimidazolium ion on the resin matrix within 40 min of refluxing. A maximum anion exchange capacity of ∼ The authors thank Miss N. Subhashri, M.Sc. Student, Anna University for assistance.