OBJECTIVE:
                  The main aim of the study was to analyze the outcomes of clavicle fractures in adults treated non-surgically and to evaluate the clinical effects of displacement, fracture patterns, fracture location, fracture comminution, shortening and fracture union on shoulder function.
               
                  METHODS:
                  Seventy clavicle fractures were non-surgically treated in the Orthopedics Department at the Tuanku Ja'afar General Hospital, a tertiary care hospital in Seremban, Malaysia, an average of six months after injury. The clavicle fractures were treated conservatively with an arm sling and a figure-eight splint for three weeks. No attempt was made to reduce displaced fractures, and the patients were allowed immediate free-shoulder mobilization, as tolerated. They were prospectively evaluated clinically and radiographically. Shoulder function was evaluated using the Constant scoring technique.
               
                  RESULTS:
                  There were statistically significant functional outcome impairments in non-surgically treated clavicle fractures that correlated with the fracture type (comminution), the fracture displacement (21 mm or more), shortening (15 mm or more) and the fracture union (malunion).
               
                  CONCLUSION:
                  This article reveals the need for surgical intervention to treat clavicle fractures and improve shoulder functional outcomes.Clavicle fractures are commonly found in all age groups. In our clinical practice, we encounter clavicle fracture patients who often complain that their shoulders feel inadequate after a given treatment period. Their shoulder strength and motion are reduced compared to their pre-injury condition and to their contralateral shoulder. In certain situations, the patients were unable to perform the same activities they performed before their injuries. All these problems result from nonunion, malunion and shortening of the clavicle. As far as the literature is concerned, there are no quantitative data indicating that clavicle fractures should be treated surgically. The Malaysian Orthopaedic Association meeting (held in June 2008 in Kuala Lumpur) concluded that there is a need to operate on certain clavicle fractures. Neer (1960) reported 3 nonunions out of 2,235 fractures that were treated with the closed method, This prospective cohort study was performed between May 2008 and April 2010 in the Orthopedics Department at the Tuanku Ja'afar General Hospital, a tertiary hospital in Seremban, Malaysia. Patients who presented with clavicle fractures and had completed at least 6 months of follow-up were included. All clavicle fractures were treated non-surgically. The shoulder functional outcomes of the clavicle fractures were measured using the Constant scoring technique. The Constant scoring technique refers to a scoring system consisting of four variables that assess shoulder function, based on the guidelines of the European Society for Shoulder and Elbow Surgery (ESSES). Devices for measuring strength:  Strength was measured using a standard Range of motion was measured using a goniometer (JAMAR Co., Pakistan). The outcomes of the different end-points 6 months after the injury were explored using the chi-squared test and Pearson's χ-squared test. A p-value <0.05 was considered to be statistically significant. Selected subgroups of patients were compared after 6 months using estimated relative risks with 95% confidence intervals. The clinical outcomes of the non-surgically treated clavicle fractures were evaluated after 6 months of follow-up using the Constant scoring technique developed by Constant and Murley. Only the researchers performed the physical examinations and recorded the data and scores to minimize any inter-observer error. These data were analyzed using SPSS (version 15.0).   The Pearson chi-squared results in  In this study, analyses were made to determine how severely displacement affects shoulder function. The chi-squared values revealed a significant difference between displacement and shoulder function (chi-squared value = 23.386, df = 4, p = .000<.05). Although a displacement of 0.50 cm could affect shoulder function in this study, this effect was not statistically significant.  A shortening of 1.20 cm (12 mm) could affect shoulder function in this study, but this effect was not statistically significant.  Clavicle fractures represent 45% of all shoulder girdle injuries. Based on the 70 patients in this study, our results showed that 34 patients (48.6%) had reduced shoulder function on the affected side, whereas 36 patients (51.4%) did not experience reduced shoulder function. The Constant shoulder score varied from 39 to 94, with a mean of 77.19. Our results showed no statistically significant correlation between clavicle fracture location and the Constant score. The clavicle fracture location did not appear to affect shoulder function. The current recommendation for an unstable distal clavicle fracture is surgery; however, the number of distal clavicle fractures in our sample was small (7 patients). A larger sample may have altered the results. Krüger–Franke et al. (2001) reported very good outcomes in a series of 41 patients with lateral clavicle fractures who were treated with the K-wire stabilization with cerclage and AO-plate osteosynthesis. An 8-year follow-up revealed good or very good outcomes in 97% of these subjects. Our findings revealed a statistically significant correlation between the fracture type and shoulder function. Our results showed that patients with comminuted clavicle fractures had reduced shoulder function compared to patients with other types of fractures (oblique/spiral and transverse). This finding is consistent with an earlier report by Wiesel et al. (2006), who used multivariate analysis to identify a lack of cortical apposition and the presence of comminution as risk factors for nonunion in diaphyseal clavicle fractures that lead to reduced shoulder function. Our fracture displacement results showed that a bone displacement of 20 mm or more can negatively impact shoulder function, but this effect was not statistically significant. However, a displacement of 21 mm or more was significant associated with reduced shoulder function. In another study, a fracture displacement of 20 mm or more was associated with unsatisfactory outcomes. Clavicle fracture patients with shortening (in the AP view) of 14 mm had no reduction in shoulder function, but shortening of 15 mm or more was statistically associated with affected shoulder function. This finding agrees with earlier studies by Goss and Constant et al. (1993), who reported that shortening of more than 15 mm was associated with shoulder discomfort and dysfunction. We found a significant correlation between the fracture unity and the Constant score. Patients with fracture malunions had reduced shoulder function compared to patients with fracture nonunions. In contrast, patients with good fracture unions had no reductions in their Constant scores. Malunions and nonunions lead to further shortening, which affects shoulder function. Clavicle fracture treatment continues to progress. Based on our findings, we conclude that a comminuted fracture, a fracture displacement of 21 mm or more, a shortening of 15 mm or more and fractures complicated by malunion and nonunion may lead to further shortening and can reduce shoulder function. We recommend treating fractures with a displacement of more than 21 mm, a shortening of more than 15 mm, symptomatic nonunions and malunions primarily with open reduction and internal fixation with plates and screws. Sometimes, augmentation with bone grafting can enhance the outcome, especially after a comminuted fracture. We recommend that further studies be performed with longer follow–ups because late complications can arise after a clavicle fracture. We also believe that a longer study time frame and more patients could produce more accurate results. Admittedly, a limitation of this study was the difficulty of calling back patients for assessments 6 or more months after their injuries, especially when they felt that their injuries did not cause any significant disability. We are indebted to the following dedicated individuals who willingly offered their expertise and valuable time to provide their guidance, opinions and reviews of this article: Associate Prof. Srijit Das and Associate Prof. Rizal.