Phosphatases are recognized to have important functions in the initiation of skeletal mineralization. Tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (TNAP) and PHOSPHO1 are indispensable for bone and cartilage mineralization but their functional relationship in the mineralization process remains unclear. In this study, we have used osteoblast and ex-vivo metatarsal cultures to obtain biochemical evidence for co-operativity and cross-talk between PHOSPHO1 and TNAP in the initiation of mineralization. Clones 14 and 24 of the MC3T3-E1 cell line were used in the initial studies. Clone 14 cells expressed high levels of PHOSPHO1 and low levels of TNAP and in the presence of β-glycerol phosphate (βGP) or phosphocholine (P-Cho) as substrates and they mineralized their matrix strongly. In contrast clone 24 cells expressed high levels of TNAP and low levels of PHOSPHO1 and mineralized their matrix poorly. Lentiviral Phospho1 overexpression in clone 24 cells resulted in higher PHOSPHO1 and TNAP protein expression and increased levels of matrix mineralization. To uncouple the roles of PHOSPHO1 and TNAP in promoting matrix mineralization we used PHOSPHO1 (MLS-0263839) and TNAP (MLS-0038949) specific inhibitors, which individually reduced mineralization levels of Phospho1 overexpressing C24 cells, whereas the simultaneous addition of both inhibitors essentially abolished matrix mineralization (85%; P<0.001). Using metatarsals from E15 mice as a physiological ex vivo model of mineralization, the response to both TNAP and PHOSPHO1 inhibitors appeared to be substrate dependent. Nevertheless, in the presence of βGP, mineralization was reduced by the TNAP inhibitor alone and almost completely eliminated by the co-incubation of both inhibitors. These data suggest critical non-redundant roles for PHOSPHO1 and TNAP during the initiation of osteoblast and chondrocyte mineralization.Tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (TNAP) is the isozyme of the alkaline phosphatase family whose activity is linked to the promotion of matrix mineralization in bone and cartilage Instead, PHOSPHO1, a member of the haloacid dehalogenase superfamily Phospho1‐R74X null mutant ( Previously characterized clones 14 and 24 of the MC3T3-E1 cell line ( Mouse Recombinant human PHOSPHO1 and TNAP protein was produced and purified as previously described Cells were plated at 2.5×10 Cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 Cells were lysed in RIPA buffer (20 RNA was extracted from cells using RNeasy total RNA (Qiagen Ltd., Crawley, UK), according to the manufacturer's instructions. For each sample, total RNA content was assessed by absorbance at 260 Embryonic metatarsal organ cultures provide a well-established SigmaStat v 11.0 was used for statistical analysis. Data (mean±SEM) comparison was conducted by regular t-tests or ANOVA unless the data was not normally distributed, in which case a suitable non-parametric test was selected. Although βGP can be hydrolyzed by PHOSPHO1 to release Pi it has been previously reported to be a poor substrate for PHOSPHO1 in comparison to TNAP To directly assess the co-operativity and cross-talk between PHOSPHO1 and TNAP expression in ECM mineralization we overexpressed TNAP (MLS-0038949) and PHOSPHO1 (MLS-0263839) inhibitors were tested on Next we used metatarsals from WT E15 mice, in the presence or absence of MLS-0038949 and MLS-0263839 ( PHOSPHO1 is now recognized to be essential for the initiation of skeletal mineralization. Its genetic ablation in mice results in osteoidosis and decreased BMD which are likely to explain the observed spontaneous fractures, bowed long bones, osteomalacia and scoliosis in early life We first exploited MC3T3-E1 clones 14 and 24 because of their reported differences in TNAP expression and mineralization ability Although it is recognized that the inactivation of PHOSPHO1 in the developing chick limb or its genetic ablation in mice results in a osteoidosis and osteomalacia More definitive data on the function of PHOSPHO1 and TNAP in promoting matrix mineralization was provided by the use of previously validated PHOSPHO1 (MLS-0263839) and TNAP (MLS-0038949) inhibitors This work was supported by Institute Strategic Programme Grant funding from the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at       