To remove the adsorbed reagent of copper–lead mixed concentrate in bulk flotation, this study investigates the removal effect of sodium sulfide (SS) through micro-flotation, adsorption tests, equilibrium speciation analysis, electrochemical analysis, and first-principle density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Micro-flotation tests demonstrate that chalcopyrite and galena recovery remarkably decline by 50% and 70%, respectively, because of SS addition in a mineral–butyl xanthate (BX) flotation system. Meanwhile, adsorption tests reveal that with the addition of SS, the adsorption density of BX onto the surfaces of chalcopyrite and galena decrease to 0.0008 and 0.001 mg/g, respectively. These findings indicate that BX on the mineral surface almost completely desorbs. Electrochemical tests further show that in the BX–mineral system, combined with the oxidation peak, BX and mineral react to form CuX2/PbX2. After adding sodium sulfide, the above peak does not appear, indicating that BX does not react with minerals because of the effect of SS. The first-principle calculations based on the DFT further reveals the competitive adsorption mechanism between SS and BX on chalcopyrite (001) and galena (100) surface, thereby demonstrating the significant performance of SS as a removing reagent.Copper and lead are significant non-ferrous metals in the modern industry and are widely used in various fields. Chalcopyrite (CuFeS The usual bulk flotation of separating chalcopyrite and galena relies on a two-stage process Sodium sulfide (SS) has been extensively used as a reagent in flotation processes because of its low price, non-toxicity, and excellent chemical properties The main objective of the present paper is to systematically and thoroughly explore the regent removal mechanism of sodium sulfide on the flotation separation of chalcopyrite and galena with the application of micro-flotation, adsorption, equilibrium speciation analysis, and electrochemistry. Moreover, the interaction mechanism at the molecular level was further investigated by first-principle calculations. Samples of chalcopyrite and galena used in the present study were obtained from Chenzhou Mine in Hunan Province and Fankou Mine in Guangdong Province, China, respectively. The mineral samples were hand selected, crushed, and ground by a laboratory ceramic ball mill. The powder samples were then screened. The fractions in the size range 38 μm–74 μm are used in the flotation tests. All samples were stored in the sealed glass bottles. The X-ray diffraction pattern confirmed that the chalcopyrite and galena samples were 97.2% and 95.7% pure, respectively. Moreover, the main impurities were fluorite and calcite, which had a mild impact on mineral quality. Flotation tests were conducted using sodium hydroxide (NaOH) and hydrochloric acid (HCl) as pH regulators, butyl xanthate (BX) as the collector, sodium sulfide (SS) as an agent to remove reagent of Cu–Pb mixing concentrate and terpenic oil as the frother. All reagents used in this study were of analytical grade, except for the terpenic oil, which was of industrial grade. Deionized water with a resistivity >18 MΩ cm were used in all the experiments. All single-mineral flotation tests were conducted on an XFG flotation machine (Exploring Machinery Plant, Changchun, China) with a volume of 40 mL and an impeller speed of 1800 rpm. 2.0 g of single mineral sample and 35 mL deionized water were mixed for each test. Furthermore, the pH was adjusted to the desired value through the addition of NaOH/HCl, as measured by a pH meter (PHS-3C, Wincom, China). The pulp was then sequentially conditioned with BX (2 min) and terpenic oil (1 min). After a 4 min flotation, the concentrate was collected. Subsequently, to test the reagent-removal effect of SS, the prepared SS (3 min) was applied to the Cu/Pb concentrate, and terpenic oil (1 min) was then added. A reagent-removal process time of 3 min was employed in all single-mineral experiments. At the completion of the flotation experiment, the obtained concentrate was filtered, dried, and weighed to determine the flotation recovery. The flowsheet is shown in The flotation recovery ( The adsorption of BX onto chalcopyrite and galena was measured using a ultraviolet (UV-1810) spectrometer (Beijing Purkinje General Instrument Co., Ltd., Beijing, China). Two grams of −38 µm pure mineral was added into 40 mL deionized water, then NaOH or HCl was added to adjust pH. Afterward, the desired reagents were added in order, and the conditioning time was identical with flotation test. Then, the pulp was centrifuged for 10 min using a high-speed refrigerated centrifuge at 9000 r/min. Later, the supernatant was filtered, the solution after adsorption was measured using a UV spectrometer, and the BX adsorption on the mineral surface was calculated from standard curve. At the adsorption peak of 300 nm, the absorbancy of BX were measured under different concentrations (concentration: 0.188, 0.94, 1.88, 9.4, 18.8 mg/L), and the results are depicted in The adsorbed amount of BX on mineral surface was calculated from the difference in the concentration of initial and residual BX in the solution as the following equation: In an aqueous solution, SS will be hydrolyzed depending on the solution pH. The species include S In the aqueous solution system, existential forms and relative content of ions vary at different pH levels, which will affect the feasibility and spontaneity of precipitation reactions Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was performed using an EG & GPAR potentiostat/galvanostat Model 283 with Power Suite Software. A conventional three-electrode system was used in electrochemical tests, which consisted of a reference electrode (Ag/AgCl), a counter electrode (graphite rod), and a working electrode (mineral electrode). The pH 9.2 tetraborate (0.05 mol/L Na All our periodic calculations were performed in the framework of Cambridge Serial Total Energy Package (CASTEP) module in Materials Studio 2017 The chalcopyrite (001) and galena (100) surface were chosen for the present study because they have the most stable surfaces In this section, we first investigate the influence of pH using BX as collector on the flotation recovery and pulp potential of minerals. As shown in   The recovery of chalcopyrite and galena is directly related to the adsorption of BX on its surface. Adsorption tests are performed under the same conditions as the flotation experiments.  The competitive adsorption between HS– and BX– onto the surfaces of chalcopyrite and galena can be characterized by theory of solubility product. For example, in the system of chalcopyrite–BX–SS, the reagent-removal formation reactions are as follows: The total reaction is: This reaction quantitatively illustrates the competitive adsorption of HS– and X–. When the concentration of HS– increases, the probability of CuS generation increases. Theoretically, as long as the HS– concentration is larger than that of X–, all of the hydrophobic CuX In the flotation process of the sulfurous minerals, the mineral surface is subject to varying electrochemical processes that considerably alter their physical and chemical properties. These processes include redox reactions, intermediary element adsorption, superficial interactions, and, in general, diverse electrochemical processes that are dependent on the electrode/dissolution interactions  The results of reagent-removal tests show that when the dosage of SS increases to 2.5 × 10 The electrochemical process is considered to be an important factor for controlling the recovery and selectivity of sulfide minerals during flotation Two anode peaks and an extremely weak cathode peak occur after the addition of BX. The first anode peak occurs at 130 mV to be represented by Reaction After addition of SS into the solution, an extremely wide anode peak occurs near –200 mV in anode scanning. Reaching the summit of the anode peak at 130 mV, and the oxidation reaction of this peak shows in Reaction In the mixed solution of BX and SS, two oxidation peaks occur during anode scanning. The initial scanning potential of those two anode peaks are the same as the initial potential in the presence of SS, which indicates that the oxidation reactions are the same as the reactions in the presence of SS. The potential value when the first anode peak reaches the summit is about 130 mV. In the presence of BX, such value is the initial potential of the interaction between BX and chalcopyrite. Therefore, BX does not react with chalcopyrite at the condition of SS, which indicates that BX almost completely desorb from the mineral surfaces because of the remarkable removal effect of SS.  To determine the exact reaction pathways for the mechanism of SS in chalcopyrite and galena surface in the presence of BX, first, the BX adsorption on the reconstructed (001) and (100) surfaces of chalcopyrite and galena, respectively, are studied using density functional theory (DFT) calculations  The optimized configuration of galena (100), BX adsorption on galena (100) surface, and SS adsorption on the galena–BX system are shown in  Micro-flotation tests indicate that the pulp potential and the flotation recovery of chalcopyrite and galena decrease gradually with increased SS dosage when using BX as the collector. This change may be the reason for SS removal of BX on mineral surface, which further reduces the floatability of chalcopyrite and galena. Adsorption tests reveal that the adsorption density of BX onto the surfaces of chalcopyrite and galena decrease with the addition of SS, which indicate the reagent-removal effect of SS. Moreover, equilibrium speciation analysis of SS suggests that the elemental sulfur of SS primarily exist in the form of HS– when the pulp pH is over the range of 8.5–9.2. Moreover, a competitive adsorption exists between HS– and X– on the surfaces of chalcopyrite and galena. Electrochemical analysis of mineral–SS–BX system Eh–pH diagrams shows that BX existed in the form of BX–, and SS exists in the form of HS–. Therefore, the competitive adsorption on mineral surfaces formed in the pulp. Cyclic voltammogram tests show that BX and mineral react to form CuX The first-principle DFT calculations further reveals that SS forms the favorable adsorption configuration on chalcopyrite (001) and galena (100) surface. Furthermore, the adsorption energy is more negative than that of BX on the chalcopyrite and galena surface, which indicates stronger interaction. Moreover, after SS molecules are added, BX molecules are far from the mineral surface. The present work indicates that SS shows a remarkable removal effect in chalcopyrite–BX–SS system and galena–BX–SS system. Manuscript is approved by all authors for publication. I would like to declare on behalf of my co-authors that the work described was original research that has not been published previously, and not under consideration for publication elsewhere, in whole or in part. All the authors listed have approved the manuscript that is enclosed. The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The present work is financially supported by the Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: