The adhesion behaviour of gold particles to agglomerates of oil and carbon and the dynamic changes of the agglomerates during the contact process have been investigated. It is shown that the rate of adhesion of gold particles to agglomerates can be significantly increased by using xanthate collectors. It is further demonstrated that the longer the hydrocarbon chain of the xanthate molecule, the greater the rate of adhesion of gold to the agglomerates. The adsorbed gold particles do not markedly affect the adsorption activity of the agglomerates, i.e. recycling the agglomerates to increase the gold loading is feasible. Examination of gold-loaded agglomerates by scanning electron microscopy showed that in addition to individual gold particles, gold “flocs” and even “micro-nuggets” can be detected on the agglomerates. These flocs and nuggets are probably formed by the movement of initially adsorbed gold particles over the surface of the agglomerates. Both the composition and structure of the agglomerates change during the contact process. The oil tends to diffuse out of the agglomerates, and their oil content decreases with agitation. The gold particles can also migrate into the interior of the agglomerates due to their deformation resulting from agitation impact.The coal–gold–agglomeration process (CGA) for the recovery of liberated gold with agglomerates made from powdered coal and oil was developed less than 20 years ago ( The first successful pilot trial of the CGA process was reported by The focus of the present paper is on the adhesion behaviour of gold particles to agglomerates, their morphology and the dynamic changes in the agglomerates during the contact process.  Synthetic gold ore made by mixing gold powder (99.99% Au, nominally −50 μm, but mainly −10 μm) with washed quartz beach sand (−150 μm). Graphite powder, nominally −50 μm, plate-shaped particles, wide size range, estimated mean size about 15 μm. Potassium amyl xanthate (KAX) commercial yellow pellet form, bulk density 0.62 g/cm Sodium decanethioxanthate (DX), synthesized, shiny yellow powder, water-soluble, used as an aqueous solution of concentration 0.5%. Di- Oil–carbon agglomerates were produced by mixing graphite powder slurried in water with tetradecane containing 2 wt% DBP, as an agglomeration aid. Mixing was carried out in a 600 ml beaker equipped with two baffles 180° apart. 25 g graphite powder was slurried with 400 ml water and then 10 g tetradecane were added and mixed at 1100 rpm for 10–15 min to form the agglomerates. The density of the agglomerates was 1.2 g/cm The adhesion tests were carried out in the same beaker used to prepare the agglomerates. The contents of the beaker were stirred at 1100 rpm by a four-bladed stainless steel impeller. The stirring energy of this system was 2.26 kW/m The gold content in the dry agglomerates was analyzed in the following manner: (i) roasting the dry agglomerates to ash at 850 °C overnight in a muffle furnace; (ii) treating the ash with aqua regia to dissolve gold; (iii) analyzing the diluted gold solution by atomic absorption spectrophotometry. The morphologies of gold-loaded agglomerates were determined by scanning electron microscopy. In order to achieve high gold loadings, the agglomerates were prepared in a similar manner to that described above except that extra gold powder was used and no sand was added during the adhesion stage. At pre-determined times during the loading, a few agglomerates were removed for examination so that the build-up of gold on the agglomerates could be followed. Both the outer surfaces of whole agglomerates and inner fracture surfaces were investigated. For the latter, agglomerates were notched with a razor blade and then split apart to avoid smearing gold over the fracture surface. Whole and broken agglomerates were mounted on glass slides for examination in the SEM. The compositions of the agglomerates were determined by thermogravimetric analysis. A Stanton–Redcroft STA-1500 DTA/TG micro-balance was used. The TG curves showed a slow weight loss between room temperature and 120 °C and a much steeper and more rapid weight loss between 120 and 195 °C. Thereafter the weight remained constant up to at least 400 °C. It was assumed that the first stage of weight loss, i.e. up to 120 °C, was due to the loss of water from the agglomerates, the second stage was the removal of the oil from the agglomerates, and the constant weight residue was the original graphite. A set of experiments was conducted using two different xanthate collectors with different chain lengths. The experimental procedure was as follows: synthetic ore consisting of a mixture of gold powder (20 mg) and sand (40 g) was contacted with the oil/carbon agglomerates (30 g) with addition of the collector (50 mg/l), and samples of the agglomerates (about 2.5 g) were taken out at predetermined times for analysis of the gold content. The results are shown in It can be seen that the gold recoveries increase with time in all cases, but there are large differences in the rates of recovery with the different collectors. Within the contacting period used (50 min), the gold recovery with decanthioxanthate (DX) collector is complete. With shorter chain-length amylxanthate collector (KAX), the gold recoveries increase much more slowly, and in the absence of any collector, the gold recovery increases in a slow almost linear rate, reaching less than 50% in 50 min. Thus, the addition of xanthate collectors greatly increases the rate of gold adhesion, although adhesion will occur slowly without any collector. In another paper, The next set of experiments was designed to investigate the adsorption activity of agglomerates in multiple cycles. In each cycle, a fresh mixture of gold, sand and water (20 mg/40 g/400 ml) was used, with a contact time of 20 min. At the end of each cycle, a small amount of agglomerates (about 2.5 g) was sampled and analysed. The results of a set of five cycles are shown in It can be seen that the gold content of the agglomerates increases with the number of cycles in a linear fashion. Similar results were reported by Scanning electron micro-graphs of the surfaces of agglomerates loaded with gold after various times of contact are shown in the following figures. From these it is possible to draw certain inferences about the mechanisms of adhesion. In In the centre of The peanut-shaped, gold ‘micro-nugget’ seen in The agglomerates after 17 h agitation could be readily fractured with a knife blade. The image in In summary, various inferences about the gold adsorption process can be made from the above micro-graphs. The attachment of gold particles to the agglomerate surface is rapid and occurs randomly either on graphite particle surfaces or in the interstices between the particles. Gold particles can be adsorbed in various forms, namely as single particles, clusters, and larger gold ‘flakes’ and ‘micro-nuggets’. These various forms of gold may be formed either in the aqueous phase before attachment to the aggregates, due to flocculation of gold particles caused by the presence of the collector and the oil, especially for the smaller clusters, or after attachment, as a result of movement along the surface of absorbed gold particles or clusters, especially for those larger aggregates. The fact that large gold flakes and micro-nuggets are firmly attached to the agglomerate surface indicates that the adsorption forces are very strong. After a prolonged period of agitation, gold particles tend to cover the surface of the agglomerates and then begin to build up in multi-layers. Deformation, breakage and recombination of agglomerates during agitation seems to occur, resulting in gold particles being distributed in the interior of aggregates, as well as the creation of fresh surfaces for adsorption. This behaviour accounts for the fact that agglomerates can be recycled many times with fresh ore and they will continue to load gold to quite high concentrations ( The agglomerates are a mixture of solid graphite, oil and a small amount of water. The initial carbon–oil ratio in the agglomerates can be varied over a limited range by varying the ratio of these two ingredients at the agglomerate preparation stage. It is evident from the micrographs described above that deformation of the aggregates occurs during prolonged agitation. This phenomenon may lead to changes in the composition of the agglomerates, which needs to be investigated since the composition plays an important role in the adhesion process. A simple experiment was carried out to investigate compositional changes by agitating agglomerates in water in the absence of sand and gold particles for a prolonged period. Aggregate samples were taken at predetermined times, air dried for about one hour to drain water from the surfaces, and their compositions were then determined by thermogravimetry, as described in The changes in agglomerate composition are shown in  The gold adhesion process is significantly improved in the presence of chemical collectors. For xanthate collectors with different hydrocarbon chain lengths, the longer the chain, the more efficient is the attachment of gold to the agglomerates. After attachment, gold particles appear to be strongly bound to the agglomerates. The gold content of agglomerates increases linearly with the number of loading cycles. This indicates that the adsorption activity of the agglomerate surface remains more or less constant on recycling. Single gold particles, gold clusters, and even gold ‘flakes’ and ‘nuggets’ can adsorb on the agglomerates. Initially, single gold particles are adsorbed, and then with longer contacting time, gold clusters and flakes can be seen on the agglomerates. These are probably formed by the movement of adsorbed gold particles along the surface of the agglomerates, caused by mixing energy. Importantly, the gold particles can migrate into the interior of the agglomerates due to their deformation during vigorous agitation. Both the composition and structure of the agglomerates change during the loading process. The oil component tends to slowly diffuse out of the agglomerates, and so the oil content decreases with prolonged agitation. During a single long-term contact, or with multiple cycles of contact, gold particles enter inside the agglomerates due to the structural deformations caused by the impacts arising from agitation. For short periods of agitation, these changes of composition and structure are not significant, and do not noticeably affect the adsorption activity of agglomerate surfaces.