It is possible to analyze in situ the adsorbate/adsorbant interaction during the flotation process by high frequency dielectric measurements. The adsorption of complexing collector (sodium oleate) onto calcite increases the dielectric permittivity independently of the frequency. The dielectric constant increases after adsorption because the adsorbate and the adsorbant interact through covalent bonds. Physical adsorption involving electrostatic interactions or hydrogen bonds (dodecylamine and dodecylsulfate) has no effect on the dielectrical characteristics. The dielectric method allows to analyze the mechanisms of depression using reagents such as quebracho and sodium silicate.The separation of calcite from precious minerals such as smithsonite, fluorite, scheelite, apatite and celestite by selective flotation is extremely complex and requires an accurate analysis of the phenomena at the liquid/solid interfaces ( Fundamentally, the adsorption of collectors and depressants on the mineral surface of calcite results from a number of forces linked to the existence of interaction of electrostatic type, covalent type or hydrogen bonding. In the case of an electrostatic interaction, the surfactants are adsorbed on the mineral surface by a bond between the polar head of the collector ion and the charged electrical double layer on the mineral surface ( The development of high-frequency dielectric techniques has led to interesting results in the process of activation of the sphalerite by the Cu The present work analyzes the capability of dielectrical method to distinguish a chemisorption of a physisorption during the flotation of the calcite with collectors such as oleate, dodecylsulfate and dodecylamine. We also study the sensitivity of the technique to analyze the mechanisms of depression using reagents such as quebracho and sodium silicate. The dielectric method consists in measuring the complex impedance Z* of the decanted mineral pulp in a capacitive cell ( For a non-conductive pulp, Z* values can be transformed in the complex permittivity ε* Y*: Admittance of the cell filled with the decanted pulp, Y l: Electrical length of the cell, c: Velocity of light. If the measurement frequency is sufficiently low or if the effective length of the cell is small, the “th” function can be replaced by its limited development. So, the admittance of the cell can be calculated by the approximate formula ( C Pure calcite is ground in an agate mortar in the presence of water (particle size range: 40 The flotation tests were carried out in a hallimond tube. The density of the pulp was 4% and the volume of the solution was 100 The impedance measurements were carried out at 21 Frequency and ionic strength are fundamental parameters which determine the dielectric characteristics of the calcite pulp. Their influences depend on the optimum conditions for detecting the adsorption of collectors and depressants on the surface of the mineral. In the frequency range examined [0.4–150 It is important to know if the presence of ionic species in solution represents an obstacle to the dielectric characterization of the mineral pulp. This leads us to examine the effect of ionic strength on the dielectric response of the mineral/solution system. To quantify this effect, the calcite pulps were equilibrated with sodium nitrate at different concentrations. We suppose that there is no interaction between salt ions and the surface of the mineral. The results ( To illustrate the performances of the method, stability tests Ei (i In order to eliminate any ambiguity about the dielectric responses of mineral pulps in the presence of collectors and depressants, the dielectric constants of these reagents in solution were measured without the calcite. The results of the The high affinity of oleate for calcite is widely described in the literature. These previous and recent works indicate that the adsorbate/adsorbent interaction is of a chemical nature ( Dielectric measurements ( We can note that the relation between the variations of the dielectric parameters and the nature of bond adsorbate/adsorbent appears for concentrations of collector (10 Basing on these results, it seemed interesting to evaluate the dielectric response of the calcite pulp when the collector is introduced directly in the form of precipitated calcium oleate, and to see if it is possible to differentiate by dielectricity a chemisorption by coordination engaging a Ca So, we have prepared a solution initially containing Ca The results ( The depression of calcite is often achieved by the use of depressants such as quebracho and sodium silicate which are capable of adsorbing on calcite and rendering it hydrophilic and limiting its flotation ( The quebracho is a natural macromolecule belonging to the group of tannins and which is used to depress calcite ( The dielectric measurements show that the adsorption of quebracho on calcite does not modify the permittivity ( The difference in the dielectric behaviour of the adsorption of quebracho and oleate on calcite makes it possible to follow the depressing role of quebracho. When the calcite is initially equilibrated with solutions of oleate at different concentrations and then in the presence of quebracho, we observe a very significant decrease in the value of ε’ of the calcite/oleate system ( The flotation tests obtained with different oleate concentrations in the presence of quebracho are plotted in It is clear that the addition of quebracho on a pulp in the presence of oleate causes a decrease of ε’. This effect can be explained by an oleate/quebracho exchange at the surface or by coadsorption of quebracho and oleate. This reagent is often used industrially to depress calcite during the flotation of the smithsonite, fluorite, scheelite, apatite and celestite ( The dielectrical measurements show no change of dielectric constant after addition of collector in the presence of sodium silicate. We find the same phenomenon which is observed in the case of quebracho ( These reagents of flotation of the non-sulphurous ores generally act by electrostatic effect ( The results in The analysis of the phenomena of adsorption by high-frequency dielectric applied to the pulp of calcite confirms the interest of this technique to characterize the interface solid/solution. It is clear that adsorption of complexing collector (sodium oleate) increases the dielectric permittivity of the mineral pulp. The interaction of electrostatic nature (dodecylamine and dodecylsufate) does not lead to any variation. The method is also effective for the study of the effect of depressants such as quebracho and sodium silicate.