Novel carboxyl hydroxamic acids compounds, including 2-carboxyl-6-methylcyclohexane carboxamic acid (CMCA), 2-carboxymethyl-decylen-4-yl hydroxamic acid (CDHA), and 2-carboxymethyl-tetradecen-4-yl hydroxamic acid (CTHA) were synthesized, and the flotation behaviors of diaspore, kaolinite and illite were investigated by using these compounds as collectors. The adsorption mechanism of CTHA on the surface of diaspore, kaolinite and illite was conducted by zeta-potential, adsorption amount and FTIR spectra measurement. The interaction of CTHA on the diaspore surface may be mainly dominated by the chemical adsorption; however, the adsorption of CTHA on kaolinite or illite is mainly dominated by the physical one.Aluminosilicate minerals, such as kaolinite and illite, are usually present in bauxite. In order to remove these aluminosilicates from bauxite and raise the Al The pure minerals of diaspore, kaolinite and illite were obtained from Henan province in China, hand-picked and ground in porcelain mill with agate ball to pass 74 Flotation tests were carried out in a XFG-35 flotation machine with 35 The adsorption amounts were constructed by using the rest method and expressed as: The infrared spectra of minerals samples conditioned with or without collector were obtained by the Model FTIR-750 infrared spectrophotometer from Nicolet Co., USA. The infrared spectra were recorded from 400 Zeta-potential was determined by a Delsa-440SX zeta-potential instrument (Brookhaven Corporation, USA). The concentration of solids in the mineral dispersion was about 0.01% by using 1 Flotation tests were conducted to determine the collecting performance of the collectors. The effect of pH value on the flotation recovery of the three minerals using 2 The effect of collector concentration on the flotation recovery of the three minerals was carried out in the concentration from 2 In order to understand why CTHA has markedly different collecting capacity for the three minerals, the adsorption amount of CTHA on the surface of minerals were measured in the concentration of 2.0 The FTIR spectra of minerals conditioned with and without 2.0 To identify the interaction essence of the collector on the three minerals, CTHA was chosen to further investigate the influence on the zeta-potential of the minerals. The isoelectric point (IEP) is 6.25, 3.68, and 2.80 for diaspore, kaolinite and illite, respectively. In the presence or absence of CTHA, the negative of the minerals increases with the increasing of the pulp pH value in the range of 2–9; however, there is nearly no increase in the pulp pH value above 9. Meanwhile, the corresponding zeta-potential of diaspore, kaolinite, and illite in the presence of CTHA is lower than that without CTHA, where the results indicate that CTHA is adsorbed on the surface of minerals, resulting in the increase of the negative charges on the minerals surfaces. Regarding the adsorption amount of CTHA on the surface of minerals, infrared spectra of the minerals untreated and treated by CTHA and the zeta-potential of the pulp, the adsorption mechanism between mineral and collector can be suggested. That is, the collector on the diaspore surface is mainly a chemical adsorption while its adsorption on kaolinite or illite is mainly dominated by a physical one. According to the Stern–Gouy double-layer theory, it is assumed that the forming mechanism for the chemical adsorption of the CTHA on the diaspore surface. The collector CTHA possess the structure of chelating collectors containing carboxyl (–COOH) and hydroxamino group (–CONHOH), the pKa values for the –COOH/–COO The floatability of three minerals using CMCA, CDHA and CTHA as a collector is in the order of diaspore The research is supported by the