Nickel base superalloys provide significant improvements relative to the limitations in the areas of creep resistance, oxidation, low cycle and high cycle fatigue resistance. Since these materials are being pushed to limits of their capability in gas turbine applications, accurate mathematical models are needed to predict the service lives of the high temperature components to prevent unscheduled outages due to sudden mechanical failures. The objective of the work presented in this paper is aimed at developing a methodology to perform creep cavity growth simulation in the components fabricated by the alloy IN 718. This work mainly focuses on studying the influence of surface diffusion and the grain boundary diffusion as competing mechanisms in creep cavity growth. The differential equations developed by considering the contribution from either of these diffusion modes have been solved numerically using a finite difference scheme to track the interface explicitly during the cavity growth process in the specified conditions of stress and temperature. The results of the simulation have been validated by performing creep and stress rupture tests of IN 718 samples.Remaining creep life assessment of IN 718 alloys is one of the important areas, especially in aerospace applications. IN 718 alloys possess excellent creep rupture strength at a temperature up to 700 The intensely competitive nature of the aero engine market has led to rapid development in the area of Remaining Life Assessment of components fabricated by IN 718 alloy. Various simulation techniques such as Molecular Dynamics At temperature as high as 0.7 Therefore, the present article focuses on the growth regime of the creep cavities by taking in to account the surface diffusion as well as the grain boundary diffusion as the competing mechanisms which influence the cavity growth process. The differential equation thus formulated has been solved numerically using an explicit finite difference scheme to track the boundary of the cavity during growth. One may reason the consideration of surface diffusion as the controlling process, since it is faster than the grain boundary diffusion. The reason behind considering surface diffusion as a competing mechanism to grain boundary is grain boundary sliding. Though grain boundary sliding has not been explicitly dealt with in the present model, one of its consequences is that it reduces the grain boundary diffusion path length thereby increasing the rate of grain boundary diffusion. All this time (during growth of cavity) the surface diffusion length keeps on increasing, reducing the rate of surface diffusion (to a lesser extent) as shown in The mathematical model for creep cavity growth in polycrystalline materials is shown in Considering an array of equally spaced two dimensional cavities along a grain boundary experiencing tension as shown in As per Herring's classical theory The driving force In general, the traction distribution in the grain boundary, just after loading, exhibits the stress concentration expected near the tip of the cavity. However, for closely spaced cavities this traction distribution changes quickly as atoms flow from the cavity surface into the grain boundary ahead of the tip of the cavity. Thus, after a very short time, the traction distribution in the grain boundary reaches a steady state. Because these transients are so much faster than the overall process of cavity growth, we assume that the steady-state traction distribution is maintained at all times. One can ignore transient diffusion in the grain boundary and treat only the steady state, wherein the accumulation of matter in the grain boundary is accommodated by uniform growth of the neighboring crystals. Thus, the steady-state traction distribution in the grain boundary can be found by taking The series coupling of the diffusional processes on the cavity surface and in the grain boundary requires continuity in the chemical potential and the atomic flux at the cavity tip. One can therefore, obtain chemical potential and atomic flux continuity conditions expressed by The above two equations can be written as, On eliminating For a more detailed description of ‘ The symmetry of the problem allows us to analyze only the first quadrant of the cavity surface. The initial surface is discretized by a set of ‘ The magnitude of the curvature, The sign of the curvature is found by drawing a straight line between the anterior and posterior neighbors of the corresponding point; if this point is located at the right of the line, then a positive sign is given to the curvature and vice versa. The normal velocity The velocity The time increment Stress rupture tests for commercially available IN 718 alloy were conducted at 650 The rupture times for all the tests were recorded in Constant load type creep tests were also done at a stress of 450 For conducting optical and scanning electron microscopy of the creep and stress ruptured samples, 5 Microstructural analysis of the electropolished samples was performed using Optical microscope (Letallux) and Scanning Electron Microscope (QUANTA 200 F) to observe the creep cavities and analyze their growth morphologies.  The time evolution of the cavity surface calculated with the above described numerical method is shown in The rupture time was plotted against normalized stress ‘ When the cavities are loaded in tension stress and the chemical potential of the atoms in the grain boundary is sufficiently lower, atoms transports from the cavity surface to the grain boundary. This process leads to cavity growth as shown in  The scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of IN 718 sample as shown in The rupture time as well as the aspect ratio (experimental) was compared with results of the simulation, as described in the previous section (numerical methods) to calculate the value of ‘ The aspect ratio obtained by simulation of cavity growth in the above two cases presented (a) Histograms obtained for creep cavity aspect ratio distribution in case of creep sample subjected to  A finite-difference method was formulated for simulating the evolutions of the grain-boundary cavities under external tension, which are controlled by the combined action of surface diffusion and grain boundary diffusion. The numerical example demonstrates the capability of the method and the program. The finite-difference simulation results indicate that the rate of cavity growth is related to the diffusivity ratio of grain boundary and surface diffusion, cavity spacing, the applied stress and also the state of applied stress. It should be noted that the finite difference method proposed in the present work for simulating grain boundary cavity growth generalizes to creep cavity growth regimes in other alloys as well. The proposed finite difference method was verified against the creep and stress ruptured Inconel 718 alloy samples. The rupture time found by the proposed finite difference numerical method compares to the experimental stress rupture times within the acceptable percentage of error. The cavity shape found at intermittent times using numerical methods also resembles the corresponding cavity surface morphology as seen in the scanning electron micrographs of the stress ruptured samples of IN 718 alloy. Based on the numerical method, a competing mechanism of surface diffusion and grain boundary diffusion has been observed. The ‘ Though the grain boundary sliding has not been explicitly modeled in the proposed methodology, one of the reasons why the grain boundary diffusion (generally considered to be slow) is able to compete with surface diffusion (considered to be fast) is due to the assistance of grain boundary sliding mechanism. As a result of grain boundary sliding the grain boundary diffusion length reduces at a rapid rate. This means that the atoms need to diffuse over a shorter length, which results in increase in the rate of grain boundary diffusion. The surface diffusion length, at the same time, keeps on increasing and surface diffusion rate therefore decreases, though to a lesser extent. The results of finite difference simulations need to be verified by finite element simulations. For such comparisons, commercial FEM packages such as ABAQUS can be used to model creep cavitation growth in commercial alloys. To account for the grain boundary sliding, rectangular cohesive element may be placed in between the grain boundaries, grains being assumed to be hexagonal in this case. Cohesive elements are useful in modeling adhesives and bonded interfaces. The constitutive response of these elements depends on the specific application and is based on certain assumptions about the deformation and stress states that are appropriate for each application area. The effect of precipitates and their role in the influencing the growth of creep cavities is another area which can be worked upon. The interaction of creep with fatigue at high temperature needs to be modeled for more accurate determination of remaining life of a component as majority of the components working at high temperature are also subjected to cyclic loading. The authors thank Prof. Vakil Singh, Department of Metallurgical Engineering (IT-BHU) for sharing the experimental data of creep tests and encouragement to carry out the present work. Helpful discussion with Mr. Abhishek Sharma (IT-BHU) is gratefully acknowledged.