The strength and deformability of rock masses transected by non-persistent joints are controlled by complex interactions of joints and intact rock bridges. The emergence of synthetic rock mass (SRM) numerical modelling offers a promising approach to the analysis of rock masses, but has not been rigorously compared with actual physical experiments. In this work, SRM modelling by the discrete element software PFC3D is used to investigate the effect of geometric parameters of joints on the rock mass failure mechanism, unconfined compressive strength and deformation modulus. Firstly, a validation study is undertaken to investigate the ability of SRM modelling to reproduce rock mass failure modes and strength as determined by uniaxial and biaxial compression testing in the laboratory. The numerical analyses agree well with physical experimentation at low confining pressure. A sensitivity study is then undertaken of the effect of joint configuration parameters on the failure mode, unconfined compressive strength and deformation modulus of the rock mass. Five failure modes are predicted to occur: intact rock, planar, block rotation, step-path and semi-block generation. It is found that the failure mode is determined principally by joint orientation and step angle and the joint orientation with respect to principal stress direction is the parameter with the greatest influence on rock mass properties.A common problem in rock mechanics is the reliable estimation of mechanical properties of rock masses consisting of intact rock and discontinuities. Estimation of the strength and deformability of rock masses has complexity in nature and this difficulty increases for non-persistent joints due to interaction of rock bridges on the strength and failure mode. According to ISRM standards, for quantitative description of discontinuities in the case of rock slopes and dam foundations, it is very important to estimate the degree of persistency, especially for discontinuities oriented unfavourably. The degree of persistency determines how much intact material contributes to stability. Much has been done to investigate the behaviour of persistent joints while studies of rock masses with non-persistent joints are few. At present, the combined effect of joints and intact rock bridges is not well understood and more studies are required to improve the understanding of their behaviour. Response of the rock mass with non-persistent joints varies depending on joint configuration and loading conditions. The behaviour of each joint is affected by the presence of other joints. Analytical approaches have been used to predict the behaviour of non-persistent rock masses. The Jennings criterion Laboratory experiments on artificial rock-like materials have been widely used to understand the complex mechanical behaviour of non-persistent jointed rock masses, but preparing samples with similar properties to a real rock mass is very difficult. A large number of studies has been performed on offset rock joints with two or three flaws in various materials The emergence of Synthetic Rock Mass (SRM) analysis in 2007 was a step forward in numerical modelling of rock masses. SRM is implemented in PFC software and has the ability to simulate fracture propagation in a rock mass with non-persistent joints under selected loading regimes. The potential power of this approach is that rock mass response can be derived based on relatively simple particle contact laws at joints and in rock rather than more complex constitutive models which should be pre-defined by the user. Joints are considered explicitly in three dimensions and the brittleness of the rock sample can be captured. Furthermore, this approach has the ability to consider fracture initiation, propagation and coalescence during the test procedure and slipping of joint surfaces which suits this approach to the aims of the current research. Although previous experimental studies provide a general understanding of the effect of some geometrical parameters on the failure mode and strength of a non-persistent rock mass, the effect of each individual parameter has not been quantified. The deformation behaviour of non-persistent rock mass has not been studied comprehensively. The aim of this paper is to understand the mechanisms controlling strength, deformation, crack initiation, propagation and coalescence for multiple planes of a single set of non-persistent joints. The analysis is carried out in two stages. In the first, a validation study comparing SRM models to physical experiments on jointed artificial rock conducted by Prudencio and Van Sint Jan The findings reported in this paper can be useful in the stability analysis of rock structures such as slopes and underground openings, for which the pre-existing joints play a crucial role in the overall stability of rock structures. Results provide a fundamental understanding of the failure mechanism (crack initiation, crack propagation and crack coalescence) of non-persistent joints. A conceptual model for a jointed rock mass with multiple planes of non-persistent joints is shown in Prudencio and Van Sint Jan A synthetic rock mass model (SRM) consists of a bonded particle model (BPM), transected by a discrete fracture network (DFN) in which joints are represented by the smooth joint (SJ) model. In a bonded particle model (BPM), the intact material is represented by a composite of separate particles bonded together. At particle contacts there are two sets of springs to provide the normal and shear stiffness ( By breakage of bonds under loading, micro-cracks are produced in the BPM and macroscopic fractures are generated by their propagation and coalescence. Generally, the micro-parameters, referred to above, cannot be measured in a laboratory. The analysis of a problem is therefore a two stage process: firstly the values of micro-parameters are determined by trial and error to reproduce macro-properties as measured in the laboratory, and secondly these values are taken in the analysis to be carried out. The BPM has been shown to reproduce many features of rock behaviour such as uniaxial compressive strength ( Traditionally, joints have been generated in PFC by removing bonds between particles lying on the joint plane and assigning a low coefficient of friction to unbonded particles A typical example of a smooth joint model in two dimensions is shown in By the creation of a smooth joint, a set of elastic springs is distributed uniformly over a disc shaped part of the contact plane centred at the contact point. The area Force and relative displacement can be expressed in local coordinates of the joint plane; SRM modelling has been employed in several rock mass studies, such as determination of the scale effect The aim of this section is to explore the ability of SRM modelling to reproduce actual values of uniaxial compressive strength (UCS), biaxial strength and failure mode of jointed rock masses with non-persistent joints recorded in laboratory experiments of Prudencio and Van Sint Jan As explained in Section After calibration of the micro-parameters, ten series of jointed rock mass numerical models with different joint configurations are generated and uniaxial and biaxial compression tests undertaken. A typical SRM model is shown in In order to calibrate BPM micro-parameters, cylindrical samples with diameter 50 Inverse modelling is used to calibrate micro-mechanical properties of BPM against experimental uniaxial and triaxial compression tests carried out by Prudencio and Van Sint Jan The smooth joint parameters are normal stiffness In the numerical normal stiffness test, after generation of the sample, lateral restraints are removed and a horizontal joint plane is inserted at mid height of the sample ( In the numerical direct shear test, a constant normal load is applied vertically to the upper block and a servo control mechanism is used to keep the normal load constant during the shearing process After calibration of the BPM and SJ parameters, prismatic numerical samples identical to physical samples of Prudencio and Van Sint Jan In the numerical uniaxial and biaxial tests, the specimens are loaded by pairs of opposing frictionless walls. These walls are part of the material vessel which is used for generation of the BPM. The top and bottom walls act as loading platens which move with a constant displacement rate of 0.0075 After generation of the ten SRM series, numerical uniaxial compression tests are carried out and results compared with the experiments of Prudencio and Van Sint Jan Series A is the intact rock. Ten uniaxial tests on intact prismatic models with different randomly generated particle assemblies are carried out ( Results of all uniaxial compression tests for the numerical and experimental studies are presented in Uniaxial compressive strengths determined by numerical and experimental tests are normalised by the The results show the ability of the SRM approach to reproduce the In series B, C, D and E the only parameter varied is the joint orientation In series F, G and H samples fail in step-path mode. In that mode, wing cracks initiate from the joint tips and propagate perpendicular to the joints and connect to other joint tips of a parallel system. Failure occurs by tensile breakage of rock bridges and sliding along the joints ( In series D, F and G all geometrical parameters are the same except the joint step angle In series H, the lengths of joints, rock bridges and spacing are half of those of series G ( In series I, the joint spacing Although an investigation of the biaxial behaviour of rock masses with non-persistent joints is beyond the scope of current research, it is of interest to investigate the ability of the SRM approach to reproduce the experimental results obtained by Prudencio and Van Sint Jan Results of biaxial tests for intact prismatic samples (series A) are shown in Due to the existing problem in the BPM, biaxial numerical tests for series B to J are undertaken at low intermediate principal stresses ( Predictions of other failure criteria for rock masses with non-persistent joints are also presented in From the results of this study, it is concluded that the SRM model can reasonably reproduce observed laboratory results for uniaxial and biaxial tests at low intermediate principal stress. However, when the intermediate principal stress is increased, the numerical and experimental results diverge. In order to find the influence of each geometrical parameter on the failure mode, rock mass uniaxial compressive strength PFC computes contact forces between particles and from those forces computes equivalent continuum stress in the bonded particle model. As the uniaxial load is increased, bonds between particles fail and the number of such failures that have occurred in some stage of loading may be taken as a measure of accumulated micro-cracking or damage to the rock mass Five failure modes are observed in the numerical uniaxial compression tests: intact rock failure, planar failure, step-path failure, block rotation and semi-block generation.  Block rotation: In this failure mode, the low stress zones (blue ovals in   To consider the effect of joint orientation The results show that joint orientation has a significant effect on The effect of joint persistency Therefore, it is concluded that the decrease of joint persistency results in an increase of The effect of joint spacing At At The failure mode for all At Joint step angle At These results show that the failure mode is mostly controlled by the joint step angle To consider the effect of joint aperture SRM modelling using PFC3D software is used to explore how joint configuration parameters affect the mechanical behaviour of a non-persistent jointed rock mass under uniaxial compression. First, a validation study is undertaken to investigate the ability of SRM modelling to reproduce the uniaxial and biaxial strength and failure mode of a jointed rock mass. Ten series of jointed rock masses with different joint configurations are generated and results of numerical analysis compared with physical experiments. The SRM models show good agreement with physical experiments in reproducing the failure mode, An extensive series of numerical experiments is undertaken to investigate the effect of joint orientation At At At The authors would like to express their sincere appreciation and gratitude to Dr. John Watson for his comments and suggestions in this paper. Special thanks to David Potyondy, Mathew Pierce, Xavier Garcia and Loren Lorig from Itasca Consulting group for their invaluable technical help.