The extraction of rubidium from gold waste from the Mouteh processing plant in Iran by a three-step process (acid washing, followed by salt roasting and water leaching) was optimized. The acid washing step for removal of impurities was found to be optimal at 85°C and 5h, using 5M nitric acid. Factors effecting roasting operation were then optimized by a series of initial experiments, then using response surface methodology (RSM) based on a central composite design (CCD). Rb extraction of 90.95% was obtained with a mass ratio of GW/Na2SO4/CaCl2⋅2H2O of 1.00:0.11:0.45 at 910°C for 30min. Water leaching of the roasted mixture resulted in 97.14% Rb extraction under optimum conditions, viz. a liquid/solid ratio of 1.69 at 58.5°C for 31.4min. The proposed correlations using RSM showed good agreement with the experimental data.The Mouteh gold plant is one of the largest gold processing projects in Iran. In this plant, gold is extracted from the ore using a cyanidation process. Due to the type of the ore and operation, some toxic compounds including arsenic and mercury are transferred to the wastewater. Pollutant accumulation in the tailings dam can result in serious environmental impacts in the long term. Nevertheless, these gold wastes (GW) contain valuable metals such as rubidium, titanium, cerium, neodymium, lanthanum, etc. In addition to creating value added products for the plant, extraction of these elements as by-products can reduce the considerable volumes of waste. Rubidium (Rb) is a rare alkali metal in the first group of the periodic table, which was discovered in 1861 by German chemists R. W. Bunsen and G. R. Kirchhoff using flame spectroscopy. The most striking physical properties of this silvery-white element include softness, malleability and low melting point (39 The application of Rb in ion engines for space vehicles, photocells, methanol and alcohol production, in analytical chemistry for identification of manganese, zirconium and noble metals, as well as many other applications, indicates the unique properties of this valuable element ( The annual world production of Rb is limited to 2–4 Rb is not found as main component in any mineral and is mainly produced together with cesium (Cs) as a by-product of lithium (Li) minerals processing ( The processing of Li minerals includes upgrading the ground ores using beneficiation techniques such as gravity concentration, flotation and wet magnetic separation (  The present study was undertaken with the aim of achieving maximum rubidium extraction from GW from an environmentally friendly process. An attempt was made to optimize the extraction conditions of potentially valuable metals in a three-step process (acid washing, followed by salt roasting and water leaching) using response surface methodology (RSM) based on central composite design (CCD). The representative sample was obtained from six trenches each 2 According to XRD analysis, GW consisted of major phases of quartz (SiO The roasting operation was conducted in a muffle furnace (KSL-1200X-M, MTI corporation) at temperatures ranging from 500 CCD is an efficient experimental design that allows a reasonable amount of information to be sampled using a minimum number of experiments. In the CCD method, Experimental results obtained from the CCD are modeled by a second-order polynomial in independent factors The goodness of fit is measured by the value of correlation coefficient ( In this study, the analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed using the Design-Expert software package (version 7.0.0) from Stat-Ease, Inc., USA. Optimized conditions were estimated using the software's numerical and graphical optimization tools. To avoid the impurities such as Fe, Mg, Ca, Mn and Al, which have a considerable negative effect on Rb extraction from the leach liquor, acid washing of GW was applied using various acids. Nitric acid had a negligible effect on solubility of Rb and led to the highest levels of impurity removal. Therefore, further investigations were done with HNO To determine the effectiveness of chemical agents on the roasting efficiency, a series of experiments were conducted at 850 The ore undergoes two main processes to yield water-soluble RbCl from the calcination process, viz. solid state chlorination via the calcium salt, and sodium ion substitution ( The effect of mass ratio of GW/Na Calcium chloride was used as solid chlorination and sintering agent in the study. So a suitable amount of calcium chloride should be added. It can be observed that the Rb extraction efficiency increases up to a GW/CaCl In order to study the effect of roasting time and temperature upon rubidium extraction, a series of experiments were carried out using a mass ratio of 1.00:0.10:0.50. The leaching results, shown in A significant increase in Rb extraction efficiency is obtained by increasing the roasting temperature from 750 to 910 The comparison of surface morphologies in Roasting optimization was carried at the lowest Na Based on the Design-Expert results, the best model included quadratic and 2-factor interaction terms. The ANOVA is presented in The ANOVA results indicate a model The high correlation coefficient (0.9961) of the model, The correlation proposed for the roasting optimization process in terms of coded factors is as follows:  The Design-Expert software predicts a maximum Rb extraction of 92.35% for minimum mass ratio of GW/Na XRD analysis was used to determine the final phases of the mixture roasted under optimum conditions. According to the results, the roasted mixture consisted of major phases of quartz (SiO Salt roasting was followed by water leaching. The CCD method (face centered) was applied for optimizing the effective factors in this operation. L/S ratio (A), time (B) and temperature (C) were chosen as the independent factors. The coded and actual factors for CCD along with the Rb extraction rates are shown in The ANOVA and regression results of the model are presented in The second-order response function for Rb leaching can be expressed in terms of coded factors as follows: The effects of the three independent variables on the Rb extraction using a three-dimensional response surface map are presented in The optimum leaching conditions predicted are presented in Chemical composition of the filtrate under the optimum condition is presented in The chemical composition of the leaching residue is shown in The aim of this study was the extraction of the rare alkali metal Rb from GW from the Mouteh gold plant in Iran and optimization of acid washing-salt roasting-water leaching process. First, various acids were used in the acid washing operation to remove impurities. Highest amounts of impurities removal was achieved using 5 The authors wish to thank the Tarbiat Modarres University for providing the facilities to perform this research, and the Presidential Scholars and Technologists Fund for financial support.