The kinetics of deagglomeration in diluted suspensions of goethite nanopowder, as well as the rheology and morphology of the resulting suspensions, strongly depends on pH. At pH 3, nanopowder can be dispersed as separate nanoparticles, and the resulting suspension is Newtonian, with the viscosity only marginally higher than the viscosity of water. At pH between 5 and 12, nanoparticles tend to reaggregate and form weak aggregates/flocs. Morphology changes from a Newtonian suspension of primary nanoparticles to a non-Newtonian, shear-thinning suspension of large, porous, interconnected flocs with the yield stress reaching a maximum at an isoelectric point. The effect of pH on morphology and rheology is reversible, and as pH is reduced to 3, the suspension becomes Newtonian, with viscosity marginally higher than the viscosity of water. The rheological models based on DLVO theory do not allow prediction of the effect of pH on viscosity and yield stress, but the flow curves of goethite suspensions can be described by a fractal model with five adjustable parameters.Goethite (hydrous ferric oxide The effect of the volume fraction and pH on the rheology and morphology of the suspensions of synthetic goethite nanopowder was investigated by Blakey and co-workers Diluted suspensions of goethite nanopowder are used in pigments, catalysts, coatings, and flocculants The experimental rig shown schematically in Goethite nanopowder of bulk density 4000 kg/m Rheological properties of the suspensions at different pH were measured using a stress-controlled rheometer (AR 1000, TA Instruments, UK) with parallel plate geometry. Morphology of goethite suspensions was analyzed using optical microscopy, environmental scanning electron microscopy (ESEM), and cryogenic scanning electron microscopy (Cryo-SEM), allowing analysis of the samples in their “natural” hydrated state. Nanoparticles/aggregates size distributions were measured with a MasterSizer 2000 (Malvern Instruments, UK) and zeta potential was measured using a ZetaMaster (Malvern Instruments, UK). In the first set of experiments, the effect of pH (between 3 and 12) and energy density (between 14 and 412 MJ/m In the second set of experiments, reversibility of the changes of rheology/morphology induced by the changes of pH was investigated. A 1.25 vol% goethite suspension at pH 3 was circulated through the flow cell and the stirred vessel for 1 h at an ultrasound power input of 40 W. After that time, pH was increased stepwise to 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, and 12, and at each pH the suspension was circulated through the cell for 20 min. Next, pH was reduced stepwise from 12 to 9, 7, 6, 5, and finally to 3 and at each pH the suspension was again circulated for 20 min. The flow rate and power input were constant throughout the experiment. The pressure drop in the pipe connecting the cell with the stirred vessel was continuously recorded allowing on-line estimation of viscosity changes. At each pH, small samples of the suspension were withdrawn and rheology, morphology, and particle size distributions were analyzed. In the third set of experiments, the effect of volume fraction (0.25, 0.75, and 1.25 vol%) of nanopowder on the rheology and morphology of the suspension at the natural goethite pH (of the order of 7) was investigated. The zeta potential of goethite nanoparticles as a function of pH has recently been discussed in detail by the authors Rheology, morphology, and particle size distributions in goethite suspensions at pH 3 have recently been discussed in detail by the authors Transient particle/aggregate size distributions at pH 5 ( The total energy density necessary to completely disperse nanopowder at pH 5 was the same as at pH 3. However, at pH 5, aggregates/flocs between 5 and 20 μm were observed with the optical microscope at zero shear ( At pH 6, transient size distributions and morphology of suspension ( At an initial stage of deagglomeration (energy input of 69 MJ/m This is also confirmed by the analysis of the transient morphology of the suspension, shown in Agglomeration of fine particles into relatively large, loosely packed aggregates can be explained by further reduction of electrostatic repulsive forces, as indicated by the reduction of zeta potential from 30 mV at pH 5 to approximately 24 mV at pH 6. The presence of those relatively large (median diameter on the order of 8 μm) and porous aggregates strongly affected the rheology of the suspension, as discussed in Section Transient aggregate size distributions and morphology of suspension at its natural pH As in the previous case, primary particles that eroded from the surfaces of large aggregates tend to reaggregate and form large, loosely packed flocs/aggregates, shown in There is rather good agreement between the size of the aggregates estimated from the image (size between 5 and 20 μm) and the size measured by MasterSizer (median diameter on the order of 8 μm). Again, simultaneous breakage and aggregation during ultrasonication can be explained by further reduction of the repulsive electrostatic force at pH 7 (zeta potential ∼ 20 mV) and pH 10 (zeta potential ∼ −15 mV). At those values of pH, electrostatic repulsive forces are clearly too low to prevent reaggregation of the primary particles. Transient size distributions and morphology of the suspension shown in It appears that at this pH, the simultaneous breakage and reaggregation also occurred but the intensity of reaggregation increased, leading to multimodal size distributions with the first mode corresponding to the primary nanoparticles (median diameter on the order of 100 nm), the second mode corresponding to primary aggregates (median diameter on the order of 1 μm), and the third mode corresponding to the secondary aggregates (median diameter on the order of 20 μm). The largest aggregates were also detected by optical microscopy ( The presence of large, stable aggregates at pH 12 cannot be explained within the framework of classical DLVO theory All suspensions of acicular goethite nanoparticles with aspect ratio between 10 and 17 At higher pH, after the nanoparticles formed flocs, the suspensions became shear-thinning and apparent viscosity increased by five orders of magnitude at a low shear rate and between one and three orders of magnitude at a high shear rate. The drastic change of rheology at higher pH can be explained by the “apparent” increase of volume fraction of “solid” (flocs) and by the different shape such flocs assumed. The volume fraction of dispersed flocs at a constant mass of goethite nanoparticles depends on the porosity and size of those flocs. The size of the large flocs in The aggregated suspensions of goethite nanoparticles at pH The consistency constants From Recently, a more advanced rheological model taking into account the effect of volume fraction of aggregates ( Whereas both models fit experimental data reasonably well, neither of them allows qualitative explanation of such a strong effect of pH on the rheology of dilute suspensions as discussed above. It has been suggested In The relation between pH and yield stress shown in The relation between viscosity and pH is also unusual. The increase of pH from 3 to 5 leads to a drastic change of rheology from Newtonian, waterlike at pH 3 to non-Newtonian, strongly shear-thinning at pH 5. The viscosity at the lowest shear rate increases more than four orders of magnitude and at the highest shear rate viscosity increases by one order of magnitude ( Blakey et al. To gain a better understanding of the effect of pH on rheology and morphology of goethite suspensions, the reversibility of the changes induced by the change of pH discussed above has also been investigated. The suspension of goethite nanoparticles was circulated and ultrasonicated for 60 min at pH 3, ensuring that all large aggregates were broken into single nanoparticles. This was confirmed by ESEM images and measurements of particle size distributions. Next the pH was changed stepwise from 3 to 12 and the pressure drop in the pipe connecting the flow cell with the stirred vessel was continuously measured. At each pH, very small samples were withdrawn and the particles' size and morphology was analyzed. Typical results are shown in Up to pH 5, the viscosity of the suspension was practically the same as at pH 3 ( The changes of viscosity discussed above can be explained by changes of morphology induced by changes of pH. Weak, irregular flocs observed at pH 5 were transformed into more spherical, stronger aggregates of relatively high porosity at higher pH (see Most of the literature data on the rheology of suspensions of goethite nanopowders are related to rather concentrated systems (above 1 vol%) typical for processing of laterite slurries Even at a volume fraction of 0.25 vol%, goethite nanopowder tends to form an irregular, weak network of interconnected flocs ( The kinetics of deagglomeration of goethite nanopowder and the morphology and rheology of the resulting suspensions strongly depend on pH. At pH 3 (zeta potential 45 mV), goethite nanoparticles form stable Newtonian suspensions with viscosity marginally higher than the viscosity of water. In the range of pH between 5 and 10 (zeta potential between 30 and −15 mV), simultaneous breakage of the large aggregates and reagglomeration of the primary nanoparticles into weak, porous aggregates was observed. The suspensions become strongly shear-thinning, because the presence of those very porous aggregates increased the effective volume fraction of the dispersed phase. At pH 12 the absolute value of zeta potential was the same as at pH 3 (−45 mV), but the suspension contained nanoparticles, primary aggregates, and secondary aggregates (multimodal size distribution) and was also strongly shear-thinning. The results indicate that rheological models based on the DLVO model cannot be used to describe the rheology of suspensions of goethite nanoparticles. At natural pH, goethite nanoparticles tend to agglomerate and form shear-thinning suspensions at volume fractions as low as 0.25 vol%. The effect of pH on the morphology and rheology of the suspension of goethite nanopowder is fully reversible and can be exploited during the processing of such suspensions. This work is a part of PROFORM (“  Radius of primary particles, m Hamaker constant, J Constants defined by Eq. Diameter of particle, m Fractal dimension Distance between two particles, m Consistency constant, Pa s Mean coordination number Distance between pressure taps, m Power law index Pressure drop, Pa Flow rate, m Radius of connecting pipe, m Radius of aggregates, m Processing time, min Shear rate, s Relative permittivity, static dielectric constant, 80 for water at 26.7 °C Zeta potential, mV Viscosity, Pa s Continuous phase viscosity, Pa s Inverse Debye length, m Yield stress, Pa Volume fraction of solid Maximum concentration, at which viscosity is infinite