Background
                  Association of macromolecules particularly the role of proteins in urolithiasis has been studied for last few centuries, but still a complete profile of stone matrix proteins that mediate co-precipitation of uric acid and calcium oxalate has not been characterized. We isolated and characterize proteins from uric acid rich stone matrix, which have oxalate binding activity.
               
                  Methods
                  Matrix proteins were isolated from uric acid rich stone matrix using EDTA as a demineralizing agent. The radiolabelled solubilized proteins were fractionated with increasing ionic concentration by DEAE cellulose column chromatography to identify the oxalate binding protein. It was purified using Sephadex G-200 column chromatography. Amino acid composition was determined and monoclonal antibody was produced against the oxalate binding uric acid rich stone matrix protein. Urinary uric acid binding proteins were isolated from stone formers urine, their oxalate binding activity assayed and cross reactivity with the produced monoclonal antibody were checked using ELISA and Western blotting.
               
                  Results
                  Matrix on DEAE column chromatography elution yielded 3 protein peaks and they were named as fraction I, II and III among which fraction I had higher oxalate binding activity which was further purified with Sephadex G-200 column which yielded 2 protein peaks designated as Ia and Ib. Fraction Ib with molecular weight 29 kDa exhibited the maximum oxalate binding activity. Forty percent of this 29 kDa protein is comprised of basic amino acids. Monoclonal antibody (IgG1) was produced against the 29 kDa stone matrix protein. Urinary uric acid binding proteins were isolated from stone formers, 4 protein peaks were obtained named as fraction I to IV. Among them, fraction IV having molecular weight of ∼29 kDa cross reacted up to 85.6% with 29 kDa stone matrix protein. Moreover, urinary 29 kDa protein exhibited oxalate binding activity of 94.16±6.08 pmol/mg protein at pH 5.5.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The 29 kDa protein isolated from uric acid rich stone matrix and urine are one and the same, thereby insinuating that 29 kDa protein might play a major role in epitaxial deposition of calcium oxalate over uric acid core, consequently favoring the lithogenic events like uric acid and calcium oxalate nucleation, aggregation and retention.Anton von Hyde made the first observation in 1683 and reported that a gross structure of a calculus remained intact after the removal of crystalline portion and he named the framework of the stone as “matrix”. The current knowledge about the matrix composition is a heterogeneous material of about 60%–70% protein, 5%–10% non amino acid sugars, 2%–5% glucosamine, 6%–10% bound water and 8%–12% organic ash The complexity involved in the formation of calcium oxalate and uric acid stones are the co-precipitation of one salt over the other. This is an active area of investigation. The study of stone matrix and particularly about proteins that bind both calcium oxalate and uric acid will undoubtedly produce an answer for the formation of calcium oxalate containing uric acid stones and vice versa. We analyzed protein molecules that have oxalate and uric acid binding activities, in order to elucidate their potential role in calcium oxalate–uric acid urolithogenesis. Human renal stone and stone formers urine samples were collected from the Department of Urology, Stanley Medical College and Hospital, Chennai. The stones were washed with distilled water to free them from extraneous matter (blood, tissue, etc.) dried, weighed and pulverized with a mortar and pestle. Each stone sample was documented for its shape, size and weight. All the chemicals used were of analytical grade. The mineral content of the stone was determined quantitatively by wet chemical analysis Stones with high uric acid concentration were pooled, used for matrix isolation Approximately 2 mg of lyophilized protein was incubated at room temperature for 20 min with The oxalate bound protein fraction eluted on the DEAE cellulose column was concentrated and further purified by Sephadex G-200 (SG-200) column chromatography, using 0.01 mol/l Tris–HCl buffer. Two milliliters fractions were collected and the protein peak at A Oxalate binding of the protein fractions purified in the absence of One hundred microliters of purified protein was hydrolyzed in sealed tubes with 1.0 ml 6 mol/l HCl at 110 °C for 22 h. The residue was made up to one volume with sample diluent and the amino acids analyzed by Picotag amino acid analyzer Spleen cells from immunized BALB/c mice and SP Uric acid crystallization was induced in the stone formers urine using the procedure of Morse and Resnick The spectrophotometric crystallization assay was carried out using the method of Hess et al. The stone composition was obtained from wet chemical analysis of renal calculi by quantification of inorganic and organic crystalline components. Stones were segregated depending upon its major crystalline component. Calcium oxalate stones were constituted by approximately 50% oxalate, 30% calcium, 9% phosphorus and 4.5% uric acid. Uric acid calculi are composed of 45% uric acid, 20% calcium and 19% oxalate. Calcium phosphate stones were enriched with phosphorus (52%), calcium (29%), oxalate (12%) and uric acid (1%). Trace amount of magnesium (0.4%–0.5%) was found in all the types of stones ( The dialyzed EDTA extract were pretreated with Fraction I was further purified using Sephadex G-200 column. Two protein peaks were obtained ( Purification profile of uric acid stone matrix protein was calculated based on the oxalate binding activity at pH 5.5 (  Uric acid binding proteins were isolated from stone formers urine and resolved in SDS-PAGE. Four prominent bands were obtained corresponding to molecular weights of approximately 89, 56, 45, and 29 kDa ( The crude uric acid binding proteins were subjected to SDS-PAGE and the proteins were transferred to PVDF membrane. The membrane was processed with the monoclonal antibody produced against stone matrix protein. The uric acid binding protein isolated from human urine cross reacted with anti-29 kDa uric acid stone matrix protein ( The 29 kDa protein showed an inhibition of nucleation (16.51%) and promote the aggregation (− It is well recognized that organic constituents are ubiquitous in both physiological and pathological process and influence the mineralization processes Few research methods have been utilized for the extraction of proteins from renal stones starting from low strength EDTA buffers, electro elution and suspending the stone matrix in 10% acetic acid. Siddiqui et al. were not able to extract the protein intact from stone matrix using three different buffers Those macromolecules implicated in the crystallization processes have some form of binding activity, either through specific domains or anionic sites The 48 and 29 kDa uric acid rich stone matrix protein having oxalate binding activity are compared with the various matrix proteins involved in lithogenesis and they have a wide range of molecular weight. Nephrocalcin (14 kDa), Tamm–Horsfall glycoprotein (85 to 100 kDa), bikunin (35 kDa), prothrombin fragment I, human serum albumin (67 kDa), α Amino acid composition of nephrocalcin shows surplus of aspartic acid and glutamic acid residues, low levels of lysine, arginine and aromatic amino acids. Typically, the ratio of aspartic acid and glutamic acids to lysine and arginine approximates 8–10. The amino acid composition of uropontin, a known inhibitor also shows a high percentage of aspartate residues (207 residues However, amino acid composition analysis reveals the presence of lysine and arginine as predominant residues in 29 kDa stone matrix protein followed by glycine, alanine and then the aromatic amino acids. The total content of basic amino acids such as lysine, arginine and histidine is found to be 2.7 times higher than the content of acidic amino acids such as aspartic acid and glutamic acid. This is a striking feature distinguishing it from any of the inhibitory proteins so far isolated. Few oxalate binding proteins identified in our laboratory is found to have basic amino acids Even though 29 kDa protein is basic in nature, it also has considerable amount of glutamic acid and aspartic acid residues. The presence of calcium in uric acid crystals is encountered when glutamic acid is present in the simulation system Heterogeneous nucleation theory underlines the importance of uric acid crystals in calcium oxalate urolithiasis based on the plausibility of epitaxial growth of calcium oxalate on uric acid Most of the macromolecules included in the stones have been reported to be present in urine and their involvement in stone formation varies Uric acid binding proteins isolated from urine have molecular weights of 89, 56, 45 and 29 kDa as we reported previously The paper is dedicated to beloved (Late) Prof. R. Selvam, Head, Department of Medical Biochemistry, Dr. ALM PGIBMS, University of Madras, Taramani, Chennai.