Al–Cu matrix composites with a high volume fraction of alumina particles (41–62%) prepared by gas-pressure infiltration are characterized in tension and chevron-notch fracture testing before and after heat-treatment. Their mechanical behaviour is shown to depend markedly on the matrix structure and flow stress, and also on the nature and size of the reinforcement particles. Al–Cu matrix composites free of coarse Al2Cu matrix intermetallics and reinforced with 60 vol% high-strength polygonal alumina particles exhibit strength/toughness combinations that are in the same range as unreinforced high-strength aluminium alloys: the strength of the composites can be increased without decreasing their toughness. The results are interpreted on the basis of current cohesive zone models for crack propagation by microcavitation in elastic–plastic materials.In particulate ceramic reinforced metals produced by infiltration, the ceramic particles are packed to volume fractions of around 50% or more. This is significantly above ceramic loadings in corresponding composites produced by stir-casting or powder metallurgy, which have been the main focus of research on particle reinforced metals for structural applications: these generally contain at most 30% ceramic The present investigation is part of a systematic exploration of microstructure-property relations in model composites of aluminium-based matrices reinforced with fully packed monosized alumina particles. It was reported in a previous paper on the fracture of pure Al reinforced with densely packed alumina particles The role of the matrix flow stress on fracture of the composites was not assessed in this previous study, since all composites were made with a matrix of pure aluminium. We thus explore here the influence of increased matrix flow stress. This will obviously increase the yield strength of the composites, but is also likely to decrease their toughness: in structural materials having optimized microstructures, increased strength generally comes at the expense of decreased toughness (e.g., in optimally heat-treated aluminium alloys Relevant background may be sought in studies of the influence exerted by the matrix flow stress on the toughness of more conventional structural ceramic particle reinforced metals, containing 30% or less ceramic. The literature on the subject has been comprehensively reviewed by several authors In order to unambiguously assess the influence of the matrix flow stress on the toughness of high volume fraction PRMMCs, we have therefore selected a simple binary matrix that remains chemically inert with alumina and that can be made to feature a homogeneous microstructure free of embrittling compound formation. The well-known binary Al–Cu matrix system was chosen because: (i) a simple microstructure can be obtained, consisting of a single solid–solution phase of Cu in Al that is retained by quenching, and (ii) both liquid Al and Cu are inert in contact with alumina. Two compositions, namely Al–2wt%Cu and Al–4.5wt%Cu, were selected; these are within the solubility limit of Cu in Al near the eutectic The composites were produced by gas-pressure infiltration, as described in Reinforcing Al The second type of alumina powder, purchased from “Sumitomo Chemicals Co. Ltd.” (Tokyo, Japan), is of polygonal shape, free of angular apexes, and contains no surface defects discernible under the SEM. The average particle sizes explored for the polygonal powders were 25, 15, and 5 μm. The microstructural characteristics (particle type and size, volume fraction of the reinforcement, In a preliminary study of the influence of heat treatment on the mechanical response of Al–2wt%Cu matrix composites The as-cast condition (“F”). The solutionized and quenched condition (“T4”). Full solutionization was obtained for both matrices by treatment at 515 °C for at least 10 h; this was followed by a quench of each sample in water. To minimize the progress of natural ageing during storage between quenching and mechanical testing, these samples were kept in a refrigerator at −10 °C after quenching. Solutionization, quench and artificial aging to peak hardness at 100 °C (“T6”). Peak hardening times were determined experimentally, by treating a series of small composite coupons and measuring their hardness as a function of ageing time; the measured times for peak-hardening were in the range from 15 to 20 h for all composites. The relative increase in hardness upon peak-ageing (T6) compared with the solution treated and quenched (T4) condition was at most 15% for all composites. Hardness data can be found in Tensile curves were measured on dogbone-shaped tensile specimens according to the ASTM B577M-84 procedure. The specimens were cut by electro-discharge machining (EDM). Tests were carried out on a 25 kN hydraulic Instron (Canton, MA, USA) testing machine, at a nominal strain rate of 10 In contrast to the pure Al matrix composites, which necessitated the use of Square-section short bar specimens, with a thickness Testing procedures and data analysis were conducted according to the method specified in the Standard; in particular the compliance method was employed to calculate the plane-strain fracture toughness, A few composites were additionally tested by The arrested-crack technique described in In fractographic examination, using the backscattered electron mode of the SEM, microcavities nucleated by secondary intermetallic phases can be distinguished from microcavities nucleated between intact particles or by cracked particles. Fracture surfaces of a few composite specimens were also numerically reconstructed in three-dimensions, using the MEX software A typical optical micrograph of a polygonal particle reinforced composite (Al–2%Cu/15 μmAl all polygonal particle reinforced composites contain roughly the same volume fraction ceramic (between 57 and 61 vol%); there is thus no influence expected of the volume fraction ceramic in these composites; with angular alumina particles, the smallest (5 μm) particles stand out as producing the lowest volume fraction ceramic (41–42 vol%). Larger particles produce volume fractions closer to, albeit still somewhat lower than, what is found with polygonal particles (from 47 to 58 vol%). In as-cast composites, all particles are surrounded by numerous coarse intermetallic phases formed during matrix solidification, The influence of matrix Cu alloying on the tensile characteristics is dependent on the particle type. With angular reinforcements, the tensile response becomes increasingly brittle as the matrix Cu content increases. This is illustrated for the 35 μm particle size reinforced composites in Similar variations are also found with polygonal reinforcements; however, the composite tensile elongations at fracture remain near or above 1% with these higher-performance reinforcements: a tensile elongation in the range 1.5–2% is for instance measured with the Al–2%CuT4/25 μmAl A full listing of chevron-notch fracture toughness data (fracture toughness For a given reinforcement type, the toughness is strongly influenced by solution heat-treatment; it is, on the other hand, practically unaffected by subsequent peak-ageing. This is illustrated in Once the matrix has been solutionized to form a single solid–solution phase, the fracture toughness of the composites is found to increase with increasing matrix Cu content. Strength and toughness can thus increase together in these materials when they are optimally heat-treated. An illustration of this behaviour is presented by the raw data in The specimen size requirement was fulfilled for all composites except Al–2%CuT4/15 μmAl   Consistency was verified by comparing the toughness data with those from As was justified in The following trends emerge from the present toughness data, plotted in (i) As-cast composites are all less tough than corresponding heat-treated composites; compare (ii) In the T4 and T6 conditions, the toughness increases slightly when the Cu concentration in the matrix rises from 2% to 4.5%, (iii) Peak-aging after solutionization does not affect the toughness significantly (compare (iv) In angular particle composites, after heat-treatment the toughness increases as the average particle size increases from 5 to 10 μm, for which a peak value is obtained, (v) In all heat-treatment conditions (F, T4 and T6), for all particle sizes and for both alloyed matrices, polygonal particle composites are significantly tougher than corresponding angular particle composites, (vi) Within experimental error, the toughness of polygonal particle reinforced composites increases with increasing average particle size for the range of sizes explored here, (vii) Although this is not the only relevant parameter, it can be noted that increasing toughness does not come with decreasing volume fraction ceramic ( 5 μm angular particle composites, which contain only around 41 vol% ceramic, are among the most brittle; 10 μm angular particle composites are the toughest among angular composites in both T4 and T6 conditions, Polygonal particle composites contain the most ceramic (59 The influence of particle volume fraction on composite toughness is thus minor in comparison with that of other parameters such as particle size, matrix composition and heat-treatment condition, or particle quality. Crack profiles along crack paths and in the crack-tip process zone are presented in In polygonal particle composites the dominant mode of failure varies with the Cu content and with the heat-treatment condition. In 15 μm polygonal particle reinforced Al–2%Cu, matrix voiding is the dominant mode of failure at all heat-treatment conditions, This transition in fracture micromechanisms is also evident in the polygonal 25 μm alumina reinforced composites. With Al–2%Cu For the finer, 5 μm polygonal alumina composites, matrix voiding remains the main fracture micromechanism whatever the Cu concentration and the heat-treatment. An example is the Al–4.5%CuT4/5 μmAl In as-cast composites a large amount of Al Two contrasts emerge from the present data: (i) between composites reinforced with angular and polygonal particles on one hand and (ii) between composites with an as-cast and a heat-treated matrix on the other. The importance of the particle nature is obvious from the data: as was found with a pure aluminium matrix When the matrix is in the as-cast condition, the composite toughness decreases as the matrix flow stress increases, Such a simultaneous increase in composite strength and toughness with increasing matrix flow stress is a shift in composite properties towards globally improved mechanical performance. This is illustrated in Strength/toughness values for current high-strength aerospace aluminium alloys are also plotted in Toughening mechanisms of these composites are examined in (i) (ii) (iii) (iv) Cohesive zone modeling (CZM) of elastic–plastic fracture For The contrast between composites with an as-cast matrix and those with a heat-treated (T4 or T6) matrix is then easily explained. As seen, as-cast composites are significantly less tough; this is summarized in The absence of brittle intermetallics in the composites is, thus, an important factor for optimization of their mechanical performance. This conclusion parallels what has been found for lower volume fraction particle reinforced metals: brittle intermetallics, formed for example after overaging, are known to degrade the toughness of structural powder-metallurgy or stir-cast ceramic particle reinforced metals containing up to 30 vol% ceramic Once weak intermetallics are dissolved, voids nucleate within the matrix between particles under high stress triaxiality, regardless of matrix alloying. Hardening the matrix need then not prevent the cohesive law stress The average dimple height The data show that the composite toughness remains roughly constant as the matrix is alloyed, The limit to improvements in global composite performance that can be achieved by matrix alloying are largely set by the particles: as the matrix flow stress increases so does the stress experienced by the particles near the crack tip. Above a certain level, which depends on intrinsic particle properties, the ceramic phase will begin to crack extensively, lowering the local work of fracture It was shown in In the T6 condition, Al–4.5wt% Cu composites reinforced with 25 μm polygonal and 35 μm angular alumina particles both feature around 75% cracked particles along the crack path, This observation can be rationalized using the simple model given in In fact, it is the neat constancy of Still, despite the lack of a constant proportional relation between the local and the global fracture energies in these composites, trends with changing particle characteristics are globally as expected from their influence on the local fracture energy, increasing the intrinsic particle strength, leading to a reduced fraction of broken particles along the crack path, increases the composite toughness, increasing the particle diameter at first increases the composite toughness until the influence of particle fracture becomes dominant, A similar trend of increasing toughness with increasing particle size (generally accompanied by decreasing tensile strength) has also been observed in lower volume fraction composites, for example in MB78 and X2080 aluminium alloys reinforced with SiC particles; see the extensive review in Pressure-infiltrated composites consisting of around 50% polygonal or angular Al Polygonal alumina reinforcements produce composites that are systematically stronger and tougher than angular alumina reinforced composites. Removing brittle Al After matrix solutionization, matrix alloying improves the strength of these highly reinforced composites while preserving their high toughness. Current cohesive law models for the ductile fracture of elastic–plastic materials provide a coherent interpretation framework for the high toughness observed in the present composites, and for the influence of matrix flow stress on their toughness. With high-strength polygonal alumina particles, the strength/toughness combination of these high-stiffness, half-metal/half-ceramic composites rivals that of current high-strength engineering Al alloys. This work was funded by the Swiss National Science Foundation under Contract No. 2000-063575-00, with added support from core funding of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Lausanne. The authors also thank Mr. Randoald Müller for providing some additional tensile data, and both Dr. Andreas Rossoll and Mr. Randoald Müller for many insightful discussions.