In order to ensure the continual reaction between CO2 and SrCl2 to produce SrCO3, it is necessary to neutralize produced HCl or to remove it to another phase. Coupling the reaction with solvent extraction is a way to lower the acidity of the aqueous solution and to allow the reaction to proceed continually. Based on this coupled process, a new flow sheet for producing strontium carbonate from celestite is proposed. The factors influencing equilibrium of the coupled process of strontium carbonate production with solvent extraction have been studied.While the production of strontium compounds from celestite was known in the 19th century, it took the discovery that strontium could be used as a safety X-ray absorbent in television screen glass to greatly accelerate production. Screen glass now represents 70–90% of the total production of strontium compounds. They are also widely used in magnetic, coating, plastics, medicine and pesticide products. In China, the production of strontium carbonate has increased more than 10-fold during the last 20 years. The most important strontium mineral is celestite (SrSO The reduction process involves reacting the ore powder with solid reductants (such as coal and coke) or gaseous reductants (such as natural gas and water gas) at 1000–1200 °C to reduce sulfate into sulfide and polysulfide. The main reaction is as follows: The double decomposition process was established by Urguhart in 1884 ( Higher consumption of hydrochloric acid and sodium carbonate makes the process uneconomic. An improvement has been invented by taking a well-known decomposition method of strontium carbonate used in analytical chemistry. In this method, strontium carbonate reacts with a solution containing a high concentration of an ammonium salt with anions that could form soluble salts with strontium ions. The formed ammonium carbonate is driven away as NH NH Obviously, the key to making the double decomposition process economically viable is to further reduce energy consumption during the recycling of acid and carbonate. Accordingly, we proposed to precipitate strontium carbonate from a neutral solution—for instance, strontium chloride or nitrate—with carbon dioxide and remove the produced acid by solvent extraction at the same time ( Crude strontium carbonate is easily dissolved with acid to produce a highly soluble strontium chloride or nitrate solution. The main reactions arising from introducing carbon dioxide to the solutions and their equilibrium constants are listed below: When strontium chloride or nitrate is reacted with carbon dioxide, a basic extractant is required to remove hydrochloric acid or nitric acid from the aqueous solution. The chemical potential of H According to the above calculation, it is necessary to keep Alkyl amines, including primary, secondary and tertiary amines, are basic extractants. Their ability to extract strong mineral acids is dependent on their basicity and the steric hindrance of the alkyl groups. With the requirement that the extracted acid is to be recycled in the coupled process, it is necessary to reach a compromise between the ability to effect extraction and stripping; in other words, the extractant should not only possess a strong extractive ability, but also the loaded acid should be readily stripped.  A tertiary amine was also chosen in the present work. In the precipitation and extraction process of strontium carbonate production, the system involves four phases: aqueous, organic, gas and solid. The factors affecting the reaction equilibrium, kinetics and operating feasibility are studied in this paper and in a forthcoming paper. N235, a tertiary amine with three mixed octyl groups produced by the Institute of Organic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, was used as the extractant. The reaction–extraction experiments were conducted in a conical flask or an autoclave of 100-mL volume at room temperature. For atmospheric pressure experiments in a conical flask, organic phase (20 mL) and aqueous solution (20 mL) were mixed and pure carbon dioxide was sparged into the system. The flow rate of carbon dioxide was much higher than the reaction consumption, and the outlet gas was virtually the same as the inlet, thus ensuring a constant gas composition and a constant carbon dioxide partial pressure in the reaction vessel. Samples were taken from the reaction vessel and centrifuged to separate phases for determination. For the high-pressure experiments, the autoclave was first filled with carbon dioxide under a certain pressure before mixing the two phases. The concentration of acid in aqueous solution was determined by titration with a calibrated sodium hydroxide solution and that in the organic phase was titrated with a potassium hydroxide–ethanol solution. A 0.487 mol/L solution of N235 in kerosene and a 0.1 mol/L aqueous solution of SrCl At a fixed concentration of N235 and constant CO  In many cases, the one-to-one adduct of tertiary amine and acid may still possess basic character, possessing the ability to take up additional acid molecules to form extracts in which the molar ratio of acid-to-amine is higher than 1. Acid–amine extracts tend to form polymers, N235 (0.2 mol/L) and SrCl When contacted with an aqueous solution of a strong acid (for example, hydrochloric acid), a basic tertiary amines (HR The comparison of different solvents as diluents for the coupled reaction and solvent extraction of hydrochloric acid with tertiary amine N235 is shown in Long-chain alcohols themselves are weak extractants for HCl, while methyl isobutyl ketone (MIBK) is relatively stronger. However, as diluents, alcohols are superior to MIBK due to their greater compatibility with the extract NR The extent of ammonium salt formation obtained from the coupled precipitation and extraction process with a 0.487 mol/L N235 and a 0.2 mol/L SrCl The comparison between kerosene and iso-amyl alcohol for the coupled process was also studied (  Iso-amyl alcohol is a very good diluent for tertiary amine in enhancing extraction of hydrochloric acid. Precipitation of strontium carbonate from neutral solution of strontium chloride with carbon dioxide could be done by coupling the reaction with solvent extraction of hydrochloric acid with a tertiary amine, iso-amyl alcohol solution. The authors are grateful to Dr. Phillip Fawell, Principal Research Scientist in the Division of Minerals CSIRO Australia, for his help with the English usage.