In this work, we present an effective approach, based on the combination of the molecular imprinting process and the photocatalysis, to perform a selective degradation of a specific and toxic pesticide. The TiO2 photocatalyst was imprinted through a simple and easy scaling-up synthesis method. The herbicide 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4D), a widespread pesticide in agriculture, was chosen as contaminant-target. The morphological, structural, optical, and textural properties of the TiO2-based materials were assessed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (DRS), and N2 adsorption-desorption measurements, whereas the Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) characterization was performed to evaluate the effectiveness of the molecular imprinting process. The significant increase of the photocatalytic activity of the imprinted TiO2 with the corresponding pesticide-target, compared to bare TiO2, highlighted the synergism between the molecular imprinting and the photocatalysis. The good performance of the molecularly imprinted TiO2 photocatalyst allows to consider this approach as a promising strategy to obtain selective photocatalysts.The contamination of surface and ground waters by pesticides has become an important environmental problem, due to the extensive agriculture practices [ In the recent years, the combination of the molecular imprinting with the photocatalytic activity of titanium dioxide has been investigated [ The described procedures involve a relevant consumption of time and solvents. Moreover, the removal of the template from the polymer or the silica matrix is challenging, due to the strong chemical interaction that can be formed between the matrix and the target molecules [ To simplify the MI process, in this work the synthesis of molecularly imprinted TiO The herbicide 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4D) was used in this work as the template for the MI process and as target pollutant for the photocatalytic degradation. The 2,4D is a plant hormone regulator, and it is an active component in various widely-used herbicides [ On the above considerations, we originally investigated the combination of the molecular imprinting process, that favour a selective interaction between the analysed pesticide and the titanium dioxide, and the photocatalysis, to remove the chosen pesticide from water. The molecularly imprinted TiO The molecularly imprinted TiO The morphology of the synthesized samples was investigated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), with a field emission Zeiss Supra 25 microscope. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) analyses were performed with a Bruker D-500 diffractometer, operating with a parallel Cu-Kα radiation at 40 kV and 40 mA. The textural properties of the sample were analyzed by Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) adsorption-desorption of N The selective photodegradation of 2,4D was investigated under UV light irradiation using a UWAVE led UV lamp system with emission centred at 365 nm (full width at half maximum of 10 nm), with an irradiance of 12 mW/cm The extent of the mineralization after the photocatalytic processes was evaluated by measuring the total organic carbon (TOC) content with a TOC analyzer (Shimadzu TOC-LCSH) equipped with a non-dispersive infrared detector (NDIR). The inorganic carbon was removed from the tested solutions by purging with dry air, then the TOC content was measured after a high-temperature catalytic oxidation at 680 °C. The catalytic stability of the samples in water was evaluated by 5 different photocatalytic runs carried out in 5 weeks. In detail, after each run the powders were recovered and immersed in a solution of deionized water for 1 week. The photocatalytic activity was tested using the same procedure described above. The morphology of TiO  In order to have further confirmation to the occurrence of the molecular imprinting process, FTIR measurements were performed. FTIR spectra of 2,4D, MI TiO UV–vis reflectance spectra (  When the light is switched on, a remarkable enhancement of the degradation rate of 2,4D was obtained with the MI TiO It is important to highlight that the observed efficiency of the MI TiO The extent of the mineralization process of the 2,4D photocatalytic oxidation in the presence of TiO To verify the selectivity of the MI TiO The stability of the investigated materials in water were verified with five different runs performed in five weeks ( The good removal efficiency of the 2,4D herbicide by the MI TiO Our data demonstrate as the MI TiO The preferential photodegradation of the herbicide 2,4D through molecularly imprinted TiO This work was partially funded by the