Supercritical carbon dioxide extraction, which is a feasible “green” alternative, was applied in this study as a sample pretreatment step for the removal of gallium (III) ions from acidic aqueous solution. The effect of various process parameters, including various chelating agents, extraction pressure and temperature, dimensionless CO2 volume, the concentration of the chelating agent, and the pH of the solution, governing the efficiency and throughput of the procedure were systematically investigated. The performance of the various chelating agents from different studies indicated that the extraction efficiency of supercritical CO2 was in the order: thiopyridine (PySH)>thenoyltrifluoroacetone (TTAH)>acetylacetone (AcAcH). The optimal extraction pressure and temperature for the supercritical CO2 extraction of gallium (III) with chelating agent PySH were found to be 70°C and 3000psi, respectively. The optimum concentration of the chelating agent was found to be 50ppm. A value of 7.5 was selected as the optimum dimensionless CO2 volume. The optimum pH of the solution for supercritical CO2 extraction should fall in the range of 2.0–3.0.Gallium is a metallic element in Group IIIA of the periodic table. This metal attracted a lot of interest in the 1970s when it was discovered that gallium combined with elements of group 15 displayed semiconducting properties One of the most used general methods for the extraction of metal ions from aqueous solutions is the reaction of a metal ion with a specific chelating agent to form a metal chelation followed by solvent extraction Among the supercritical fluid mediums, carbon dioxide (CO The standard reference material used in the experimental studies was the gallium standard solution (from NIST, Ga(NO SFE was carried out using the SFX-220 extraction system (ISCO, Lincoln, NE, USA) that consists of an SFX-220 extractor equipped with a linear coaxially restrictor heater and a 50 The ISCO 260D syringe pump was used to deliver CO The extracted metal concentration was determined three times using a Flame Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer (AA-200, PerkinElmer). A gallium hollow cathode lamp, operated at 20 To obtain the quantitative extraction efficiency of gallium (III) ions from acidic aqueous solution in the presence of supercritical CO When the gallium (III) ions were extracted by pure supercritical CO As mentioned above, the extraction efficiency of gallium (III) ion from acidic aqueous solutions was low in pure supercritical CO The extraction efficiency with AcAcH in the supercritical CO To extend our early investigation on the thio-, dithio-metal complexes and to find useful chelating agents, these complexes were employed in the supercritical CO From the above description, the σ-donor ability of the oxygen, nitrogen, and sulfur chelating agents is reflected in the order: PySH The properties of CO Changing the temperature of the supercritical CO A dynamic mold was used to measure the solubility of a compound in a supercritical fluid. In the dynamic extraction, the solute is continuously, but slowly, swept with supercritical fluid. The solubility of the analyte was a function of the CO Under the conditions of pH 2.0, 3000 Another critical parameter that should be considered in supercritical CO In this study, a potential alternative separation approach to the extraction of gallium (III) ions from acidic aqueous solutions was presented. Supercritical CO The authors would like to thank the National Science Council, Taiwan, ROC (under grant NSC96-2622-E-241-001-CC3) for its financial support of this study.