The absorption of SO2 and NH3 from the flue gas into NaOH and H2SO4 solutions, respectively has been studied using an industrial scale ejector–venturi scrubber. A statistical methodology is presented to characterise the performance of the scrubber by varying several factors such as gas pollutant concentration, air flowrate and absorbing solution flowrate. Some types of venturi tube constructions were assessed, including the use of a two-stage venturi tube.
                  The results showed a strong influence of the liquid scrubbing flowrate on pollutant removal efficiency. The initial pollutant concentration and the gas flowrate had a slight influence. The use of a two-stage venturi tube considerably improved the absorption efficiency, although it increased energy consumption.
                  The results of this study will be applicable to the optimal design of venturi-based absorbers for gaseous pollution control or chemical reactors.Several options are available for the control of particulate matter from flue gases such as cyclones, settling chambers, fabric filters, electrostatic precipitators, and various types of wet scrubbers. Amongst the wet scrubbers, the venturi scrubber is unique in that it is not only very efficient for the collection of particulates but can also function as a gas absorber. The ejector–venturi scrubber is a special design of venturi-based absorbers. The main characteristic is the liquid injection mechanism, based on a mechanical atomization system. In this study, a pressure-swirl atomizer was used. The principle of operation involves a jet effect created by the water (or aqueous solution) spray nozzle. This spray nozzle is located on the top of the jet scrubber and creates a full cone-shaped spray. This is a relatively narrow-angle spray, which contacts the wall of the jet scrubber at a point above the throat. The result is an induced airflow through the scrubber. The gas and liquid enter the throat, where extreme turbulence is encountered, and continue through the diffuser section where partial separation of the gas and liquid occurs. The concurrent nature of this scrubber requires a separation device to be used to separate the gas completely from the liquid. Mechanical devices such as blowers are used when high gas flowrates are desired. The scrubbing mechanism includes the cross-flow effect of the air being entrained through the spray plus the turbulence, which occurs at the throat area. While the efficiency of venturi scrubbers for the removal of particulate matter has been extensively studied, only a few papers on gas pollutants absorption have been reported. Johnstone et al. Cooney Atay et al. All these papers, except the last, consider that the entire amount of the liquid injected into the throat section is completely atomized into fine droplets of uniform diameter moving in plug flow towards the end of the diffuser. For jet–venturi scrubbers, where the liquid is sprayed into the gas flow in the venturi throat, initially all the liquid will be in the form of droplets. However, some of the liquid soon deposits to form a wall film. There can be re-atomization at the throat if the liquid is introduced as drops upstream of the throat. The existence of the liquid film promotes the appearance of several phenomena quoted by Azzopardi and co-workers As we have seen, several theories have been put forward to describe the scrubbing action and predict its effectiveness, but to date they have been unable to come up with a single theory that predicts the results under varying operating conditions. The complexity of the coupled phenomena (mass transfer in two-phase systems and hydrodynamics) makes the study of venturi scrubbers very difficult to overcome by using mass, energy and momentum balances. Pilot plant studies are the principal means of obtaining data on this type of unit. The aim of this study is to evaluate the suitability of an ejector–venturi scrubber for the removal of two common stack gases, sulphur dioxide and ammonia. From this work, it will be possible to determine the influence of several operating variables besides different venturi tube constructions. The conclusions and the methodology employed in this study will be useful for the design of these systems.  The equipment was built in PVC and allowed several construction shapes, as shown in Gas pollutant concentrations have been selected from usual values in several types of industrial flue gas compositions, so different magnitudes of sulphur dioxide and ammonia concentrations were used. In spite of this, most of the conclusions of the present study are common for both stack gases. The amount of sulphur dioxide or ammonia absorbed was obtained from the difference in the concentration of the flue gas between the venturi tube entrance and the exit duct. The concentration was measured by using an electrochemical continuous sensor. A Pitot tube was used to determine the air flowrate, and the liquid flowrate was measured with a rotameter. As pointed out by Rappaport et al. The main factors affecting the absorption efficiency were: gas flowrate,   For each set of experiments, a mathematical model describing the effects of the related variables on the removal efficiency was derived. The regression coefficients are summarised in None of the models obtained includes the independent term ( On the other hand, the small values obtained in the variance–covariance matrix diagonal and the almost zero remaining values indicated that the parameters were obtained with high confidence. This is due to the quasi-orthogonality of the proposed experimental design. ANOVA for the full regressions was used to estimate the buoyancy of the models; The high values of  A common trend in all figures is the increase in scrubbing efficiency when the liquid absorber flowrate is increased. However, in all the response surfaces shown in Configuration 2 is less effective in the scrubbing process. However, the efficiencies obtained were only slightly worse than those of configuration 1. The non-existence of a diffuser limited the reactor volume. High efficiencies can be explained by observing the spray shape. The full cone-shaped spray conserved its identity until it reached the liquid reservoir surface ( Regarding the influence of the gas flowrate for the SO Configuration 4 for NH Configuration 3 was expected to be the best one, based on the use of a two-stage jet–venturi scrubber. Experimental performance showed generally lower scrubbing efficiencies than those for configuration 4, though they were acceptable. As observed in When two nozzles (pressure-swirl atomizers) were used, high coalescence effects were observed. This coalescence has two important consequences. Firstly, it promotes the formation of higher diameter droplets, which means a fall in surface area. Secondly, the second atomizer produces a gas core deceleration, diminishing the re-atomization rate. It is also remarkable that gas flowrate (or gas velocity) only has a slight influence on the process. This is the main difference between jet–venturi scrubbers and other venturi-based scrubbers. This performance difference is due to the liquid injection system. In the present study, the scrubbing solution is injected at high kinetic energy while in other venturi scrubbing systems, gas flowrate is the main source of kinetic energy. Thus, only re-atomization in the venturi tube is a direct consequence of gas flowrate. Considering only scrubbing efficiency improvement, configuration 4 was the most suitable, although the results did not show major enhancements. The influence of the main operating variables is similar to that in configuration 1. The most important improvement is observed at higher gas pollutant concentrations in the case of ammonia scrubbing, due to the effect of the higher driving force. The presence of the second venturi promotes the re-atomization of liquid scrubbing solution when high air flowrates are used. Observing the experimental pressure drops ( Work in progress in our laboratory aims to measure the absorption in the jet–venturi scrubber by varying the angle of dispersion of the pressure-swirl atomizer and the venturi throat diameter and length. An easy-to-use empirical method was proposed to characterise the amount of gas pollutants removed in an industrial scale ejector–venturi scrubber. The empirical model was found to adequately represent gas absorption as reflected in the excellent correlation coefficients evaluated. Experiments carried out in the present work showed an increase in absorption efficiency by using two-stage jet–venturi scrubbers, while removal levels lower than expected were observed when two-stage two-nozzle ones were used. The use of two-stage venturi scrubbers is strongly limited by the increase in pressure drop, and thus, the associated energy consumption.