Background
                  Some recent studies have asserted that locking plates do not provide adequate fixation of proximal humeral fractures. The purpose of this study is to review our experience with proximal humeral locking plates, including complications, functional outcomes, and predictors of successful treatment.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  At our institution, 45 patients (46 shoulders) with displaced proximal humeral fractures were treated with a proximal humeral locking plate over a 6-year period. Patients underwent standard surgical and rehabilitation protocols and were evaluated clinically with Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand and American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons standardized outcome measurements and range of motion at last follow-up. Radiographs obtained preoperatively, immediately postoperatively, and at final follow-up were evaluated for fracture type, union, and change in alignment.
               
                  Results
                  There were 43 patients (44 shoulders) available for range-of-motion and functional outcome measures with an average follow-up of 34 months. Fracture types included 19 two-part, 21 three-part, 3 four-part, and 1 head-splitting fracture. The mean Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand score was 11. The average American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons score was 85. The average visual analog pain score was 0.8. The average range of motion was as follows: elevation, 140°; external rotation at side, 49°; external rotation in abduction, 77°; and internal rotation, T11. No patient had evidence of screw cutout, varus collapse, or avascular necrosis. One patient required hardware removal.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Displaced proximal humeral fractures can be successfully fixed with locking plates when attention is paid to anatomic reduction, proper plate placement below to the greater tuberosity to allow abduction, screws in the head with subchondral bone purchase, calcar screws from inferior-lateral to superior-medial and delaying shoulder motion until at least 2 weeks.Proximal humeral fractures are a common problem in orthopaedics, accounting for 5% of all fractures. Periarticular locking plates with fixed-angle stability have been shown to be effective in osteoporotic bone. The purpose of this study is to review our experience with proximal humeral locking plates, including complications, functional outcomes, and predictors of successful treatment. After obtaining institutional review board approval, we reviewed all proximal humeral fractures from 2003 to 2009 at our institution. This showed 45 patients (46 shoulders) who had undergone ORIF with a proximal humeral locking plate. Inclusion criteria for the study were a proximal humeral fracture treated with a locking plate and at least 1 year of follow-up. The patients were contacted and scheduled for a follow-up office visit with an independent surgeon not involved in the surgery or care of the patients. At this visit, range of motion of both shoulders was measured with a goniometer for elevation, external rotation at the side and in abduction, and internal rotation. Final radiographs were evaluated for union, hardware status, avascular necrosis, and fracture anatomy. Review of all subjects’ medical records was performed to obtain data including age, arm dominance, worker’s compensation status, mechanism of injury, concomitant injuries, type of fracture, previous radiographs and reports, and complications or further procedures. Patients also completed the American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons (ASES) scoring survey, as well as the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) scoring survey. Surgery was performed with the patient under general anesthesia. Appropriate prophylactic antibiotics were given before surgery and for 24 hours postoperatively. All fractures were approached through a standard deltopectoral interval in the captain’s chair position. Data were analyzed with unpaired Of the 45 patients who underwent ORIF with a proximal humeral locking plate, 43 patients (44 shoulders) were available for an average follow-up of 34 months (range, 12-88 months). The average age at injury was 68 years (range, 24-98 years). Of the patients, 85% were over 60 years of age. Thirty were women. Thirty-one fractures were in dominant shoulders. There were 19 two-part fractures, 21 three-part fractures, 3 four-part fracture, and 1 head-splitting fracture per the classification system originally described by Neer. The functional results were DASH scores with an average of 11 (range, 0-21.7). ASES scores averaged 85 (range, 62-100). Average visual analog score was less than 1, ranging from 0 to 3. Range of motion on the injured side was as follows: elevation, 140° (range, 100°-175°); external rotation, 77° (range, 45°-95°) in abduction and 49° (range, 10°-85°) at the side; and internal rotation ranged from T5 to the iliac crest with an average of T11. ASES and DASH scores showed no significant difference when analyzed by age, dividing patients above and below 60 years ( Upon viewing all radiographs, reviewing radiograph reports, and comparing immediate postoperative films with those at final follow-up, we noted that all fractures were united, with no change or loss of reduction, and no hardware failure at final follow-up ( Biomechanical studies have confirmed the potential advantages of locking plates over conventional plates, such as increased load to failure and a significant decrease in deformation. Proximal humeral fractures present a challenging problem for orthopaedic surgeons. These difficult fractures can have excellent pain-free, functional outcomes if attention is paid to details including anatomy and surgical technique. Hepp et al Anatomic reduction increases the stability of the fracture fragments due to cortical contact. Solberg et al reviewed 70 proximal humeral fractures treated with locking plates and found that varus malreduction was a significant risk factor for further varus collapse and screw cutout. The idea of targeting screw purchase into the head is supported by bone mineral density studies, which have shown that the posterior/inferior and central portions of the head have the most dense trabecular bone. During our procedures, fluoroscopy was used to determine the optimal screw length for subchondral bone purchase. Liew et al Impingement by the plate has been reported as a common complication relieved by plate removal. Historically, osteonecrosis of the head is a common complication of proximal humeral ORIF, with rates in the literature ranging from 2% up to 50%. Finally, immediate motion was avoided in this series. We chose to delay passive motion until at least 2 to 4 weeks, based on the security of fixation, the age of the patient, and the perception of the quality of the proximal humeral bone. Active motion was not instituted until at least 6 weeks. The range of motion at final follow-up was as good or better than other reported series, suggesting that the delay was not detrimental to the outcome. We believe that by allowing some early fracture healing to add stability to the internal fixation, loss of fixation and collapse can be minimized, if not avoided. One major strength of this study is that all of the procedures were performed by a single surgeon with a standard surgical technique and rehabilitation protocol. Previously validated functional outcome measures were used for all subjects, unifying data. However, this study is limited by its retrospective nature. The results are similar to, but better than, other recently published studies on proximal humeral locking plates, which do not show the high failure rates initially published in the literature. Proximal humeral fractures that require plate fixation should be fixed through a deltopectoral approach. Anatomic reduction with medial support should be attained. Plate and screw placement should be controlled with fluoroscopy. These techniques improve the likelihood of a pain-free, functional outcome, although fracture pattern at injury has an influence on outcome. As always, new sophisticated implants cannot make up for poor surgical technique, but with attention to detail, locking screw constructs can provide sufficient stability of an anatomic reduction in the proximal humerus to allow healing and good functional outcomes. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.