This work was aimed at studying the effect of wood galactoglucomannan hemicelluloses (HC) on the recovery of copper and molybdenum from a high clay ore. The performance of HC was compared with the results obtained using carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC). Results indicated that HC has a stronger effect than CMC to increase the recovery of Cu from a high clay ore, but a higher depressing effect on the recovery of Mo. At 230ppm of HC copper recovery increases 7.6 percentage points and Mo recovery decreased 20.7 percentage points respect to samples floated without HC. Thus the use of HC and CMC to improve copper recovery in the flotation high clay copper ore appears to be very promising, but considerations must be done when treating molybdenum rich ores. Due to the fact that HC are semi-amorphous with side hydroxy group on the chain, one possible mechanism of adsorption may be related to hydrogen bonds existing between these hydroxy groups and the surfaces of the clay mineral particles. Further studies that include tests to clarify the mechanisms of adsorption of HC on clay minerals and valuable species, as well as the effect of this reagent on other types of high clay ores are necessary in the future.Carbohydrates such as dextrin, starch, and celluloses have been proposed as dispersing agents for clays in the flotation of potash, phosphates and iron ores ( A potential source of carbohydrates can be found in forest products such as wood cellulose which reached a worldwide production of 117 million tons in 2015 (Forest products statistic, The objective of this research work was to assess the effect of wood galactoglucomannan HC on the recovery of copper and molybdenum from a high clay ore. The performance of HC was compared with the results obtained using CMC. The study was carried out using a Cu-Mo ore sample obtained from a mine located in Northern Chile. The chemical analysis of this sample indicated a composition of 0.49% Cu, 0.014% Mo and 5.93% Fe. XRD analyses were carried out using a Bruker D4-Endeavor operated with Ni-filtered Cu radiation which showed that the main copper sulphides were chalcopyrite, chalcocite and covellite. The analysis also indicated that kaolinite concentration in the sample was around 13%. HC samples of 44.000 The flotation tests were done using a 2.7  For comparison purposes, flotation tests to evaluate the effect of CMC were also performed. The adverse effect of clay minerals on the flotation process of copper sulphide ores can be explained by several mechanisms ( Further research must be conducted to confirm the results obtained in this work. Such experiments might include studies to clarify the mechanisms of adsorption of HC on clay and valuable species, and the effect of this reagent in other types of high clay ores. The ability of HC to improve copper recovery in the flotation of a high clay Cu-Mo ore was tested and compared to CMC. Results indicated that HC has a stronger effect than CMC to increase the recovery of Cu from a high clay ore, but it also has a higher depressing effect on the recovery of Mo. Thus, the use of HC appears advisable only when processing high clay copper ores with no presence of molybdenite. The promissory results obtained in this work need to be confirmed by further studies, which might include tests to clarify the mechanisms of adsorption of HC on clay and valuable species, and the effect of this reagent in other types of high clay ores. This work was supported by “Convenio de Desempeño, UCO 1302”, Ministry of Education, Chile. Leopoldo Gutierrez thanks the support from FONDECYT under the projects initiation into research no. 11140184, and Centro CRHIAM-Fondap no. 15130015.