With decreasing wettability and rough surfaces the adhesion forces between the interacting surfaces shift to higher values. This is due to capillary bridging by nanobubbles which are sitting on one or both rough surfaces and cause capillary interactions. For particles, the coverage with such bubbles for different wettability and gas oversaturation is shown. Also, it is possible to identify three general types of force distance curves: curves with no capillary interactions, curves with capillary interactions but no repulsion during approach and curves with capillary interactions and a small repulsion just before snap-in. Possible reasons for repulsion are analysed and a calculation of Hamaker constants is presented. Furthermore, well-known models for adhesion on rough surfaces are compared with the experimental data.Knowledge about interaction forces and the related influencing parameters is of great interest for various industrial processes like flotation, filtration or product design by agglomeration. In the case of deep bed filtration of liquids, the efficiency of the process depends particularly on the adhesion forces between particles and e.g. foam filters [ Firstly a short-range true hydrophobic interaction, decaying exponentially and having a range of a few nanometers, caused by a structuring of water molecules near the low energetic surface; Secondly a long-range interaction, acting up to several hundreds of nm, caused by capillary bridging due to small cap-shaped bubbles, often called nanobubbles [ The structuring of water molecules near the hydrophobic surfaces occurs due to a re-orientation of the dipoles parallel to the surface because it is energetically more favourable to interact with themselves than with the surface. Consequently, a water depletion layer is generated. In turn, nanobubbles are formed during immersion, because of a gas solubility gradient (temperature or solvent-exchange induced) or by perturbation. As a result of the depletion layer, dissolved gas molecules are enriched in this layer and act as a gas reservoir for the nanobubbles. Their long-term stability, for years subject of discussions, can be explained by a dynamic equilibrium between in- and outflux of gas if the liquid is supersaturated as well as a contact line pinning [ Investigations on nanobubbles are usually done on atomically rough surfaces, more precisely samples with rms values below 5 nm. Surfaces in industrial processes are much rougher, e.g. rms > 200 nm, so adhesion models and/or phenomena seen on smooth surfaces might be inexact for technical processes. Interestingly, there is only a small number of published vdW-models for technical rough surfaces yet, e.g. by You et al. [ In case of rough surfaces, the impact of both short- and long range interaction has to be estimated. In this study the authors focus on technical rough hydrophobized ceramic samples in a water-based system described elsewhere [ Topographical imaging and force spectroscopy were done using the atomic force microscope XE-100 from Park Systems (South Corea). All measurements were carried out with deionized water. Samples in the form of pressed and sintered ceramic tablets were prepared as it is described in [ For the topographical investigation and the measurement of particle-particle interactions of alumina particles at different wetting conditions, the particles have been embedded into a thin epoxy layer, whereby these particles were fixed to the grounded glass substrate. By using this method, the particles have been silanized with Dynasylan® F8261 via chemical vapor surface modification (CVSM), described in [ In a previous study, the influence of wettability on the interaction forces has been studied on sintered alumina samples with and without polishing [ Clearly visible and in accordance with the previous studies is an increase in adhesion if wettability is decreased. For two hydrophilic surfaces, the force distribution is determined by the changing interaction area due to variations in surface roughness. No nanobubbles are detected onto the surface. A Weibull distribution fits the data very well. Such a distribution is a continuous two-parameter probability distribution, normally used for the determination of failure rates: Here, Another influencing property on adhesion between surfaces is their roughness. Therefore, ceramic samples with different wetting properties were investigated. It is seen for hydrophilic surfaces in liquid phase that higher roughness results in a decrease of adhesion force because of a smaller contact area ( Unfortunately, up to now it is not possible to analyse the force data of two hydrophobic surfaces more in detail by using AFM, for instance if bubbles sit only on one or on both surfaces. It is, therefore, highly probable that nanobubbles do not sit exclusively on the rough sample surface as it was observed in [  A closer look at the force spectroscopy data for rough hydrophobic samples is shown in Interestingly, the force distance curves with snap-in differ regarding their behaviour just before the particle jumps into contact. Curves with high snap-in/adhesion force always show a slight repulsion, which has an exponential nature (case III). In case of deep bed filtration or other engineering processes, this leads to the necessity to provide enough energy, kinetic energy respectively, to overcome this repulsive barrier. Still unclear is the reason for the small repulsion just before a snap-in occurs (case III). An explanation might be a trapped bubble on the particle surface that interacts with nanobubbles sitting on the sample. In the opinion of the authors such repulsive effects just before snap-in might occur due to surface charges of the nanobubbles on the hydrophobic surfaces, hydrodynamic forces because of a deformation of the bubbles surrounded by water or another (additional) repulsive force. Comparable to microbubbles, the nanoscopic gaseous domains are negatively charged [ For such reasons, Hamaker constants were calculated with Lifshitz theory for the investigated systems. For Dynasylan®-coated alumina we have determined Hamaker constants for Teflon due to the PTFE-like structure of the silane. This simplification was done due to the unknown layer thickness and homogeneity of the silane on the rough surfaces. With the Ninham-Parsegian representation,  In comparison to vacuum, the Hamaker constants are reduced with water as the intervening medium. Differences for the calculated Hamaker-constants arise due to different spectral data provided in the references. Repulsive van der Waals forces occur for ceramic-water-air systems, whereas the PTFE-water-air system shows attractive forces. Assuming an entirely silane-covered surface and validity of the PTFE-simplification for the Hamaker constant as stated out before, vdW interactions should be attractive. If (in addition to surface charges and hydrodynamic interactions) repulsive vdW forces play a role, then only in the event of an insufficient homogeneity of the silane coverage, e.g. on edges. However, repulsive interactions just before snap-in have been measured only for strong adhesive forces with large deformation, so in the authors opinion the case M-H Besides this closer examination on reasons for repulsion just before snap in, Hamaker constants of the ceramic systems presented in Section 3.1 are calculated using Lifshitz theory ( Where  It should be noted that the three models for vdW interactions on rough surfaces take only roughness on one of both surfaces into account and the particle roughness of rms = 0.08 μm is not considered. Also, the limitation of Rabinovich's model is rms < 20 nm, that is to say the investigated samples are not suitable for this model. On the other hand, Rumpf and Fritzsche do not give any limitations about their model validity and such a wide range of valid roughness (0.2–0.8 μm) is hardly to imagine. So, in conclusion it is to say that with correctly calculated vdW forces one can determine non-van der Waals attractive forces like short range hydrophobic or capillary forces on rough surfaces, but at the moment no further splitting is possible due to the lack of appropriate models. Fitting the experimental data of sphere-plate interactions with Weibull distributions leads to considerably better accordance (see F/D values in This study deals with the influence of nanobubbles on rough hydrophobic surfaces. It is shown for rough materials and particles that wetting plays an important role on measured adhesive forces. Adhesion is enhanced for both particle-particle and particle-plate interactions if wettability is improved or a higher gas oversaturation takes place. On the other hand, a higher roughness leads to smaller adhesive forces for good wetting systems while it is the opposite case for the hydrophobic system. Three types of force distance curves are presented. In the case of capillary forces, repulsive interactions just before snap-in are observed and reasons for their appearance are discussed. Also, Hamaker constants of the different interacting systems are calculated and models for van der Waals forces on rough surfaces are validated. Thanks to Dr. Claudia Voigt (Institute of Ceramic, Glass and Construction Materials of TU Bergakademie Freiberg) for sample preparation of the tablets and to Dr. Christian Weber for constructive discussions and help in calculation of Hamaker constants. The authors would like to thank the