Gamma flotation process is characterized by emphasis on the control of solution surface tension and the separation of minerals in suspension with this technique is based on the differences in wettability of minerals. The wettability properties of mineral surfaces can be defined in terms of their values of critical surface tension of wetting (γ
                     c) as a quantifying parameter, which is an essential property to achieve selectivity in surface chemistry-based separation processes. That is, the gamma flotation technique utilizes the differences in the critical surface tension of wetting (γ
                     c) of minerals. Similar to the flotation method, shear flocculation, oil agglomeration and liquid–liquid extraction processes also utilize differences in wettability of minerals. Therefore, the separations of minerals by the control of surface tension in the shear flocculation, oil agglomeration and liquid–liquid extraction methods can be provided. In this study, the separations of some minerals with these processes have been investigated by using the control of the solution surface tension and the successful results could be reached. Consequently, these new separation processes have been defined as ‘gamma shear flocculation’, ‘gamma oil agglomeration’ and ‘gamma liquid–liquid extraction’.As the grade of mineral deposits decreases, the valuable minerals often appear in the form of finely disseminated grains in an ore. Therefore, size reduction by crushing and grinding is required to liberate the valuable constituents. However, fine particles produced during the comminution processes decrease the efficiency of the concentration processes in mineral processing operations. Therefore, there is considerable interest in developing a process that could successfully handle such fine particles The wettability properties of mineral surfaces can be defined in terms of their values of ‘critical surface tension of wetting ( The gamma flotation process, which operates on the basis of solution surface tension control to facilitate the separation of inherently hydrophobic solids, is based on the differences in wettability of minerals In this study, similar to the gamma flotation process, the separations of some minerals with shear flocculation, oil agglomeration and liquid–liquid extraction techniques by using the control of the solution surface tension have been investigated depending on the critical values of the solution surface tension. This critical value is ‘the critical surface tension of wetting ( The experiments were carried out using high purity samples of celestite (SrSO Methanol (>99.9% in purity), purchased from Merck, was used to obtain the desired surface tension of solutions. The solution surface tension ( The products obtained from the gamma processes of shear flocculation, oil agglomeration and liquid–liquid extraction were analyzed by GBC Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer (AAS) for their Sr content. The grades of celestite and/or dolomite of the products were also calculated. The shear flocculation, oil agglomeration and liquid–liquid extraction experiments were carried out in a 400 cm The flocculation experiments were made using 1 The celestite In the liquid–liquid extraction experiments, 80 cm The critical surface tension of wetting ( The separation of dolomite The critical solution surface tension ( The separation of dolomite Similar to the gamma processes of shear flocculation and oil agglomeration, the gamma liquid–liquid extraction technique is also based on the differences in wettability of minerals. The critical solution surface tension (  The gamma processes of shear flocculation, oil agglomeration and liquid–liquid extraction can be presented schematically as shown in The minerals used in this experimental study are known to be salt-type minerals in regard to their physico-chemical properties and therefore their separations by surface chemistry processes such as flotation, shear flocculation, oil agglomeration and liquid–liquid extraction are relatively difficult. Furthermore, these minerals have hydrophilic character whose The separation of minerals with the control of the solution surface tension in the flotation technique is known as ‘gamma flotation process’. Similar to the gamma flotation process, the separation of minerals in the shear flocculation method can also be provided by the control of the solution surface tension and therefore this new method can be defined as ‘gamma shear flocculation process’. This process utilizes the differences in ‘the critical surface tension of wetting ( The authors acknowledge the financial support of this study provided by