This work studies the tribological properties of liquid paraffin to which diamond and SiO2 nanoparticles, which were prepared by the surface modification method using oleic acid, had been added and observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and infrared (IR) spectroscopy. Also, the dispersion capability and stability dispersivity of both modified nanoparticles in liquid paraffin were measured using a spectrophotometer. The measurements show the dispersion capacity and the dispersing stability of oleic acid-modified diamond and SiO2 nanoparticles in liquid paraffin.
                  The tribological properties are evaluated using a ball-on-ring wear tester. The results show that both nanoparticles as additives in liquid paraffin at a tiny concentration have better antiwear and antifriction properties than the pure paraffin oil. Also, SEM was used to observe the plowing of nanoscale grooves of worn surfaces by diamond and SiO2 nanoparticles.The reduction of friction and wear is critical to the proper functioning of modern machines. A more complex machine has a stricter lubrication requirement. Machine components and mechanism pairs depend on high-quality lubricants to enable withstanding high temperatures and extreme pressure (EP). Extreme pressure and antiwear (AW) additives are typically adopted to improve the tribological performance of a fluid lubricant in reducing friction and surface damage under severe conditions. Sulphur, chlorine and phosphorous containing compounds as traditional additives are designed to cover chemical metal surfaces by forming easily sheared layers of sulphides, chlorines or phosphides, preventing severe wear and seizure Nanoparticles have attracted considerable interest in recent years because of their excellent physical and chemical properties. However, inorganic nanoparticles very easily agglomerate in many media and have poor dispersive capacity in organic solvents and oil. Therefore, the applications of many nanoparticles are quite limited. However, the dispersion problem can be solved using some physical and chemical approaches. Li and Zhu The tribological properties of nanoparticles used as oil additives have been recently investigated. Chen and co-workers Zhang and co-workers Tarasov et al. The cited works specify four mechanisms of antiwear and friction reduction by nanoparticles added to base oil. They are as follows (1) smaller nanoparticles are more likely to interact with the surfaces of the friction pairs to form a surface protective film; (2) smaller spherical nanoparticles are more likely to roll between the surfaces and change the sliding friction to mixing of sliding and rolling friction; (3) compressive stress concentrations associated with high contact pressure can be reduced by very many nanoparticles, which bear the compressive force dispersively and (4) nanoparticles are deposited on the surface, and form a physical tribofilm that compensates for the loss of mass, which effect is called the “mending effect”. A combination of four effects explains the good friction and wear properties of nanoparticles in base oil. Both diamond and SiO Nanoparticles were purchased from an industrial company in Taiwan. Diamond nanoparticles were dispersed primarily using a comminution ball impactor. The sedimentation method was adopted to separate the various sizes. The nanodiamonds were dispersed in the solution under 44 The impurity content of nanodiamond was <0.5% for Si, <0.2% for Fe, <0.1% for Cr and Na, <0.01% for Al, Cu, Ca, Mg, Mn, Ti and Pb. The total impurity content was less than 0.9%. The impurity content of nano-SiO Oleic acid-modified nanoparticles were synthesized in the authors’ laboratory. One gram of nanoparticles was added to 1 Nanoparticles generally agglomerate as large particles with sizes of over 2 The composition and structure of the synthesized oleic acid (CH The stability of modified nanoparticles in liquid paraffin was evaluated from the transmittance of dispersions, which were measured by spectrophotometry. The properties in wear resistance and friction reduction of the nanoparticles as an additive in liquid paraffin have been evaluated with a ball-on-ring tester, which is designed by a stationary ball forcing against a rotating ring. The wear tests were performed with loadings of 50, 100, 150, 200, 250 and 300 The wear scar diameter is a function of the additive concentration in liquid paraffin, as presented in The friction coefficient is obtained as a function of the additive concentration of oleic acid-surface-modified particles in liquid paraffin. The friction coefficients are measured by performing sliding tests with pure liquid paraffin, liquid paraffin with 0.2 The friction coefficient of the liquid paraffin with 0.2      Shen et al.  The nanoparticles modified by oleic acid exhibit good dispersivity and stability in liquid paraffin. The SiO Oleic acid-surface-modified diamond and SiO The optimal concentration of diamond particles that minimizes the wear scar diameter is 0.2–0.5 The SiO EDS analysis of the lubrication film that is formed on the worn surfaces was performed; the nanoparticles in the film not only bore the loading but also separated the rubbing faces, preventing direct contact and reducing friction and wear.