The co-extraction of uranium and iron with di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (DEHPA)/tri-n-octyl phosphine oxide (TOPO) in kerosene from loaded phosphoric acid in the second extraction cycle is influenced by the factors uranium, iron, DEHPA concentration, P2O5% and organic-to-acid ratio (O/A). From a general regression equation, two mathematical models have been generated representing the effect of these five factors on the selectivity and yield: the interaction between factors has been ascertained. Analysis and interpretation of the results enabled us to determine the best experimental operating conditions of the second extraction cycle to obtain a least contaminated loaded solvent and to improve the quality of the yellow cake.The recovery of uranium from wet phosphoric acid by the di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (DEHPA)/tri- Several investigations have been carried out to study the competition between the extraction of some impurities, particularly the iron and the extraction of uranium, but no one has taken into consideration all factors affecting the selectivity and yield.   The main objective of this investigation is to study the effect of five determinant factors (uranium, iron, DEHPA concentration, P The di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (DEHPA) and tri- The phosphoric acid (85%) was obtained from Fluka, the uranyl nitrate UO Eight acidic solutions were prepared containing, as shown in The organic and aqueous phases were mixed using a magnetic stirrer for a fixed time of 10 min in a thermostatic bath at 28 °C. The uranium concentration in the aqueous phase was measured by the fluorometric method. Concentration of uranium in organic phase was calculated by material balance. Iron concentration in loaded organic was measured with a UV spectrophotometer at A wide range between low and high levels, as shown in From the results of Coefficients of the main effect of The Student's The regression coefficients are not correlated and their significance can be checked separately. The elimination from the regression equation of nonsignificant coefficient has no consequence for the other coefficients The role of the DEHPA on the selectivity and yield is very important as shown in The dependence of the selectivity and yield of uranium and iron extraction on the P At low uranium concentration (2 g/L), P  The influence of Fe(III) concentration present in the initial phosphoric acid solution on the yield of uranium was negligible even at high concentration of Fe(III), as shown in The increase of O/A ratio increases the capacity of the solvent. At high value of O/A, nearly all the uranium in the acid was extracted, and the leftover DEHPA extracts iron from the aqueous phase until saturation. The increase of O/A from 0.8 to 1.5 leads to the increase of yield and decrease of the selectivity, as shown in Two mathematical models were established, based on experimental data, representing the effect of five parameters (uranium, iron, DEHPA concentration, P For the second extraction cycle, factors that can be controlled to vary the selectivity and yield are: the molar concentration of DEHPA in kerosene, P The authors wish to express their thanks to Dr I. Othmanm, General Director of Syrian Atomic Energy Commission, for help and support and to Dr. G. Zayzafoon, head of Department of Chemistry and Dr. H. Kalawi for fruitful discussions.