Micro-fine high Nb containing TiAl alloyed powders were prepared by using fluidized bed jet milling from the pre-crushed Ti–45Al–8.5Nb–0.2W–0.2B–0.02Y(at.%) ingot. The effects of process parameters on the powder characteristics were investigated. The results show that the particle characteristics are mainly determined by classifier frequency. At or above 5600rpm, the ground powders are composed of coarse block-shaped particles and finer flaky debris, with particle number-average diameter lower than 18μm. With the increase of classifier frequency and the decrease of grinding gas pressure, the amount of flaky debris formed under abrasion mechanism gradually increases, which causes the obvious decrease of the powder number-average diameter, distribution uniformity, and sphericity degree. With the classifier frequency of 8400rpm and grinding gas pressure of 0.55MPa, the obtained powders possess the minimum particle size of 5.32μm, with a uniformity level of 0.38 and a Wadell's sphericity factor of 0.820.With low density, high strength and corrosion resistance at elevated temperatures, high Nb containing TiAl alloys have attracted considerable attention as candidate materials for high-temperature structural application in aerospace, automotive and gas turbine industries The preparation of TiAl based alloyed powders with high properties is the basis for improving the PM products performance. So far, TiAl based alloy powders are usually processed by plasma rotating electrode atomization or inert gas atomization with non-crucible melting. However, the powders obtained usually contain many pores and coarse particles, and especially the proportion of particles under 30 In the present work, micro-fine high Nb containing TiAl alloyed powders were processed by fluidized bed jet milling from alloy ingot. The effects of the process parameters on powder characteristics and breakage mechanism were investigated. High Nb containing TiAl alloy ingot was produced by a water-cooled copper crucible induction melting furnace with a nominal composition of Ti–45Al–8.5Nb–(W, B, Y). The ingot was chipped into scrapes with size lower than 300 The phase constitutions of the feed and the ground powders were characterized by a Siemens D 5000 X-ray diffraction meter using Cu radiation. The powder microstructural observations were performed by a LWO1450 scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The oxygen and nitrogen contents were measured by the inert gas pulses-infrared thermal conductivity method, and carbon content by high-frequency combustion-infrared measurement. The particle size and distribution was examined by using a LMS-30 laser particle size analyzer. The parameters of number-average diameter ( The value of Wadell's sphericity factor, denoted as  Grinding gas pressures also show a slight influence on the particle size distribution. For the powder ground at a lower frequency with particle size distribution of single peak feature, the distribution peak has a small left shift from 38.9  The particle size distribution uniformity ( The change of particle sphericity factor (  The phase constitution analysis results show that, at the same classifier frequency, there is no distinct difference for the powder samples ground at different grinding pressures. Then The oxygen, carbon and nitrogen contents of the alloyed powders during the fabrication process are listed in In general, jet milling system mainly consists of grinding chamber and classifying chamber. After entering grinding chamber, the raw particles are accelerated by means of a jet stream of carrier gas, and mechanical impact collision drastically occurs among inter-particles and rigid obstacles with extremely high energy. As a result, the powder particles can be efficiently smashed and refined. After grinding, the particles are carried out by gas and flow up to the classifier chamber with rotating rotor, where classification takes place. In the chamber, the particles are simultaneously subjected to gas flow drag force and rotation centrifugal force. The centrifugal force is proportional to particle weight and the rotating speed of rotor. If the centrifugal force is greater than the drag force, particles will be sent back into the grinding chamber for further grinding. When the particles are reduced in size, and the centrifugal force is smaller than the drag force, particles will be transported by gas flow through the rotor and collected. The particle size for which centrifugal force equals drag force is called cut size. The value of cut size,  The breakage mechanism of the TiAl based alloy powders during the jet milling is shown in The milling conditions which directly influence the breakage mechanism are controlled by the operating parameters. Among them, classifier frequency represents the rotation speed of wheel classifiers. From Eq. Destructive breakage brings the efficient reduction in particle size. Hence, when the classifier frequency rises from 4200 The characterization of high Nb containing TiAl alloyed powders by fluidized bed jet milling was investigated. The following conclusions can be drawn from the discussion: The micro-fine high Nb containing TiAl alloyed powders with controlled average particle size can be efficiently prepared in quantity by fluidized bed jet milling from the pre-crushed alloy ingot. The particle characteristics are mainly determined by classifier frequency. At or above 5600 Grinding gas pressure has a certain impact on particle characteristics and breakage mechanism. Decreasing grinding gas pressure causes the enhancement of abrasion breakage, leading to the rise of the flaky debris proportion. The breakage mechanism of the jet milled TiAl alloy powders depends on milling conditions and particle characteristics. Coarse particles are dominated by destructive breakage, with fracture mode of interlamellar and slightly deviated translamellar. As the grinding process continues, the particles are efficiently refined. Abrasion and fatigue breakage tend to play a leading role, which produces more flaky debris among block-shaped particles. With the classifier frequency of 8400 This research was sponsored by the