Many energy strategies can be applied to a building to improve its energy efficiency without compromising comfort. The analysis becomes more complex when considering not only the energetic improvement but also the corresponding economic cost and especially when considering its multiple environmental impacts.
                  This study presents a methodology for determining the optimal insulation thickness for external building surfaces. As a case study, we model a cubicle like building. It is representative for a conventional Mediterranean construction system and is situated in Lleida, representing a moderate climate in Spain. Our approach is based on a multi-objective optimization model that minimizes simultaneously the cost and eleven environmental impact indicators associated with both the energy consumption over the operational phase and the construction materials used (including the waste produced during the disposal phase). To simplify the problem we reduce the dimensionality of the multi-objective optimization problem identifying and removing in a systematic manner redundant criteria from the mathematical model. To accelerate the optimization analysis we apply a surrogate model which provides the global prediction of the objective functions, and an evaluation of uncertainty of the prediction of this model.
                  Results show that this approach represents a practical tool for performing the dimensionality reduction of criteria and the acceleration of building design optimization through the use of a surrogate model. The capabilities of our methodology are demonstrated through a case study based on a thermal modelling of a house-like cubicle where the thicknesses of the insulation walls of the building exterior surfaces are defined as variables and optimized with appropriate algorithms. The objective is to minimize simultaneously the cost and several environmental impacts of the building. The cost indicator includes the electricity cost for heating and cooling the building and the cost of the materials for its construction. The environmental impact accounts for the impact of the electricity consumed and the impact of the materials used. This impact is quantified following the life cycle assessment (LCA) methodology ( In this study the aim is to develop a multi-objective optimization approach that includes an objective reduction method and a surrogate model. The goal is to minimize the total cost ( For the environmental impact assessment the following impacts are considered: Acidification & eutrophication, ecotoxicity, land occupation, carcinogenics, climate change, ionising radiation, ozone layer depletion, respiratory effects, fossil fuel extraction, mineral extraction and the aggregated endpoint EI99 indicator ( Without loss of generality for the dimensionality reduction an exhaustive exploration based on the Brockhoff and Zizler (  The application of the algorithm ( Start with the the iteration counter it Perform a pseudorandom simulation of cubicle designs. If If Apply the objective reduction method to set Build a surrogate model from solutions in set Use a MOO method to optimize the surrogate model consiering objectives in End if. End if. The analysed cubicles present a conventional Mediterranean construction system ( With the objective reduction exhaustive exploration it is found that we can remove 9 of the 12 objectives from the original problem maintaining the dominance structure. The total cost is directly included in the objective function while the other two, which were obtained after applying the objective reduction algorithm, asses the environmental impact aspects. Moreover, it is observed that solving the problem by considering the economic cost and the widely used aggregated EI99 (for the environmental impact assessment) might change the dominance structure of the problem, with the consequence of losing potential Pareto solutions of the original space of LCA impacts. A surrogate model is built in Matlab R2015a. The multi-objective surrogate model is then solved using the epsilon-constraint method. 25 epsilon parameters where imposed on each objective, leading to 625 NLPs (Nonlinear programming). In CONOPT each NLP requires 17 iterations to be solved and each iteration requires 6 evaluations of the objective functions. The algorithm takes 2,500 After conducting the optimization with the surrogate model we obtain 19 Pareto solutions (  In this work we have presented a systematic tool to obtain optimal building designs for MOO problems. As we are working with many objectives and MOO grows in complexity while the number of objectives increases we resort to an objective reduction method that reduces the dimensionality of the problem keeping its structure unaltered. The computational cost required to solve optimization problems might be very high. To Although the tool we present is a general methodology that can work with any decision variable and objective function we illustrate its capabilities through a case study where a house-like cubicle is considered, the insulation thicknesses of the external surfaces are the evaluated variables and the objectives are to minimize the economic cost and several environmental impacts of the building. Results show that the number of objectives can be significantly reduced while keeping the structure of the problem. 3 of the 12 indicators were selected for assessing the whole problem. Although the construction of a surrogate model involves time, it notably reduces (8 times) the optimization process making shorter the devoted time to solve the whole problem. The results and conclusions of the presented case study depend on the specifications of the model and particularly on the parameter values used for the thermal and economic analysis. They indicate that, for our case study, significant improvements can be reached (26 % from the economic perspective, 17 % from the carcinogenics impact viewpoint and 51 % from the ionising radiation impact standpoint) respect the base case (cubicle without insulation). The authors would like to acknowledge financial support from the Spanish Government (DPI2012-37154-C02-02, CTQ2012-37039-C02).