This study discusses a possibility for enhancement of heat transfer between solids and ambient gas by application of powerful acoustic fields. Experiments are carried out by using preheated Pt wires (length 0.1–0.15 m, diameter 50 and 100 μm) positioned at the velocity antinode of a standing wave (frequency range 216–1031 Hz) or in the path of a travelling wave (frequency range 6.9–17.2 kHz). A number of experiments were conducted under conditions of gas flowing across the wire surface. Effects of sound frequency, sound strength, gas flow velocity and wire preheating temperature on the Nusselt number are examined with and without sound application. The gas phase heat transfer rate is enhanced with acoustic field strength. Higher temperatures result in a vigorous radiation from the wire surface and attenuate the effect of sound. The larger the gas flow velocity, the smaller is the effect of sound wave on heat transfer enhancement.The ability of sound waves to propagate through an elastic medium such as gas makes them an attractive non-contact method in supplying energy to a material being processed. This method appears to be particularly promising for high temperature processes like pyrometallurgy and solid waste incineration, because in the processes the rates of many physico-chemical phenomena are controlled by the gas phase heat and mass transfers. The effect of sound waves on heat transfer from or to a solid surface has received considerable attention in the past. The theoretical investigations However, the obtained results are hardly applicable for the above mentioned processes where temperatures of particles or the ambient gas are much higher than those tested in the previous studies. Higher temperatures can result in a vigorous thermal convection or radiation from or to the particles, that can attenuate effect of sound. Moreover, the theory of acoustic streaming gives good predictions for displacement amplitudes of fluid volume smaller as compared with particle dimension. This is not valid when a higher intensity wave is applied to particles of tens of micrometers in size. The purpose of the present experimental study is to check the possibility for heat transfer enhancement in standing and travelling sound waves of high intensity (<164 dB) within a wide range of wave frequencies (0.3–17.2 kHz). Two experimental setups were employed in the present study. A series of experiments was carried out to examine the influence of forced convection on the acoustically enhanced heat transfer. Air was passed over the Pt wire from the side through a funnel (4) and a fine grid (8). The gas velocity near the Pt wire was initially measured by replacing the wire with the anemometer sensor. In the experiments of high frequency range, four sound generators of the Hartmann type were designed to perform the measurements at four fixed frequencies ranging from 6.9 to 17.2 kHz. In the high frequency range, measurements were made under conditions of a travelling sound wave. The sound unit was attached directly to the acrylic box used in the low frequency experiments with both acrylic tubes being removed. In order to eliminate a formation of standing waves in the working space, a sound-absorbing screen was mounted at the opposite side of the box. The intensity of the travelling sound wave was initially measured by using the same noise meter. The microphone was positioned in one plane with the Pt wire normal to the direction of wave propagation. The measurement procedure was as follows. At first, the Pt wire was exposed to a sound wave for 10 s. Then, the wire was heated up to a given temperature by passing a current impulse through it. After the current has been switched off, wire temperature was determined by measuring the wire electrical resistance. The measurement data were stored and processed by a PC equipped with a programmable data acquisition processor. The experimental results are presented in terms of the heat transfer coefficient, First, the effects of standing wave strength and frequency on the heat transfer enhancement were examined. The strength was expressed in terms of the acoustic Reynolds number, A series of experiments was carried out under conditions where air was flowed over the Pt wire simultaneously with exposing it to a sound wave. The relationship between Results for high frequency range are shown in In considering the effect of sound waves on The rate of heat transfer between preheated Pt wire and ambient gas can be enhanced under the application of sound waves. The heat transfer coefficient increases with the sound strength in both standing and travelling sound waves. Nusselt number was found to be proportional to the square root of acoustic Reynolds number when the wire was positioned in the velocity antinode of standing acoustic field. The effect of sound waves on the heat transfer is decreased as the wire preheating temperature becomes higher. It occurs due to an increasing role of radiation in the heat transfer at higher temperatures. The effect of sound waves is independent of frequency in the low frequency standing wave range. However, there is a tendency for decrease in the effect of sound as frequency of travelling wave increases in the high frequency range. The large the velocity of flowing gas, the smaller is the effect of sound wave on heat transfer enhancement.