The objective was to evaluate the survival capability and quantify the persistence of the food-borne pathogens Listeria monocytogenes and Salmonella enterica in the Cacciatore, Felino and Milano type salami preparation. The batter of each sausage was inoculated with a five-strain cocktail of L. monocytogenes or S. enterica (ca. 104–105 CFU/g) and their progression was monitored at specific time intervals during preparation of the sausages. Four different batches were prepared at different times for each sausage/pathogen combination. Different models were used to fit the experimental data and to calculate the kinetic parameters. The best model was chosen based on statistical comparisons. S. enterica proved to be more sensitive susceptible to fermentation and ripening processes than L. monocytogenes. Both pathogens, however, survived relatively well as the result of the conditions (pH, a
                     w and fermentation temperature) prevailing during fermentation and ripening of the sausages. Water activity proved to be a key factor in the survival of the microorganisms. The statistical analysis of quantitative data gathered from challenge tests is useful for the food business operators as it can provide practical information on the process parameters combinations that could lead to a better control of the pathogens.In fermented sausages a sequence of hurdles leads to stable and safe products ( Listeriosis accounted for 1642 reported cases in 2012 within the EU, estimated from all the food products; 10.5% more than in 2011 and has been gradually increasing over the past five years ( Modeling may provide the required information on the changes in pathogen counts in fermented sausages during the manufacturing process. The application, however, of modeling in such foods is more difficult compared to other because pH and Therefore, the objective of this study was to evaluate the survival capability and quantify the persistence of the food-borne pathogens Meat batter for the production of Cacciatore, Felino and Milano type salami were prepared at the premises of Fructarom Italy (Parma, Italy) using industrial equipment for sausage preparation, and transported, at refrigerated temperature, to the Istituto Zooprofilattico for the pathogen contamination, stuffing and maturation. The transportation in all cases lasted less than 3 h. Starter cultures BITEC STARTER R4, B1 and R3 (Frutarom Savory Solutions GmbH, Korntal-Münchingen), were used to inoculate Cacciatore, Felino and Milano type salami. The cultures consist of strains of species The inoculation procedure is described in The same procedure described in Enrichment was also performed in parallel with enumeration to confirm the presence of the pathogens if their concentration was below the detection limit (10 The pH was measured by immersing the pH probe of a digital pH meter (micropH 2001, Crison, Barcelona, Spain) in a diluted and homogenized sample containing 10 g of sausage and 90 ml of distilled water. Water activity ( Various models describing the inactivation trend of both pathogens were used ( The Weibull model is. The biphasic model is. The log-linear with tail model is. All inactivation models were fitted to the experimental data by nonlinear regression using the Microsoft Excel 2007 (Microsoft, Redmond, WA, USA) add-in GInaFiT v1.6 ( Various statistical indices were employed to identify the best model describing adequately the inactivation data ( A one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) comparing the calculated parameters of interest among the different experimental trials within each pathogen was performed using the SPSS v15.0 program (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, Ill., USA) to determine whether there was a significant influence of these parameters (composition and type of fermented sausage) on The LAB counts increased rapidly during fermentation in all sausages (increase of 2.3–2.5 log The pH decreased during fermentation and displayed a slight increase during ripening in all sausages ( The The log-linear, Weibull, biphasic and log-linear with tail models were fitted to the experimental data of The inactivation of both pathogens in the fermented sausages was nonlinear ( The inactivation of  Another evidence that supports the role of  The present work was supported by the FP7-People-2011-CIG (LisGenOmics) project through the granting of a Marie Curie scholarship (