A multistage utilization process was developed to fully recover valuable metals from vanadium-bearing converter slag and reduce the content of hazardous elements, such as vanadium and chromium, in the tailings. A mechanical activation–calcification roasting–acid leaching process was firstly employed to recover vanadium. This process generated two products, viz. a V-bearing solution accounting for ∼95% V recovery and vanadium tailings with Fe and Ti contents of 31.85% and 8.94%, respectively. Then, based on theoretical calculations and physical measurements, a coal–based direct reduction–magnetic separation process and a hydrochloric acid leaching process were employed for the stepwise recovery of iron and titanium, respectively, from the vanadium tailings. Iron was recovered in the form of high chromium–vanadium iron with 81.53% Fe, 1.31% Cr, and 2.04% V, and titanium was recovered as titanium dioxide pigment with 85–90% yield. Such a comprehensive and clean utilization of vanadium-bearing converter slag has great potential for practical application.Almost 88% of the vanadium in the world is extracted from vanadium titano-magnetite ore Vanadium can be recovered from vanadium-bearing converter slag by several processes, such as sodium salts roasting–water leaching Vanadium tailings are obtained as a byproduct of vanadium production. In China, a large portion of vanadium tailings is dumped in landfills or stockpiled, and only a small amount is used as road base aggregates and raw material for V-Ti black ceramics After extraction of vanadium, the most abundant metal in vanadium tailings is iron and its recovery has been investigated by many researchers. Such recovery processes comprise reduction in a blast furnace Considering the poor utilization of vanadium tailings and urgent demand for V, Fe and Ti resources, a more comprehensive utilization of vanadium-bearing converter slag is now necessary. Therefore, this paper discusses a multistage utilization process for the gradient-recovery of V, Fe, and Ti from vanadium-bearing converter slag. The slag was acquired from the Panzhihua Iron and Steel Corporation, China, and crushed to a particle size smaller than 125 Vanadium slag (100 The dissolution rate of vanadium was determined by pipetting out 4 The leaching residue (100 The vanadium content in the solid samples and solutions was determined by the ferrous ammonium sulfate titration method, while the other elements were analyzed by X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (XRF, Shimadzu XRF-1800). The mineralogical compositions of the samples was determined by XRD analysis using a Rigaku D/max 2500 PC X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation ( The iron in the vanadium tailings was recovered by a coal-based direct reduction process. The main objective of the thermodynamic analysis was to predict the effect of the reduction temperature and carbon addition on the chemical composition of the reduction products. Thermodynamic equilibrium of a mixture containing varying amounts of carbon was calculated as a function of the temperature using the Factsage 6.2 software. The calculations were based on the minimization of the Gibbs free energy of the system under isothermal and isobaric conditions. The chemical composition of the vanadium-leaching residue was introduced in the Equlib program as input data. The amount of carbon was increased from 10 to 14 As shown in Calcification roasting is the most important step in the whole process since its conversion rate greatly influences the leaching rate of vanadium. In our previous study, we found that mechanical activation can significantly decrease the roasting temperature and shorten the roasting time The effect of the activation/leaching time on the dissolution of vanadium was determined in dilute sulfuric acid solution at a pH value of 2.5, leaching temperature of 50 After leaching, the slurry was filtered and washed with a 1% sulfuric acid aqueous. The leaching process yielded two products from the vanadium slag: vanadium-containing leaching solution and a leaching residue. The vanadium in the leaching solution can be extracted by vanadium recovery methods such as those using ammonium salts Based on the results of the leaching process, we here propose a complex strengthening technology for the extraction of vanadium from vanadium slag, as shown in Compared to the traditional calcification roasting–acid leaching process, only one mechanical activation process is introduced in the proposed process. Such mechanical activation step do consume relatively more energy; however, mechanical activation enhances the roasting and leaching efficiency, as well as the recovery rate of vanadium, which offset the increasing cost of the added step. Therefore, the proposed process is still feasible for practical application. The leaching residues generated from the calcification roasting–acid leaching process are called “vanadium tailings in which the V As it can be seen in  Liquid iron was enriched with Fe, Cr, and V, while Si, Mn, Ca, and Ti were concentrated in the slag. Under optimized reduction conditions, i.e., a mass of liquid iron in the range of 30–35  The XRD patterns of the magnetic and non-magnetic fractions are shown in From the above studies, it is concluded that the reduction and magnetic separation results are generally consistent with the results of the theoretical calculations, and thus a metallic-iron recycling process from vanadium tailings is here proposed, as shown in Compared to extraction methods from iron ore, the recovery of iron from vanadium tailings is not economical. However, the overall cost cannot be measured solely in economic terms, but must also include the increased benefit of mitigating the hazardous materials pollution. Vanadium tailings contain high chromium and vanadium levels and cannot be easily discharged in China due to the current reinforcement of the environmental regulations. Such vanadium tailings are available almost for free in China, as large amounts are being dumped in landfills or used as road base aggregates. Furthermore, the increased costs can be offset by recycling metals that are highly valuable for China, a country lacking Cr and Fe resources. Therefore, the proposed process presents promising applications in industry on the basis of the exceptionally cheap vanadium tailings, the simple extraction technology, and the efficient recovery of hazardous metals. According to the results of the theoretical calculations and the experiments above, Ti is concentrated in the slag generated from the iron recovery process. A typical Ti-bearing slag may contain 16.5% Ti and 3.1% Fe. After the reduction and separation steps, the slag was also enriched in Si, Al, Mn, Ca, and Mg. Large amounts of accumulated slag are not only a potential environmental problem but they constitute a waste of natural resources. However, it is not economical and practical to directly use this kind of slag to manufacture titanium dioxide pigments through sulfuric acid or chloride methods due to its low titanium content. Hydrometallurgical methods have been reported to recover titanium from metallurgy waste such as blast furnace slag According to the potential–pH equilibrium diagram of a Ti-H The titanium in Ti-bearing slag existed mainly in the form of Kennedyite ((Fe Based on the above analysis, we proposed a titanium recycling process from vanadium tailings, as shown in The comprehensive utilization of vanadium-bearing converter slag was evaluated and the follow conclusions were drawn: Recovery of vanadium: Mechanical activation can significantly improve the vanadium conversion rate during the calcium roasting–acid leaching process. The vanadium content in the vanadium slag decreased from 15.29% to about 0.85% of V Recovery of iron: A coal-based direct reduction–magnetic separation process was developed for the recovery of iron in the form of high chromium-vanadium iron with 81.53% Fe, 1.31% Cr and 2.04% V, and the recovery of titanium in the form of Ti-bearing slag with 16.45% Ti. Recovery of titanium: Ti was recovered in the form of titanium dioxide pigment with 85–90% Ti recovery from slag by a hydrochloric acid leaching process, involving the preparation of titanium-bearing solution, followed by purification and high temperature hydrolysis, and finally drying and calcination. These processes allow for the comprehensive utilization and clean utilization of vanadium-bearing converter slag. However, further studies are needed to validate the proposed processes, including their detailed technological optimization, economic analysis and environmental impact assessment. This work was supported by the