The prediction of acid rock drainage and metal leaching (ARDML) from mine sites requires a detailed understanding of the site specific rates and mechanisms of weathering. This is typically obtained through geochemical and mineralogical characterisation testwork that is undertaken on representative materials. One of the key components of this characterisation work is kinetic testing which generates critical data on the rate at which minerals within waste materials weather in the presence of moisture and oxygen. One of the most commonly applied kinetic tests is the humidity cell test (HCT) in which granulated material is exposed to cyclical dry and humid air and periodic leaching.
                  Knowing when to terminate a HCT is one of the key challenges encountered whilst undertaking a kinetic program. It is essential to balance the economics of continuing tests for extended durations with the danger of missing critical data if the test is terminated too early. This is particularly true where there are discrepancies in prediction between basic diagnostic (static) tests and kinetic tests. This may occur for example when corresponding static geochemical tests have predicted a significant potential for ARDML but the HCT has continued for well over a year without showing any acid-generation. In these cases, the initial period of HCT data can be used to estimate the time to onset of acidic conditions, which may be many years. However, this estimate does not explain why such a discrepancy exists. Likewise, static testing, bulk and basic mineralogical characterisation do not provide sufficient information to explain such discrepancies which are commonly related to such factors as sulfide and carbonate mineral liberation, mineral associations and grain size distributions.
                  This paper explores a novel mineralogical response to the uncertainty by applying a metallurgical mineralogy technique of mineral liberation analysis on sulfide minerals from pre leach HCT material. The results show that quantitative sulfide mineral liberation analysis can be used to understand HCT leachate quality. This information could be used to increase confidence in the termination of cells which contain no significant sulfide encapsulation. Altogether, quantitative liberation analysis opens up the possibility of improving the overall efficiency and data quality of a geochemical kinetic program as opposed to the historic method of running uncertain HCT samples indefinitely to observe the long term behaviour.The weathering and gradual oxidation of exposed sulfides in mine waste material has the potential to result in acid-rock drainage and metal(loid) leaching (ARDML). If the potential for ARDML is not identified during the early stages of mine planning and design, it can result in serious environmental liability and unforeseen costs during operations and post-closure owing to waste management plans that are not appropriately designed (e.g. For this reason the accurate assessment of ARDML risk now forms a critical part of Pre-Feasibility and Feasibility level mine design evaluations. It is also a requirement of the Equator Principles governing Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and permitting on projects funded by the World Bank. Guidance on ARDML assessment is published in the Global Acid Rock Drainage Guide ( Static testing diagnoses the ARDML potential of any given material type through various test protocols. These may include acid-base accounting (ABA) (i.e. One of the typical uncertainties with an HCT is determining when textural controls are providing a sufficient rate-limiting influence such that the potential upper rate of acid generation as indicated by static testing will not be realised during the execution of the HCT. One possible response to this uncertainty is to run HCTs for extended lengths of time (e.g. over 100 As an alternative or supplement to the geochemistry approach the authors here present an automated mineralogical approach to the issue. The use of automated mineralogy in predictive ARD studies is an emerging tool recently highlighted or applied in several publications ( Three samples representative of mine waste from an epithermal gold deposit were submitted for static and kinetic testing. The static tests included WRA, ABA and NAG testing. ABA indicates the potential for a given material to produce net acid conditions based on a balance between the acid generating sulfide minerals and acid neutralising carbonate minerals which are calculated as the acid generating potential (AP) and acid neutralising potential (NP) respectively. Each sample was individually air dried (if necessary) and then screened on a 2″ screen. Plus and minus 2″ weight distribution was calculated. Plus 2″ material was stage crushed to just passing 2″ and was recombined with screened minus 2″ material. The 100%-2″ feed was thoroughly blended and split to obtain ∼5.0 Sulfide sulfur (S This generates an estimate of acid generating potential (mole ratio of 31.25 multiplied by S Net Acid Generation (NAG) tests provide an estimate of the acid generated through the accelerated oxidation of sulfides by hydrogen peroxide to generate sulfuric acid. The acid produced consequently dissolves any neutralising minerals present, with the net result that acid production (NAG value as equivalent kg H The kinetic tests were carried out according to the ASTM D 5744-13 After 67 XRD analysis was carried out on the pre-leach HCT samples using a Philips PW1710 Powder Diffractometer at the Department of Earth Science, Cardiff University, UK. Bulk analyses were carried out on samples. Scans were run using Cu Kα radiation at 35 Samples of the pre-leach HCT material were prepared into polished thin sections before qualitative assessment by optical petrography and quantitative textural assessment by automated mineralogy. Optical petrography was carried out on a Meiji MX9000 fitted with a mounted Canon EOS 600D housed at SRK Consulting, Cardiff, UK. Automated mineralogy was carried out on a ZEISS EVO MA-25 scanning electron microscope fitted with one Bruker xFlash 6|60 EDX detector housed at Petrolab Ltd, Cornwall, UK. Analysis on the ZEISS EVO MA-25 consisted of a bright phase search plus context. The back scatter electron threshold was narrowed to focus on pyrite grains which were then selectively analysed in the context of the immediate textural association ( A phase classification scheme was developed using the Mineralogic Mining software. Delineating grains into different phase classes is achieved by matching criteria that compare the quantitative measurements of elemental composition, as determined from the ED spectrum, with standard mineral composition data. A mineral group name or a general name (after dominant elements) is used for a class where there is a range in the elemental composition data such that a specific mineral member cannot be separately identified (e.g. chlorite group). The speciation of all minerals was aided by data from XRD analysis and optical petrography. Liberation, grain size data and mineral association analyses were undertaken using Mineralogic v1.3. This returns pyrite liberation analysis by partial perimeter percent by frequency in 10% bins. Additional analysis of this pyrite liberation and grain size data was carried out using mySQL modelling procedures, which returns pyrite liberation by partial perimeter adjusted for the size (area) of the pyrite grain. Static and kinetic geochemical data for the samples are summarised in The consumption of neutralisation potential (NP) within each cell is shown in The differences in HCT behaviour are also observed in the metal(loid) release rates for the three samples ( The results of the XRD analysis and optical petrography on the pre-leach material show that the major minerals present within each sample are broadly similar (e.g. Qualitative textural assessment of the three samples reveals a high degree of pyrite encapsulation within non-reactive silicates ( In addition to the information provided by optical microscopy the automated microscopy routine provides quantitative analysis of: (i) the grain size distribution of pyrite; (ii) the immediate mineral associations of that pyrite; and (iii) the liberation by exposed partial perimeter of the pyrite. The grain size distribution data provided in Analysis of the pyrite association data also shows strong similarities between samples pre-leach 1 and pre-leach 3, with similar association amounts for quartz, orthoclase, biotite, and clay minerals. For pre-leach 2 the association with quartz and orthoclase is more dominant ( Pyrite liberation curves show the largest difference between the three samples. Pyrite liberation when analysed by frequency of occurrence show that sample pre-leach 3 had the greatest degree of pyrite liberation, with samples pre-leach 1 and pre-leach 2 having lower degrees of pyrite liberation ( This study has focused on three well-characterised samples where thorough static and kinetic testing was undertaken. For these three samples the sulfide sulfur contents were similar and all were predicted to be potentially acid-forming from static testwork. Two of the three samples did produce acidic leachate after considerably different lengths of time (i.e. 25 The automated mineralogy analysis routine was undertaken using a bright phase search plus context to delimit the partial perimeters exposed for pyrite grains and their immediate mineralogical context. This analysis routine circumvents the difficulty of the coarse grain size inherent in HCT tests. As grains reach up to 6.3 Qualitative petrographic analysis of the three samples suggested that pyrite showed a greater degree of liberation in pre-leach 3, though still with a high degree of encapsulation. Qualitatively the degree of liberation in pre-leach 1 and 2 looked similar and the magnitude of their greater encapsulation relative to pre-leach 3 was uncertain. Whilst this qualitative petrography was useful in understanding why pre-leach 3 produced acidic leachate earlier than pre-leach 1 and 2, it does not provide sufficient information to understand the difference in behaviour of pre-leach 1 and pre-leach 2, or the magnitude of the difference in behaviour of pre-leach 3 from the other two samples. This optical microscopy analysis highlights both the advantage of considering textural information in the assessment of ARD performance (e.g. The automated mineralogy study quantified the liberation of the three samples and showed the degree to which pre-leach 3 had the greatest pyrite liberation, and that this was significantly higher than either pre-leach 1 or pre-leach 2 (roughly 2–3 times greater). This was true whether liberation was considered as frequency of pyrite grains in each liberation class ( An additional observation of this liberation analysis is that all leach tests show a moderate to high degree of pyrite encapsulation. Indeed, when one considers the inherent stereological bias in 2D. liberation studies (e.g. The different rates of acid-generation have also had an impact of the rate of metal(loid) release with the pre-leach 3 generally showing slow and steady increase in metal(loid) loadings through to cell termination and two distinctly different start times. In contrast, pre-leach 2 showed a rapid increase in metal(loid) release for all elements that was coincident with the onset of acid-generation. This distinct behaviour in pre-leach 2 may relate to the lack of NP remaining in the cell during acid-generation but it may also relate to different trace element loadings in the pyrite. In this regard several controls on pyrite oxidation rate have been proposed for Co and Ni (which are argued to inhibit oxidation; e.g. To further understand the difference in behaviour of pre-leach 1 and 2 requires looking at the grain size distribution (GSD) data. Analysis of pyrite GSD data showed that pre-leach 2 had the finest pyrite GSD, whilst pre-leach 3 had the coarsest pyrite GSD. Pre-leach 1 had an intermediate pyrite GSD between these two samples. Therefore, relative to pre-leach 1, pre-leach 2 has finer pyrite. This is a critical observation as their liberation curves when adjusted for weight percent are indistinguishable. Pyrite reactivity will be a function of grain shape, grain size and inclusion content (e.g. The association data for the three samples shows that the primary (>98%) association of pyrite in all three samples is with unreactive and stable silicate phases (quartz, orthoclase, biotite and clay minerals) and that for this project this association does not have a material effect on the pH or the metal(loid) release. The development of quantitative mineralogy techniques for application in kinetic humidity cell testwork is part of a wider requirement to increase the use of textural and automated mineralogy within ARDML assessments. It is based on the recognition, as in traditional process mineralogy, that the fundamental controls on mine waste reactivity are mineral textures and that simply measuring chemical data will be insufficient for understanding subsequent waste rock dump water quality (cf. For these three samples the automated mineralogy study has shown that the speed with which HCT cells generate acidic leachate and release metal(loids) can be linked primarily to quantitative pre-leach pyrite liberation and secondarily to GSD data. More generally, the principal benefits of an automated mineralogical approach is to provide valuable quantitative information on the nature of pyrite in the waste rocks which can be used to explain discrepancies between static and kinetic testwork. The quantitative nature of the analysis goes beyond optical microscopy providing both greater depth of information and greater certainty in interpretation. For the geochemist overseeing the ARDML assessment pre-leach automated tests improve the overall quality of the geochemical program assisting in the difficult decisions of when to terminate a humidity cell or for how long to operate cells with high degrees of pyrite encapsulation. This study opens up the possibility of further development with: (i) the potential to look at carbonate liberation in conjunction with pyrite liberation; and (ii) the potential to incorporate trace element pyrite analysis through tools such as Laser Ablation ICP-MS into the interpretation of metal(loid) release. An integrated automated approach that combines state-of-the-art pyrite liberation, carbonate liberation and trace element analysis will be the focus of future ARDML assessment programs. Two anonymous reviewers are thanked for their comments on an earlier manuscript draft.