Tibial plafond fractures are technically challenging and have the potential for serious complications. Minimizing soft tissue trauma can compromise visualization of articular reduction. There has been recent interest in the use of arthroscopy to improve visualization of plafond fractures while preserving the soft tissue envelope. Here the authors offer some technical points in order to simplify a technically demanding procedure.Tibial plafond injuries are devastating injuries with good to excellent outcomes as low as 37% in some series Recently, there has been increasing interest in the arthroscopic management of tibial plafond fractures After initial assessment and stabilization of all associated life- and limb-threatening injuries, arthroscopic-assisted tibial plafond fixation is managed in 2 stages. The first stage involves definitive fixation of the fibula, posterior buttressing of the distal tibia, and temporary external fixation. This is accomplished by positioning the patient lateral on a beanbag, and leaving the hip mobile enough to allow supine positioning of the ankle. The patient is placed in a slight Trendelenburg position. This nondependent positioning prevents the need for a tourniquet, thus minimizing secondary tissue trauma. After prepping and draping, a delta frame external fixator is applied. Reduction maneuvers to reestablish length, rotation, and alignment are performed. Frequently, an extra pin through the cuneiforms is required to prevent forefoot equinus. Once provisional reduction is achieved and the frame is secured, the fibula fracture and posterior malleolar fracture are approached through a posterolateral approach with the incision 1 cm posterior and parallel to the fibula. Palpating the fibular head proximally will provide a reference point to prevent incorrect placement of the proximal portion of the incision. Accurate placement of this incision is important to allow for proper exposure of the fibula and posterior tibia, and to minimize concerns with the skin bridge associated with the anterolateral distal tibial incision, which will be made later. As the fibula is exposed, care is taken to avoid the sural nerve, which may cross the incision distally. To reduce the fibula, we have found the use of Hintermann distractors particularly useful in reestablishing length, especially in the presence of severe comminution ( Once the fibula is stabilized, the Volkmann fragment is approached by retracting the peroneal tendons anteriorly. The Volkmann fragment is then buttressed without fixation with an undercontoured 1/3 tubular plate. Fractures that extend posteriorly into the diaphysis or have metadiaphyseal comminution are difficult to address with posterior plating without requiring significant soft tissue dissection. Other plates may be used, but a tubular plate allows slight overreduction, which is useful during the second stage of the procedure ( Once swelling has subsided, the definitive fixation with arthroscopic assistance is performed. This is accomplished by supine positioning, with the leg on an incline pillow. This positioning minimizes dependent venous bleeding during arthroscopy and facilitates easier use of fluoroscopy. The leg is prepped with the external fixator in place. The cuneiform pin is removed to allow for flexion and extension of the ankle. The procedure starts with a 5-cm incision through the anterolateral approach with the distal extent ending just distal to the joint line. This incision allows for identification and protection of the superficial peroneal nerve ( Arthroscopy proceeds without use of a tourniquet, with a 2.7-mm-long 30° arthroscope and 30 mm of pump pressure with the patient in a slight Trendelenburg position. The low pump pressure minimizes fluid extravasation, whereas Trendelenberg positioning provides adequate visualization. The long scopes are required to work around the external fixator bars. The distraction obtained during external fixator placement and the mobile nature of the anterior and medial tibial fragments allows for access to the posterior recesses without the need of further distraction ( Reduction starts with reduction of the Volkmann fragment using the talar dome as a template. This is best accomplished using a blunt elevator through the anterolateral portal. Counter pressure is provided by the posterior buttress plate. A K-wire is passed through the tibial metaphysis to secure the reduced Volkmann fragment ( The development of minimally invasive techniques and better soft tissue management has resulted in a significant decrease in postoperative wound complications. Wyrsch et al showed a 25% deep infection rate in closed pilon fractures and a 100% overall complication rate when treated with primary ORIF Although wound complications have been minimized, so too, has visualization. Older studies have shown that outcome is related to reduction quality There have been 2 reports of using arthroscopy as an adjunct for the treatment of pilon fractures. Kralinger et al was the first to describe arthroscopic-assisted reduction of a pilon fracture Although technically challenging, arthroscopy is valuable as a tool for visualization and reduction of type 3C pilon fractures. It allows for the removal of loose chondral fragments, provides excellent visualization of the articular surface, minimizes soft tissue stripping, and may even provide prognostic value regarding the risk of posttraumatic arthritis.