A cage mill of a plant processing salts was analyzed using the simplified population balance model and a scale-up procedure was developed for predicting the industrial performance from information obtained from a pilot cage mill. Two fundamental assumptions were made, (1) that the non-load power consumption for the industrial and pilot mill was machine dependent and therefore a scale-up value should be determined and (2) that the specific energy consumption during grinding was material dependent only so that values obtained experimentally for a given material from the scaled-up pilot mill could be used directly to determine de operating condition of the industrial mill if a given grinding objective is specified.The Cage Mill is a grinding device with multiple counter rotating cages where material are fed through a feed chute directly into the center of the innermost cage The reduction process begins here as the material is broken by impact at the innermost cage which scatters the shattered particles randomly. The particles are then struck by the subsequent cage rows before exiting through the bottom of the mill, Since the principal grinding mechanism in cage mills is impact, for scale-up from a pilot mill, we must require that the impact on a particle be equal on both mills. This will be the case if the tangential velocities of the corresponding cages are equal. If and When industrial and pilot mills run at the prescribed speed and feed rates, to lead to the same impact force to particles, they draw a different amount of power. This fact is natural due to the different size and design and therefore a scaling factor must be calculated for the energy consumption. The procedure to determine this factor is shown in Due to the random motion of the particles as they pass through the cages, the mill content may be assumed to be well mixed and the equation of a fully mixed population balance may be applied. On the other hand, there is no screen at the mill exit so that no internal classification occurs. To avoid laborious parameter determination we will assume compensation condition and use the simplified population balance model. We will further discuss this issue later in this paper. Consider the grinding in a cage mill as a first order phenomena In all industrial grinding operations the power According to Eq. The industrial cage mill, as shown in To characterize the comminution process in the industrial cage mill, the solid and brine feed flow and the voltage and current were recorded. Samples of feed and discharge materials were screened through 8 to 200 Tyler mesh. Two sampling campaign were made on the industrial cage mill on two different materials. On each campaign a sample of 500 Material of Test 1 was used for parameter determination and for obtaining the power scale-up factor. Operating conditions of the industrial mill was a feed rate of 147 The pilot cage mill consists of a cylindrical body with two rows of square bars 2.5 The entire 500 The screen analysis of the two pilot cage mill tests and the reduced specific grinding rates are given. From the power draw of the plant Test 1 and Pilot Test 1 the power scale-up factor Using Eq. Test no.2 in the Plant and in the Pilot mill, with material having different composition than Test no.1, was used to verify the quality of the simulation. The Industrial Cage Mill product particle size distribution of Test no.2 is compared with the scaled-up simulated particle size distribution from the Pilot Cage Mill Test 2 and the power scale factor The use and success of population balance for modeling comminution processes has been demonstrated by numerous examples in the technical literature. It requires the possibility of determination of two parameters, the specific rate of breakage and the primary breakage function. The most frequent method used for parameter determination is batch grinding of several mono-sized particles. This procedure is impractical in the present case since the laboratory mill used is a continuous pilot mill and at least 60 Due to these limitations we used the idea proposed by Similarity in the operation of an industrial and a pilot impact mill, such a cage mills, requires equal impact on the particles, and this may be assured if in both mills the tangential velocity of the cages are equal. One problem in reproducing this rule in the laboratory was that the pilot mill velocity control could not be fine tuned as required. Therefore approximate values were used. Another factor that had to be determined was the feed rate in the pilot mill. Since the scaled velocity for the pilot mill was established, we decided to determine the pilot mill feed rate as the one that would give the same reduction ratio as the industrial mill. These values were made during Test no.1. Once similarity of operation was obtained the power draw was recorded. As discussed previously in  The objective of this project was to establish a method to predict the plant cage mill performance for different material by performing test on a pilot cage mill. The result of this research shows that the information obtained from the pilot mill is adequate to make such prediction. This work is part of the Master of Science Thesis of Francisco Rodriguez at the Department of Metallurgical Engineering of the University of Concepción. The authors acknowledge financial support from the