Background
                  Treatment for proximal humerus fractures remains controversial. Studies of open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) rarely account for reduction quality, while surgeon experience and sagittal plane reduction remain unstudied. In a retrospective case series analysis of AO/OTA C-type proximal humerus fractures treated with ORIF using a locking plate, we hypothesized that reduction quality would be associated with outcome, and reductions would improve with experience.
               
                  Methods
                  We retrospectively identified 41 3- and 4-part proximal humerus fractures treated with ORIF by a single orthopaedic traumatologist. Two blinded traumatologists assessed injury and post-operative radiographs for medial calcar disruption and five measures of deformity. Major complications and functional outcome were assessed.
               
                  Results
                  Outcome by ASES score was similar to previous reports (mean 73.6, std dev 22.5). Eleven of 35 patients (31.4%) with greater than six months follow-up experienced a complication. Post-reduction sagittal HSa<25° (RR = =9.44, p = =0.024) and medial calcar disruption (RR = =3.82, p = =0.009) were associated with complications. Post-reduction coronal and sagittal HSa improved with experience (p < 0.001 and p = =0.032, respectively) as did the likelihood of overall anatomic reduction (p = =0.006). ROC analysis found a threshold for superior reduction quality after 23 cases (AUC = =0.873, p < 0.001).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Sagittal reduction quality and medial calcar disruption were associated with complications. Additionally, reduction quality improved with experience. Future studies of proximal humerus ORIF should include multiplanar assessments of reduction while accounting for surgeon experience.Proximal humerus fractures are common and orthopaedic surgeons across a variety of practice settings must be prepared to encounter them This consensus is reflected in a trend of increasing surgical treatment of proximal humerus fractures, commonly with a locking plate Studies of ORIF, most commonly utilizing a locking plate construct, have described variable results with some reports of high complication rates [ While coronal plane reduction has been examined and found to be significantly associated with complications, the influence of sagittal plane reduction on outcome has not yet been examined. Additionally, the role that surgeon experience may play in the reduction of proximal humerus fractures has not been studied, but has been shown to play a significant role in the management of other challenging orthopaedic injuries, such as acetabular fractures Upon obtaining Institutional Review Board approval, we retrospectively identified consecutive AO/OTA C-type proximal humerus fractures in adult patients treated with open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) by a single surgeon (HS) between January 2008 and January 2017. The study included 41 of 56 cases identified after 15 were excluded based on pre-determined criteria (5 primarily diaphyseal fractures, 3 open fractures, 3 fractures with ipsilateral shoulder girdle fractures, 1 with concomitant ipsilateral brachial plexus injury, and 3 with incomplete radiographic records). In each case, patients were treated with a similar clinical evaluation, operative technique, and postoperative rehabilitation protocol. Injuries were assessed with AP and scapular Y views, and consent for surgical fixation was obtained through shared decision-making following discussion of treatment options, risks, and benefits. ORIF was performed utilizing a Proximal Humerus Internal Locking System (PHILOS) plate (Synthes, Raynham, MA, USA) through either a deltopectoral or lateral deltoid splitting approach depending on fracture characteristics. Sutures were placed in the rotator cuff to control the tuberosity fragments. The reduction of the head to the shaft was performed and provisionally stabilized with Kirschner wires. AP and axillary views were obtained with the arm in 25˚ to 30˚of external rotation and scrutinized for quality of reduction. The tuberosities were reduced and provisionally stabilized. If the fracture pattern and bone quality dictated the use of allograft or calcium phosphate cement, this was placed prior to definitive fixation. Sutures controlling the rotator cuff and tuberosity fragments were passed through the suture holes in the plate. The plate was applied on the lateral cortex and great care was taken to ensure the calcar screw was positioned at the optimal location The patients were allowed to begin passive range of motion exercises without weight bearing immediately following surgery. Patients returned to clinic at 2-week intervals for evaluation, acquisition of additional imaging, and advancement of their physical therapy protocol as appropriate depending on their fracture pattern and the surgeon's assessment of the quality of the fixation. In cases of simple fracture patterns with good fixation and little comminution, active range of motion was begun at 2 weeks. Conversely, those with more severe injuries were generally advanced to active motion at 4 weeks or later, if needed. Injury and reduction parameters were independently assessed by two fellowship-trained traumatologists (WL and JC) blinded to outcome. Assessment was performed on images obtained immediately following surgery in all but one case, where 2 week follow up images were used. Injury parameters included coronal plane head-shaft angle (HSa), head-shaft displacement (HSd), greater tuberosity cranialization (GTc), and medial calcar disruption, as well as sagittal plane HSa and HSd. The methodology for measuring coronal plane parameters was adapted from previously published techniques Chart review was performed to identify the primary outcome of complications, including avascular necrosis (AVN), loss of reduction, post-traumatic arthritis, infection, and need for reoperation. Patients were contacted by mail and telephone to quantify functional outcome using the American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons (ASES) assessment tool, and to identify any additional complications or intervention that may have occurred. Chi-square analysis and student's The study cohort included 41 type C proximal humerus fractures occurring in 40 individuals. The average age of these patients was 58.5 years (range 20.5–98.1 years, std dev 14.3 years). This included 26 women and 14 men, who experienced 17 high energy and 24 low energy mechanism injuries resulting in 17 right-sided and 24 left-sided AO/OTA Type C proximal humerus fractures. The average interval time from injury to operative fixation was 8.3 days (range 0–29 days, std dev 6.5), and mean follow-up time was 42 months (range 3 to 128 months). ASES questionnaires were completed by 23 individuals, with a mean composite score of 73.6 (std dev 22.5). The mean injury coronal HSa was 142.8° (range 50.8–227.2°, std dev 41.1°), HSd was 5.3 mm (range 0–30.4 mm, std dev 6.48 mm), and GTc was 1.1 mm (range 0–14.2 mm, std dev 3.0 mm). The mean injury sagittal HSa was 44.3° (range 87.1–122.2°, std dev 36.9°) and HSd was 8.0 mm (range 0–51.2 mm, std dev 10.0 mm). The medial calcar was disrupted in 20 of the 41 fractures. There were 26 Neer 3-part fractures and 15 Neer 4-part fractures. The OTA classification system was used to classify 18 C1, 20 C2, and 3 C3 fractures. The mean reduction coronal HSa was 133.3° (range 113.3–156.7°, std dev 9.4°), HSd was 1.1 mm (range 0–8.4 mm, std dev 2.2 mm), and GTc was 0.2 mm (range 0–5.1 mm, std dev 0.8 mm). The mean reduction sagittal HSa was 23.8° (range −7.4° to 41.3°, std dev 9.6°) and HSd was 2.6 mm (range 0–18.4 mm, std dev 4.5 mm). A medial support screw was utilized in 37 of 41 fractures (90.2%). The inter-rater reliability was determined to be Complications were assessed for cases having at least 6 months follow up (includes clinical and telephone follow-up; Among injury radiographic parameters assessed, coronal HSd and medial calcar disruption were significantly associated with complications ( ROC analysis demonstrated sagittal alignment (HSa<25°) was highly predictive of complication (Area Under the Curve = 0.813, There were no changes in mechanism of injury, polytrauma status, or fracture classification (Neer 3 or 4-part) as surgical experience grew ( Post-reduction coronal and sagittal HSa both improved significantly with surgeon experience ( The main purpose of this study was to determine if biplanar reduction quality was associated with complications for proximal humerus fractures treated with ORIF using a locked plate. We found that post-reduction sagittal alignment was strongly associated with the primary outcome measure, complications, which has not previously been reported. Additionally, we observed a significant relationship between calcar disruption and complications, which corroborates previously published reports Of the host and injury factors assessed, only coronal HSd and medial calcar disruption were significantly associated with complications. Meanwhile age, mechanism of injury, polytrauma, fracture type (i.e. Neer 3 or 4 part), and the remaining injury radiographic measures were not significantly associated with complications. These results support the notion that reduction quality in surgically treated proximal humerus fractures may play an independent role in outcome, a generally accepted concept yet to be clearly demonstrated in the literature. The role of medial calcar disruption and the surgical goal of recreating this buttress with a reduced calcar and stabilizing medial support screw is well supported by both clinical and biomechanical data [ Additionally, we sought to determine if surgeon experience played a role in the ability to achieve an anatomic reduction in what is widely accepted as a technically challenging operation. We found that surgeon experience was significantly associated with reduction quality, and that the likelihood of obtaining an We acknowledge that this study has several limitations, including its retrospective design. While the relatively small series size and treatment by a single surgeon limits the generalizability of our results, it does allow us to assess how reduction quality changes during a surgeon's career. Coronal plane angulation was rarely the source of malreduction and the accuracy of coronal reduction likely limited our ability to confirm the previously reported relationship between coronal reduction and outcome We found that post-reduction sagittal plane angulation and medial calcar disruption were strongly and synergistically associated with complications, and that surgeon experience substantially influenced the likelihood of obtaining an Dr. Bernstein is a consultant for Smith and Nephew and Nuvasive; Dr. Harkin's immediate family member is a paid employee of Globus Medical; The remaining authors have no financial disclosures or potential conflicts of interest. This research was approved by the Loyola University Medical Center Institutional Review Board. This research did not receive any external funding. The implants utilized in this study are approved for the described application by the United States Food and Drug Administration.