In mechanized excavation projects, the major part of feasibility studies includes predicting the lifetime of cutting tools. Estimating the required numbers of tools for excavating a certain length of a section, under defined geologic conditions, and assessing the cost and downtimes needed for tools replacement are the other important issues in the preliminary studies of these projects. Presently, there are several experimental models used to study the abrasive capacity of soil materials in mechanized tunneling applications. In this paper, the effect of plastic behavior of clay particles on the abrasivity of soil materials was studied using the results of LCPC abrasivity tests. The results showed that the rheological behavior of abrasive samples changes considerably with the change of the clay particles mineralogy and the dominant water content. These changes have a significant effect on recorded wear amounts. Based on the obtained results, the plastic limit and the liquid limit of the clay part can be used to predict the appeared abrasive trends in LCPC tests. Moreover, during performing the LCPC tests, the consumed power of the electromotor of the testing device was recorded. The obtained power graphs confirmed the effect of the mineralogy and the water content of the clay part on the rheological and abrasive behavior of the testing samples.The increasing demand for mechanized excavation machines in different civil and mining projects, has led to several studies about soil abrasivity in the last years. Various experimental setups have been used to study the abrasive capacity of soil materials in mechanized tunneling applications. Some of the most well-known models are LCPC abrasimeter (  In the investigations presented in this research paper, the effect of plastic behavior of fine particles on the abrasivity of soil materials is studied with the LCPC test. Natural soil deposits often have a considerable amount of clay particles with different mineralogy, which is expected to influence both the abrasivity and the consistency of the soil. Moreover, slurry shields, and sometimes EPB TBMs, use bentonite for soil conditioning purposes. The rheological behavior of clay containing soils changes considerably with the change of dominant water content. It appears that the rheological changes have a significant effect on the abrasive properties of soft grounds. In addition, LCPC abrasivity tests were applied in the studies. The central laboratory of bridges and roads In the conducted investigations, five weights were designed and made to study the impact of effective stress levels on the wear of steel propellers. The details of the design of loading weights have been published elsewhere ( The AFNOR standard recommends using XC12 steel grade with the hardness of 60–75 HRB in making propellers. However, regarding to inaccessibility to this grade of steel, the propellers were made of St-37 structural steel. The hardness of used steel parts was measured in the range of 63 ± 5 Rockwell B (HRB) that is in line with the recommended hardness in the standardized test. During a part of the experimental investigations, in addition to measure the weight loss of the steel propeller, the consumed power of the electromotor was recorded. A 3-phase power meter was designed and manufactured ( In order to investigate the effect of the plasticity of fine particles on the wear capacity of soil deposits, synthetic soil samples were made with mixing the crushed angular Silica grains and clay particles. The size range of the used silica grains ( In the first step, in order to see the effect of fine particles on the abrasive behavior of soil mixtures, the variations of The mixtures of crushed and fine silica grains show a quite different trends in  Adding clay minerals to the abrasive samples and changing the share of clay minerals change the The principals of soil mechanics can describe the trends of Considering the very low water absorption of silica particles in the abrasive samples, one can assume that the whole added water into the sample is absorbed with clay particles. Moreover,  Using the specified ranges for the behavior of the clay part in the graphs of When the water content is within the range between Passing the moisture content relevant to liquid limit (  In When As mentioned in  The high degree of conformity between the trends of  The The silica–kaolinite mixtures in the moisture range of Another important point in the figures of Clay particles and moist, are both normally present in the natural soil deposits. Based on the results, the plastic behavior of clay has a considerable effect on the abrasivity of soil mixture. The results also show that the plastic and liquid limit of the clay part can be used to predict the abrasive behavior of soil mixture, at least in the results of LCPC tests. It seems that in dry conditions, the hard and coarse grains play a major role in the abrasive capacity. However, in the presence of water, the kind, and percentage of clay particles, and in the other word, the rheological behavior of the clay part is determinant. The most important moisture range is the water contents between plastic limit and liquid limit, which results in nearly zero Therefore, the bigger the plasticity index, the greater the range of water contents in which the clay part shows plastic behavior. The  The photos of In this paper, the effect of plastic behavior of fine particles on the abrasivity of soil materials has been studied. Natural soil deposits normally contains clay particles with different mineralogy. Moreover, slurry TBMs and sometimes EPB TBMs use bentonite for soil conditioning purposes. The rheological behavior of clay materials changes considerably with the change of dominant water content. LCPC tests were performed on the synthetic soil samples, which include different percentages and types of clay particles. Water contents and surface stress levels were changed in the testing program. The results showed that: Adding fine particles to the abrasive mixture has considerable effect on the obtained When clay particles are added to hard and coarser silica grains, the average hardness of the testing sample decreases and therefore lower When the water content is below the soils plastic limit ( A continuous plastic matrix of clay forms when the water content is between the plastic limit and liquid limit ( When the prevailing water content is greater than the liquid limit ( Recording the power consumption of the electromotor of the testing device reveals the interaction between the abrasive mixture and the steel propeller. Adding water to the dry samples decreases the level of consumed energy. The lowest level of consumed energy is always relevant to the water contents within the range of plastic and liquid limits. Entering into the range of liquid behavior of clay part not only increases the consumed power level but also severe fluctuations appear on the real-time power signals. These changes are thoroughly in line with the recorded trends of The cohesion of the clay particles to the sample container wall can cause inconsistent trends in the obtained An overall review of the results shows that there are considerable differences between the interactional mechanisms prevailing in LCPC tests and real cutting tools. Moreover, it seems that the discrepancy increases when the rheological behavior of the testing sample changes due to the presence of clay and moisture. Based on this, it can be indicated that the LCPC test is not a proper experimental setup for studying prevailing trends and correlations in the wear of soil cutting tools.