A hydrometallurgical method of alumina and silica gangue removal from rejects slime of iron ore by alkali and acid leaching is proposed. Up to about 80% gangue is removed by chemical leaching with sodium hydroxide, sulphuric, hydrochloric and nitric acids. Although sulphuric acid is the most effective among the acids, it suffers from a substantial loss of iron. Sodium hydroxide is the most effective leachant at 95°C with an optimum concentration of 5M NaOH for 2h. The iron value of the leached slime improved from 58.8% to 67.5% and contained <2% Al2O3.
                  Process parameters were optimized by circulating and staged leaching with different concentrations of sodium hydroxide (1.25–7.25M). The leaching kinetics shows that the principal reaction of alumina+silica is first order with respect to hydroxide ions.A large quantity of iron ore fines are generated during mining which is about 35% of the total iron ore mineral. Slimes, defined as − Earlier efforts have been made to reduce the alumina level by ( Therefore, chemical beneficiation of minerals arises from the limitation of physical beneficiation processes. Very little information has been published on the removal of gangue from iron ore slime by chemical leaching ( The present investigation has been carried out to identify a laboratory scale hydrometallurgical method for removal of gangue material by leaching with a suitable inorganic acid or with sodium hydroxide to produce blast furnace grade iron ore. Sodium hydroxide selectively reacts with silica and alumina present in gangue material to form soluble sodium silicate and aluminate with minimum iron oxide dissolution; whilst mineral acids not only react with gangue material but also reacts with iron oxides and goethite phase. Sulphuric acid is comparatively better due to its lower reactivity towards goethite and iron oxides with minimum loss of iron. However, hydrochloric acid quite readily dissolves goethite and other iron oxides even though it may have an advantage in dissolving gangue materials more readily as soluble chloride salts. Nitric acid is not preferred because of its low reactivity and the formation of nitrates and nitroso compounds ( The test samples of iron ore rejects were taken from the slime ponds of iron ore at Joda mines, Tata Steel Ltd, India. The iron ore slimes were in situ sieved and analysed with 94.4% present as < A three neck round bottom flask of 1 litre capacity fitted with a spiral condenser was used as a reactor and placed in an oil bath maintained ± Typically for acid leaching, 400 Some experiments were carried out with circulating leaching. In this method, solution was continuously recycled at a constant flow through the extractor until the gibbsite-goethite-quartz phase in the ore was dissolved at equilibrium. The reaction parameters were varied for different runs in order to investigate the effect of the circulating leach condition and solution samples were collected at specific time intervals for the kinetic study. It was observed that circulating leaching was more effective than staged addition of leachate. The elements in the sample were determined by atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES). The total alkali and acid concentration in the solution was measured by wet-chemical as well as potentiometric titration. The XRD patterns of feed material are presented in About 1 The effect of different acid and caustic leachants on slime extraction has been studied under a range of different experimental conditions and concentrations as summarised in The leaching results for four different concentrations of sodium hydroxide are given in The dissolution of alumina, silica and phosphorus vs. leaching time is shown in For the dissolution of alumina or silica, the concentration derivative with respect to time can be expressed as a first order reaction, according to:   The main contaminant of the fine particle (< The following optimum conditions were identified for single stage percolation leaching:6.25 Clearly, the leached ore has to be washed to recover the caustic and the recovery and recycling of sodium hydroxide is necessary to reduce the cost of the process. The authors would like to thank the R&D and Scientific Division of Tata Steel Ltd, India operation for providing the research opportunity and publication permission.