Facies study is a powerful tool to better understand complexities of carbonate reservoirs. Porosity, frame flexibility factor and bulk modulus of fluid are believed to be the most proper rock physical parameters to define desired facies in carbonate rocks. Bayesian inversion is a natural choice to invert the desired facies from seismic data. The inversion method then often includes (1) Bayesian inversion of elastic parameters from seismic data, (2) Bayesian inversion of rock physical parameters from elastic parameters by considering an appropriate up-scaling method and (3) Bayesian classification of facies from inverted rock physical parameters. Neuro-Bayesian inversion method has been introduced in this study, which is a combination of an artificial neural network (ANN) classifier and Bayesian inversion of rock physical parameters that allows an improved facies prediction. Comparison between Bayesian and neuro-Bayesian methods is performed to illustrate the accuracy of predicting the facies, improved from 67% to 73% in the final results. Moreover, the Bayesian method predicted just two of the three facies where Neuro-Bayesian method predicted all the three facies successfully.Carbonate rocks are one of the most important reservoirs worldwide. Previous studies ( Bayesian inversion ( In Bayesian facies inversion, the most probable facies is selected to have a maximum According to the inherent characteristic of each facies type, corresponding rock physical parameters such as porosity, pore type and fluid content can be grouped in one class. Two samples from one class have the most similarity to each other and consequently samples from two different classes have the most dissimilarity. In seismic data, rock physical parameters control elastic behaviour in each facies. This means that elastic parameters such as P- and S-wave velocities (as well as density) are a function of rock physical parameters. Finally, seismic responses depend directly on the elastic parameters, implying that they are controlled by facies type. Suppose that Bayesian inversion of elastic parameters from seismic data. Bayesian inversion of petrophysical parameters ( Elastic parameters, inverted from seismic data, are in seismic scale while available petrophysical parameters, obtained often from well log data, are in well log data scale, which is about 100 times much smaller. The difference in scaling can be accounted for by Bayesian up-scaling methods ( Bayesian classification of facies from inverted rock physical data. In Bayesian classification, a GMM with The problem appears when GMM does not completely fit a complex distribution. In that situation, there are some samples that GMM cannot cover them properly resulting in a misclassification in the final results. The main goal of this paper is to replace Bayesian classification with an ANN classifier to improve the accuracy of the method. As shown in Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) is a popular neural network algorithm with several advantages such as better performance and reasonable time for convergence ( In order to illustrate the applicability of the approach, we present a case study from a carbonate gas reservoir in Iran. The dominant lithology of the reservoir zone is calcite and dolomite with lower amounts of anhydrite and illite-rich shale. In this study, 2D prestack time migrated seismic data in three angles: 6, 16 and 26 degrees were used. As shown in The facies distribution, conditioned to the rock physical parameters, can be calculated using A Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) neural network was applied in this study. An MLP consists of three layers: input, one or more hidden layer(s) and an output layer. As mentioned earlier, the inverted rock physical parameters (porosity, frame flexibility factor and bulk modulus of fluid) are used as input for MLP. Therefore, the input layer is a 3 by 1 vector size for each sample containing rock physical parameters ( As shown in The parameters of MLP are trained using error back propagation (BP) with a Levenberg–Marquardt (LM) learning function and a sigmoid activation function (  After training and testing the network, we used it to predict facies from the rock physical parameters obtained by the Bayesian inversion. To compare the two approaches, Bayesian and Neuro-Bayesian facies inversions, we extracted real facies from the well data and compared them with the results of these two methods at the well position, which is shown in Since this network classified test data without any mistake, a question that may arise is: Moreover, Bayesian inversion was not successful in predicting the unfavourable facies because these facies were too thin in their thicknesses. This is also because GMM was not completely fitted to all the data; thus, the membership values of these kinds of samples were not correctly determined. In contrast, Neuro-Bayesian inversion was able to predict at least one unfavourable facies in a correct position in the well. This is a second advantage of the Neuro-Bayesian facies inversion, which allows for a better interpretation of the reservoir properties. Sensitivity analysis is an important part of every ANN study. In this study, to assess the effect of each input variable, three MLPs similar to the one discussed in the Alongside the above-mentioned benefits, the deterministic prediction of the facies can be accounted as a shortcoming of the method. Uncertainty assessment is a critical parameter in some of practical works in the petroleum industry. Therefore, the Neuro-Bayesian method is not applicable for this purpose unless a high accuracy of deterministic facies prediction is demanded. Probabilistic neural network (PNN) and/or Bayesian neural network are suggested to produce probabilistic classification for future studies. Future studies should also implement the applied method to more cases to fully unravel its potentials, limitations and possible improvements to the algorithm. This is, however, beyond the scope of this paper. An artificial neural network classifier was used in place of a Bayesian classification in the Bayesian facies inversion workflow. Inverted porosity, frame flexibility factor and bulk modulus of fluid were considered as the input samples for the network and, favourable, unfavourable and transition facies were considered as output values for each sample. A network with 3-13-3 structures was determined as an optimum network based on mean square error calculations. The network was trained using 70% (1026 samples), validated using 15% (220 samples) and tested using 15% (220 samples) of available data. Results of the test data showed 100% accuracy for the facies prediction. Bayesian and Neuro-Bayesian methods were then applied to real seismic data, 2D prestack migrated seismic data from a carbonate reservoir, and their corresponding 2D facies were produced. A comparison between the two methods at the well position showed that the accuracy of the facies prediction increased from 67% to 73% when the Neuro-Bayesian inversion method was used instead. The other improvement in the final result was that all the three facies were predicted by the Neuro-Bayesian method while the Bayesian method predicted just two facies and unfavourable facies was not presented in the final 2D section. We acknowledge the National Iranian Oil Company (NIOC) and especially H. Khoshdel for providing the seismic data and permission to publish them in this study. Five anonymous reviewers and the editor provided critical and useful comments to an earlier version of this paper for which we are grateful.