We report the aqueous phase chemical reduction synthesis of starch stabilized Ag–Cu alloy nanoparticles. Changing the proportions of Ag and Cu precursor salts leads to different levels of solid solubility. The variations in the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) absorbance of sols are analyzed from the perspective of nanoparticles composition and their structural features. Small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) analysis of the Ag–Cu nanoparticles sols shows the formation of mass fractal aggregate nanostructures in all cases.The nature of absorption due to localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) in noble metal nanoparticle sols depends on the nanoparticle material, size, shape, and aspect ratio In this context, an important issue pertains to the possibility of enhancing solid solubility of components in such small finite systems (nanoparticles) We note that the size difference between Ag and Cu is less than 15% and both have face centered cubic (fcc) structure. Therefore, according to the Hume–Rothery rules Ag and Cu should form solid solution. The observation of enhanced solid solubilities under metastable condition conforms to this. Liquid phase chemical reduction routes are integral to the synthesis of such alloy nanoparticle sols. The choice of precursors, reducing and stabilizing agents is critical to the nature of alloy NPs sols desired. Moreover, changes in dispersant media such as pH and ionic strength can cause nanoparticle destabilization and aggregation. A few attempts have been made to prepare In the present study we report the synthesis of Ag–Cu NPs by chemical reduction route in aqueous medium. Our object is to investigate this complex interplay between LSPR changes due to nanoparticle aggregation and that due to alloy formation. The synthesis is in situ and starch is used to stabilize the dispersions. Recent investigations have shown that in comparison to the stabilizing effect of PVP and PVA, starch as a dispersing agent is more effective in restricting the size of nanostructures formed AgNO All experiments, the UV–visible spectra and the XRD were repeated and found to be reproducible. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) of all samples were done at a scan speed of 0.25°/min. Extensive overlapping of Ag, Cu (of different levels of solid solubility) peaks, broadening and splitting of peaks is observed. The major overlapping peaks are deconvoluted using standard routines to determine the peak positions and line widths. The lattice parameters of the identified phases are compared with the experimental data of Linde The XRD patterns for various samples are shown in In S1, two FCC (Ag) (1 The domain size of all phases, in the samples considered, is in the nanometer range ( It is important to keep in perspective that alloy formation has been investigated by the XRD analysis of dried precipitates, while LSPR is a sol property. That is, the finer nanoparticles will remain in sol state and may not be detected in the XRD pattern. To correlate better the particulate morphologies with the LSPR behavior, the next section presents the SAXS analysis of the sols. SAXS observations are given by the scattering-intensity, Two distinct fractal regimes in the Regime 1 smaller fractal aggregates are more compact, that is, have fractal dimensions >2.45. For samples S3 and S4 compact surface fractal particles are formed. The fractal dimensions of the rest of the samples are in accordance with the Shih, Aksay, and Kikuchi (SAK) model In conformity with the SAXS analysis, in all TEM images (  Excepting the case of S5, in all the intended alloy compositions, two LSPR peaks are observed. One is characteristic of (Ag) nanoparticles LSPR maximum absorbance wavelength ( We find, in all cases, the intensities of characteristic (Ag) LSPR absorbance peak are more than the (Cu) absorbance. The observed phenomenon can be explained by either of following two possible situations. The first possibility being that the LSPR absorbance is due to nanoparticles of (Ag) shell with (Cu) core. While the other option is that the LSPR behavior is due to sols consisting of separate (Ag) phase and (Cu) phase nanoparticles. Since the standard reduction potential of Ag In contrast to the LSPR of S0, none of the intended alloy compositions show the broadening or splitting of the AgNPs LSPR absorbance curve. For samples S1, S2, S3 and S4 the (Ag) nanoparticles LSPR Keeping in view the above discussion, it appears that the larger aggregates have (Cu) compositions. Further, we observe the intensity of CuNPs LSPR maximum absorbance increases as we progress from S1 to S6. In an earlier report on starch stabilized CuNPs synthesis As mentioned earlier in Section We have studied the co-reduction of silver nitrate and copper nitrate in aqueous medium. Hydrazine hydrate was used as the reducing agent with starch as the sol-stabilizing agent. From the XRD analysis of the dried precipitates, the maximum solid solubilities in (Ag) and (Cu) have been found to be ∼10.5 This work was supported by