Vermicompost, which had been derived solely by the action of the epigeic earthworm Eisenia fetida on parthenium (Parthenium hysterophorus), was tested for its impact on the germination and early growth of green gram (Vigna radiata), ladies finger (Abelmoschus esculentus) and cucumber (Cucumis sativus). Seedlings were germinated and grown in soil amended with 0 (control), 0.75, 1.5, 2, 4, 8, 20 and 40% (by weight) parthenium vermicompost. Even though parthenium is known to possess strong negative allelopathy, as also plant/animal toxicity in other forms, its vermicompost (VC) manifested none of these attributes. Rather the VC enhanced germination success, introduced plant-friendly physical features in the container media, increased biomass carbon, and was seen to promote early growth as reflected in several morphological and biochemical characteristics in plants which had received parthenium VC in comparison to those which had not. All these effects were statistically significant. Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) Spectrometry revealed that the phenols and the sesquiterpene lactones that are responsible for the negative allelopathic impact of parthenium were largely destroyed in the course of vermicomposting. FTIR spectra also indicated that lignin content of parthenium was reduced during its vermicomposting. The findings open up the possibility that several other invasives known for their negative allelopathy and toxicity may also produce vermicompost which may be plant-friendly and soil-friendly. It also makes it appear possible that the huge quantities of phytomass that is generated annually by parthenium can be gainfully utilized in producing organic fertilizer via vermicomposting, thereby providing a means of exercising some control over parthenium's rampant growth and invasion.Parthenium Attempts to thwart parthenium spread by mechanical, chemical or biological means have proved ineffective as parthenium continues to spread, even threatening to overrun natural forests ( One of the ways by which biomass or similar other biodegradable substrates can be gainfully utilized as also have a substrate most of its carbon content sequestered is vermicomposting ( Conventional vermicomposting technology has been commercially successful only when animal manure is the substrate. To a much more limited extent food waste has been vermicomposted. But no past attempts in vermicomposting phytomass by conventional vermireactors has shown the potential of large-scale utilization ( It is likely that parthenium vermicompost may also be toxic to soil/plants as parthenium is. The first of these problems has been recently solved ( In separate treatments, each in triplicate, 60 randomly picked seeds of green gram ( Three weeks after germination, the plants were harvested for the determination of their shoot length, root length, shoot fresh weight and root fresh weight. Known quantities of plant material were oven dried at 105 °C to a constant weight, to calculate their dry weight. After harvesting the plants, the container media (soil with or without added vermicompost) from each experimental container was sampled with a uniform cylinder of known internal diameter and height. After the volume of the samples had been measured, the samples were oven dried to constant weights at 105 °C. Bulk density, particle density, and total porosity were then determined by the procedures described by The water holding capacity of the vermicast was measured by filling the vermicast in cylinders with a pierced base. The cylinders were capped, immersed in water, and drained. They were weighed and then oven dried at 105 °C to constant weights. The loss of weight on oven drying gave the quantity of water held by the vermicast in each cylinder ( The analysis of chlorophyll, carotene and tissue nitrogen content was performed following standard methods ( For Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectral studies, samples were oven dried, finely ground, mixed thoroughly with KBr (spectroscopic grade), homogenized in an agate mortar, and pelletized at a pressure of about 1 MPa. The spectra were recorded over 4000–400 cm The extent of significance in the observed variations was statistically determined by one-way repeated measure analysis of variance (ANOVA), multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA), and least significant difference (LSD) ―as per standardized protocols ( In all the three species tested, parthenium vermicompost (VC) enabled greater success in seed germination compared to control when used in concentration range 0.75–2% ( It is now well established ( Several organic chemicals have also been identified which break seed dormancy, ranging from relatively simpler aliphatic chemicals such as methanol, ethanol, acetone and ethyl ether to aromatics like phenol and hydroxyquinoline to complex growth regulators like gibberellins and cytokinins ( What is novel and particularly significant in the present study is that the VC shows absence of any inherent hostility towards seeds of other species that one would have expected from a species possessing negative allelopathy that parthenium does. Parthenium vermicompost (VC) fostered better growth in terms of shoot length, root length, shoot dry weight and root dry weight in green gram compared to control when used in concentration range 0.75–4%. Thereafter a slight fall in the growth was observed ( The growth of cucumber seedlings in terms of root length, shoot dry weight and root dry weight was higher than control in 0.75–20% VC treatment, whereas the shoot length was higher upto 4% VC treatment and then fell slightly ( It is known that as happens with germination, the early growth of plants is also adversely effected if nutrients are supplied in excess of the seedling needs ( With the exception of tissue N content in ladies finger and carotenoids content in cucumbers the chlorophyll-a, chlorophyll-b, carotenoids and tissue N levels were higher in 0.75–8% treatments in comparison to controls and higher VC concentrations ( These findings make it clear that the chemicals which make parthenium antagonistic and even toxic to other species of plants appear to have been destroyed in the course of the weed's vermicomposting. Other studies, reported in Section The bulk density and particle density of the container media (soil, with or without added VC) decreased with increasing concentration of the VC ( The nitrate and ammonium concentrations in the container media followed the trend of VC concentration ( The increase in VC concentrations caused substantial enhancement in the microbial biomass carbon of the container soil ( The FT-IR spectra of parthenium and its vermicompost, reproduced in The peak at 1650 cm In contrast, the FTIR spectra of the vermicompost shows significant changes. The peak at 1737 cm Remarkably vermicomposting seems to have caused degradation of not only lignocellulose but lignin as well, indicated by the disappearance of the 1413, 1320 and 1254 cm Vermicomposting is seen to have led to the formation of polysaccharides as indicated by the emergence of a new peak at 802 cm Vermicompost, which was generated from the action of the earthworm As subsequently seen from FTIR (Fourier transform infra red) spectra of parthenium and the parthenium vermicompost, the phenols and the sesquiterpene lactones that are responsible for the negative allelopathic impact of parthenium were largely destroyed in the course of vermicomposting. FTIR spectra also indicated that lignin content of parthenium was reduced during its vermicomposting. SAA thanks the University Grants Commission, (UGC), New Delhi, for Emeritus Professorship and associated grants. NH thanks the UGC for the Maulana Azad National Fellowship while TA thanks the UGC for a major research project.