The sintering behavior of nanosized tungsten powder (25nm average size) synthesized by a thermal plasma process, in which ammonium paratungstate (APT) was reduced by hydrogen was investigated, compared with submicron W powder (0.5μm average size) and nanosized W powder (23nm average size) produced from the latter by high energy milling. The hardness of the compact of the plasma-synthesized powder (315 VHN) sintered at 1400°C was higher than that of submicron-sized powder (193 VHN) and was similar to that of the milled powder (309 VHN). The plasma-synthesized powder, however, yielded a compact with much lower tendency to form cracks than the milled powder.Tungsten is used in the production of numerous end use items. It is widely used for high temperature applications such as filaments in light bulbs, cathodes in high power lamps, and rocket nozzles in space crafts. Tungsten is also used in the manufacture of superalloys and catalysts (hydrodesulfurization and hydrodenitrogenation) The preparation of tungsten metal powder is a critical step in the production of tungsten metal and alloys in consolidated forms, since the powder properties significantly affect the subsequent operations, such as pressing and sintering. Nanoscaled tungsten powder promises to yield very hard, strong, and wear resistant materials via the press-sinter route. A small particle size requires lower temperatures and shorter times of sintering to attain dense but small grain size structures In this work, a thermal plasma process was applied to produce nanosized tungsten powder using ammonium paratungstate (APT) as the precursor, which is an intermediate product obtained from high grade concentrates of wolframite or scheelite ore. Then, its sintering behavior at 1400 Nanosized tungsten powder was synthesized in a thermal plasma reactor, in which ammonium paratungstate (99.9%, Alldyne Powder Technologies Inc.) was used as the precursor and hydrogen (99.9%) was used as the reducing agent This paper presents the results of sintering behavior of the plasma-synthesized W powder, compared with submicron-sized W powder and nanosized W powder produced from it by milling. For the comparison of its sintering behavior, submicron (0.5 The synthesized tungsten powder (hereafter referred to as “PW”) and submicron tungsten powder (hereafter referred to as “SW”) were each mixed with 2 The produced tungsten powders were analyzed by XRD (Siemens, D5000) and its morphology was examined by TEM (FEI, Tecnai30). The tungsten powders and sintered compacts were analyzed using analytical scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Topcon sm-300). The grain size of produced W powder was calculated from the XRD pattern by applying the Scherrer equation or the Stokes and Wilson equation The densities of the sintered compacts were determined by applying the Archimedes principle, which is based on the fact that the partial loss in weight of the sample in water due to buoyancy effect is related to its volume. Then, the Vickers hardness (LV-700 AT, LECO Co.) of the sintered compact was measured on the polished surface by making indentations at a load of 30 The SEM micrograph in Nanosized tungsten powder (PW) was synthesized from the plasma reactor by the addition of H The particle sizes of the nanosized tungsten powders were also examined using TEM micrograph, as shown in Ten grams of tungsten powders were cold-pressed in a die with a diameter of 16.2 mm prior to sintering experiments and the green densities of SW, MW and PW were 48%, 36% and 46% of the theoretical value, respectively. It is indicated that the highest value was obtained from the SW with a particle size of 0.5 The sintering experiments were conducted at 1400 In order to investigate the grain growth during sintering, the sintered compacts at 1400 The hardness of sintered compacts from SW, MW, and PW at 1400 In the present work, nanosized W powder with an average particle size of 25 The authors wish to thank Prof. Patrick R. Taylor of Colorado School of Mines for his help with the selection, design and initial operation of the plasma reactor system. Thanks also go to Mr. Robert W. Byrnes of the University of Utah for his competent work with the design and repair of the experimental facilities.