Ion-selective electrodes (ISEs) are in many respects ideal sensors for use in the analysis of industrial and environmental samples. Thus, in recent years, the advantages that they offer have led to their adoption in a wide range of applications.
                  Ion-selective electrodes offer several significant advantages over other techniques in the field. These are: insensitivity to sample color, viscosity or suspended solids, rapid response to changes in determinant concentration, and possible use in a very wide concentration range. A further advantage of analytical method involving ISE is that they are relatively simple, and cheap to develop, set up and run.
                  One of the possibilities to improve the detection limit of ISE is to control the ion transport through the ion-selective membrane with a galvanostatic current. Passing nanoampere-level direct currents across the membrane can control ion fluxes through the membrane, which can obscure the determination at low concentration level.Decreasing the detection limit of ion-selective electrodes revolutionized potentiometric analysis. Nowadays, potentiometry at a trace level is a routine technique. Ion-selective sensors with improved detection limits are investigated in at least 10 laboratories worldwide. This results in recent dramatic improvements of sensor selectivity and lower detection limit The potentiometric response of carrier based ISE's is directly related to the activity of the primary ion at the sample-membrane phase boundary layer. It requires constant activities in the membrane, i.e. no concentration gradients. However, zero-current fluxes in the membrane phase has been observed For all experiments, deionized water (Milli-Q plus, Millipore, resistance18.2 Ion-selective membrane composition: 1% ionophore ETH 1001, 65% plasticizer, 33% PVC, 1% ionic additive KTFPB. After dissolution in 2 The external current was applied between two homemade Ag/AgCl electrodes immersed in the inner and the sample solutions each. Solution of 10 It was proved that to obtain Nernstian response constant activity in the membrane is required After measurements in the specially designed cell we have done the same measurements in a conventional ion-selective electrode Philips body. Results are comparable with those in the cell ( The electrochemical control of undesirable leaching and maintaining ideal concentration profiles allows the extension of the detection limit of the sensor. When a current is applied across an ion-selective membrane, an ion flux of fixed magnitude and direction is induced. Even for well-balanced systems any unforeseen changes in the sample composition will inevitably induce concentration gradients and concomitant ion fluxes in either direction. Applying an external current presents an easy and straightforward experimental control. External current treatment also allows surface cleaning or pretreatment This work was financially supported by KBN grant 4 T09A 085 25.