Single-phase YAG nanoparticles have been produced by the rapid hydrolysis and dehydration of Al3+ and Y3+ salts in EtOH–H2O mixtures using continuous supercritical water hydrothermal synthesis. The effects of the nature of the starting solution, the metal concentration, the EtOH content, the flow rate and the temperature on the particle size were studied. EtOH promotes crystallization and highly crystalline materials are obtained at relatively low temperatures. Furthermore the critical temperature of EtOH–H2O mixtures is lower than that of pure H2O, reducing the operating temperature. From the variables studied, the most important parameter seems to be the temperature and much smaller particles have been obtained when experiments are conducted under supercritical conditions (average 50nm), in comparison to near critical or subcritical conditions (average 150nm). The method is simple and clean and requires neither addition of a base to the system nor the use of very high reaction temperatures and potentially allows the continuous production of large quantities of material.The synthesis of yttrium aluminum garnet (YAG or Y YAG powder is conventionally prepared from the solid-state reaction of Y Continuous supercritical water hydrothermal synthesis (SWHS) is an emerging technique, which has been recently used to produce nanoparticulate metal oxides Hydrothermal synthesis of YAG powder has been previously reported in the literature. Hakuta et al. have produced particles of YAG doped with Tb (YAG:Tb) from nitrate solutions in scH Other papers have described YAG manufacture using solvothermal methods We have recently carried out a detailed study of a new design of flow reactor. The mixing of a cold metal solution and a scH This paper reports an investigation of YAG production in mixtures of EtOH and H Aluminum acetylacetonate [Al(acac) Two different starting solutions were employed:   Experiments were conducted in the supercritical reactor system developed at the University of Nottingham Flow rates for scH All products were characterised by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) and, in selected cases, by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). XRD data were collected using a Phillips EXPERT Continuous supercritical water hydrothermal synthesis was carried out using Solutions A and B in the reactor shown in Previous authors have suggested that using alcohols may reduce the crystallization temperature To assess the role of EtOH in the starting solution, we conducted a series of experiments changing the initial concentration of EtOH in H TEM images of YAG particles produced with the highest and lowest EtOH content, 90 and 60 The reaction temperature required to obtain pure YAG using EtOH–H Further experiments were conducted using Solution A with a 60 Decomposition of solutions of pure Al(acac) AlO(OH) is an impurity commonly found in YAG experiments generated in scH Several experiments were also conducted using Solution B (mixture of “Al and Y acetates”). In this case, however, the EtOH content was kept constant at 60 While containing the same concentration of metal ions, the differences between the Solutions A and B are: (i) the much lower pH of Solution B and (ii) the presence of the ligand acetylacetone (acac) in Solution A. Solution A has a higher pH and the presence of the large (acac) ligand. pH of Solution A is ca. 9 due to the hydrolysis of Y(acac) The effect of temperature was studied for the SWHS of Solution A (Al(acac) TEM images of the sample synthesized at 355 The product obtained from the SWHS of Solution A (Al(acac) The YAG particles produced at 355 Highly crystalline YAG particles have been produced by continuous SWHS of metal solutions containing Y Two different starting solutions have been employed: Solution A (mixture of Al(acac) In contrast to other solvothermal processes in a batch reactor, our method is much faster (a few seconds versus hours) and at the concentrations and flow rates employed in these experiments, allows the continuous production of up to 3.6 We gratefully acknowledge the financial support of EU COST Network D30 and ICI Strategic Technology Group. A.C. thanks MEC (Spain) for its support through a “Ramón y Cajal” contract. We thank Messrs P. Fields, R. Wilson and M. Guyler for technical assistance.