A novel process for the production of spray-dried ginger powder and paste-like ginger condiments was developed on pilot plant scale. The process includes the operations of fine grinding, enzymatic hydrolysis, finishing, pasteurization and spray-drying, respectively. Before scaling-up the enzymatic hydrolysis was optimized on laboratory scale using D-optimal design and analyzed by response surface methodology considering the individual and interactive effects of temperature (40–55°C), pH (4.0–6.0), and enzyme concentration (500–5000ppm) on the reduction of viscosity of the ginger homogenate. In-process determination of gingerols and shogaols demonstrated that pungency is hardly influenced by cell wall degrading enzymes, but significantly affected by temperature and pH. An enzyme mixture composed of cellulolytic and pectinolytic activities at a 2:1 ratio yielded maximal tissue digestion and highest retention of pungent principles within 2h, applying a dosage of 5000ppm at 40°C and pH 4.0. During processing the amounts of 4-, 6-, 8- and 10-gingerol slightly diminished, while 6- and 8-shogaol faintly increased. The ginger digest obtained after finishing turned out to be a valuable raw material to be processed into various ginger products. Pasteurization and spray-drying resulted in homogenous paste-like ginger preparations and spray-dried ginger powder, respectively. Additionally, the solid residue contained large amounts of pungent principles, which enables its application as a flavoring agent. Consequently, the process described in this study allows an exhaustive utilization of ginger rhizomes for the production of various ginger applications.Ginger ( The cross section of a ginger rhizome shows a shriveled skin, an outer epiderm of polygonal cells, several rows of larger hypodermal cells, polygonal cells of an internal cork tissue, parenchymal cells of the cortex, an endoderm and a central cylinder. Both the cortex and central cylinder are dotted with fibrovascular bundles and oleoresin cells among predominantly starch cells ( According to the consumers’ preferences, a wide variety of ginger products deriving from different countries are known. Besides salted, pickled and juicy products, ginger is currently processed into ginger powder, oleoresin and oil, respectively ( The application of cell wall degrading enzymes represents another novel approach in spice production. Enzymatic hydrolysis of plant materials is currently being used for a variety of reasons, e.g. for improved yields in juice processing ( All reagents and solvents used were purchased from VWR (Darmstadt, Germany) and were of analytical or HPLC grade. 6- and 8-gingerol were obtained from Extrasynthèse (Lyon, France). Cellulolytic and pectinolytic enzyme preparations (Cytolase Ginger rhizomes ( For the reduction of microbial load and for the inactivation of endogenous enzyme activities, fresh, washed ginger rhizomes were immediately heated in water at 90 The enzymatic digestion explained in the following was performed according to a method described by    The enzymatically digested ginger mash was passed through a finisher (type PAP 0533, Bertuzzi, Brugherio, Italy) fitted with a fine sieve of 0.4 Although the scale-up process was conducted twice, the yield of ginger digest was limited. Therefore, the spray-drying experiment was performed with the first lot of Brazilian ginger rhizomes, whereas the production of the ginger pastes was conducted from a second lot of Brazilian ginger rhizomes. In the pilot plant scale reaction vessel, the ginger digest was heated at 90–100 Additionally, the ginger digest was filled in 370 The ginger digest was spray-dried using a Mini-Spray-Dryer B190 (Büchi Labortechnik, Flawil, Switzerland) at temperatures of 165 Aliquots of 300 Analysis of pungent principles was performed using an Agilent HPLC series 1100 (Agilent, Waldbronn, Germany) equipped with ChemStation software, a model G1322A degasser, a model G1312A binary pump, a model G1313A autosampler, a model G1316A column oven, and a model G1315A diode array detection system. The column used was a 150 Individual pungent principles were quantified using the calibration curve of 6- and 8-gingerol. The quantification of the gingerol homologues and the structurally related shogaols was used with a molecular weight correction factor. Concentration of stock solution was determined spectrophotometrically using their specific absorption coefficients For peak assignment LC–MS analyses were performed with the HPLC system described above coupled to a Bruker (Bremen, Germany) model Esquire 3000+ ion trap mass spectrometer fitted with an APcI source. Data acquisition and processing were performed using Esquire Control software. Positive ion mass spectra of the column eluate were recorded in the range of Several attempts for the production of paste-like ginger products have been made using ginger purée as the raw material. To enhance homogeneity and storage stability, table salt and stabilizers such as xanthan had been added ( Due to the plant cell wall composition, different combinations of pectinolytic, cellulolytic and hemicellulolytic enzyme preparations were screened in preliminary studies with respect to their potential to break down the plant tissue and to reduce the viscosity of the ginger mash (data not shown). Since a mixture of Cytolase CL and Pectinex Ultra SP-L (ratio 2:1, w/w) yielded maximum reduction of viscosity, this combination and ratio was used for the optimization of enzymatic hydrolysis on laboratory scale. The ratio of pectinase:cellulase activity is based on the cell wall constitution of the ginger rhizome. The cellulose–hemicellulose network and the relatively high amounts of cellulose compared to pectin compounds implicates addition of higher cellulolytic and hemicellulolytic enzyme activities. The disintegration of the cellulose–hemicelluose network releases the pectin matrix to get hydrolyzed by the pectinolytic enzyme activities. This synergistic effect of pectinase and cellulase activities on cell wall hydrolysis was also observed in former studies ( As the variables after the backward elimination steps were significant, the mathematical model During scale-up to pilot plant scale the enzymatic hydrolysis first proceeded more slowly than on laboratory scale ( Finishing after hydrolysis was performed to remove undigested coarse fibers. A sieve with mesh size 0.4 Due to its low pH, pasteurization of the ginger digest was sufficient to ensure microbiological safety and for the inactivation of the added enzyme preparations. Thermal treatment may be accomplished by different processing techniques concomitantly resulting in various ginger products. The production of spray-dried ginger powder and ginger pastes was conducted on pilot plant scale to outline the versatility of the ginger digest obtained by enzymatic hydrolysis. The simplest method for the production of paste-like ginger products consisted in the pasteurization of the ginger digest and immediate cooling to ambient temperature. The thermal treatment caused the gelatinization of the ginger starch, since it showed a relatively high initial pasting temperature (80 Microencapsulation techniques were developed to protect flavor compounds against destructive changes and to convert the flavor into free-flowing powder. However, reports on microencapsulation of spice oleoresins in the scientific literature are scarce. Microencapsulation of cardamom, capsicum and black pepper oleoresins by spray-drying using edible gums and starch as carrier materials has been described ( The pungent principles of fresh ginger are primarily composed of a series of homologous phenolic ketones known as gingerols ( The HPLC separation of pungent principles in lyophilized ginger rhizome extracts is shown in 6-Gingerol and 6-shogaol are the principal pungent compounds of ginger products ( While enzymatic hydrolysis of plant materials is currently being used for enhanced release of secondary plant metabolites ( The pungency of ginger is an important sensory characteristic and should therefore be evaluated throughout processing. The fresh ginger rhizomes investigated in this study contained 20.1 As already mentioned above, two different lots had to be used for the production of spray-dried ginger powder and ginger pastes, respectively. For comparison of the data obtained, the relative retention of pungent principles was calculated based on the raw material utilized. The concentration of pungent principles of the ginger pastes decreased by approximately 35% during pasteurization in the pilot plant reaction vessel, while pasteurization both at 80 An enzyme-assisted process for the liquefaction of ginger to ginger digest was developed on pilot plant scale employing established processing operations. Due to its low pH value pasteurization of the digest was sufficient for microbiological safety and for the inactivation of the added enzyme preparations. This was accomplished by pasteurization and spray-drying of the ginger digest using the ginger starch as carrier material and gelling agent, respectively, to obtain spray-dried ginger powder and paste-like ginger condiments. In ginger pastes, a high retention of valuable ingredients may be obtained by the omission of a drying step. Investigations into the composition, the amounts and the alterations caused by side activities of enzyme preparations, of volatile oils and color during processing into ginger pastes and spray-dried ginger powders as well as their storage stability will be a subject of a current study. Since the application of cell wall degrading enzymes demonstrates a simple means for the liquefaction of plant material, further spices may be enzymatically digested to obtain homogenous paste-like products. The latter preparations implicate an enhanced pumpability and handling in food processing industries. Furthermore, immediate thermal treatment of the freshly harvested ginger allows its application as a condiment in critical products and might avoid changes in sensorial and textural properties. Since the non-digested residue may be used as a pungent ingredient, the novel process allows the complete exploitation of the ginger rhizome. The authors thank Mr. Michael Rendlen for supplying the raw material. One of the authors (U.S.) gratefully acknowledges funding of the present research by the Landesgraduiertenförderung Baden-Württemberg.