A simple test method has been developed to quantify the response of metals and alloys to two-body wet abrasion. A metallographic polishing machine was modified to create a disk-on-flat sliding test rig. Adhesive-backed SiC grinding papers were used under fixed load and speed to rank the abrasive wear of seven alloy steels, some of which are candidates for drill cones for geothermal drilling. Standardized two-body abrasion tests, like those described in ASTM G132, feed unused abrasive into the contact; however, the current work investigated whether useful rankings could still be obtained with a simpler testing configuration in which specimens repeatedly slide on the same wear path under water-lubricated conditions. Tests using abrasive grit sizes of 120 and 180 resulted in the same relative ranking of the alloys although the coarser grit produced more total wear. Wear decreased when the same abrasive disk was re-used for up to five runs, but the relative rankings of the steels remained the same. This procedure was presented to ASTM Committee G2 on Wear and Erosion as a potential standard test for wet two-body abrasive wear.Wear occurs in many forms. Among them, abrasive wear results in as much as 50% of the material wastage by wear of industrial components Reducing the costly effects of abrasive wear damage is important in agriculture, mining, and petroleum exploration. In particular, the wear of the cones in geothermal well drilling results in the loss of hard inserts, and that has been the subject of prior work in this laboratory In light of the diversity of abrasive wear's occurrence, different kinds of tests have been developed to measure it. Some use standardized procedures, but others rely on one-of-a-kind apparatus. For example, two ASTM standard test methods have been developed for dry two-body abrasion. These are ASTM G132 The test described here involves a pin-on-disk like configuration in which the sliding specimen remains at the same radial position on the abrasive disk. The device was simpler to construct than a traversing tribometer that supplies fresh abrasive to the contact area, but it was important to understand the effects of reusing the same area of the abradant on the method's ability to rank materials. Therefore, the purpose of this paper is to describe the effects of grit size and abrasive paper reuse on the relative rankings of seven steels, three of which are commercial compositions and four of which are experimental compositions that are under evaluation for geothermal drilling applications. A bench-top wet lapping machine that was designed for metallographic specimen polishing was modified to use as a wear tester. As shown in Two grit sizes of commercial abrasive grinding disks with pressure-sensitive adhesive (PSA) backs were used in these experiments Two methods for measuring wear were initially considered. The first was to measure the width of the flat spot worn on the disk circumference and convert it to wear volume. The second used weight loss ( After comparing results based on both scar width and weight loss methods, weight loss was found to be more repeatable and convenient. It avoided the added steps of making multiple width measurements in a microscope and estimating the actual edge of the wear scar amongst the abrasion marks. A digital analytical balance capable of measuring to the nearest +/−0.2 If desired, a normalized volumetric wear factor Seven ferrous alloys were used in these experiments. Three commercial alloys were used as baseline materials and four were variants of alloy steels processed by various methods and heat treatments. The steels and their measured Rockwell hardness numbers are listed in Specimens of 1045, 4340, and H13 steels were tested three times each using a fresh 180 grit SiC (nominal particle diameter 70 The effects of multiple reuse of the 180 grit paper were studied to compare the most abrasion resistant (NC8 B) and least abrasion resistant (S-SAM A) of the four experimental alloys. That is, the same abrasive sheet was used for five sequential tests, but using a different place on the circumference of the disk for each run. The effects of abrasive reuse are summarized in In addition to the 180 grit paper, tests were also run to compare paper reuse effects for a coarser grit SiC paper (120 grit, nominal particle diameter 115 Two possibilities were considered to explain the reduced wear rates of the steels with increased paper use. The first possibility was loading (i.e., filling the space between the grits with debris), and the second was abrasive tip wear. Loading would explain why the more heavily wearing alloy would clog the space between grits faster and thus, its wear rate would drop faster. Likewise, tip blunting, fracture, or grit loss with repeated use would be expected to increase with longer periods of wear testing. The phenomenon of loading was readily observed in a dry abrasion test that was conducted using the alloy S-SAM-A against 180 grit paper for 250 Since paper loading could not be verified as the reason for the observed decrease in steel wear rate with numbers of tests, grit wear became a more likely explanation. Optical microscopy of the sliding path on paper used in wet abrasion tests failed to reveal any changes in the morphology of the abrasive points, but a paper by Mulhearn and Samuels Initial results using this simple test method based on a modified polishing machine as a tool for ranking relative abrasion resistance are encouraging; however, further research is needed to establish the method's sensitivity to various applied variables. These include not only normal force and speed, but also the effects of abrasives of similar grit size but from different manufacturers While the focus in this paper was on test methodology, it was nevertheless interesting to note the unexpected trend between hardness and abrasive wear of the most and least wear-resistant of the four experimental alloy steels tested, regardless of whether tests were done with new or once-used abrasive. A simple two-body, wet abrasion test apparatus was constructed using a metallographic lapping machine. Unlike two-body abrasion tests in which a fresh abradant is supplied to the contact, this method continues to slide the test piece over the same path. To determine if that configuration would affect the ability of the test to rank a series of materials, seven different steels were tested using two grades of abrasive paper, and in both fresh and previously used conditions. The following conclusions were obtained: The relative ranking of four steels in two-body wet abrasive wear was independent of whether 180 or 120 grit fresh abrasive paper was used, although the quantity of wear was higher with coarser grit as expected. While the quantity of wear decreased with abradant reuse, the relative ranking of four experimental alloys remained the same when testing was done on abrasive paper that had been reused on the same material. Five subsequent tests using the same 180 grit paper, each test using a new area of the slider specimen, resulted in decreasing specimen weight loss with the number of reuses. Comparing a relatively high and low abrasion-resistant alloy, the less wear-resistant alloy was more affected by abradant reuse than the more wear-resistant alloy. The causes for that trend could not be explained in terms of paper loading with debris, and it is proposed, based on earlier published work, that changing grit morphology was the cause. This remains to be verified. The two-body wet abrasive wear test described here is straightforward to implement using readily available equipment and abrasive products. The test-to-test variability, based on two or three tests per material, was sufficiently small to rank the relative wet abrasive wear rates of seven different grades of steel. That relative ranking was insensitive to the grit size (within the range of 120–180 grit). There would appear to be no advantage in running longer tests, with the possible exception of achieving better discrimination between the most wear-resistant alloys in which the weight loss was less than about 10 While not specifically addressed here, the test method has a potential to be used with standard reference specimen materials to determine the relative loss in abrasion efficiency of various abrasive papers, textiles, and other adhesively fixable surfaces. It may also be considered as an alternative to the other types of abrasion tests, such as the rotary wear test that described in ASTM G195 Thermal treatments of individual alloys that slightly increased their hardness (HRC) actually reduced their wear resistance. However, when comparing one alloy class to another, the harder of the two alloy classes experienced less wet abrasive wear. As a result of the work described here, this test method was presented to ASTM Subcommittee G02.30 (Abrasive Wear) for consideration as a new standard test method during its 2012 spring meeting. The test has the advantage of low cost, the use of simple specimens and fixtures, and short testing times. It also does not require the kind of specialized mechanical assemblies that are needed to conduct tests in which fresh abrasive is continuously provided to the sliding contact, as for example in ASTM G132 The author wishes to thank the U.S. Department of Energy, Assistant Secretary for Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, Office of Geothermal Technologies for supporting this work, and Dr. Steve Pawel of ORNL for his helpful comments on the draft manuscript.