Melt Conditioning Twin Roll Casting (MC-TRC) of magnesium AZ31 alloy sheets were subjected to cold rolling at room temperature. It was observed that 13.8% thickness reductions were obtained without any cracks. In the case of MC-TRC sample a strong texture was observed which suggested orientation of basal plane towards the rolling direction during the casting process and hence deformation at cold condition was possible. Detailed optical microscopic investigations were carried out for homogenized cold rolled MC-TRC samples. Heat treatment of MC-TRC sample was done at 400 °C and it was observed that fine equiaxed grain structure obtained in 12.5 min. Tensile testing at 200 °C of cold rolled heat treated (HTCR) MC-TRC samples were performed and compared to the commercially available AZ31 TRC samples.Magnesium alloy sheets possess properties like light weight, high damping capacity, high dent and crash resistance and good machinability. These properties make magnesium alloy sheets a viable option for automobile, aerospace and electronic/communication markets. In spite of all these properties, they exhibit limited ductility which hinders its commercial production. Conventionally, magnesium sheets are produced by the combination of several processes, i.e., direct chill (DC) casting process, multiple hot rolling and intermediate heat treatment processes, which results in a significant amount of energy consumption. Twin roll casting (TRC) process is a combination of casting and hot rolling process. This process is capable of eliminating the problems associated with the processing steps mentioned above. Strip produced by TRC process contains centre-line solute segregation due to directional solidification from surface of the strip to its centre. It has been observed that the sheets produced from TRC process also possess coarse dendritic grains structure, which results in low strength and ductility of TRC Mg sheets Cold rolling of metal sheets is done to improve strength followed by a good surface finish. However, due to its HCP structure, magnesium and its alloys cannot be cold roll, as they have only 3 active slip systems at room temperature. Melt conditioning before TRC (MC-TRC) helps in eliminating centreline segregation and promote the formation of fine equiaxed dendritic grain structure. Melt conditioning results in disintegration of MgO films and agglomerations. These dis-integrated MgO particles are dispersed throughout the melt which acts as potent nucleation site for Grain refiners can be used to promote heterogeneous nucleation but its usage in TRC process can lead to nozzle blockage and upstream nucleation In the present investigation, the AZ31 strips produced from MC-TRC process were subjected to cold rolling. Detailed microstructural analysis of cold rolled MC-TRC samples were carried out. It was also found that homogenization time for cold rolled MC-TRC samples decreased in comparison to MC-TRC sample. Hot rolled AZ31 MC-TRC sheet was subjected to cold rolling at room temperature (25 °C). A constant speed of 10 m/min was maintained during the rolling process. The initial sheet thickness was 1.8 mm, which was reduced to 1.55 mm by cold rolling. The specimens of identical shape and sizes were cut from cold rolled MC-TRC strip. The sharp edges of the specimens were smoothened by grinding to prevent the formation of thermal stress. The specimens were homogenized inside the muffle furnace at 400 °C for various time intervals such as 2.5 min, 7.5 min, 12.5 min, 17.5 min, 20 min, 40 min and 60 min followed by water quenching. Specimens were covered with graphite powder to prevent oxidation at elevated temperature. Homogenized specimens were subjected to tensile testing at room temperature. The dimension of the samples were; length-90 mm, gauge length-30 mm, width in gauge length-12 mm and thickness-1.55 mm. The tests were carried out at strain rate 1 s Detailed microscopic observation was carried out on optical and scanning electron microscopes. The specimens were properly grinded, polished followed by etching to obtain the microstructures. All the microstructures were taken from the longitudinal section of the sample. Fracture analysis of the fractured tensile specimen was accomplished using microstructures obtained from Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM). Electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD) equipped in Ultra55 field emission gun scanning electron microscope (FEG-SEM) was used for texture studies. The EBSD patterns were acquired using charge-couple device (CCD) camera with a pre-tilted sample stage at 70°. A 20 kV of accelerating voltage, 15 mm working distance and spot size 4 were used during the scanning. The diffracted patterns were acquired and interpreted using HKL Channel 5 Flammenco software and the EBSD map analysis was acquired using Tango software. Cold rolling of AZ31 MC-TRC sheet resulted in 13.8% thickness reduction without any cracks.   Tensile testing of heat treated cold rolled MC-TRC strip was performed at warm temperature (200 °C). An elongation of 10.2% was obtained ( Fracture analysis of HTCR MC-TRC sample and commercial Mg alloy sample was done under scanning electron microscope. Based on the microscopic images obtained, it has been observed that in both the sample, failure occurred via “Mixed mode” fracture [ Thickness reduction of 13.8% on cold rolling of AZ31 MC-TRC can be attributed due to the orientation of basal planes towards the rolling direction during melt conditioned twin roll casting process. It has been reported that AZ31 MC-TRC samples undergoes substantial amount of deformation as compared to TRC process due to difference in solidification mechanism Heat treatment for homogenization of cold rolled MC-TRC strips were performed for various soaking time period. Equiaxed recrystallized grains ( To compare the results of heat treated cold rolled MC-TRC (HTCR-MCTRC) samples, commercially available AZ31 Mg alloy samples were subjected to microscopic investigation. In contrast to heat treated cold rolled MC-TRC samples, commercial Mg alloy shows relatively finer equiaxed grains ( Higher strength and elongation in case of commercial Mg alloy compared to HTCR-MC-TRC alloy ( In the present investigation; MC-TRC AZ31 samples were subjected to cold rolling at room temperature and a significant deformation of 13.8% was obtained without failure. This was possible due to the orientation of basal planes towards the rolling direction during melt conditioned twin roll casting process. Fine and equiaxed grain structure was obtained only after 12.5 min of heat treatment at 400 °C in the case of MCTRC cold rolled sample, which suggests significant strain inside the sample due to cold rolling. The grain size of the cold rolled MC-TRC AZ31 samples were coarser compared to that of commercially available AZ31 alloy strips and hence the commercially available AZ31 alloys strips showed better strength and ductility compared to cold rolled MC-TRC AZ31 samples. None. We are grateful to Mr. Santosh Nagwanshi for his technical support. The samples of MC-TRC were obtained from BCAST, Brunel University and hence we convey our sincere thanks to all members of BCAST who have worked on MC-TRC project.