Background: The rate of protein digestion affects protein utilization in elderly subjects. Although meat is a widely consumed protein source, little is known of its digestion rate and how it can be affected by the chewing capacity of elderly subjects.
                  
                     Objectives: We used a [1-13C]leucine balance with a single-meal protocol to assess the absorption rate of meat protein and to estimate the utilization of meat protein in elderly subjects with different chewing efficiency.
                  
                     Design: Twenty elderly volunteers aged 60–75 y were involved in the study. Ten of them had healthy natural dentition, and the other 10 were edentulous and wore complete dentures. Whole-body fluxes of leucine, before and after the meal (120 g beef meat), were measured with the use of a [1-13C]leucine intravenous infusion.
                  
                     Results: A rapid increase in plasma aminoacidemia and plasma leucine entry rate was observed after meat intake in dentate subjects. In complete denture wearers the increase in leucine entry rate was delayed (P < 0.05), and the amount of leucine appearing in peripheral blood during the whole postprandial period was lower than in dentate subjects (P < 0.01). Postprandial whole-body protein synthesis was lower in denture wearers than in dentate subjects (30% compared with 48% of leucine intake, respectively; P < 0.05).
                  
                     Conclusion: Meat proteins could be classified as fast digested proteins. However, this property depends on the chewing capacity of elderly subjects. This study showed that meat protein utilization for protein synthesis can be impaired by a decrease in the chewing efficiency of elderly subjects.Aging is associated with a decline in body muscle mass, leading to a decrease in physical autonomy and an increase in vulnerability of elderly people. This loss of muscle mass must result from an imbalance between the constant synthesis and degradation of muscle proteins. An alteration of muscle protein anabolism in older subjects in the fed state was reported ( In response, dietary strategies aimed at optimizing a postprandial increase in plasma amino acids, without increasing total daily protein intake, were proposed. The use of rapidly digested proteins ( A rapid and intense rise in postprandial aminoacidemia is therefore beneficial for protein anabolism in elderly subjects. However, although the amino acid composition and the total digestibility of all protein sources are now well known, the kinetics of their digestion and their impact on the postprandial rise of plasma amino acids are still poorly described. Although a lot of studies were done with milk proteins ( In addition, it seems possible that, for meat, this property could vary according to the subject and in particular to the person’s chewing efficiency (individual capability to transform a lump of food into a proper swallowable food bolus). Aging is often associated with a decrease in chewing efficiency, leading to a lower disruption of swallowed meat pieces ( Therefore, this study was designed to determine the effect of a meat meal on the postprandial variations in plasma aminoacidemia and whole-body protein metabolism in elderly subjects. It was also designed to assess how chewing efficiency can modify these indicators, with 2 groups of subjects having different dentition characteristics, namely healthy dentate subjects and full-denture wearers. Beef meat was obtained from semimembranous muscle kept 15 d postmortem at 4 °C. Then it was cut into slices, vacuum-packed, cooked at 65 °C, and stored at −18 °C. Before use, the meat was thawed by immersing packs in warm water and then grilled until the inner temperature reached 65 °C. L-[1- Twenty healthy elderly subjects (aged 60–75 y) participated in the study. Ten of them were dentate (ND) with at least 8 pairs of natural postcanine teeth. The other 10 subjects were edentulous (DP) for ≥5 y. They wore full dentures with a correct interocclusal relation and good stability. The current dentures had been in place for ≥6 mo, and subjects felt comfortable with them. Chewing performance of these subjects is presented elsewhere ( Whole-body fluxes of leucine before and after the meal were measured with the use of [1- The Plasma concentrations of amino acids were measured after deproteinization with sulfosalicylic acid by ion-exchange chromatography (Bio-Tek Instruments ARL, St Quentin Yvelines, France). Plasma urea concentrations were measured with the use of enzymatic reactions on an autoanalyser (Cobas Mira; Roche Diagnostic Systems, Neuilly sur Seine, France). Leucine fluxes were calculated from the time-dependent evolution of the The equations used have been reported in detail by Boirie et al ( where IR is [ Time and time × group effects on arterial concentrations and leucine fluxes were tested with the use of the repeated option of the PROC MIXED procedure of SAS (SAS/STAT Users Guide, release 8.1, 2000; SAS Institute Inc, Cary, NC), with subjects as random effect and with time, group, and time × group as factors. When significant time × group interaction was found, the LSMEANS procedure was used to test differences at specific times, between groups, and within groups compared with baseline. Each postprandial curve was characterized by its zenith ( Postabsorptive concentrations in measured essential amino acids (EAAs) were not different between groups ( The kinetics of plasma urea concentrations were not different between groups ( The variations in Leu Ox kinetics were different in the ND and PD groups ( The present study was designed to characterize the modifications of whole-body protein metabolism in elderly subjects after a meat meal and to determine how it is affected by chewing efficiency. For this purpose, the leucine appearance rate and the NOLD rate were compared in 2 groups of elderly subjects: one group of subjects with a good natural dentition and another group of complete denture wearers known to have a poor chewing efficiency ( Postprandial increase in the plasma amino acid concentrations observed in the present study was in agreement with data reported for young adults after a beef meat meal ( In reference to their absorption rate, proteins have been classified as “fast” or “slow” proteins ( Both the plasma leucine concentration and the total whole-body rate of appearance of leucine were lower in denture wearers than in dentate subjects 60–140 min after the meal, and the greatest values were reached in denture wearers ≈60 min later than in dentate subjects. Together with the pattern of carbon dioxide production, these observations indicate a delayed absorption of meat proteins in denture wearers. To flow out of the stomach, solid food has to be reduced to small-sized particles, and it was observed in young subjects that incomplete comminution of ham cubes during mastication decreased the gastric emptying rate ( The amount of leucine appearing in peripheral blood during the whole postprandial period was lower in denture wearers than in dentate subjects (63% compared with 82% of leucine intake). This difference is surprising; we were expecting a delay in leucine appearance but not a difference in the total amount of leucine absorption. For both groups, the appearance rate returned to baseline values 2 h before the last sampling time, indicating that no more detectable amounts of dietary leucine entered the peripheral blood. Thus, the decrease in total entry rate does not seem to be attributable to an insufficiently long sampling time. It could theoretically be due to a higher inhibition of whole-body proteolysis in denture wearers than in dentate subjects. However, it seems unlikely because it was shown that postprandial inhibition of whole-body proteolysis in the elderly is not affected by the digestion rate ( Thus, the lower amount of leucine appearing in plasma of denture wearers is more likely due to a higher retention of ingested leucine in splanchnic organs. Whether it is due to a longer retention of amino acids in the digestive lumen (incomplete digestion) or to a higher extraction by splanchnic tissues (digestive tract, liver) remains undetermined. A lower gastric emptying rate is likely to occur together with prolonged intestinal digestion because of fewer disrupted pieces of meat. Whether this results in a lower efficiency in the digestion of meat is unclear because an increase in transit time could compensate more or less for the differences in initial buccal disintegration of meat. Few investigators have studied the impact of chewing on digestive processes and more particularly on meat digestion. Farrell ( A greater utilization of dietary leucine in splanchnic tissues in denture wearers than in dentate subjects also has to be considered. A high variability in splanchnic extraction of dietary leucine exists in elderly subjects; its range was 26–88% in 6 elderly men ( Finally, because of the delayed absorption of meat proteins and to the lower total amount of amino acids entering peripheral blood in the postprandial period, whole-body protein synthesis was lower in denture wearers than in dentate subjects (30% compared with 48% of leucine intake was used for protein synthesis during the whole postprandial period in dentate subjects and denture wearers, respectively). Muscle protein metabolism was not investigated in the present study, which would have needed muscle biopsy sampling to determine the protein fractional synthesis rate. Nevertheless, the result on whole-body protein synthesis is consistent with previous experiments showing that muscle protein synthesis sensitivity to feeding is altered during aging ( We thank the physician and nurse of the Human Nutrition Unit for conducting the experiment; to C Pouyet, C Cossoul, and J Prugnaud for mass spectrometry analysis; and to G Bayle for amino acid analysis. The authors’ responsibilities were as follows—DR: planned and implemented the study, analyzed statistics, interpreted data, and wrote the manuscript; MM: volunteer recruitment volunteers and sample collection and analysis; CY: volunteer recruitment and sample collection and analysis; CB: volunteer recruitment and sample collection and analysis; L Mioche: study design and critical revision of the manuscript; L Mosoni: study design and critical revision of the manuscript; PPM: study design and critical revision of the manuscript. None of the authors had a conflict of interest.