The development of periodontal ligament–cementum complex (PLCC) originates from the interaction between epithelial cells of Hertwig's epithelial root sheath (HERS) and mesenchymal cells of the dental follicle. While previous studies have suggested that the Wnt pathway is involved in osteogenic differentiation of dental follicle cells (DFCs) during tooth root development, its involvement in the interaction between DFCs and HERS cells (HERSCs) in tooth root mineralization remains unclear. Here, we investigated the hypothesis that HERSCs control osteogenic differentiation of DFCs via the Wnt pathway. We found that during co-culture with HERSCs, DFCs exhibited a greater tendency to form mineralized nodules. Moreover, under these conditions, DFCs expressed high levels of cementoblast/osteoblast differentiation-related markers, such as bone sialoprotein (BSP) and osteocalcin (OCN), the periodontal ligament phenotype-related gene type I collagen (COL1), and β-catenin (CTNNB1), a core player in the canonical Wnt pathway. In contrast, expression in DFCs of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) was greatly decreased in the presence of HERSCs. Expression of CTNNB1 in DFCs was stimulated by Wnt3a, a representative canonical member of the Wnt family of ligands, but suppressed by Dickkopf1 (DKK1), a Wnt/CTNNB1 signaling inhibitor. Furthermore, in the presence of treated dentin matrix (TDM), differentiation of DFCs was enhanced by Wnt3a when they were in direct contact with HERSCs, but was curtailed by DKK1. Taken together, these results indicate that during tooth root formation, HERSCs induce osteogenic differentiation of DFCs in a process involving the Wnt pathway and the dentin matrix. Our study not only contributes to our understanding of tooth root development and diseases of tooth root mineralization, but also proffers a novel potential strategy for controlling mineralization during tooth root regeneration.Mammalian teeth are compound organs comprised of three vastly different, but closely attached, mineralized tissues, namely, enamel, dentin, and cementum Following crown morphogenesis, the inner and outer enamel epithelial cells form a bilayered HERS that extends in the apical direction. Morphologically, the HERS provides a structural boundary between two mesenchymal structures, the dental follicle and the dental papilla, in which epithelial–mesenchymal interactions (EMI) play an important role during root formation It is generally accepted that the HERSCs regulate the differentiation of dental papilla cells into odontoblasts, which secret the dentin matrix to form the first peripheral layer of dentine. Given that the subsequent development of cementum is induced by exposure of newly formed dentine to mesenchymal cells of the dental follicle The canonical Wnt signaling pathway is known to be crucial for adult homeostasis and for the formation of mineralized tissue All animal procedures were approved by the Ethics Committee of West China School of Stomatology, Sichuan University, China. HERSCs and DFCs were harvested from the first molars of Sprague–Dawley (SD) rats (postnatal day 7). Epithelia were digested with collagenase (625 HERSCs and DFCs were identified by immunofluorescence technique. Cells were fixed with 4% polyoxymethylene for 30 In addition to immunofluorescence evaluation, DFCs were observed by transmission electron microscope (TEM). Briefly, DFCs were harvested, pelleted by centrifugation (3000 For adipogenic differentiation, primary adipogenic conditions were prepared as described previously For osteogenic differentiation, a total of 1 To recapitulate in vivo interactions between HERSCs and DFCs, we established a direct co-culture system for these cells. Passage 2 HERSCs (5.0 TDM was prepared as described in previous studies Recombinant mouse Wnt3a and rat DKK1 proteins were purchased from R&D (Wiesbaden, Germany). For preparation of stock solutions, proteins were dissolved in PBS containing 0.1% bovin serum albumin (BSA). Co-cultured cells were separately treated with 100 After 7 DFCs were isolated by differential digestion as described above, after which total protein was extracted and normalized according to the manufacturer's instructions. Membranes were probed with primary antibodies, including anti-ALP (1:1000, Santa Cruz, USA), anti-BSP (1:1000, Abcam, USA), anti-OCN (1:1000, Santa Cruz, USA), anti-COL1 (1:5000, Abcam, USA), anti-CTNNB1 (1:4000), and anti-LEF1 (1:400, Abcam, USA). Anti-ACTB (1:1000, Santa Cruz, USA) was used as an internal control. Immunoreactive proteins were then visualized using Immobilon Western Chemiluminescent HRP Substrate (Millipore, USA). Assays were repeated three times and relative grayscale densities were calculated. Omentum was used as an in vivo culture system for HERSCs/DFCs. Nine SD rats were divided into three groups, namely, a Wnt3a group, a DKK1 group and a control group. Implantation of TDM with HERSCs/DFCs was performed under deep anesthesia. 4 Data are expressed as the mean HERS and dental follicle tissues were harvested from the first molar tooth germ ( After culturing in adipogenic medium for 4 Compared with the DFCs group, we observed a higher number of red-staining mineralized nodules in the HERSCs/DFCs group after culturing for 10 Relative to DFCs only, we found that levels of CTNNB1 were higher in DFCs co-cultured with HERSCs when assayed by immunocytochemical staining ( Next we investigated the effect of modulation of the Wnt signaling pathway on osteogenic differentiation of DFCs in co-culture with HERSCs. qRT-PCR analysis showed that expression levels of CTNNB1, LEF1, ALP, BSP, OCN and COL1 were increased after activation of the Wnt pathway by treatment with Wnt3a, and decreased in response to inhibition of the Wnt pathway by treatment with DKK1 ( Next we investigated the effect of modulation of the Wnt signaling pathway on osteogenic differentiation of DFCs in co-culture with HERSCs. qRT-PCR analysis showed that expression levels of CTNNB1, LEF1, ALP, BSP, OCN and COL1 were increased after activation of the Wnt pathway by treatment with Wnt3a, and decreased in response to inhibition of the Wnt pathway by treatment with DKK1 (Supplemental Fig. 1; Analysis of TDM omentum implants by H&E and Masson staining identified a distinct line of demarcation between the original TDM and the newly-formed mineralized tissues ( In this study, we analyzed the effect on the osteogenic differentiation of DFCs of co-culture with HERSCs isolated from the same tooth germs to recapitulate the in vivo biological processes. Since previous studies have suggested that DFCs make contact with HERSCs during tooth root development, and given that the proximity of epithelium to mesenchyme is crucial for organogenesis The results described above demonstrate that HERSCs may stimulate DFC differentiation via cell–cell communication and that HERSCs are promising candidates for the induction of osteogenic differentiation of DFCs. BSP and OCN are primarily expressed in odontoblasts, cementoblasts, and osteoblasts, and are widely distributed in the calcified interface between skeleton and cartilage, as well as in mineralized tissues, such as tooth and bone In vitro and in vivo results both suggested that activation of the Wnt pathway by treatment with Wnt3a promoted osteogenic differentiation of DFCs, and that inhibition of Wnt signaling by treatment with DKK1 suppressed this differentiation. In contrast, a previous study showed that enhanced Wnt/CTNNB1 signaling was associated with inhibited cementoblast differentiation and increased proliferation in an immortalized murine cementoblast cell line In addition to cellular signaling pathways, the inductive microenvironment is an important component in the mineralization process In summary, our study affords new insight into the mechanisms by which HERSCs act as a mineralized signaling hub regulating osteogenic differentiation of DFCs. Our data indicate a role of Wnt signal pathway in osteogenic differentiation, and demonstrate that TDM is required for the osteogenic differentiation of DFCs. Our work not only contributes to our understanding of tooth root development and diseases of tooth root mineralization, but also point to novel strategies to regulate mineralization during tooth root regeneration. The following are the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at