Superconducting coils are designed for the generation of specified magnetic fields (low, intermediate, or high). To function in different field regimes, it is important to analyze the pinning mechanics and the types of pinning centers in the superconductor in a precisely defined magnetic field. Correct identification of pinning centers would allow for the formulation of approaches to increase the critical current density and critical magnetic field, ultimately making it possible to reduce the cost of producing superconducting coils (with smaller amounts of wire needed). This paper will present a method to analyze pinning centers in MgB2 superconductor wires in low, intermediate, and high magnetic fields at 4.2 K, 20 K, 25 K, and 30 K. This method allows us to elucidate the influences of doping, isostatic pressure, and reduction of the wire diameter on individual pinning centers in a specific magnetic field. In this article, we also show a method to analyze the types of pinning centers and their impact on the engineering critical current density (J
                     ec). This method not only allows for the identification of the types of pinning centers, but also identifies which type allows for a shift in the J
                     ec criterion of 100 A/mm2 to enable higher magnetic fields.Currently, superconducting coils are mainly based on NbTi wires, Nb MgB H. Rogalla, P. H. Kes, et al. reported that critical current density is important for the construction of superconducting coils H. Rogalla, P. H. Kes, et al. In this paper, we show two methods which allow for a better understanding of the operation of various types of pinning centers in low, medium, and high magnetic fields, which will facilitate the design of superconducting coils. In addition, our methods show the type of pinning center that would allow a shift in the Analysis of the pinning mechanisms and pinning centers was conducted using the method Gajda Analysis of the microstructure is helpful for providing insights into various defects such as B-rich phases, impurities, breaches in layers, etc. in MgB Our results show that annealing in isostatic pressure of 1.1 GPa at 570 °C for 120 min leads to a reduction of the wire diameter from 0.648 mm (0.1 MPa) to 0.625 mm (1.1 GPa), a reduction in the cross-sectional area of the wire of about 4%, a reduction in the effective diameter of the filaments from 60 μm to 50 μm, and a reduction in the cross-sectional area of the filaments of about 20% (  In The results obtained provide strong support for using MgB Studies have shown that undoped MgB The results in The results in The critical engineering current density is very important for the design of superconducting coils. Superconductor coils are designed to work in a precisely defined magnetic field where the field strength depends on the application. For example coils with low magnetic fields (1 T to 3 T) are found in MRI and electric motors; coils with magnetic fields ranging from 3 T to 8 T are found in induction separation and induction furnaces; and coils with high magnetic fields (above 8 T) are found in nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and laboratory magnets. Most well-known pinning center analyses (Dew-Hughes For the range of magnetic fields in which the most effective action is surface pinning centers For the range of magnetic fields in which the most effective action is point pinning centers For the range of magnetic fields in which the most effective action is line pinning centers For the range of magnetic fields in which the most effective action is substitution within the crystal lattice For the range of magnetic fields in which the most effective action is precipitation inside the grain Our study of pinning centers was conducted in low, intermediate, and high magnetic fields for temperatures where superconductor MgB Based on the calculations and pinning analysis in Currently, superconductor wires used in superconductor coils typically have  The method of analysis of the pinning mechanism for undoped MgB The engineering critical current density I declare that this document contains the original test results. Moreover, now this article has not been sent to another journal. I would like to inform the editorial staff that there are no conflicts of interest between individual authors. This work was supported by the