Grinding systems are widely used in many industrial applications although they are operated at very low efficiency. A successful design of grinding/comminution systems has been the goal of many research groups. The spiral jet-mill is one of the most common comminution systems. In order to optimize the performance of the jet-mill, a 3D numerical model was developed to accurately predict the jet-mill's behavior. A discrete element model (DEM) was used to predict particle motion while subjected to fluid forces calculated by computational fluid dynamics (CFD). Discrete comminution functions were implemented into the DEM in order to simulate the fatigue and breakage of particles. Particle sizes decrease due to breakage in the simulation, just as in the actual process. The breakage forces acting on the particles are affected by both particle–particle and particle–wall interactions. As the forces increase, finer particles are formed and attraction forces, such as Van der Waals force (VdW) become dominant. The VdW forces cause the fine particles to agglomerate or stick (caking) to the jet-mill walls, eventually affecting the milling process. Since our aim is to understand the milling process in order to increase its efficiency, both breakage and attraction forces were considered. The effect of VdW forces on the milling process was investigated numerically, which cannot be done in an experimental unit, and the predictions of the numerical simulations with and without VdW force were compared with experimental data.The surface area to particle mass ratio (specific surface area) is very important in the chemical and pharmaceutical industries. In order to obtain the desired ratio, a size reduction process is required. One of the most commonly used tools in this process is jet-mill. In the jet-mill, jets of fluid are injected to a static grinding chamber and exit the mill through an outlet/classifier in the center of the mill, creating a vortex like fluid motion that carries the fine particles. Particles in the jet-mill are subjected to very strong centrifugal and drag force. Fine particles will be carried out of the mill following the fluid stream due to their very small inertia. The centrifugal force will carry the large particles to the walls of the mill due to their high inertia, where they will break as they collide with the walls of the mill. The advantages the jet-mill has over other mills made it ideal, for processes were low contamination and narrow product size distribution is required. However, the efficiency of the jet-milling process is very low, and many parameters control its performance, to name a few: feed pressure, milling pressure and feed material size. In order to optimize the milling process experimental work and know-how are needed. The optimization of the milling process may be very dear in terms of both raw material and time; therefore means to speed up the process are very important. With the increment in computer capabilities, the ability to use simulation in order to cut down the time and cost of jet-mill optimization becomes a valid option. In order to simulate such a process, the flow field properties must be known and the interaction between the grinded particles and the fluid must be determined. Particles–particles and particle–wall collisions must be traced as they account for the breakage and fatigue. Furthermore, the fatigue and breakage must be modeled One of the most common ways to retrieve the flow field properties is by means of CFD simulations such as the ANSYS FLUENT software that solves the Reynolds Averaged Navier–Stokes (RANS) equations. By coupling the CFD with a DEM code, we are solving the motion of each particle individually and monitor every impact it undergoes. The feed size and particles' property distributions are considered as inlet and initial conditions. Obviously, we are tracking the momentum transferred to the particles and how it is affecting the fluid flow field In order to properly describe the milling process, a three dimensional CFD–DEM numerical simulations were conducted. Empirical comminution functions were implemented into the simulation Conservation balances of mass, momentum and energy, together with the realizable The gas phase mass balance equation is The gas phase momentum balance equation for Newtonian fluids is: The translation of a particle is given by Newton's 2nd law The rotational motion equations are solved by summing the torque due to both contact forces and particle fluid interaction and is expressed as: The contact force, Also, the relative velocity between particles is: The relative normal velocity The relative tangential velocity All of the velocities given above (linear, angular, tangential, and normal) vectors are illustrated in Normal and tangent stiffness for particle–particle interactions are calculated using series and parallel spring summation respectively were each particle's constants are based on its own individual properties The normal stiffness for each individual particle is: In a similar manner the tangent stiffness for each individual particle is: The normal and tangential stiffness for particle–wall interactions can be evaluated by: Similarly the damping coefficients for the normal, tangential and particle–wall interactions are calculated by: The normal and tangential coefficients are evaluated for each individual particle and translated for each interaction using the series and parallel summation respectively. As the particles become smaller, attractive forces begin to affect the particle motion as well. The forces affecting the particle motion depend on both the operating conditions and the particle size. As we are modeling dry grinding, due to lack of moisture, the dominant non-contact force in the milling simulation is the VdW force. The Van der Waals attraction is due to intermolecular moments leading to surface attraction  Due to over prediction of the force acting between two particles of different size at intermediate proximity while using the Derjaguin approximation, in the preset study, we expressed the VdW force by taking the spatial derivative of the expression for the potential energy The present model takes into account fluid–solid interactions due to drag force, shear lift force, rotational lift force and buoyancy. The drag force acting on a single particle moving in fluid is: Due to the presence of neighboring particles and their mutual effects on the drag force, Richardson and Zaki  The shear lift force (valid for  The rotational lift force considers the relative motion between the particle and the fluid. This was expressed by: In this work the model developed by Kalman et al. The properties of the comminution model are derived from the following empirical functions with empirical constants ( The comminution model The comminution functions used in this work are as follows. The initial strength distribution  The initial strength function is called once for each particle upon its creation. The selection function describes the probability of a particle to break under a certain load or impact velocity. Rozenblat et al. The selection function is called once for each impact at the first time step where the collision is detected. Since the selection function was derived from particle–wall interactions, in the case of particle–particle some modifications must be made in order to account for the particle–particle selection function. Initially the relative velocity (for comminution purpose) between the particles was set to represent the velocity equal to the velocity at which the same force is acting on each particle due to the collision with the wall. More recently, we developed a semi analytical equation that does not need any additional parametric variables. The maximal force per impact can be shown to depend on the maximal displacement and the stiffness of the collision, under the very reasonable assumption that the damper hardly affects the maximal force, only the penetration. Hence, the maximal force for particle–particle and particle–wall collision is: Substituting Eq. The above equation gives a highly detailed representation of the equivalent impact and it should be used instead of Eq. The particle–particle selection function is called for each particle–particle impact event on the first time step of the collision. After finding the equivalent velocity for wall impact it calls the standard selection function (Eq. When the strength of a particle is larger than operating strength due to the equivalent force (according to the equivalence/selection function) it does not break. Instead, the particle weakens according to the fatigue function. The fatigue crushing strength of particles, This equation is to be used for impact cycles under the same velocity. However, it is easy to see that the function is a geometric series; hence it can be discretized per single impact with the common ratio: Therefore by remembering the initial strength of the particle it can be implemented in the simulation in the following form: The fatigue function is called for each impact where the collision is detected, only in if the particle was not broken. The breakage function describes the size distribution of the fragments, resulting from breakage of a particle of a given size. Kalman et al.  The above mass based distribution was then transformed in The breakage function is called at the end of the calculation of all particle interactions as it produces new particles that will demand additional calculations. By generating the fragment after calculating all the interactions the computational cost is reduced. Agglomeration and caking are very important parameters for milling efficiency. Caking is the buildup of material on the walls of the mill. The conditions for recognizing the aggregates are poorly documented in the literature. Therefore, it was decided to adopt several conditions and implement them in the simulation. The conditions for maintaining a constant contact point are: Particle–particle normal relative velocity is zero. Particle–particle tangential relative velocity is zero (no sliding). Particle–particle relative angular velocity around the contact normal direction is zero (no torsion). Particle–particle angular velocity relative to the tangent contact normal direction is zero (no rolling). This condition automatically satisfies condition 2, however because numerically it is more difficult to check whether condition 4 is satisfied, condition 4 is only checked if condition 2 is satisfied. It should be noted that here zero means smaller than a threshold value. While conditions 1, 2 and 3 are relatively intuitive, condition 4 is a bit more complex and led to a new way of introducing rolling friction. Particles rolling on top of each other vs. an agglomerate rolling are presented in While checking the first two conditions is very simple, verifying the remaining conditions posed some problems. In order to resolve those problems, additional models were added to the code; two more friction models were added, namely: rolling friction and torsion friction. Wensrich and Katterfeld There are several ways to account for rolling friction in DEM simulations. One way to treat the rolling friction which is somewhat more complex than the classical calculation, is breaking the interaction into a rolling spring, rolling damper and rolling slider For simple calculation of rolling friction, the torque is assumed to be proportional to the normal force ( In order to decrease angular velocity of the particle as to satisfy condition 4 (no rolling), the particles velocity at the contact point must be the same. The way to check this condition is to find the velocity at which each particle should rotate around the other particle and compare it to the velocity of the contact point without the angular velocities of the particles. If the two velocities are the same then the particles do not roll on top of each other. Therefore, the modified relative tangential velocity is not taking into account the angular velocity (unlike Eq. In order to satisfy condition 4, the particle's angular velocity multiplied by the distance between the particle's centers is expected to be equal to the above expression. This leads to a new angular velocity vector, Here Now, as we know at what angular velocity a particle is expected to revolve in order to satisfy the no rolling condition, it can be used to calculate the torque acting on a particle due to rolling friction Torsion friction is hardly documented and the only term that was found in the literature was reported by Luding Instead of using the spring and damper interaction calculation, for simplicity, we developed a simple expression for the torque by integrating the force acting on the contact surface. This torque is calculated by The expression in Eq. The experimental data of Teng et al. In order to solve governing equations of the Eulerian phase, the ANSYS FLUENT 13 pressure–velocity coupling “SIMPLE” algorithm for the spatial discretization together with an unsteady, 1st-Order Implicit discretization in time were used. The two way coupling simulations were conducted by coupling ANSYS FLUENT 13 with our in-house BGU–DEM code  Upon creation, dust particles are excused from the simulation in order to save simulation time. This means that the time required for those particles to be represented in the outlet is zero time steps. On the other hand all of the larger particles created in the simulation have to move through the jet-mill following their calculated trajectory. This process takes time and actually leads a shift toward the dust particles in the product size distribution. This shift is expected to be less significant as the simulation progresses due to the mass ratio being proportional to the cubic diameter of the fragments. Therefore, it can be expected that as the time progresses the classical ‘S’ shape curve will be obtained as more physical particles will be accounted for at the outlet. Nevertheless, at the moment with the time restrictions the trends of the numerical simulations and experimental results are similar, where the numerical results present a narrower size distribution than the experimental data and the mean diameter of the numerical results is only 1. 5 Although this result may seem inaccurate, when considering the initial raw material distribution with a mean diameter of 200 Numerical prediction of the particle size distribution within the mill is compared with the experimental product size in Agglomerate detections consume a lot of calculation time. This is mostly due to the necessity of a very small time step needed to satisfy a no rolling and no torsion condition between the particles, time step ten times smaller than the one used in the simulation A three dimensional numerical DEM–CFD comminution model was developed. The model enables the prediction of particle comminution/attrition due to impact in many industrial/laboratory systems. The model was used to investigate jet-mill behavior. Fluid motion was simulated using ANSYS-FLUENT and particle motion was calculated using our in house BGU–DEM code. The particles in the simulation underwent fatigue and breakage as they succumbed to the centrifugal force acting on them. The fragmented particles followed the air stream out of the mill. Very fine particles were automatically assumed to move out from the outlet. The simulation predictions exhibit similar trends to the experimental data in terms of mean particle size and size distribution width. It was found that as the size distribution is less narrow the simulation prediction is less accurate. The simulation didn't accurately predict the size distribution when the grinding pressure was low; however it was found that by adding the VdW force into the simulation a slightly better fit can be expected. Due to the large number of particles, the small time step needed for stability and limited computer capabilities the simulation took couple of months to complete. It is expected that as computer capabilities improve shorter run times will make the use of the model developed in this work more applicable and will allow us to gain better information regarding the jet-milling process.