This work assesses the carbon monoxide formation upon Fenton process, the most popular method for Advanced Oxidation Processes (AOPs). CO concentrations in the order of 11,000 mg/Nm3 were measured in the Fenton oxidation of phenol after 180 min reaction at 90 °C and 3 bar. The Fenton oxidation performed on phenol and its oxidized intermediates such as hydroquinone, catechol and short-chain acids allows concluding that CO is produced through the oxidative cleavage of aromatic rings; the hydroquinone route being more selective to CO than catechol. In all cases, the carbon mass balance was satisfactorily closed to 100%. The study of the influence of the operational conditions shows that CO production is clearly favoured at H2O2 dosage above the stoichiometric value and low temperatures (T < 90°). The H2O2 dosage was the most influence variable.
                  The results of this work evidence for the first time the production of noxious amounts of CO along with CO2 in Fenton processes. This finding highlights the importance of evaluating not only liquid phase intermediates due to their recalcitrant and/or toxic behavior, but also gas phase because of CO emissions.Advanced Oxidation Processes (AOPs) are efficient methods to remove pollutants in air (odour elimination, purification) [ The AOPs are widely applied for the treatment of wastewater with very different composition such as industrial wastewater containing toxic compounds [ It is generally accepted that the mineralization process in AOPs is the formation of CO The Fenton process (Fe This work, therefore, evaluates the emissions of CO Hydrogen peroxide solution (30% w/v) and FeCl Fenton runs were performed in a stainless steel high-pressure reactor (BR-300, BERGHOF) equipped with a PTFE reaction vessel of 500 mL. The reaction volume was 310 mL, and the reactants were added sequentially at the beginning of each experiment. Briefly, 300 mL of an aqueous solution containing a predefined concentration of the target pollutant and Fe CO yields were calculated as the amount of CO in gas phase per amount of carbon removed from the liquid phase, in mg, CO/(TOC Fenton experiments were carried out with phenol, catechol and hydroquinone and some acid mixture, consisting of acetic, formic, fumaric, malonic and maleic acids. The trails were performed at the initial concentration of 1000 mg/L of aromatics or 400 mg/L of each acid, 90 °C, 100 mg/L of Fe The influence of the operating conditions on the CO TOC and Total Inorganic Carbon (TIC) in solution were measured using a TOC Analyzer (Shimadzu, mod. TOC-Vsch). Hydrogen peroxide concentration was analysed by colorimetric titration TiOSO CO  CO The carbon mass balance is closed to 100% upon reaction, as is shown in Attending to the CO According to the evolution of intermediates in the Fenton oxidation of phenol ( The differences found in the CO/(TOC The carbon mass balances calculated for each initial compound upon oxidation are shown in The undesired production of CO upon Fenton oxidation process could be minimized by the selection of the operating conditions. For this reason, the H The CO production and CO/(TOC The increasing of Fenton reaction temperature from 30 to 90 °C, Lastly, the catalyst concentration effect on the CO According to the above results, H A gas phase with noxious concentrations of CO along with CO Although further studies are needed, the results of this work may lead to predict the formation of CO in other AOPs than Fenton. Therefore, advanced oxidation technologies in wastewater must be conceived with a treatment strategy that integrate wastewater and gas management to assure the treatment effectiveness and sustainability expected. Financial support from the project CTM2016-76454-R ( Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: