A test configuration for studying mixed-mode is analyzed analytically and numerically. It is based on the End Notched Flexure test, inserting a roller in the cracked part in order to promote mixed mode I/II. The analytical approach includes the calculation of the force exerted by the roller, the midpoint displacement, the compliance of the test, and the relative displacement of both arms of the crack. Moreover, the energy release rate is determined based on the complementary strain energy. With respect to numerical analysis, the two-step extension procedure is used for determining energy release rates in mode I and mode II. Comparison between analytical and numerical results has been carried out in order to check the suitability of the test method.crack length, corrected crack length and crack increment, respectively distances from the support to the position of the roller when it is at the outer side and at the inner side of the support, respectively width and thickness of the specimen, respectively distance from the support to the edge of the specimen, when there is interference surface areas of the upper and lower arms in the cracked zone, and of the whole section in the uncracked zone, respectively compliance of the test flexural modulus longitudinal, transverse, in-plane shear elastic moduli and Poisson ratio, respectively forces at the crack tip and horizontal and vertical displacements of the released nodes, respectively mode I, mode II and total energy release rates, respectively second moments of area with respect to the middle plane of the upper and lower arms in the cracked zone, and of the whole section in the uncracked zone, respectively bending moments and shear forces in the cracked zone bending moments and shear forces in the crack tip due to mode I, and mode II, respectively half span of the test applied load roller radius work done by external forces, strain energy and complementary strain energy, respectively force exerted by the roller displacement of the load application point of the specimen relative displacement between the upper and lower arms in the cracked zone initial load and initial displacement, respectively asymmetric double-cantilever beam end load split test mixed-mode end load split test Interlaminar fracture is one of the most common failure modes in composite materials. As delamination in composites is often a mixed-mode fracture, it is important that the composite toughness be measured at different mode mixtures A standardized method for characterization of the mixed-mode I–II fracture toughness was introduced in 2001 For the MMB test the ratio between mode I and mode II, named mixed-mode ratio, remains constant. In the mixed-mode end load split test (MMELS) the mode mix depends on the crack extension. This test is a modified version of the end load split test (ELS), where the interlaminar crack in a beam-type specimen is forced to propagate under mixed-mode and has been analyzed by different researchers. The studies of Hashemi et al. Other test and specimen configurations have been proposed in order to analyze the mixed mode I/II fracture. The asymmetric double-cantilever beam (ADCB), where the crack plane is out of the laminate midplane, generating a mixed mode load state at the crack tip. Mangalgiri et al. Szekrényes proposed three different specimens for analyzing mixed mode I/II: Two prestressed specimens, one based on the End-Notched Flexure (ENF) specimen Kolluri et al. Bonhomme et al. The aim of this study is to present a novel analytical model for a mixed-mode I/II interlaminar fracture test configuration for unidirectional composites. It is similar to ENF, but the specimen has an inserted roller for promoting mixed mode. This configuration was proposed by Szekrényes The test configuration is based on the ENF test. In order to get mixed mode, a roller is introduced between the two surfaces of the crack: The mode II is provided by the external load, and the mode I is obtained by the opening of the crack due to the insertion of the roller as shown in This configuration has already been used by Szekrényes In the analytic approach it is assumed the hypothesis of small bending rotations. Thus, the horizontal components of forces that the supports and the roller exert on the specimen are neglected. Otherwise, even in the case of small bending rotations, the span reduction due to the variation in the contact point between the specimen and support rollers is not negligible depending on the radius of the rollers  The roller is replaced by the forces that generate the displacement. Being The upper arm is named 1 and the lower arm is named 2. The internal forces and moments in the cracked zone are: Bending moments and shear forces in the zone without crack are shown in Applying equilibrium equations it results: Bending moments and shear forces in the right half of the specimen are: The force exerted by the roller can be determined applying the Castigliano–Engesser theorem Being The relative displacement associated to the forces exerted by the roller is 2 Bending moments and shear forces depend on According to Eq. The displacement of the load application point is determined by the unit load method and the Engesser–Castigliano’s theorem. Since The derivatives obtained in the different parts of Hence, the displacement of the load application point is given by Substituting the values from Eqs. Taking into account only the term that corresponds to bending effects, and replacing the value of According to Eq. When the roller is inserted, the two arms of the crack are separated. The relative displacement between the crack-arm ends has been determined in order to analyze possible interference. Two opposite unit loads are applied on the basic system corresponding to the specimen, as shown in The derivatives obtained in the cracked zone of Substituting the forces and moments from Eqs. Taking into account only terms that corresponds to bending effects and replacing the value of When the relative displacement is positive the two arms get separated. When it is equal to zero or negative, there is interference. According to Eq. As it can be seen in Eq. The initial conditions when shear effects are not considered can be calculated replacing The expression of the compliance of the applied load–displacement is: Replacing the values of Eq. According to Eq. In this case the position of the roller is defined by Moments and shear forces in the cracked zone are: Moments and shear forces in the zone without crack and in the other half of the specimen are: Following a similar procedure to the previous section, the force between the two arms is given by: Considering only bending effects, the The In spite of the basic system is the same as in the previous case, the derivatives of forces and moments are determined in different intervals, being: Replacing the moments and forces from Eqs. Taking into account only bending effects, substituting the value of the force According to Eq. The basic system is the same as in the previous case, shown in Taking into account only bending effects and replacing the value of the force In this case it is possible to calculate interference conditions imposing If The initial displacement Replacing the values of Eq. In this case, as in the previous one, the compliance is independent on the radius of the roller. Regarding the particular case in which the roller is directly positioned above the support, that is If For the displacement of the load application point, when Replacing the value of If For the relative displacement between the two crack-arm ends, when Replacing According to Eq. The initial displacement and the initial load are obtained from Eq. Replacing values from Eq. According to Eq. Arrese et al. According to Griffith In spite of the crack advance is an irreversible process, it is assumed that in an elemental variation the strain energy is an exact differential. According to Eq. Identifying first summands of Eqs. Furthermore the complementary strain energy Differentiating Eq. In this case the state variables are Identifying the first summands of Eqs. In order to obtain the derivative with respect to As loads remain constant, in the derivation process it is assumed that As It is worth pointing out that in the present case the approach based on the derivative of the compliance is not suitable, as the work is not carried out by a unique force, but by two. Determining When Replacing the value of It is worth pointing out that when the roller is positioned at the outer side, the value ( Following the same procedure as in the previous section, determining By similar reasoning to the previous case, the partition of the energy release rate due to each fracture mode can be expressed as: Replacing the value of Regarding the particular case in which the roller is positioned above the support, the energy release rate and the contribution of each mode can be determined, replacing Results of Eq. The result obtained in Eq. According to Williams Considering the moment case shown in The relation between moments for each fracture mode and moments at the crack tip, and between shear forces for each fracture mode and shear forces at the crack tip are: The mode partition, being When the roller is at the outer side, the moments and forces at the crack tip are shown in The bending moments and shear forces are then: Replacing the values from Eq. The result obtained in Eq. When the roller is positioned at the inner side, the moments and shear forces at the crack tip are: Replacing the values from Eq. The result obtained in Eq. For a given specimen geometry shown in The material used to perform analytical and numerical calculations has been the HexPly AS4/8552 RC34 from Hexcel Composites, which properties are given in In spite of the tensile, compressive and flexure modulus are different in a unidirectional composite The critical values of This correction is related to the stiffness of the specimen along the thickness, which is not included in beam theory. Then, the mode I Double Cantilever Beam test is modelled as an elastic foundation in the middle plane of the specimen for obtaining Eq. The values of  As it can be seen in  For a given radius, the mode ratio decreases when the roller moves towards the crack tip, as a greater opening mode is promoted. When the roller radius is 1 Besides An Ansys package was used to perform the numerical calculations. In order to calculate The energy release rate is then calculated by means of the loads obtained in the first step and the displacements from the second step calculated in the same node pair 1–1′ using the following expressions:    Δ The suffix The element used to model the test was the PLANE 42 with the plain strain option. The element size was set to 0.1  With the aim of comparing analytic and FEM results, rollers of 0.5  The analytical values of A test configuration for obtaining mixed mode I/II interlaminar fracture in unidirectional composites has been proposed. It is a generalization of a previous proposal based on the ENF configuration with an inserted roller. Internal forces, midpoint displacement, compliance and energy release rate have been determined analytically. Furthermore, it has been shown that all mixed modes can be achieved with simple variations concerning the radius or the position of the inserted roller. The analytic values have been compared with those obtained by FEM. The Two Step Extension Procedure has been used for obtaining the energy release rate by FEM. The values obtained by the new analytic approach agree reasonably with those obtained numerically. After having checked the analytic approach with FEM, and as different mode mixtures can be easily obtained, experiments can be carry out in order to determine interlaminar failure of composites under mixed mode I/II with the proposed procedure. Due to the difficulty of determining optically the crack length in ENF tests, the proposed configuration can be used for opening the crack with the roller at the outer side of the crack tip. In that case, the mode I contribution is very small but it is expected that the crack tip advance will be monitored more easily than in the case of ENF test.