The electrochemical mechanisms of chalcopyrite dissolution in the absence and presence of Sulfolobus metallicus at 70°C were studied using cyclic voltammetry and Tafel methods. The cyclic voltammetry experiments show that S. metallicus does not change the oxidative and reductive mechanisms of chalcopyrite dissolution. The initial oxidation potentials of chalcopyrite dissolution are equal in the absence and presence of S. metallicus. However, the current density of oxidation in the presence of S. metallicus increases significantly. At about 0V, the products on the surface of chalcopyrite are CuS, elemental S0, and Fe2+. At about 0.384V, CuS may be oxidized, and chalcopyrite may be transferred to CuO, Fe2O3, and elemental S0. The Tafel experiments show that S. metallicus may increase the corrosion potential and corrosion current density of chalcopyrite. S. metallicus may also reduce the polarization resistance of chalcopyrite in bioleaching. These results indicate that S. metallicus may accelerate the oxidation of chalcopyrite.Chalcopyrite (CuFeS Therefore, the aim of the current study is to extend bioleaching by applying electrochemical techniques to study the chalcopyrite leaching mechanism and corrosion kinetics. High-purity chalcopyrite samples were obtained from the Jiangxi Dexing Copper Mine. The size of the particles was less than 30 An iron-free nutrient culture ((NH The chalcopyrite powder was sufficiently saturated by the culture medium with A conventional three-electrode system was used for electrochemical measurements. An Ag/AgCl electrode, a carbon electrode, and a powder microelectrode were used as reference, auxiliary, and working electrodes, respectively. All potential in the present study was quoted in volts, with respect to the Ag/AgCl electrode (vs. Ag/AgCl). Electrochemical experiments were made in an iron-free nutrient medium at 70 Cyclic voltammetry was used to determine the electrochemical mechanism of chalcopyrite dissolution. The Tafel was used to assess kinetics. All the electrochemical experiments were carried out on Princeton Applied Research PARSTAT 273A.  Previous papers ( At about 0.384 In Eqs. The equilibrium potential According to As the potential is less than −0.181 Processes A  The corrosion potential and corrosion current density in the presence of In sum, the presence of The electrochemical behavior of chalcopyrite in the absence or presence of The oxidative and reductive mechanisms of chalcopyrite dissolution are proposed. The Tafel results show that This work was financially supported by the National High Technology Research and Development Program of China (863 Program) (No. 2007AA060902), the key Program of the