 The complexity of recycling an item is described in the scheme below. Naturally the actual recycling routes differ depending on what the “item” actually is. It is clear from the previous scheme that the recycling of any more complex material is a truly interdisciplinary field even if we only focus on actual technical solutions. In addition to these, there are both societal and economical factors to take into account. This book is dedicated to the recycling of complex material such as WEEE. Clearly, to obtain the high set recycling goals given by the EC in Europe there is a need for a multidisciplinary approach. Each technique has their own focus and some of the individual conclusions from each chapter are given here. This first chapter outlines different strategies and incentives used in different countries, focusing mainly on Europe, to collect and manage electronic waste. There is a large variety in how each country approaches WEEE managements with various levels of involvement and subsidies from the government. No apparent trend or “silver bullet” can be identified for approaching WEEE management. For example: allowing only one company a monopoly have been shown in some cases to be effective and in some cases ineffective, in comparison to free competition between companies. Historical and cultural aspects may play a role and there is most likely a period of adjustment after introducing a management strategy. However, doing nothing should be considered as the worst approach. Then we move onto materials flow in the economy. There the classic representation using Sankay diagrams lend themselves well to describe the flow of raw material, high value products, and waste for these applications (ie, electronic devices). One important point is made on the large uncertainties in this type of analysis, following of course the uncertainty in the available data. Moving forward, this should be addressed and uncertainty analysis could point toward areas that need improvements to increase our confidence in MFA for WEEE. Another challenge, that has impact on many aspects of WEEE recycling, is the ever changing composition of metals in a given product as technology evolves and certain elements or metals are replaced by less expensive or toxic alternatives. This makes WEEE recycling to some degree a moving target. After dealing with the more socioeconomic sides, the focus moves to the more practical aspects of recycling processes by treating what is normally the first step, that is, different physical separation methods. One of the first things that is usually done is to sort out products that can be reused, or if a part of a device can be reused. If the item cannot be reused there may be a material that can be recycled and a treatment method is selected and applied. A distinction can be made between wet versus dry methods with the dry methods including: dismantling, shredding, magnetic separation, Eddy current separation, optical sorting, and other. Wet methods include, for example, flotation and sinking methods, hydrocyclones, jigging and shaking tables. Each individual method may not be the only mechanical-physical necessary to complete the task and one method may follow the other, if appropriate. Reasons to choose one method over the other depend on such factors as the composition, nature of the waste, and what material is economical to recover. Again this is an evolving landscape and methods for mechanical separation, though mature, still have room for improvement to meet future waste. The mechanical separation leaves bits and pieces of different size. These pieces are typically sorted also with respect to size. Smaller pieces are typically materials separated using electrostatic separation. While plastic granules might be used as a feedstock for producing new plastic, the added softeners and other chemicals limit the ability to directly reuse the plastic for high performance applications. The methods described here are based on the conductive properties of the material as charge may be transferred from electrodes in the process to the material followed by a separation using the difference in polarity of different material. Different equipment and their application to various typical material encountered in WEEE is discussed. Nonconductive materials such as plastics can also be separated by electrostatic methods according to how the plastic places in a “triboelectric series” providing a measure of how much positive or negative charge is transferred, thus allowing a prediction of how it would separate from other plastics. Equipment used for triboelectric separation is described in some detail. Now, when the plastics and larger chunks of pure metals have been sorted out there is a more difficult mixture of smaller pieces left to handle for separation into pure metals. Essentially there are two dominating methods: pyrometallurgy and hydrometallurgy. Non optimized pyro-based methods have a long history, simply involving open incineration and recovery of the ashes or molten metal. However, environmental concerns have rendered this method illegal in many countries. Controlled pyrolysis and smelting is practiced in several countries now and a few examples of leading companies are given. A number of different pyrolysis methods are discussed including low and high temperature pyrolysis and vacuum pyrolysis. Molten salt and pyrochemical processes are briefly discussed. Just as with the sorting methods, pyrolysis rarely is the only method applied to obtain a pure product and it will often be carried out in series with another separation/purification method. Hydrometallurgy, on the other hand is typically the best for already oxidized material. They typically require converting the waste to a liquid, often aqueous, ionic solution, and subsequently treating this with an organic solvent or resin to separate certain metal ions, that is, liquid–liquid extraction or ion exchange. A number of active ingredients, extraction reagents, and their suggested application are provided in an extensive table. Also included are tables providing the composition of various metals in different WEEE’s that are suitable for hydrometallurgical separation. Finally, a number of detailed examples along with reaction pathways are given as well as a brief description of WEEE hydrometallurgical recycling on industrial scale. Once the societal and technical possibilities have been discussed the turn comes to the actual life cycle assessment. As an example the main part of this discussion is focusing on studies published in English literature describing Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) of WEEE management and recycling. Some of the guiding principles and nomenclature in LCA is introduced as well as a brief discussion of how to analyze and what to expect from the results. Overall this chapter again brings up the general challenge in that there In this book, we have covered the most promising/used techniques and each of them has their own special conclusions and some of them are outlined in the chapters in this book. However, the real advances are obtained when this multitude of techniques are tuned to work optimally together. This fine tuning of interactions between the techniques is one of the real challenges of the future and the basis of that is to have understanding of challenges and possible achievements of each technique. In this context, the current book is a good step in the right direction for creating more optimized recycling operations.