The surface free energy, surface tension and contact angles were performed to investigate the properties of wetting agents. Adsorption of wetting agents changes wetting behavior of polymer resins. Flotability of polymer materials modulated by wetting agents was studied, and wetting agents change significantly flotability of polymer materials. The flotability decreases with increasing the concentration of wetting agents, and the wetting ability is lignin sulfonate (LS)>tannic acid (TA)>methylcellulose (MC)>triton X-100 (TX-100) (from strong to weak). There is significant difference in the flotability between polymer resins and plastics due to the presence of additives in the plastics. Flotation separation of two-component and multicomponent plastics was conducted based on the flotability modulated by wetting agents. The two-component mixtures can be efficiently separated using proper wetting agent through simple flotation flowsheet. The multicomponent plastic mixtures can be separated efficiently through multi-stage flotation using TA and LS as wetting agents, and the purity of separated component was above 94%, and the recovery was more than 93%.Plastic wastes generated from the automotive, electronic, and information technology (IT) fields as well as from packaging materials, and household products are constantly increasing due to the industrial development and short life span of plastics ( Froth flotation shows some exciting advantages such as superior separation efficiency and cost-effective ( In this work, four wetting agents, namely lignin sulfonate, tannic acid, methylcellulose and triton X-100, were used to study the flotation behavior and flotation separation of polymer materials modulated by wetting agents. The properties of wetting agents were investigated through surface free energy, surface tension and contact angles, the flotability of polymer resins and post-consumer plastics was studies modulated by wetting agents, and flotation separation of plastic mixtures was further conducted using proper wetting agents. Polymer materials including polymer resins and post-consumer plastics were taken as research objects. Polymer resins (PP, PE, PTFE, ABS, PS, PVC, PET and PC) were obtained from commercial source. Samples of post-consumer plastics (PVC-sho, PVC-pip, PVC-dec, PVC-hos, PVC-pac, PET-dri, PS-fac, PC-cup, ABS-tv, PS-lam, PC-cd and ABS-air) were purchased from a waste plastics market (Miluo, Hunan Province, China). The samples were shredded in laboratory using a plastics cutting mill. Particle size used in flotation experiments was −5 Four wetting agents were involved in this paper, namely lignin sulfonate (LS), tannic acid (TA), methylcellulose (MC) and triton X-100 (TX-100). TA, MC and TX-100 were analytically pure, while LS was industrial product, and they all were used as received. Terpineol (TP), used as frother, was analytically purity. Tap water was used throughout the flotation experiments, and its pH was 6.8–6.9. A JJC-I contact angle measuring instrument (Changchun Optical Instrument Factory, China) was employed to measure the contact angle of liquid on the solid surface. Liquid surface tension was measured by Du Nouy rings method, and the apparatus was the JZHY-180 interface tension meter (Hebei Chengde Test Machine Factory, China). The measurements of contact angle and surface tension are demonstrated in our previous paper in detail ( Parameters of solid surface energy can be obtained through measuring the contact angle between the solid surface and liquid ( The flotation experiments were conducted in a glass column with a height of 170 The flotation tests of simple polymer material (polymer resins or post-consumer plastics) were conducted first; at the end of the tests, the float and sink products were collected respectively, rinsed with tap water, dried in atmosphere, and weighed. Then, flotation separation of plastic mixtures was carried out. The polymer particles were mixed manually in the mass ratio 1:1 to prepare two-component or multicomponent mixtures, and separated using flotation. The float and sink products were collected respectively, rinsed with tap water and dried in atmosphere. The products were manually sorted based on the difference in color and weighed, and the recovery and purity of each product was calculated based on mass balance. Distilled water (W), glycerol (G), formamide (F), diiodomethane (D) and ethylene glycol (E) were used as probe liquids to determine the contact angle of wetting agents, and the surface energy parameters were calculated with respect to the group of three liquids, i.e., WGD, WFD and WED. The surface free energy parameters are shown in From  Comparing The flotability of PP, PE and PTFE, which are nonpolar resins, are shown in  From The flotability of polymer resins can be shown as PS It can be observed in There is little difference between the flotability of PET-dri, PS-fac, PC-cup and that of PET, PS, PC resins, which can be due to the little presence of additives in these plastics. A minor fraction of TA does not affect the flotability of PS-fac but restrains PC-cup and PET-dri, while a minor fraction of LS has little influence on the their flotability. MC and TX-100 have some impact on the flotability of polymer materials at the concentration larger than TA and LS. The additives not only affects the physical adsorption of wetting agent molecules, but also result in the chemical adsorption between wetting agent and additive, and thus additives may have considerable impact on wetting behavior of wetting agents ( Based on the flotability of post-consumer plastics modulated by wetting agents, PET-dri, PS-fac, PC-cup and PVC plastics (PVC-sho, PVC-hos and PVC-pac) were chosen to investigate the flotation separation of plastic mixtures. Separation of two-component mixtures of PET-dri, PS-fac, PC-cup and PVC plastics was conducted using the flotation flowsheet shown in As shown in According to the results of separation of two-component plastic mixtures, flotation separation of multicomponent plastic mixtures was carried out by using multi-stage flotation. As shown in From The wetting agents exhibit Lewis base character, and the Lewis basicity is TA Wetting agents can hardly adsorb on nonpolar resins. Adsorption of wetting agents changes significantly the flotability of polar resins, and the flotability decreases with increasing the concentration of wetting agents. The flotability of polymer resins can be shown as PS There is significant difference in the flotability between polymer resins and plastics as well as between the PVC plastics, which can be explained by the presence of additives in the plastics. The wetting ability of wetting agents is TA In terms of separation PVC plastics from PET-dri, PS-fac or PC-cup, two-component mixtures can be efficiently separated using TA, LS and MC, and the best results were achieved by employing LS. In the case of PET-dri, PS-fac and PC-cup, superior separation can be obtained using TA as wetting agent. Mixtures of PET-dri, PS-fac, PC-cup and PVC plastics can be efficiently separated through multi-stage flotation using TA and LS as wetting agents. The purity of separated products was above 94%, and the recovery was more than 93%. The authors would like to gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the Project (2010CB630903) supported by the National Basic Research Program of China and the Key Laboratory of Resources Chemistry of Nonferrous Metals, Ministry of Education (Central South University) for the laboratory facilities, and we would like to express our sincere appreciation to the anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments, which greatly help us in improving the quality of the paper.