Qualification and quantification of mixing processes are crucial requirements for process engineering and energetic optimization in chemical and pharmaceutical industry as well as in wastewater treatment and biogas production. The analysis of mixing processes in stirred systems becomes a challenging task, especially when using opaque substrates. With Electrical Resistance Tomography (ERT), a powerful measuring technique is provided to allow a comprehensive and non-intrusive quantification of mixing processes of complex suspensions. Combined with advanced cross-correlation techniques, ERT offers the possibility to derive the axial flow velocity profile inside a stirred system. Investigations in different scales are an essential prerequisite regarding the evaluation and optimization of large-scale mixing processes under consideration of similarity laws. The experimental tests presented in this paper are carried out in reactor systems with volumes of 0.1m3 and 1m3. The validity of scale-up methodologies was ensured by comparable flow conditions and velocity distributions between the lab and pilot plant scale. For biogas plants, as an example of the importance of efficient mixing, the scale-up principles ‘geometric similarity’, ‘constant impeller tip speed’, ‘similar viscosity and flow characteristics’ as well as ‘scale-up of particles and fibers of the dispersed phase’ are proved to be valid by the Fraunhofer Institute for Ceramic Technologies and Systems (IKTS). Within the scope of further investigations, reliable information related with Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) are ought to be derived for the continuing evaluation of mixing processes at any scale to establish a foundation for the dimensioning and operation of stirring systems, especially for highly concentrated, non-Newtonian fluids.drag coefficient (dimensionless) reactor diameter (m) impeller diameter (m) impeller diameter in the large scale version (m) impeller diameter in the small scale version (m) particle diameter (m) expected value (dimensionless) sampling speed (s) height of the reactor (m) consistency index (Pa sample length (dimensionless) distance between two ERT sensor planes (m) dimensions in the large scale version (m) dimensions in the small scale version (m) first raw moment (m) flow behavior index (m number of current driven electrode pairs (dimensionless) number of voltage measurement electrode pairs (dimensionless) agitator speed in the large scale version (s agitator speed in the small scale version (s power requirement in the large scale version (W) power requirement in the small scale version (W) power per unit volume (W pixel P at the point (x,y) (dimensionless) reactor radius (m) particle Reynolds number (dimensionless) impeller Reynolds number (dimensionless) sensitivity coefficient (dimensionless) time delay (s) voltage (V) impeller tip speed (m impeller tip speed in the large scale version (m impeller tip speed in the small scale version (m reactor volume (m reactor volume in the large scale version (m reactor volume in the small scale version (m velocity (m velocity in the large scale version (m velocity in the small scale version (m arithmetic mean value (m) volume-weighted particle size (m) shear rate (s dynamic viscosity (Pa scale-up factor of geometric similarity (-) liquid density (kg electrical conductivity (S electrical conductivity of the pixel P(x,y) (S Computational Fluid Dynamics Electrical Resistance Tomography Linear Back Projection Modified Sensitivity Back Projection Particle Image Velocimetry Re-Normalization Group Signal-To-Noise Ratio Experimental investigations are an important prerequisite for an optimal dimensioning of stirring systems for opaque, fibrous and highly concentrated substances. Multiphase systems, like fermentation residues in biogas plants, consist of a non-Newtonian suspension with a dispersed phase, e.g. corn silage or wheat straw and a gaseous phase. Common measurement systems for the quantification of mixing processes, such as sensors and tracers, are often characterized by locally limited evaluation capabilities. Due to the lack of qualified models for the calculation and simulation of mixing processes featuring fibrous and highly concentrated substances, which are characterized by a distinct non-Newtonian flow behavior, CFD cannot be utilized as an appropriate basis for the dimensioning of stirring systems at the moment. The insufficient consideration of the granulometric parameters and the challenging determination of the rheological properties as well as the fact that CFD models, which are applied to simulate mixing processes of multiphase systems, are still not state-of-the-art The main issue of one joint research project, in collaboration with our cooperation partners KSB AG and TU Berlin, is to show and develop functional relations between the substrate properties, the stirring parameters, the flow velocities, the mass transfer as well as the biogas yield as a foundation for the identification of optimum flow conditions for stirring systems used in biogas plants. Extensive experimental investigations using ERT at Fraunhofer IKTS, are used to qualify and quantify mixing and fluid flow processes. An essential requirement for the applicability of the results is the scale-up of industrial mixing processes to laboratory or pilot plant scale by using validated scale-up principles. The aim of the scale-up of mixing processes in biogas plants is the indemnification of comparable velocity distributions in the small scale (M) and large scale (H) versions of the process vessel of interest. A basic prerequisite for the scale-up of industrial processes is given by the similarities between the small scale and the large scale version. Using geometric, kinematic and dynamic similarity for scale-up of tumbling mixers were first proposed by Wang and Fan in 1978 Furthermore, it is necessary that there is a similarity of the flow field between the reactors in the different scales (kinematic similarity). That means that the time intervals, in which particles cover geometrically similar distances, are in a constant ratio. The scale-up criteria, which are relevant for mixing processes, are summarized in the so-called Penney-Chart The criterion of a constant power per unit volume According to ZAUNER According to MERSMANN et al. According to TRIVENI et al. A further criterion for the scale-up of mixing processes is the criterion of constant impeller tip speed In this equation, Experimental investigations at Fraunhofer IKTS with ERT concerning the application of various scale-up principles demonstrated that the criteria of constant Reynolds number as well as constant Froude number are not suitable for the scale-up of mixing processes for this kind of complex and particle-loaded suspensions. The constant tip speed was identified as a suitable criterion based on comparable flow velocity profiles and mixing qualities at the different scales. The work presented here shows the scale-up for mixing processes with coarse particle suspensions, i.e. industrial biogas plants. Under consideration of fluid dynamic similarity laws, the industrial mixing process is scaled up to laboratory and pilot plant scale. In addition to the geometric similarity, kinematic and dynamic similarity has to be considered too As a comprehensive and non-intrusive method, ERT is used to quantify and qualify mixing processes. The ERT system used at Fraunhofer IKTS is a commercial instrument (ITS P2+; Industrial Tomography Systems, Manchester, UK) and comprises acrylic-walled vessels in different scales with the sensor system consisting of an arrangement of several measurement electrodes grouped in planes, a Data Acquisition System (DAS) and a PC with control and data processing software. In this present work, each sensor plane consisted of 16 electrodes, equally spaced around the periphery on the inner side of the vessel. The sensors are in continuous electrical contact with the fluid inside the reactor and are connected to the DAS by co-axial cables to reduce electromagnetic interference and noise The adjacent measurement strategy, a pre-defined measurement protocol, is used to inject a defined current between every pair of electrodes in every sensor plane and measures the resultant voltage difference between the remaining pairs of electrodes, which are temporarily carrying no AC current. Thus, ERT produces a spatial cross-sectional potential field, which is influenced by the different electrical conductivities of the components of the multiphase system. As a result, the distributions of the electrical conductivities and the volume concentrations of the dispersed phase in the reactor can be determined. The change in resistivity is caused by the addition of a tracer phase. It is equivalent to the reactor content (same properties in rheology and granulometry) and is additionally mixed with sodium chloride to obtain differences in conductivity. In the experimental tests of this work the continuous phase (liquid phase, matrix fluid) has a conductivity of about 2 mS/cm and the tracer phase of about 10 The ERT at Fraunhofer IKTS has an injection current range of 0.1–75 The image reconstruction is realized using the linear back projection algorithm (LBP). The main advantages of LBP are its simplicity and its low computational demands. To gather information about the internal conductivity distribution of the multiphase system, the reactor interior cross-section is spatially gridded into squares of equal size (pixels). Each sensor plane consists of such a two-dimensional tomogram composed of 316 pixels. During the experiment, the electrical conductivities In this equation, For the image reconstruction of the experimental tests the standard software of ITS Systems, LBP algorithm with Modified Sensitivity Back Projection (MSBP), is utilized. The experimental data are collected at a rate of 19 frames/s and the reconstruction speed is about 0.7 The determined conductivity maps are the initial source for the velocity calculation. The analysis of the velocity profiles in the reactors is carried out with the commercial software AIMFlow, version 1.0 (MOSAIC Scientific Ltd., Leeds, UK). This software uses a direct cross-correlation method between two sensor planes with a known separation to calculate the axial flow velocity distribution as shown in Eq. According to Fraunhofer IKTS it is necessary to extend the existing and established scale-up methods for mixing processes featuring highly concentrated and fibrous suspensions. The criterion ‘scale-up of the contained particles and fibers The drag force acting on a particle in a fluid flow is influenced by the flow conditions as well as the particle geometry. The drag force is determined by the drag coefficient Vortices are formed at Reynolds numbers Thereby, there will be comparable flow conditions in reactors with geometric similarity for substances with equal flow characteristics. Combined with the criterion of constant impeller tip speed, a reasonable scale-up of highly concentrated suspensions is possible. The experimental tests are carried out using two cylindrical reactors of acrylic glass with a height-to-diameter ratio Low-speed submersible mixers, type Amaprop 2500, with an impeller diameter of Different types of model suspensions based on xanthan gum are used for the determination of mixing processes with ERT. For the comparative investigations with CFD, a particle-free xanthan gum solution with a concentration of 0.5 In this work the volume-weighted particle size The straw is comminuted by a double-screw extruder considering the scale-up criterion (scale-up factor The particle size As shown before similar viscosity and flow characteristics are further criteria for the scale-up of mixing processes of highly concentrated complex multiphase systems. The rheological properties of the particle-free fluid as well as the suspensions used in the experimental tests can be described by the power law model of Ostwald-de-Waele. The expression of the dynamic viscosity For the determination of the viscosity the Viscotester VT 550 (Thermo Scientific HAAKE) with the special immersion sensor FL10 has been employed. It is a Searle rotational viscometer for quality control applications and it can be used up to maximum fiber lengths of 20 The viscosity is linearly proportional to the shear rate on a logarithmic scale ( The realization of similar viscosities and flow characteristics for the xanthan gum suspensions with extruded wheat straw for the different scales proved to be very challenging. The particle size distributions of the two types of extruded wheat straw are presented in To get comparable flow characteristics ( Consistency index For fundamental examinations, the use of particle-free fluids permits a comparison to other measurement systems, such as Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV), and CFD. In the following, the results of the experiments with ERT using particle-free xanthan gum solutions in comparison with CFD calculations are presented. The dimensions of the reactor in the different scales are shown in the schematic diagram in For the graphical presentation of the calculated distribution of the axial velocities by AIMFlow the software MATLAB is used. The numerical calculation is carried out by our cooperation partner KSB. The CFD software Ansys Fluent is used to predict the vertical flow velocities in the vessels of different scales. In order to simulate this, the Re-Normalization Group (RNG) The vertical flow velocities, velocities in z-direction, inside the reactors of the different scales from the experimental investigations and the simulation are shown in The flow velocity profiles are eligible to make qualitative conclusions. The comparison of the flow velocity profiles in the different scales shows that the vertical velocities have the same dimension and direction in comparable sectors of the reactors. ERT and CFD show the highest positive velocity around the impeller. The relatively high distance of the submersible mixer to the bottom of the reactor causes a suction of the fluid flow (upward flow). The orientation of the stirrer leads to an impact of the flow beam on the reactor wall with a subsequent down-flow where the highest negative velocities occur. An absolute consistency of ERT and CFD could not be reached because the mixing process is a dynamic process as opposed to the calculation with CFD as a stationary process. For the derivation of quantitative conclusions the cumulative distribution of the vertical flow velocities as well as the average and maximum velocities of ERT and CFD for the different vessels are used. The comparison of the cumulative velocity distribution for the lab-scale reactor and the pilot plant scale reactor showed a successful conformity for the ERT measurements and the CFD calculation, and is depicted in The average flow velocities of the ERT measurements are 0.048 The criterion of constant impeller Reynolds number Re The comparison of the distribution and the dimension of the velocities shows significant differences between the lab scale reactor and the pilot plant scale reactor. An impeller Reynolds number of about 146 (transition flow regime) means a tip speed of 2.4 Due to the twice as high tip speed of the lab scale impeller compared to the pilot plant scale impeller, the percentage of velocities >0.01 The experimental tests show that the criterion of constant impeller Reynolds number cannot be used for the scale-up of the investigated mixing processes of highly concentrated suspension in laminar and transitional flow regime. The comparable vertical flow velocities between the different scales of vessels point out that the scale-up criteria ‘constant impeller tip speed’ as well as ‘constant viscosity and flow characteristics’ can be identified as a suitable scale-up principle for mixing processes. Furthermore, the similarity of the experimental tests by using ERT with the CFD calculations shows that ERT, combined with advanced cross-correlation techniques, is an eligible measuring system for the determination of vertical flow velocities. Thus, ERT can be used for the evaluation of mixing processes of highly concentrated suspensions. Additional investigations using a single submersible mixer with smaller off-bottom clearance are still carried out to confirm the previous results. For the verification of the scale-up principle ‘scale-up of particles and fibers of the dispersed phase’ a second series of experiments with particle loaded xanthan gum solutions is performed. Analogous to the large-scale biogas plant, the two submersible mixers are arranged and operated in a horizontal position ( As describing in chapter 2 the dispersed phase (wheat straw) is comminuted considering the scale-up factor µ ( Considering this and a constant density, the approach of constant particle Reynolds number The experimental investigations using ERT show equivalent axial velocity distributions ( The average velocities are 0.06 The minor deviations in velocity between the different scales can be attributed to the different spatial resolution of the ERT-grid in the lab-scale and the pilot plant scale reactor. One pixel of the ERT-grid in the 0.1 Considering the scale-up of the contained particles, the experiments show that the axial velocity distributions are essentially constant. Thus, the prerequisite for same particle Reynolds numbers in the different scales of the reactor is achieved. The particles and fibers used in the experiments of this work are a priori disproportionately large particles, similar to a big object in a flow channel, and cannot be compared with colloidal systems. An important aspect for the scale-up of the particles of the dispersed phase is that bigger particles lead to bigger vortices in a fluid flow. The presence of particles and fibers with a larger particle size also means increased particle-particle as well as particle-wall interactions. As a result, a higher flow resistance and thus lower flow velocities are implied. The investigations of SCHWARK-WERWACH In the following experimental test carried out with ERT, the particles and fibers of the dispersed phase are used without changing the particle size. In the lab scale reactor as well as the pilot plant scale reactor the suspension of xanthan gum solution with a concentration of 0.5 The comparison of the axial flow velocity profiles ( The experimental tests carried out using highly concentrated suspensions with extruded wheat straw regarding the proposed scale-up principle have shown that the advanced criterion of scale-up particles and fibers is an essential prerequisite for the scale-up of mixing processes of complex multiphase systems. The experimental investigations with the suspensions depicted, that an intensive attention should be paid to the contained particles and fibers. First measurements with the ERT system using suspensions characterized by different particle volume concentrations have shown that the flow pattern is influenced by the existence of particles. The same experimental set-up as shown in The decrease in velocity is caused by the particles and not by the flow characteristics. The flow characteristics of the different suspensions, as presented in This investigations regarding the influence of particles will be intensified. Further series of experiments using ERT have to be performed to identify the correlation between particle volume concentration and flow velocities. The knowledge concerning industrial mixing and fluid flow processes is an essential prerequisite for the improvement of their efficiency. The experimental investigations in different scales under consideration of similarity laws at Fraunhofer IKTS using ERT, are an important method for the qualification and quantification of mixing processes of highly concentrated, fibrous substrates. The comparable results of the tomographic experiments with CFD by means of particle-free fluids show that ERT is a suitable measuring system. ERT can be used as a complement to CFD, especially for multiphase systems in which the application of CFD is limited. The scale-up of industrial mixing processes is a key aspect for the dimensioning of stirring systems as well as for the optimization of existing mixing and flow processes. Based on the evidence of consistent flow conditions and flow velocity distributions between laboratory and pilot plant scale the scale-up principles ‘geometric similarity’, ‘constant impeller tip speed’, ‘similar viscosity and flow characteristics’ as well as ‘scale-up of particles and fibers of the dispersed phase’ can be derived for mixing processes in biogas plants. First experimental tests using suspensions with varying particle concentrations have shown a particle influence on the flow pattern inside a stirred vessel. This investigations are still at the beginning, but they will be intensified in future work. A potential correlation between the flow velocity and the volume concentration of the particles will be an important aspect. It can be denoted that the viscosity cannot be regarded as a sum parameter, but number, size and distribution of the particles of the suspension play an important role regarding the flow characteristics of the substrates. In turn it would be very important for industrial measurement and control systems. The financial support of the