The lack of protein sources in several parts of the world is triggering the search for locally produced and sustainable alternatives. Insect production is recognized as a potential solution. This study is a life cycle assessment (LCA) of food industry side streams transformation via Hermetia illucens into intermediate products applicable for feed and food purposes. It relies on attributional modelling for the estimation of the most impacting stages of insect production and on consequential modelling for the estimation of potential benefits or risks for the agri-food system. The consequential LCA included effects on the market, associated with upstream increase in feed (increase in commercial feed production) or downstream availability of insect product (substitution of fertilizer, protein concentrate for feed or chicken meat). Attributional and consequential LCAs are followed by sensitivity analyses, which identify the most promising directions towards sustainable insect production and estimate the magnitude of impact reductions if those directions are pursued by the industry. Analyses of the existing pilot process largely correspond with other findings in the literature, indicating fresh insect biomass is almost twice more sustainable than fresh chicken meat. Produced at pilot scale, protein concentrate (insect meal) while being competitive against animal-derived (whey, egg protein, fishmeal) and microalgae, has higher environmental impacts than plant-based meals. Further scenarios illustrate strategies for more sustainable use of environmental resources providing guidance for producers and funding agencies to direct the industry to an impact profile that is lower, than many existing protein sources.Mixing Storing Transporting (within company) Egg production Feeding Climate system Transporting Utilities Insect separation By-products separation Grinding Pelletizing Extraction Utilities Drying Storage Transportation (within company) Utilities Insects are recognized as a potential solution for the global problems associated with the lack of protein sources for feed and food due to the increasing world population ( Available literature indicate the promising potential of  Insects are considered as less environmentally impacting source of proteins than meat products. However, in certain cases their environmental impact might be in the range of impacts similar to chicken and pork products, e.g. nitrous oxide emissions ( Insects, containing high amounts of proteins, are also perceived as a potential substitute for meat ( The goal of this study is the assessment of the determinants of the environmental impacts of insect based intermediate products (usable for feed and food) and to provide guidance on how the industry should move forward to exploit the potential of insects to minimize its environmental impact with specific attention on the potential use of non-utilized biomass from food and feed industries. This study relies on a systemized multi-season dataset of This study consisted of two parts. First, LCA analyses of historical production data from a pilot plant were performed for understanding the environmental dynamics of The study included two types of LCA: (1) the analysis of environmental impact of production stages of insect-based products and its comparison to benchmarks (traditional feed and food intermediates); (2) identification of environmental consequences of production and consumption choices towards insect-based feed and food. The results provided clarification on the environmental hot-spots of insect production (attributional approach) and estimation of system consequential changes due to the change of diet of The insect industry is on the verge of transitioning from pilot scale to industrial scale production. Producers at the pilot scale have focused on stable, safe production to demonstrate the potential of their production process. Consequentially, the full potential for environmental impact reduction from insects still lies ahead. Improvements will come from two sources: (1) efficiency improvements informed by pilot plant operations that producers will realize in their next generation facilities; and (2) shifts in inputs as the industry extends operations to incorporate a wider range of feed and energy sources. Building upon the framework of production dynamics developed in the LCA part of the paper, several sensitivity analyses exploring the impact reductions achievable by these two sources of improvement were performed. These analyses estimated the magnitude and highlight the most promising directions for the industry to realize the upcycling potential of insects. The LCA study consisted of four main parts: (1) modelling and analysis of The assessment followed the standard LCA approach ( The A-LCA required the allocation of environmental impact between co-products at the stages of feed production, The C-LCA followed established practices ( In order to provide a reliable and “fair” comparison of insect derived products for feed and food, a proper indication of insect biomass functions was required. This approach led to the setting of a proper functional unit (FU), system boundaries and assurance of data quality. The analyzed production and processing facility (Protix, Dongen, The Netherlands) is a multiproduct enterprise. Therefore, it was analyzed with a few FUs in the A-LCA, which would reflect the main products and account for the possible results misinterpretations. A-LCA related FUs included: 1 kg of dried and pelletized organic fertilizer (FU1); 1 kg of fresh BSF biomass (puree) used as a component for pet food production (FU2); 1 kg of protein concentrated meal used as feed ingredient (and potentially for food) (FU3); and 1 kg of BSF fat used as feed additive for pork production (FU4). C-LCA modelling was performed on the basis of a single product (fresh Additional assessment was performed for the comparison of Most of the insect production schemes in Europe fall within a conceptual scheme, similar to animal production: feeding, growing, processing, distributing and consuming. This study followed the general concept of insect production and processing ( Two main assumptions were used for the modelling of C-LCA scenarios: (1) the increase of The LCA model of In order to identify the potential uncertainties in data used for model construction we applied Monte Carlo simulations with 1000 runs using SimaPro v8.2.0.0 (PRé Consultants B.V., Amsterfoort, The Netherlands). Following this approach, we identified the results with low uncertainties levels and used only these to draw conclusions. Despite the application of industrial data for the LCA model construction, the study still required some assumptions related to the attributional and consequential modelling approaches. For the allocation of the impact of insect diet components (by-products of food industry) we used economic allocation similar to the approach of the Agri-footprint database (Blonk Consultants, Gouda, The Netherlands). The prices for the products (and accordingly economic allocation factors) were provided by the industrial producer (Protix, Dongen, The Netherlands) as well as modelling was performed with the data from one industrial source, and, therefore, should not be directly extrapolated to other industrial partners dealing with different production systems. The C-LCA included modelling of production with substituted products. Sensitivity analyses to assess the potential magnitude of environmental impact reduction in the insect industry in the short-term were based on direct assessments of next-generation growing hardware. Mid and long-term analyses assumed changes to key inputs that are already being explored by the industry as logical steps for reducing environmental footprint in the production process, for example as automated production units ( Short-term (ST) scenarios included aggregated improvements of approximately 25% each in feed and energy. Derived impacts were determined with direct previous trials and should achieved due to improved feed conversion, application of adapted hardware of higher scale and more controlled use of resources by the end of 2019 in a new facility being constructed by Protix in the Netherlands.  The application of non-utilized side-stream for feed reduces direct impacts of insect production and has an impact on the larger food production system. To account for both dynamics, A-LCA and C-LCA sensitivity analyses are performed. In the C-LCA analysis, two scenarios were investigated. In one, composting treatment of the insect feed was avoided, while in the second, anaerobic digestion was unnecessary. Energy consumption is a major source of environmental impact for insect production and processing. A logical way to reduce this impact is to rely on renewable energy sources. That is why a transition to alternative energy sources was foreseen as a feasible option in a long-term (about 10 years) perspective (LT) due to the need of a considerable investments required. In this sensitivity analysis, photovoltaic energy production was assumed as input. Long-term scenarios included non-utilized side-stream for feed and the short-term efficiency improvements. Since the primary C-LCA effects of this scenario were realized using non-utilized side-stream for feed, only an A-LCA analysis is conducted for long-term scenarios. Production of In The highest relative impacts for all the products was observed in the categories of Global warming and Non-renewable energy consumption (around 50% of impacts). Respiratory inorganics, terrestrial ecotoxicity and land occupation also had considerable impacts at 40%. High impacts in the categories confirmed the conclusion on the highest impact of feed and growing of The general conclusions for the baseline impacts were in line with results in the literature ( The sustainability of insect production is typically cited as one of their advantageous properties. The impact of HM and HP was compared to other protein sources based on values found in the literature. In Broadly, insect proteins were compared against other sources, which can be classified as animal and non-animal sources. Animal-based protein sources used for human nutrition almost universally displayed higher average values across the impact types than BSF proteins. Fishmeal is an important animal-based protein source used in feeds and pet food. Insect products are often portrayed as a solution to the unsustainable overfishing behind fishmeal ( Plant-based proteins are among the most sustainable. It is only in the mid and long term that insect proteins could be environmentally competitive across most of the impact types, but again a switch to sustainable feed and renewable energy is vital to gain the beneficial position comparing to plant-based proteins. There were two exceptions to this pattern: fresh water depletion and land use. Insect production, even at the baseline showed lower impact estimates in these categories than soybeans and with the efficiency gains in next-generation production it became competitive against rapeseed cake. Therefore, while the outlook may be that it will require mid to long term improvements for BSF proteins to achieve impacts as low as plant-based sources across many types of impacts, in locations where water and land are scarce, or habitat destruction for agriculture is an issue, BSF production may already be a preferable protein source. Microalgae is another emerging source of proteins, which can provide beneficial products for human nutrition. The impact estimates of these nascent protein sources are all off the high end of the chart. However, due to lacking technology readiness in many stages of the value chain and missing economy of scale for broad applications short, mid and long-term improvements need to be taken into account as well. A sensitivity analysis testing the dependency of results and conclusions on changes to assumptions and methodological choices was performed for A-LCA results with the alternative life cycle impact assessment methodology (ReCiPe). It indicated that the relative impacts of products had similar distribution to those presented ( The C-LCA included the potential changes to the feed and food markets as a reaction to the changes caused by insect production. In addition to the baseline case, two sensitivity analyses were performed for HP and HM involving a transition to non-utilized side-streams as feed. In the base case, where side streams that could be used for other livestock are fed to Further modelling of an increase in market demand for insect products included the need to identify the products substituted on the market. Substitution of organic fertilizer (ecoinvent 3.1) resulted in reduction of environmental impact of Two sensitivity analyses were considered for HP and HM. In the first (denoted with C), it was assumed that non-utilized side-streams were fed to The single score impact results (overall environmental impact, see part 3.1) demonstrated that A-LCA had relatively low uncertainties levels (compared to C-LCA, part 3.2). However, different midpoint impact categories were characterized with various standard deviation (STD) levels for 95% of confidence interval. The lowest STD was indicated for Land use (3–4%), Global warming impacts (4–6%) and Respiratory inorganics (7–10%). STD of results for Non-renewable energy use category varied from 14% to 22% and for Water use from 12 to 14% for all the A-LCA scenarios. The highest uncertainty levels of A-LCA were indicated for Terrestrial ecotoxicity: 18–48%. Environmental impact results with C-LCA were characterized with high ranges of STD ( General improvements to production technology efficiency can be expected from the more advanced players in the industry. These are likely to produce sizable gains in the short-term, as they are motivated not only by environmental concerns but also by the cost savings they bring. The shift to these technologies is occurring as pilot plant technologies are refined and specialized machinery is being developed or transferred from other more advanced production processes to insect production. New entries to the industry who are exploring technology options will benefit from reduced impacts by selecting maturing technologies. The shift to non-utilized side-streams for feed is perhaps the most important for the development of the environmental potential of the insect industry. Both the A-LCA and C-LCA sensitivity analyses indicated that using feeds not suitable for livestock feed or human food will have sizable direct impact reductions and could fundamentally change our feed and food production systems. However, the shift to non-utilized side-streams in feed comes with industry specific challenges. Whereas efficiency improvements in production technology can borrow extensively from developments in other industries, using some non-utilized side-streams for insect feed requires specific development. The results of the analyses showed that industry operators and government support that drives improvements in safety and quality as well as the development of networks for non-utilized side-streams collection not directly usable as insect feed will be rewarded with sizable environmental impact reductions. As this process matures, industry players and communities that can successfully switch to these types of streams are also likely to benefit from lower costs of production and advantages from a circular economy. Finally, the switch to renewable energy is a key for bringing the global warming impact of insect production below the levels realized by nature-based production systems not so strongly dependent on energy use, such as fishmeal and crops. At the same time, it is unlikely that on-site renewables will be a solution for all insect producers. However, the sensitivity analysis is a useful guidance for industrial producers interested in a holistic approach to managing their environmental impact profile. Moreover, it showed that a government, which supports renewables development, will be able to extend the environmental impact reductions from that technology by supporting insect production with a low global warming footprint. Thus, they would accrue the benefits of insect production, such as low land and water use, without the negative repercussions of intensive high-tech land-based food production. The aim of the current study was the assessment of environmental impacts of insect-based intermediate products (usable for feed and food) with reliance on systemized multi-season dataset of Attributional LCA of a high productivity pilot industrial scale of Upscaling of insect production (improved efficiency of feed conversion and processing) reduced environmental impact making The authors acknowledge the 