Three-dimensionally ordered macroporous (3DOM) LaFeO3 and nano-LaFeO3 perovskite-type oxides were synthesized by impregnation of polystyrene (PS) templates and combustion method, respectively. The obtained LaFeO3 perovskites were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area, and hydrogen-temperature programmed reduction (H2-TPR). The performance of the perovskites as oxygen carriers in chemical looping steam methane reforming (CL-SMR) to produce syngas (H2 + CO) and hydrogen were investigated. The synthesized 3DOM-LaFeO3 was pure crystalline perovskite giving a surface area of 8.088 m2/g, higher than that of nano-LaFeO3 particles (4.323 m2/g). In the methane reduction stage, methane was partially oxidized into syngas at a H2/CO molar ratio close to 2:1 by the 3DOM-LaFeO3 in the main stage of the reactions. In the steam oxidation stage, the reduced perovskites were oxidized by steam to generate hydrogen simultaneously. No significant decrease of the yields of syngas and hydrogen was observed during ten successive redox cycles, indicating that the 3DOM-LaFeO3 perovskites have good repeatability. In comparison to nano-LaFeO3, 3DOM-LaFeO3 has more stable reactivity of methane oxidation and better resistance to carbon formation. In spite of a part of 3DOM structure were collapsed in the course of the cyclic reactions, the specific surface area of the 3DOM-LaFeO3 was still higher than that of the nano one. The better reactivity of 3DOM-LaFeO3 compared with that of nano-LaFeO3 is partially attributed to the higher surface area.Due to the low carbon content, clean-burning, and abundant reserves, natural gas is drawing more and more attentions and it will be a dominant energy source in the early-to-mid of this century because its demand in the world energy consumption is increasing steadily in the past few decades. Currently, the exploiting and using of natural gas is mainly focused on the conversion of its main component—methane (CH Hydrogen is an environmental friendly energy carrier which is considered as a possible replacement for gasoline, diesel fuel, heating oil, natural gas, and other fuels. To meet the great demand for hydrogen in the future hydrogen economic era, various hydrogen production technologies are developed, including hydrocarbon reforming, aqueous phase reforming, biomass gasification, thermochemical water splitting, as well as photoeletrolysis In the SMR, 13.7 kg of CO Chemical-looping steam methane reforming (CL-SMR) Generation of syngas and hydrogen through the process of CL-SMR has been reported by some researchers. Kang The success of the CL-SMR process is highly dependent on finding suitable oxygen carriers which have sufficiently high methane conversion performance, high comminution and agglomeration resistance, and good activity for water splitting to produce hydrogen. Also it must have good reactivity in both reduction and oxidation cycles. Perovskite-type metal oxides are attracting more and more attentions as catalysts and as oxygen carriers in view of their high thermal stability, good mechanical properties, decent activity, as well as high oxygen mobility Three-dimensional ordered macroporous (3DOM) material is a kind of cellular materials with uniform pore size and well-ordered periodic structure. Vevel The present study seeks to investigate the feasibility of utilizing 3DOM-LaFeO 3DOM-LaFeO In our previous communication Nano-LaFeO The morphology of the perovskite-type oxides were studied by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) on a Hitachi S4800 instruments. The crystal phases of the oxides were identified by XRD in a Japan Science D/max-R diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation ( CL-SMR reactivity evaluation was carried out in a fixed-bed quartz reactor under atmospheric pressure as shown in For the successive CL-SMR cycles, the methane conversion step and the steam oxidation step were introduced as above. After the steam oxidation step, dry air (30 ml/min) was introduced into the reactor to guarantee the oxygen carrier recovery its lattice oxygen completely. The structures of perovskite-type oxides of fresh and used were examined by XRD to identify the crystalline phases formed. As shown in  The specific surface area and average pore diameter of the fresh and reacted oxygen carriers are shown in H The redox performances of 3DOM-LaFeO  The methane reduction and steam oxidation redox reactions to examine the performance of 3DOM-LaFeO The yields of all gaseous products including CO, H Performance of nano-LaFeO  The performance of 3DOM-LaFeO 3DOM-LaFeO In the methane reduction stage, methane was partially oxidized by 3DOM-LaFeO The financial support of  scanning electron microscopy X-ray diffraction Brunauer–Emmett–Teller steam methane reforming polystyrene chemical looping steam methane reforming hydrogen-temperature programmed reduction chemical looping combustion three-dimensionally ordered macroporous potassium persulfate