Effects of food matrix and individual food components on potential bioaccessibility of pomegranate were investigated by means of simulating in vitro gastrointestinal (GI) digestion. The foodstuffs (sunflower oil, skim milk, cooked lean meat, bread, skim yogurt, probiotic yogurt, apple, lemon, honey, soy milk, cream, and soybean) and the food components (gluten, casein, isolated meat protein, lactose, fructose, galactose, glucose, salt, ascorbic acid, starch, cooked starch, tocopherol, linoleic acid, cellulose, citric acid and pectin) were codigested with pomegranate in model systems to better understand matrix effects. Total phenolic content (TPC) and total anthocyanin content (TAC) were determined by spectrophotometric methods and major phenolics/anthocyanins were analyzed by RP-HPLC/PDA detection both before and after in vitro GI digestion at post gastric (PG), dialyzable (IN) and non-dialyzable (OUT) fractions. Phenolics of pomegranate were found to be stable during gastric conditions (115%), with 25% loss in pancreatic digestion, available (14%) in IN. Although preserved (89%) in PG, anthocyanins were lost in pancreatic digestion (38%), but still available (12%) in IN. Milk, bread, yogurt, probiotic yogurt, lactose, starch, cellulose, salt, citric acid or tocopherol codigestion with pomegranate decreased TPC for all fractions. Proteins affected losses in PG and OUT fractions. Carbohydrates such as starch, lactose, glucose and pectin appeared to affect the loss of phenolics and exerted 2-fold decreases in serum fraction (IN). For TAC, only meat, soymilk or cream codigestion with pomegranate resulted in IN losses. Proteins did not significantly affect TAC in IN, but were inhibitory in PG. However, carbohydrates and fatty acids significantly increased TAC in IN. Generally cyanidins were found to be more stable in food matrices and pancreatic conditions than other anthocyanins.Pomegranate ( Bioavailability is generally defined as the proportion of the nutrient that is digested, absorbed and metabolized through normal pathways ( In the literature, limited research is available on According to the research by The objective of this study is to understand how food matrix and individual food components affect the digestibility of phenolics and especially the anthocyanins found in pomegranate fruit (one of the richest sources of phenolics) by using Pomegranate fruits (Hicaz Nar variety) were obtained from two different local markets in Istanbul, Turkey. After removing the peels, pomegranate arils (control) were separated and milled under liquid nitrogen by using a grinder (IKA A11, Germany) and ground samples were stored at − Methanol, formic acid, sodium carbonate, sodium hydroxide, hydrochloric acid (37%), sodium acetate trihydrate, trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), citric acid and sodium chloride (salt) were purchased from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). Lactose, fructose, galactose, glucose, ascorbic acid, tocopherol (Vit E), cellulose, pectin, gallic acid, Folin–Ciocalteu reagent, ethanol, pepsin, pancreatin, bile salts, acetonitrile and HPLC standards such as pelargonidin 3-O-glucoside were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (Steinheim, Germany). Sodium bicarbonate from BDH Chemicals Ltd (Poole, UK), potassium chloride from Riedel-de Haen (Hanover, Germany) and linoleic acid (Fluka, Switzerland) were also used. Cyanidin 3-O-glucoside, pelargonidin 3,5-di-O-glucoside, cyanidin 3,5-di-O-glucoside, delphinidin 3-O-glucoside and delphinidin 3,5-di-O-glucoside were supplied from Extrasynthese (Genay, France) to use as HPLC standards. Food components such as gluten (Doruk Marmara Flour Company, Turkey), soy protein isolate (Royal Food Distribution Marketing Import and Export Co., Turkey) and casein (Milkon Milk and Food Products Co.,Sakarya, Turkey) were also supplied from domestic companies. Extraction of polyphenols from milled pomegranate arils was carried out (as controls) to determine the initial values and compare the changes in total phenolic and anthocyanin contents for samples after in vitro gastrointestinal (GI) digestion. Extractions were performed both by distilled water and aqueous methanolic solution. To simulate the conditions in GI digestion distilled water extract was selected as control. But methanolic solutions are typically used during chemical analysis of bioactive compounds and therefore gastrointestinal digestion of methanolic extracts was also carried out. The extraction method was modified from Model systems composed of both commonly consumed foods and food components were developed to investigate the matrix effect on phenolic and anthocyanin bioavailability of pomegranate. Food materials such as sunflower oil, skim milk, skim yogurt, probiotic yogurt, honey, soy milk and cream were added to test tubes without any pretreatment. Apple was peeled and grated. Lemon was squeezed to obtain the lemon juice. Bread crusts were removed from the bread and ground for bread crumbs. Lean minced meat (beef) was roasted for 20 Starch was mixed with water, cooked at 90 For combinations of solid food materials, 5 For combinations of food components, 1  Results obtained for methanolic extracts (control) were assumed as 100% and recovery % values were calculated from these data for all fractions. LOSS values calculated for total phenolic contents (TPC) and total anthocyanin contents (TAC) represent the losses during pancreatic digestion which are obtained by subtracting IN and OUT fraction values from the PG values (LOSS Foodstuff and food components without pomegranate were used as control digestions to monitor changes in phenolics. These control digestion values for food matrices and also single pomegranate digestion controls were compared with either codigested pomegranate Total phenolic and total anthocyanin contents were analyzed by a UV–Visible spectrophotometer (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). Total phenolic content (TPC) was determined by using Folin–Ciocalteu method as described by While analyzing codigested samples, since the food matrices tested can involve phenolic compounds or some other compounds may react with the Folin–Ciocalteu reagent, expected and found values were compared with each other to see the real effects of the food matrix. For this reason each food was tested alone for their total phenolic contents with the same method and the values obtained for both single pomegranate and each foodstuff were summed up to find the expected (E) value, whereas the found (F) value was obtained directly by measuring the codigested sample. For measuring total anthocyanin content (TAC) pH differential method was used as described by Anthocyanin profiles of all extracts and in vitro digestion samples were determined by High Performance Liquid Chromatography with Photo Diode Array (HPLC–PDA) detection. External standards were used to prepare standard calibration curves. Samples or extracts obtained from in vitro digestion were acidified to 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (v/v) by using 10% TFA and mixed well. After centrifuging they were filtrated through a 0.45-μm membrane filter and placed into vials. Samples were analyzed in a Waters 2695 HPLC system with PDA (Waters 2996) detection. Luna C18 column (150 All of the analyses were carried out in triplicate for each sample. The results were reported as mean value Total phenolic and anthocyanin contents of pomegranate arils both before (extracted with both distilled water or 75% methanol:water with 0.1% formic acid–controls) and after GI digestion (PG, OUT and IN fractions) were determined as shown in TAC of pomegranate methanolic extract was measured as 13.2 There was about 25% loss during pancreatic digestion as only 14.2% of initial TPC remaining in the extract entered into serum (IN). However for TAC, loss was greater (38.4%) during pancreatic digestion and only 11.7% of initial extract passed into serum fraction (IN). As claimed by Amounts of major phenolics and anthocyanins identified in pomegranate extracts before and after simulated GI digestion are given in Major anthocyanins determined in pomegranate in decreasing order according to their contents were: pelargonidin 3,5-di-O-glucoside (pel 3,5-di-O-glu), cyanidin 3,5-di-O-glucoside (cyn 3,5-di-O-glu), delphinidin 3,5-di-O-glucoside (del 3,5-di-O-glu), cyanidin 3-O-glucoside (cyn-3-glu) and pelargonidin 3-0 glucoside (pel 3-O-glu). Cyn-3-glu and pel 3-O-glu were also identified by Anthocyanins were stable during acidic gastric conditions in this study as observed by To understand the potential bioaccessibility of phenolic compounds in pomegranate after digestion with other foods and components, TPC values were measured and the data obtained is presented in Generally consumption of pomegranate with foodstuffs or food components exerted either inhibiting effects or no effects on TPC value. Only for pectin at PG fraction a promoting effect on TPC was obtained. Oil, cream and galactose codigestion with pomegranate exerted no effect or possibly a protective effect on TPC at each fraction. On the other hand, milk, bread, yogurt, probiotic yogurt, starch, cooked starch, lactose, cellulose, tocopherol, citric acid and salt codigestion with pomegranate affected TPC content negatively at each fraction. The consumption of meat and bread with pomegranate caused significant reduction in PG and OUT as observed by Food matrices inhibiting TPC of pomegranate only at PG fraction were found to be lemon and soybean; for IN fraction only probiotic yogurt, apple, stearic acid, pectin and glucose were inhibitory and for the OUT fraction only meat was inhibitory. Food matrices having no significant effect in IN fraction but had inhibiting effects in both PG and OUT fractions were honey, soymilk, soy protein, casein and meat protein. On the other hand, matrices having no significant effect in OUT fraction but had inhibiting effects in both PG and IN fractions were linoleic acid and fructose. Ascorbic acid was the only one having no significant effect in PG fraction but had inhibiting effects in both IN and OUT fractions. The preserving effect of oil on TPC content during digestion was observed in this study. According to Significant decreases were evident for TPC of pomegranate (p The effect of milk and milk proteins on phenolics and antioxidant activity is a controversial topic. When the effects of carbohydrates were evaluated; starch, gelatinized starch, lactose and cellulose were found to adversely affect TPC content at each fraction, while lactose, fructose and glucose had adverse effects (about 2 fold decrease) in the IN fractions. Galactose seemed to preserve phenolics at each fraction of GI digestion. Although pectin was protective in PG and OUT fractions, the IN fraction had a 2-fold decrease in TPC. Pectin has been shown to reduce bioavailability of β-carotenoid ( Effects of salt or sugar were evaluated during dialysis by Total anthocyanin content of pomegranate extract and combinations of pomegranate with other foods at each fraction of GI digestion were determined and compared statistically as shown in In After gastric conditions (PG) protein ingredients such as soy protein, casein, meat protein and gluten seemed to affect TAC content of pomegranate negatively, while ascorbic acid, fatty acids such as stearic acid and linoleic acid, and carbohydrates such as lactose, starch, cooked starch, pectin and cellulose had no significant effect on TAC contents. However, galactose, fructose, glucose, tocopherol, citric acid and salt improved the TAC contents in PG fraction. For OUT fractions meat protein was the only component affecting TAC negatively. On the other hand, other proteins such as soy protein, casein, and gluten had no significant effects similar to those like stearic acid, linoleic acid, lactose, galactose, fructose, starch and tocopherol. Glucose, pectin, cooked starch, cellulose, ascorbic acid, citric acid and salt showed promoting effect on TAC content in this fraction. For the IN fraction which represents what enters into serum, food components fortunately either had no effects or positive effects on the TAC content of pomegranate. The ones having no effects were basically the protein components such as soy protein, casein, meat protein and gluten. However, all other components tested had positive effects on the bioaccessibility of pomegranate anthocyanins. The cream contains milk fat, which in combination with protein and carbohydrates reduced its effects. In an in vivo study, when strawberries were consumed with cream, the peak plasma concentration of pel 3-O-glu was not different than when strawberries are consumed alone. The only difference was the delay in peak plasma concentration indicating that cream delayed gastric emptying and extended mouth to cecum transit time. However the results obtained in this study for the decreasing effect of cream in IN fraction are taking into account all the anthocyanins available in pomegranate instead of just the pel-3-O-glu (  Another study by The changes in major anthocyanins after consumption of pomegranate with other foods and food components were evaluated as shown in From Fatty acids had no significant effects on major anthocyanin contents at each fraction (p Study of When the effects of codigestion with foodstuffs and food components on the major phenolic punicalagin were evaluated (data not shown), bread, yogurt, honey, cream, soybean, gluten, starch, cooked starch and salt were found to negatively affect the content of punicalagin in the IN fraction. On the other hand, meat, all sugars, pectin, cellulose, soy protein, meat protein, fatty acids and citric acid had positive effects on the level of punicalagin. For OUT fraction apple, cream and soybean decreased whereas oil, milk, meat, probiotic yogurt and starch increased the level of major phenolics. For post gastric fraction none of the codigested foods had positive effects, while milk, meat, bread, yogurt, probiotic yogurt, honey, cream, soybean, salt and tocopherol all had negative effects on the punicalagin concentration. Enhancement of the digestibility of phenolic compounds in carob flour was evident in the presence of hazelnut oil rich in monounsaturated fatty acids ( While evaluating the results obtained for anthocyanin and phenolic profiles only the concentrations of initial anthocyanins were evaluated, meaning that if any new compound or metabolite is formed or if any conversion occurs during GI digestion it was neglected. A recent study by Phenolic compounds of pomegranate were found to be more stable to gastrointestinal digestion than anthocyanins. Losses were mostly during pancreatic digestion rather than gastric digestion. Anthocyanins were generally stable during gastric digestion however during pancreatic digestion only cyn 3,5 di-O-glu and cyn 3-O-glu were stable to a limited degree. For total phenolic content values, milk, bread, yogurt, probiotic yogurt, lactose, starch, cellulose, salt, citric acid or tocopherol decreased TPC at all fractions. Proteins were most effective in increasing the losses in the PG and OUT fractions. Instead of proteins, carbohydrates such as starch, lactose, glucose and pectin seem to be effective components for increasing the loss of phenolics exerting 2-fold decreases in the serum fraction (IN). On the other hand, for total anthocyanin contents meat, soymilk or cream codigestion with pomegranate resulted in losses only in serum fraction (IN). Most carbohydrates and fatty acids increased TAC in the same fraction even greater than that in the OUT fraction. Proteins were not significantly effective in decreasing TAC in the IN fraction however they were effective in increasing losses during gastric digestion (PG). Overall it can be said that food components or food matrices have different effects on anthocyanins and other phenolic compounds. While developing or consuming a functional food product, the interaction of the bioactive compound with a food component in a food matrix should be considered to increase the bioaccessibility of that compound. Future studies should focus on the conversions between those polyphenolic compounds and the metabolites formed to better understand the fate of polyphenols during digestion. This study was supported by