Clay minerals, acting as effective ozonation catalysts, are always coexisted with detrimental flotation reagents in sulfide flotation wastewaters. In this study, the catalytic ozonation of refractory O-isopropyl-N-ethylthionocarbamate (IPETC) collector was investigated with coexisted kaolinite (Kaol). The removal of IPETC, mineralization and the decrease of electrical energy consumption were enhanced by catalytic ozonation with Kaol relative to sole ozonation. The IPETC removal increased at higher initial pH and larger Kaol dosage, suggesting a beneficial role of coexisted Kaol in the IPETC removal in alkaline medium. The hydroxyl radicals (•OH) scavenging experiments confirmed •OHs as the main reactive species responsible for IPETC removal by catalytic ozonation. The R
                     ct characterization revealed the yields of more •OH radicals at larger Kaol dosage. The presence of Kaol reduced equilibrium ozone concentrations in pure water, showing the positive roles of Kaol in the catalytic ozone decomposition and ozone mass transfer. The changes of byproducts adsorbed on Kaol indicated that surface oxidation reactions by active species might also contribute to IPETC removal and its mineralization. The mechanisms of IPETC removal were proposed by catalytic ozonation with Kaol.To enrich the contents of sulfide minerals from low grade ores, froth flotation is extensively applied in global mining industries for nearly 100 years ( Conventional processes, such as chemical oxidation ( Advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) are based on the generation of hydroxyl radicals (•OH) that can oxidize organic pollutants with high reactivity and non-selectivity. Thus, some AOPs, including photocatalysis, UV photolysis, and Fenton oxidation, have been investigated to remove sulfide flotation collectors ( In catalytic ozonation process (COP), natural minerals, such as kaolinite (Kaol) ( Alkyl-thionocarbamates are one class of sulfide flotation collectors ( Kaol is a typical clay mineral widely present in flotation wastewaters as suspended solids ( Based on the above, the aim of this work is neither to explore a novel ozonation catalyst for the effective removal of IPETC collector nor to investigate IPETC degradation pathways in COP. The main aim is to evaluate the removal of IPETC, mineralization and electrical energy consumption by COP in the presence of coexisted Kaol, and to explore the mechanisms of catalytic ozonation of IPETC collector with Kaol. The results can provide a deep insight into the roles of coexisted clay minerals in the ozonation of sulfide flotation wastewaters. The Kaol mineral, provided by China Kaolin Clay Co., Ltd., was used as received without further purification. The main chemical compositions (weight content), given by the manufacture, was Al The The catalytic ozonation of IPETC was conducted with a batch mode in a jacket glass cylindrical reactor (2.5 L). The experimental setup was shown in Fig. S1. Ozone was generated using air as a source by an ozone generator (SW–004, Qingdao West Electronic Purifiers Co., China). In COP experiments, 2 L of 100 mg/L IPETC solution was mixed with Kaol and the suspension was put into the reactor. The ozone gas at a flow rate of 1.67 L/min was immediately introduced though a porous diffuser to initiate IPETC degradation. The ozone dosage rate was set at 2.065 mg/(min⸱L). The samples were taken at designed time intervals and residual ozone was quenched by 0.1 mol/L Na To investigate the oxidation mechanism, the hydroxyl radicals quenching experiments were performed using tert-butanol (TBA) as •OH scavenger. The TBA concentration in the IPETC solution was 20 mg/L. The measurement of equilibrium ozone concentration was carried out by introducing ozone gas into pure water for 30 min at different initial pHs or Kaol dosages. The ozone dosage rate was 2.065 mg/(min⸱L). 30 min was long enough to reach the dissolution equilibrium of dosed ozone. Experiments to determine The infrared spectrum of received Kaol was recorded with a Nicolet IS50 FT-IR spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The X-ray photoelectron spectrometry (XPS) analysis of Kaol catalysts was conducted with an X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (Kratos AXIS Ultra DLD) using a monochromatic Al Kα radiation. The binding energy was calibrated with a reference to C 1 s peak at 284.6 eV. The aqueous O The concentration of pCBA was measured by using a high performance liquid chromatography (LC–10AVP plus, Shimadzu, Japan) equipped with a UV detection and a Shim-pack XR–ODS chromatography column (3.0 mm × 100 mm). The samples with an injection volume of 100 μL were analyzed using an eluent containing 0.5% H The solution pH and conductivity of treated IPETC solutions were monitored by using a multi-parameter water quality meter equipped with different electrodes (Bante 900-UK, Shanghai Bante Instruments Co. Ltd., China). The solution pH was analyzed by a pH combination electrode (P11 mode). The solution conductivity was determined by a glass conductivity probe with platinum cells (K10 mode). The solid-phase extraction and gas chromatography–mass spectrometry (SPE/GC–MS) was developed to identify degradation byproducts of IPETC collectors. An SPE 24-port vacuum manifold system (Phenomenex, U.S.) was applied to extract byproducts from ozonated IPETC solutions. The extracts were further analyzed by GC–MS (Shimadzu, GCMS–QP2010 SE, Japan) equipped with a capillary column (Zebron ZB–FFAP, 30 m × 0.32 mm × 0.25 μm, Phenomenex, U.S.). The detailed procedures of byproduct extraction and GC–MS analysis were seen in the Supplementary Materials. The Fourier Transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) spectrum of received Kaol, as given in The removal efficiencies of both IPETC collector and TOC were given in As shown in As shown in In this study, the mineralization extents of C, S, and N elements of IPETC were adopted to quantitatively describe the mineralization. The mineralization extent of C ( To better understand the mineralization of IPETC, the SPE/GC–MS analysis was conducted to identify organic byproducts. The GC–MS total ion chromatograms of IPETC solutions ozonated at 60 min by SOP and COP was shown in Most of sulfide flotation processes are conducted in alkaline pulps, resulting in the pH of flotation wastewaters ranging from 8.0–12.0 ( The equilibrium ozone concentrations at different initial pHs were measured with and without the presence of Kaol. As given in The catalyst dosage is one of the important factors in the catalytic ozonation, and more •OHs would be yielded at the higher catalyst dosage ( The electrical energy per order (EE/O), defined as “the electric energy in kWh required in removing a pollutant by one order of magnitude in 1 m In general, •OHs were considered as the main active species in the COP owing to the ozone decomposition on the surface of solid catalysts ( The inhibiting effect of TBA on catalytic ozonation was generally an indirect approach to confirm the formation of •OHs. In this work, the As seen in To further confirm the •OH generation, the equilibrium ozone concentrations at different Kaol dosages were measured at initial pH 10.0. As given in As discussed above, the inhibiting effect of IPETC removal by TBA, the increase of To investigate the adsorption of IPETC and its byproducts on Kaol, the S2p and N1s XPS spectra of Kaol before and after adsorption and COP treatment were recorded. As shown in In summary, Kaol mineral, acting as natural ozonation catalyst, significantly enhanced the removal of refractory IPETC, mineralization, and the decrease of electrical energy consumption during the COP of IPETC. The IPETC removal increased at higher initial pH, indicating that the high alkalinity of flotation wastewaters might have a beneficial influence on IPETC removal by catalytic ozonation. The IPETC removal was enhanced and electrical energy consumption was decreased at larger Kaol dosage. The TBA inhibiting experiments confirmed that •OH radicals, main reactive species, could be generated through the catalytic decomposition of ozone on Kaol and bulk ozone decomposition initiated by OH The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was sponsored by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at