With the rapid depletion of relatively simple iron ores that can be readily beneficiated, agglomeration magnetic separation has been increasingly applied for recovery of fine iron minerals. In this study, the effects of stirring speed, pH, and flocculant dosage on the recovery of fine hematite are investigated by floc-magnetic separation experiments in the presence of carboxymethyl starch (CMS). The experimental results show that the recovery of fine hematite is improved in the presence of CMS in the high-intensity magnetic separation (HIMS) with sufficient kinetic energy input and appropriate pulp pH value. Compared to the conventional HIMS, the concentrate recovery has increased by 7.03 percentage point in the presence of CMS under optimal conditions. Furthermore, the mechanism of the interaction between CMS and fine hematite is investigated through scanning electron microscopy, energy dispersive spectroscopy, and zeta potential and infrared spectrum measurements. The results of SEM-EDS and optical microscope tests indicate that CMS can adsorb on the surface of hematite, but not on the quartz surface. The results of the zeta potential and FTIR measurement illustrate that electrostatic adsorption and hydrogen bond adsorption exist between hematite and CMS, but barely found between quartz and CMS. Therefore, the selective agglomeration of fine hematite particles is formed by the polymer bridging effect of CMS in the pulp. Subsequently, the collecting efficiency of fine hematite particles is improved in the HIMS. The model of selective flocculation of fine hematite is proposed and attributed to two processes: the sensitisation process and the collision process. While the former process is the selective adsorption of CMS on the surface of fine hematite particles through hydrogen bonds, the later process is the polymer-bridging flocculation performance with sufficient kinetic energy input at an appropriate pulp pH value.Along with the reducing of high-grade iron ore resources, the utilization of fine-grained low-grade iron ore resources becomes more and more important. However, the current hematite resources account for a high proportion of fine-grained refractory iron ore resources during shallow mining, which has led to a high level of attention to the development of fine-grained refractory hematite resources. Generally, finely disseminated hematite ore could not be effectively beneficiated using the conventional separation equipment or technology, owing to its small size, low specific susceptibility, and high specific surface area [ Flocculation or agglomeration separation is an economical and effective method for recovering fine-grained mineral resources [ Selective flocculation or aggregation is an extremely complex physical and chemical process accompanied with a series of physical and chemical changes in the flocculation system, which can be attributed to two processes: the sensitisation process and the collision process [ Carboxymethyl starch (CMS) is a primary variety of modified starch that is derived from starch and a carboxymethyl agent (e.g., chloroacetic acid) in an etherification reaction under alkaline conditions [ Currently, studies on the application and mechanism of CMS in the magnetic separation process of fine weakly magnetic iron ore are limited. In this work, the effects of stirring speed, pH, and CMS concentration on the magnetic separation of fine hematite are studied by floc-magnetic separation experiments. Moreover, the interaction mechanism of CMS and fine hematite is investigated through electronic scanning microscopy (SEM), energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS), and zeta potential and infrared spectrum measurements. The hematite ore sample used in this work was obtained from the magnetic separation tailings of the Ansteel Company (China), and the iron grade was 21.27%. The corn starch used in the experiment was an industrial pure reagent from the Ansteel Company. The hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide from Tianjin Kemiou Chemical Reagent Company (China) with analysed purity were used to adjust the pH. The water used in the zeta potential and EDS-SEM measurements was deionised water, while the water used in the actual ore test was the laboratory tap water (pH = 7.1). CMS was prepared by the etherification of corn starch and chloroacetic acid. The preparation process of CMS can be described as follows: add the corn starch into the distilled water and stir them to completely dissolve under the temperature condition of 85 degrees, and then add 40% sodium hydroxide into it and alkalize for 1 h; finally, the chloroacetic acid was added for etherification reaction for 2 h under the temperature condition of 55 degrees. The degree of substitution of carboxymethyl groups has also been determinated by acidification method, which is as shown in The X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis and the chemical composition of the hematite ore are shown in The selective agglomeration of the fine hematite ore in aqueous suspensions was performed in an XFG flotation cell: 100 g of hematite ore samples were weighed and placed in the 500 ml flotation cell with a 20% slurry concentration, and subsequently stirred for 8 min with a stirring speed of 1992 r/min for the sufficient dispersion of mineral particles. Subsequently, the pH of the pulp and the stirring speed of the flotation cell were adjusted according to the condition of experiment, followed by the addition of CMS in the pulp and stirring for 4 min. Finally, the slurry was fed into the wet magnetic separator (XCSQ-50*70), with the magnetic field intensity of 318.31 kA/m. The morphology of the floc-magnetic separation raw materials and products was investigated through a field emission scanning electron microscope (Zeiss ULTRA PLUS) as well as an optical microscope (BDS200) equipped with a digital camera. The representative samples of the magnetic separation feedings, concentrates, and tailings (each of them was prepared with and without CMS) were obtained and dropped on the SEM seat separately, and they dried naturally. The samples were subsequently gold coated, and scanned by SEM, combined with EDS spectra to analyse the composition of the particles. A small amount of the sample was dropped on the optical microscope seat to observe the morphology of the floc-magnetic separation raw materials and products. The Nano-ZS90 zeta potential analyser was used for the measurement of the zeta potential. Single minerals were ground to −5 μm. The pH of the mineral suspension mixture of a 2 g sample and 50 ml water were adjusted using hydrochloric acid or sodium hydroxide solution. Subsequently, the slurry added to the CMS was agitated for 6 min using a magnetic stirrer and settled for 5 min. The supernatant was extracted with a syringe and injected into the electrode. Each zeta potential point was obtained from the average of the three measurement results. The FTIR spectra of the samples were recorded in the range of 500–4000 cm The effect of the CMS dosage on the flocculation magnetic separation index of fine hematite is shown in The pH value of the pulp has a significant influence on the electrical properties of the mineral surface, and can affect the adsorption of the flocculant on the surface of the mineral. The kinetic energy input in the agglomeration was realised through mechanical agitation in the mixing tank, and the strength of the kinetic energy input was closely correlated with the stirring speed. Accordingly, the effect of kinetic energy input on the flocculation-magnetic separation was investigated through varying the stirring speed in this work, as illustrated in As shown above, the experimental results indicate that compared with the conventional high-intensity magnetic separation (HIMS), the concentrate recovery from magnetic separation in the presence of CMS is increased by 7.03%, under the conditions of CMS dosage of 400 g/t, pulp pH value of 10, and stirring speed of 954 r/min. The flocculant selectively adsorbed on the hematite surface, as shown in the following results of the SEM and EDS measurements. Therefore, the particle-capture efficiency of the magnetic matrix improved owing to the particle size increasing through the polymer bridging flocculation, to improve the recovery of fine hematite. To illustrate and explain the influence of CMS on the HIMS of fine hematite vividly and clearly, the SEM and EDS analysis of magnetic separation feedings, concentrates, and tailings (each of them was prepared with and without CMS) was performed. The results are as follows.  As shown from the results of The magnetic separation tailings' SEM-EDS and optical microscopy images with and without adding CMS are illustrated in  However, a large difference was shown between the zeta potential of hematite particles, with and without adding CMS. In the absence of CMS, the zeta potential of hematite declined with the pH until approximately pH 12.0, and the measured pH isoelectric point was approximately 4.4. In the presence of CMS, the surface electric property of hematite changed, and the zeta potential was negatively charged across the examined pH range. The estimated pH isoelectric point was approximately 3.7. Additionally, the difference between the zeta potential of the hematite particles with and without adding CMS became larger with the increase in the pH value. It is reported that the Fe The selective adsorption of the flocculant on the surface of the valuable minerals is key to achieving polymer flocculation separation. An infrared spectrometer is a useful tool to investigate the interaction mechanism between hematite and starch. The FTIR spectra of CMS, and hematite untreated and treated by the agent, were obtained in the spectrum range of 4000–500 cm  Based on the structural characteristics of CMS, we describe a selective agglomeration model of hematite particles in hematite and quartz systems in the presence of CMS, as shown in CMS significantly influenced the magnetic separation of fine hematite with selective flocculation. The primary factors affecting the selective flocculation and magnetic separation efficiency of hematite included the flocculant dosage, pulp pH value, and agitation speed. The results of the floc-magnetic separation experiments showed that compared with the conventional HIMS, the concentrate recovery in the magnetic separation was increased by 7.03 percentage points under the conditions of CMS dosage of 400 g/t, pulp pH value of 10, and stirring speed of 954 r/min. The results of SEM-EDS and optical microscope tests indicated that CMS could adsorb on the surface of hematite, but not on the quartz surface, thus resulting in the formation of selective mineral flocs. The appropriate strength of the kinetic energy input would lead to the proximity of the particles with the bridging effect of flocculants, and hence agglomeration. Additionally, adding CMS in the pulp can improve the superfine hematite particle capture efficiency, and reduce the loss of fine hematite in tailings during magnetic separation. The results of the zeta potential and FTIR measurement illustrated no hydrogen bonding or chemisorption effect between the CMS group and the bare atoms on the quartz surface, while CMS exhibited electrostatic adsorption on hematite surface in acidic conditions, and hydrogen bond adsorption in alkaline conditions. This study has an important implication in the recovery of fine-grained hematite where CMS play a dominant role in the selective adsorption of minerals. To promote fine particle HIMS, increasing the flocculation and avoiding the entrainment of gangue minerals is the key. This creative research work was supported by the