Porous-surfaced Ti implant compacts were first fabricated by environmental-electro-discharging-sintering (EEDS) of atomized spherical Ti powders. Single pulses of 0.75 to 2.0 kJ/0.7 g powder, from 150, 300, and 450 μF capacitors, were applied to produce 12 different porous-surfaced implant compacts in an Ar atmosphere. The solid core formed in the center of the compact shows similar microstructure of cp Ti which was annealed and quenched in water. Hardness value on the solid core was much higher than that at the particle interface or on particles in the porous layer. This can be attributed to both heat treatment and work hardening effects induced from the EEDS. The compressive yield strength was in a range of 12 to 303 MPa and significantly depended on input energy. Selected porous-surfaced Ti implant compacts with a solid core have much higher compressive strengths compared to the human teeth and sintered Ti implants fabricated by conventional sintering process.Since the surface features of dental implant have been changed from smooth to notched surfaces, most implants have been designed to maintain immobility during healing so that osseointegration will occur. One of designs, porous-coated implants are intended to increase the surface area for the promotion of immobilization of the implant in bone by enabling mechanical interlocking between the implant and tissue, leading to faster osseointegration Fabrication of porous-surfaced Ti based implants normally involves either plasma-spraying or sintering powders onto a solid substrate Fully porous Ti implant (no solid core) and porous-surfaced Ti implant with a core were mechanically tested by Asaoka et al. If a “safety factor” is considered so that a particular structure may be able to withstand a certain amount of overstress, the porous Ti implant requires a higher strength than the presently evaluated compressive strength. Also, it must be considered that the high temperatures involved in these processes result in detrimental changes in the microstructure and mechanical properties. To overcome these problems related to the high temperature sintering process employed for the fabrication of porous-coated Ti implant, fully porous and porous-surfaced Ti implant compacts have first been fabricated by one-step environmental-electro-discharge-sintering of spherical Ti powders in times less than 400 μs. To provide a wide range of porosities we have manipulated discharging conditions such as capacitances (150, 300, 450 μF) and input energies (0.75, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0 kJ). The mechanical characteristics of 12 different implant compacts were evaluated in terms of hardness and compressive strength, and the effects of discharge condition on these properties were investigated. Atomized Ti spherical powders (Grade II), produced by the rotating electrode process (TLS Technik, Germany), were sieved to yield one particle sizes in the 50–100 μm range. 0.7 g of powder was introduced by vibration into a quartz tube with an inner diameter of 4.0 mm that had a tungsten electrode at the bottom. A copper heat sink tube was placed in the quartz mold. An upper electrode was automatically machine-driven on to the top of the powder column followed by application of a 10 kg load. The discharging chamber was evacuated to 2×10 Twelve different implant compacts obtained from the current experimental conditions were sliced every 2 mm and their cross-sections were examined under an optical microscope to investigate their microstructures. Micro-Vickers hardness measurements were carried out to find if any change had occurred during a discharge. The average hardness values were obtained from at least 20 measurements on the solid core, at the particle interface and on particles in the porous layer. These are compared with the hardness of as-received powders. Compression tests of each implant with 6 mm in length were carried out to measure the compact strength and the interface strength between particles in the porous layer. All the data were correlated with discharge conditions such as input energy, capacitance and heat generated during a discharge. Estimation of discharge time and heat generated (Δ  Measured micro-Vickers hardness values are plotted in Two different types of compression tests were conducted by selecting the opening size of a hole on the bottom jig to measure the desired strength. Loads at yielding of the particle–particle interfaces were estimated and are plotted in For the compressive strength, each implant compact was placed on the bottom jig without a hole and subjected to load. The effect of input energy on the compressive strength is shown in The poor yield strength of the sintered Ti implant can be considered due to the micro-structural change in powder particles and week bonding at the particle interface caused by a long exposure to high temperature. On the other hand, the Ti implant compact fabricated by EEDS has greater strength (up to 303 MPa) compared to the sintered Ti implant (237 MPa). This can be attributed to the microstructure with no grain growth, quenching and work hardening effects, and better joining of particles to solid core and particles at the interface. Environmental-electro-discharge-sintering (EEDS) was employed to fabricate fully porous and porous-surfaced Ti implant from atomized powders (50–100 μm), which were subjected discharges of 0.75 to 2.0 kJ/0.7 g powder from a 150 to 450 μF capacitor bank. Hardness values at the particle interface and on particles in the porous layer remained almost the same regardless of Δ The compressive yield strength was in a range of 12 to 303 MPa, which significantly depends on input energy. Selected porous-surfaced Ti implant compacts with a solid core have much higher compressive strengths compared to the human teeth and sintered Ti dental implants. It is concluded that the porous-surfaced dental implant can be fabricated by EEDS of Ti powders, which are superior to those produced by conventional sintering process. This work was supported by a Grant from “the Center for Advanced Materials Processing of the 21st Century Frontier R&D Program”, funded by the Korean Ministry of Science and Technology.