Declining market prices make it necessary to reduce supply costs of forest chips to ensure profitability in the supply chain and a continued supply of forest chips to the energy industry. Comminution and transport are two of the major contributors to the total costs in the forest fuel supply system. In order to fully utilise truck payloads and reduce transport costs, logging residues are usually chipped at the landing. For the chipping contractor, it is important to maximise the proportion of effective work time in relation to scheduled work time. Currently it is not uncommon that effective work time is less than 50 per cent of scheduled work time, due to chip transports using the chipper, waiting for chip trucks, and other delays. Increased chipper utilisation requires greater coordination between the chipper and the chip trucks transporting the produced chips to the customer. Supply systems have been simulated to examine how transport distance, number of trucks, shift scheduling and chip buffers affect the system costs for a high-performance chipper system. System costs and machine utilisation vary greatly, depending on system configuration. It is always beneficial to have six containers in the buffer on the landing rather than three, and trucks should begin their shifts at one-hour intervals. To maximise chipper use and minimise system costs, four container trucks are needed if the transport distance exceeds 50km. However, the large seasonal fluctuations in demand for biomass chips makes it hard to fully utilise the potential of the system over the whole year. The study concludes that it is important to regard chipping and chip transport as one operation, not two separate ones, as they are so dependent on each other.The European Union has targeted that 20 percent of energy should be produced from renewable sources by 2020. Each member state has its own target and Sweden aims to produce 49 per cent and Finland 38 per cent of its energy from renewable sources by this date Between 2013 and 2014 the use of primary forest fuels in Sweden declined from 20.2 to 18.0 Forest fuel supply chains are challenging, since the material is scattered over large areas and has difficult properties e.g. small piece size, varied shape, and bulkiness To increase payloads and thereby reduce transport costs, many forest fuel assortments are chipped on the landing prior to transport. This is a result of the work on optimisations in the 1980s by Eriksson & Björheden In order to further reduce supply costs chipping and transport systems need to be improved and new systems must be developed and tested. This can involve either field studies or analytical approaches. Field studies of chip supply systems tend to involve short-term time studies of the performance of a specific system setup. For practical and economic reasons, it is not easy or even feasible to manipulate landing conditions, system design and the capacity of the transport fleet in these studies. Furthermore, results are easily influenced by external factors, such as differences in road conditions, delivery quotas, and the material to be chipped. Discrete event simulation of system performance is a way to avoid these disruptions and enables viable studies of different system configurations. This approach has been used for studying chipping systems delivering pulpwood chips Chipping is a major cost item in the supply systems for forest fuels, so it is important to increase the cost-effectiveness of chipper use by improving chip supply systems. One reason is that the chipping equipment has some of the highest hourly costs of any machinery used in Swedish forestry. Although many of the chippers used on landings have high productivity per effective chipping hour, they are often not used efficiently. The chipping season is short, often not more than 8 to 9 In many of the chipping studies carried out in recent years, the proportion of efficient chipping work in relation to scheduled work time has been as low as 40–60 per cent. The rest of the time is spent on other activities, such as shunting chips on the landing In order to increase chipper utilisation, contractors are testing new ways to organise their work. For instance, chips on the landing can be shunted with a separate machine, thereby enabling the chipper to concentrate on chipping The layout of the landing is significant for the efficiency of both chipping and transport. A landing suitable for a conventional forwarder-mounted chipper might not be suitable for a chipper truck, and vice versa More container trucks in the system increases chipper utilisation, but also increases the risk of queues on the landing, thereby reducing truck utilisation The overall aim of this study was to identify ways to reduce the supply cost for forest chips through more efficient use of existing chipper systems. The study also attempted to describe how the supply costs for a chipping system, consisting of a chipper, a forwarder for shunting containers, and container trucks, are affected by shunting distance, buffer size, truck scheduling, and number of trucks available. The study was carried out using a discrete event simulation model of the system. The model was constructed based on experiences from a field study of a similar system The model simulates the supply chain of forest chips, from a stack of logging residues on the landing until the chips are delivered to the customer, during one working week, i.e. Monday to Friday ( On the landing there is a buffer of three or six containers. These can be placed at the reloading point, adjacent to the chipper, and one can be loaded on the forwarder. Both the chipper and the forwarder are operated according to a schedule where the working day starts at 06.00 and ends at 14.30, with a lunch break between 10.00 and 10.30. The chipper starts and ends its work adjacent to the residue stack. The forwarder starts and ends at the reloading point. If the forwarder is not there at 14.30, it has to continue work until it arrives at the reloading point. On Monday morning the forwarder transports empty containers to the chipper, and as soon as there are full containers at the chipper, it brings them back to the reloading point ( The chipper starts to work as soon as there is an empty container to fill, and continues until all containers at the residue stack are filled ( The container trucks are operated according to a shift schedule determined by the shift type. The working day begins and ends at the contractor’s garage. There are eight hours of normal working time per day, with a maximum working day of 9 A container truck starts its work on Monday morning when it leaves the garage for the landing ( Machine costs have been calculated as net costs excluding profits for a large contractor that owns all machines in the studied supply chain. The calculated net costs per load should not be mistaken for the price the contractor needs to charge for chipping and transport. The machine costs per effective work hour and waiting hour have been calculated using the simple machine cost calculation spreadsheet program produced by the COST0902 project, which is available as a supplement to the paper In the calculations, assumptions are that all machines work 1640 scheduled hours annually, interest rate is 3 per cent, and salvage value is 15 per cent of the investment. When calculating the costs for waiting time, the cost for fuel and consumables has been deducted from the hourly costs for efficient work time. The purchase price for a container has been set to €4946; with an expected economic life of 12,000 Data is presented for cases with a shunting distance of 200 As the variance for the result parameters The system with four container trucks working in staggered shifts produced the largest numbers of loads per day ( The effect of buffer size on production was very significant, and it was only when two trucks worked in staggered shifts that the effect of buffer size was not significant. When all trucks used the simultaneous shift schedule, an increase in buffer size from three containers to six gave more or less the same effect on production as adding another container truck to the system ( Shift system had a major effect on system performance for the systems with three or four container trucks, where the staggered shift schedule outperformed the simultaneous shift schedule. When only two container trucks were used in the system, shift schedule had no effects as long as the buffer consisted of six containers. If the buffer was three containers, a staggered shift schedule was slightly preferable. When the best performing systems with two, three or four container trucks were compared, three trucks gave the lowest cost per load at 30 When system costs are divided into separate costs for chipping, shunting and transport, all three work tasks are clearly affected by the road transport distance ( Container trucks did not average eight working hours per shift when a buffer of six containers was used, regardless of road transport distance ( Queuing time for the trucks on the landing was significantly increased if all trucks started to work simultaneously ( For a system with only two container trucks, the two shift forms and buffer sizes do not affect either average production or costs, providing the small buffer is not combined with a simultaneous shift start. The reason for these small differences is that the trucks become naturally separated as work progresses. Since the inter-arrival time between trucks is fairly long and the capacity of the chipper and forwarder high, there is also a high probability that at least three containers in the buffer will be full when a truck arrives. In a case where two trucks arrive at the landing simultaneously, the second truck has to wait for the first to load, and if there are only three containers in the buffer, it must also wait while the chipper fills the three empty ones that the first truck left. However, this waiting time causes a separation between the trucks, which reduces the probability that they will arrive at the landing simultaneously next time. Furthermore, it is only the first morning in the week that both trucks are guaranteed to arrive to the landing at approximately the same time. On the remaining days, there is always the possibility that one is leaving the garage for the landing while the other is leaving to deliver a stored load to the heating plant. Shift form and buffer size have a large impact on the performance of systems with three or four container trucks. In many cases, the production difference between a six-container buffer and a three-container buffer is equivalent to the production increase obtained when another truck is added to the system. As the cost of the additional three containers is just a fraction of that of a container truck, the larger buffer size is recommended on all landings with sufficient space for six containers. If the landing is too small, three containers must be placed on the next landing where there is material to chip. However, the use of a forwarder that shunts containers increases the feasible shunting distance compared to if a forwarder-mounted chipper is used for shunting. This makes it unlikely there would not be enough room for a six-container buffer within a feasible distance from the chipper. When there are three or four trucks in the system, staggered shifts reduce both the time spent waiting and total unused time. This is logical, as it eliminates much of the queuing on the landing in the morning. Shift schedule has little influence for systems with two container trucks, so contractors do not take this into account when adding a third truck to the system. The main reason is that, although shift scheduling is assumed to have an effect on system production and system costs, the size of the effect has not been realised by the contractors. Of the simulated systems, the best system has four trucks, staggered shifts and a buffer of six containers. It gave the highest production irrespective of road transport distance and the lowest costs per load at distances equal to or longer than 50 The studied system is hot, so there is a lot of waiting time for the three machine types. The waiting times for the forwarder shunting the containers are of relatively little interest, as the effect on total system costs is small. However, in cases where the shunting capacity is too low, total costs escalate rapidly due to increased waiting times for the chipper and container trucks. Shunting distances longer than 200 Except for these cases where shunting capacity limits chipper utilisation, chipper waiting times are most often caused by insufficient transport capacity in the haulage phase. In the systems with two container trucks, chipper waiting time was approximately 50 per cent where the transport distance of the container trucks was 70 The waiting times for the container trucks are of two types: 1) queuing on the landing, i.e. waiting while another truck is loading, or waiting until three containers are full, and 2) waiting in the garage because there is not enough time left in the day to fetch another load. Queuing time on the landing is affected by shift schedule and buffer size, but also by stochastic events occurring throughout the working day, such as trucks not being driven at the same speed, or variations in unloading times. Waiting time in the garage can be reduced if the truck can be used for another shorter transport before the shift is finished. The lower hourly cost for the container trucks compared to the chipper means that waiting times for the trucks are more acceptable, providing utilisation of the chipper is high and without increasing the total cost for the operation. Consequently, waiting time for the container trucks should not necessarily be regarded as a sign of excess truck capacity in the system. Relocations between landings have not been considered in this study. Relocations will reduce system performance depending on the amount of residues at each landing Currently, Swedish forest companies often regard chipping and chip transport as two separate work tasks, and it is common that there is one contractor for the chipping operation and another for the chip transport. The chipping contractor is paid according to the weight or volume of chips produced, i.e. per tonne or cubic metre, without any consideration of transport capacity or distance. The haulier is paid per tonne and distance travelled. This data is then used to optimise the supply chain The possibility of fully utilising the system capacity does not just depend on the ability to balance chipping and haulage capacities, but also on factors such as customer demand for chips and the distribution of transport distances. As uncomminuted forest fuel has better storage properties than forest chips System capacity can also be better utilised through strategic planning of the chip deliveries. By prioritising landings close to the customer during periods of high demand, the number of delivered loads per day can be increased, which also increases the average transport distance during the rest of the year. This in turn increases system utilisation over the year The biomass material varies in quality between landings, mostly in terms of moisture content. This can be used to increase system utilisation in periods of low demand, as the demand concerns delivered energy. Material from landings where dry high-quality chips can be produced should be delivered in winter when demand is high. Material from landings where chip quality is lower, i.e. moisture content is high, should be delivered in summer when demand is low The analyses show that the system with four trucks, a six-container buffer and staggered shifts is the most cost-effective system overall. The system with three trucks, a six-container buffer and staggered shifts is the second best alternative. In order to avoid system sub-optimisation, chipping and chip transport should be regarded as one work process, and not two separate work tasks. This work was funded by the