SBA-16 silica samples with cubic 
                        I
                        m
                        
                           3
                           ¯
                        
                        m
                      symmetry were synthesized according to methods reported in literature and characterized by nitrogen adsorption and X-ray diffraction. The adsorption behavior of the n-octane(1)/octanol(2), n-octane(1)/ethanol(3), and octanol(2)/ethanol(3) binary liquid mixtures on SBA-16 was studied over the whole concentration range at 25 °C. Inverted U-shape isotherms were found and described by mathematical functions. The experimental binary data were verified by using a consistency test for the specific free wetting energies on the liquid/solid interface. The ternary adsorption excess isotherms of n-octane(1)/octanol(2)/ethanol(3) at 25 °C were predicted from the binary data. The work presents the first complete and consistent tabular set of binary liquid adsorption data for creating ternary data on ordered mesoporous silica.In contrast to gas adsorption However, if the applicability of ordered mesoporous silica materials as adsorbents and the mechanisms of liquid adsorption are in the focus of attention, liquid adsorption experiments are not only useful but necessary. On the one hand, SBA-16 silicas exhibit high pore volumes and surface areas, and their surfaces can by easily functionalized, i.e., they promise application in catalysis, separation, pollutant removal, etc. On the other hand, solids with tunable mesopore sizes and uniform pore structure can be used as model adsorbents to develop and evaluate theories of liquid-phase adsorption. It is generally known that primary measurable information in liquid-phase adsorption on solids is given by adsorption excess isotherms of binary mixtures. Thermodynamics provides a useful tool for obtaining relevant information from those isotherms, e.g., information on the adsorption excesses of multicomponent liquid mixtures at different interfaces by means of the absolute or excess formalisms The purpose of this paper is to present our recent experimental results in liquid-phase adsorption on SBA-16 with cubic In literature, extensive work has been reported on synthesis conditions for SBA-16 ordered mesoporous silica structures In order to obtain SBA-16 silica quantities sufficiently large for liquid-adsorption experiments, the synthesis procedures were repeated, and products with a comparable degree of order and pore size distribution were mixed. The liquid adsorptives Characterization of SBA-16 was carried out by nitrogen adsorption and X-ray diffraction (XRD). Powder XRD patterns were recorded on the XRD-7 diffractometer (Seifert) using Cu The surface excess concentration of component The Excess-isotherm points were determined by the traditional immersion method For the determination and reproduction of an adsorption isotherm of 20 data points over the whole concentration range with measurable mole fraction differences  In order to obtain SBA-16 in quantities sufficiently large for liquid-adsorption experiments, products with comparable degrees of order and pore size distributions were mixed The measured The In order to mathematically describe the measured binary The parameters of Eq. In analogy to For The natural logarithms By way of illustration, the natural logarithms  In order to illustrate the trend within the ternary Gibbs triangle of the ethanol adsorption isotherm (cf. Finally, The experimental adsorption excess isotherms of the The financial support for this project by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, KA 1560/2, and KA 1560/3-1) and the Saxon State Ministry for Science and Art is gratefully acknowledged.