The diet selection, ingestive and digestive responses of goats and sheep offered a single forage, which was prepared with three staple lengths: long (L), medium (M) and short (S) (mean particle size (mm): 13.29, 7.26 and 0.69, respectively) were studied in three experiments. The sheep (Scottish Blackface wethers) increased their dry matter intake (sheep DMI: 60.1, 61.1 and 66.2gDM/(kg W0.75) per day for L, M and S) and reduced mean retention time (MRT) of the undigested residues (sheep MRT: 54.6, 52.9 and 45.9h for L, M and S) and digestive efficiency (sheep DM digestibility: 0.524, 0.522 and 0.493 for L, M and S) with the reduction in forage particle size. The respective responses of goats (feral crosses) were not modified with forage staple length (goat DMI: 68.1, 65.9 and 67.3gDM/(kg W0.75) per day for L, M and S); (goat MRT: 38.7, 39.3 and 41.1h for L, M and S); (goat DM digestibility: 0.495, 0.475 and 0.480 for L, M and S). However, both species had similar intakes of digestible dry matter (DDMI) on all staple lengths (mean DDMI: 32.0 and 32.6g DDM/(kg W0.75) per day for sheep and goats). On the longer staple lengths (L and M) goats masticated the fibre into smaller particles than did sheep and had (P<0.01) a greater proportion of small particles in their boli (mean: 0.45 and 0.30 for goats and sheep). The selection of components within the forage offered was different for the two species. Goats consumed forage of lower nitrogen (N) (P<0.01) and in vitro organic matter digestibility (OMD) (P<0.05) and higher neutral detergent fibre (NDF) (P<0.01) contents than sheep. This was associated with the residues from sheep having a coarser texture than those of goats. When the forages of different staple lengths were offered in pairs to the animals, there was no evidence for selection of forage types by either species. It would appear that the greater ability of goats to chew efficiently provides a reason for the different responses to staple length in intake, digestibility and MRT by the two species.Forages are generally characterised by the properties of their structural components ( Sheep and goats appear to differ in their chewing effectiveness, that is the rate at which particles are reduced in size (for definition see In a previous experiment goats selected for longer staple lengths, within a forage, than did sheep ( A single batch of rye-grass ( Twelve yearling Scottish Blackface wethers (mean live weight (kg): 57.7, S.D.: 5.00) and 12 feral × dairy breed wether goats (mean live weight (kg): 52.8, S.D.: 5.18) ( Measurements of the ingestive behaviour, voluntary feed intake, water intake, apparent digestibility and the mean retention time (MRT) of the undigested residues were performed whilst animals were confined in metabolism cages. Sheep and goats were housed separately in adjacent metabolism rooms. Temperature was maintained at about 15 A 3×3 Latin square design, i.e. each animal testing the three staple lengths over three periods, replicated four times for each animal species, was adopted. Animals were accustomed to the staple length in the individual pens, for a preliminary period of 6 days. They were then weighed, their body condition recorded and transferred for the next 14 days into the metabolism cages for subsequent measurements. Each forage was offered ad libitum twice daily in two equal portions at 09:00 and 16:00 On days 4–7 after being housed in the metabolism cages, measurements of ingestive behaviour were made over a 24-h period as described by On the morning of day 8 animals were offered 50 Voluntary intake and digestibility were measured between days 9 and 14. Forages and residues were weighed to the nearest 1 The fractionation of the dried feed samples and of the residues into different particle size classes was effected using the method described by The reduction in the size of the particles after the initial mastication, following ingestion, was measured by collecting oesophageal extrusa samples of the forages with different staple lengths. Four oesophageal-fistulated Scottish Blackface wethers (mean live weight (kg): 66.4, S.D.: 4.25) and four oesophageal-fistulated feral × dairy breed wether goats (mean live weight (kg): 48.8, S.D.: 5.06) were used. The animals were 2–4 years of age, had good teeth and had previously been used for oesophageal sample collection. Animals were housed in individual pens with continuous access to fresh water and a mineral block and their daily diet consisted of 0.75 Each animal tested was offered each of the three staple lengths on three days in a 3×3 Latin square design. On collection days feed was withdrawn for about 2 Extrusa samples were thawed prior to analysis, thoroughly mixed and sub-sampled. A sub-sample of 30 Preferences for the different staple lengths were assessed while animals were kept in individual pens. The choices made, from two hay staple lengths simultaneously presented to the animals, were tested in a 3×3 Latin square design replicated four times for each animal species, i.e. the three possible combinations of choices of pairs of forage staple length (represented by the treatments) were tested over three periods: Forages were offered twice daily, at 09:00 and 16:00 A sub-sample of all feed, residues and faecal samples was dried for 24 The faecal collections or their sub-samples of about 80 Data were analysed using mainly the ANOVA procedure on Genstat 5 (Release 3) ( Intake was calculated as the DM consumed on a metabolic live weight basis (g DM/(kg W The distribution of the particles from the sieved forage samples, described by the weight proportions of the different size classes, was expressed as modulus of fineness, mean particle size and the particulate fraction of ≥1.4 The chemical components of the offered forage were compared to that of the residues using the REML procedure, where species, staple length and the category of the sample analysed were taken as fixed effects, and animal by period as the random effect. Faecal particle size data were log The ingestive behaviour variables were analysed with the REML procedure, since the data structure was incomplete. Species, staple length, species by staple length and period were the fixed effects, whilst animal by period were the random effects in the analysis. To calculate the mean retention time of the undigested residues in the alimentary tract, the multi-compartmental model of The dry weight of the particulate material retained on each sieve (sieve size The amount of the DM weight retained on the three sieves with the larger apertures (i.e. sieves of 5.6, 2.8 and 1.4 Intake was calculated as the dry matter consumed on a metabolic live weight basis (g DM/(kg W The chemical composition of the grass hay from which the staple lengths were derived was: 855 The voluntary DM intake was higher ( The apparent digestibility coefficients for DM, OM, N and NDF were found to decline ( No difference was observed between the staple lengths for the intake of digestible dry matter (DDMI) (32.6, 31.5 and 32.5 The calculated content of the consumed diets for the chemical components measured (i.e. OM, N and NDF) and for in vitro OMD, was affected ( Goats’ residues had a higher content of N and lower content of NDF ( In general, the particle size characteristics of the residues for both species were significantly lower than those of the respective offered forages ( The description of the C There was no significant effect of the staple length on MRT ( Staple length affected ( The number of daily total ingestive jaw movements was different ( The number of rumination cycles per day was not different between the staple lengths (580, 568 and 579 rumination cycles per day for lengths L, M and S, respectively), while goats had fewer cycles ( Faecal particle size (log The mean size of the masticated particles of the different types of hay increased ( As with mean particle size, hay staple length significantly affected the proportion of particles, by weight, in the fine fraction of the oesophageal samples. Length S was associated with a higher fine fraction than the L and M ( The total voluntary intake of DM and OM was higher ( The statistical analysis of the preference indices revealed that preference, for the hay staple lengths offered, in all treatments were not significantly different from zero ( The physical form of the diet had a differential effect on the DMI by the two species. DMI by goats was observed to be similar for the three staple lengths, while for sheep the preparation of the forage into shorter staple lengths increased DMI of the length S hay to such an extent that the DM intake approached that of the goats. In reviewing the literature, several authors ( Water consumption was higher for sheep than goats, as has been reported previously (e.g. The digestive response of the two species to the staple length of the forage was different. While goats had similar apparent digestibilities for all staple lengths, sheep had significantly lower digestibility values for length S hay than L and M, which was associated with a significantly higher DMI and a faster MRT. The mean retention time of the undigested residues in the gastrointestinal tract was found to be considerably longer for sheep than goats. This observation agrees with a wealth of similar findings published in the literature ( The explanation for the higher nitrogen and the lower cell wall contents in the residues of goats than sheep, could be due to the feeding behaviour of goats as compared to sheep. Goats tend to feed from the top of the feed-bin, whereas sheep tend to feed from the bottom. This difference in behaviour in association with the physical separation of the particles, where the fine particles (having the higher N and lower NDF contents) sink to the bottom of the feed-bin, results in fines not being ingested by goats. The statistical analysis in the present study indicated that the effect of the changes in the physical characteristics could explain a significant proportion of the variation in the chemical composition of the forage residues. Furthermore, as the size of the offered forage particles decreased, both species responded in the same direction by having higher levels of nitrogen, NDF and in vitro OMD contents in their residues. Although several studies report sheep, when consuming hay, selecting against stems and other lignified plant parts ( A partial explanation for the apparent superiority, of between-species comparisons, in voluntary intake and digestive ability is the effectiveness of chewing ( The total number of ingestive jaw movements did not differ between species, but differences existed between staple lengths, whereby staple length S was associated with the fewer ingestive jaw movements (ca. 26% less jaw movements). This difference was attributed to the length of time spent eating, since the rate of ingestive jaw movements was found to be constant (ca. 148 jaw movements/min) across staple lengths. Total ruminating jaw movements were not different between species and the rate of chewing during rumination was found, as for eating, to be constant (ca. 97 chews/min) across the staple lengths studied. However, the proportion of time animals spent ruminating the hay staple lengths was longer for sheep (ca. 13%) than goats. Animals, which can ruminate more roughage during the 8 or 9 If choices of the animals are determined through an optimal foraging decision framework ( The creation of various staple lengths of hay by processing the forge through different machines had a differential impact on the ingestive and digestive responses of sheep and goats. In sheep as staple lengths declined, voluntary intake was higher, digestibility values lower and MRT shorter, while in goats there was no effect of staple length on intake, digestibility and MRT. There were some differences in ingestive behaviour between the species, with goats being more efficient chewers than sheep. It would appear that the greater ability of goats to chew efficiently, both during ingestion and rumination, provides a mechanism for the different responses to staple length in intake, digestibility and MRT by the two species. However, when forages were offered in pairs to the animals diet selection was not different between species. The development of a more integrated approach to the study of physical and chemical properties of forages would be valuable in understanding diet selection processes. We would like to thank Bob Mayes for comments on the manuscript. The research was funded through the State Scholarship Foundation of Greece and the Scottish Executive Environment and Rural Affairs Department. Ewen Robertson and Iain Thomson provided technical support.