The dissolution behavior of Nb2O5, Ta2O5 and their mixture in highly concentrated KOH solution (>50% wt.) has been investigated. A 43 orthogonal design was used to study the effects of four leaching parameters, reaction temperature, KOH/Nb2O5, mole ratio, agitation speed and reaction time on the dissolution yield of Nb(V). It was found that the effect of reaction temperature on the dissolution yield of Nb(V) was much greater than that of the other three factors. The results of factorial experiments showed that a high KOH concentration was benefit to the formation of soluble potassium hexaniobate, but high temperature was benefit to the formation of insoluble potassium niobate, and almost all Ta2O5 was converted into insoluble potassium tantalate. The insoluble potassium niobate and potassium tantalate were analyzed by XRD, which were proved to be KNbO3 and KTaO3, respectively. The dissolution behavior of the mixture of Nb2O5 and Ta2O5 was similar with that of Nb2O5.Among the rare metals with high melting point, niobium and tantalum have been utilized widely in the steel, electronic and other high-tech industries ( A new process for leaching a low-grade niobium–tantalum ore with concentrated KOH solution was proposed by the Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, with an objective to eliminate the fluorine pollution at the source. In the new process, low-grade niobium–tantalum ore is decomposed in concentrated KOH solution under atmospheric pressure. The experimental results of the new process show that the rate of decomposition for low-grade niobium–tantalum ore is close to 100 ( The technique of leaching niobium and tantalum from a low-grade niobium–tantalum ore by highly concentrated KOH solution is under development, and there is a general lack of information. Although the kinetics of the leaching of a low-grade niobium–tantalum ore by concentrated KOH solution has been investigated ( All the chemical reagents employed were of analytical grade and deionized water was used in the corresponding procedures during the experiments. The Nb The dissolution process was carried out in a 500-ml nickel stainless steel canister equipped with a thermometer and a mechanical stirrer ( All the experiments were conducted in batches. For each run, the required amounts of solid KOH and deionized water were transferred to the reactor. The contents were then heated to the desired temperature under continuous stirring. When the temperature reached the pre-set value and remained stable, a certain amount of Nb The reactions of Nb Eq. Firstly, the soluble K In some earlier studies ( The results of L   According to the results of the orthogonal experiments, reaction temperature has much more significant influence on the dissolution yield of Nb(V) than other factors do. However, it is impossible to keep reaction temperature above the boiling point of the corresponding KOH solution under atmospheric pressure. Thus, the effects of reaction temperature and KOH concentration on the dissolution yield of Nb(V) were further investigated by factorial experiments, under the conditions of agitation speed 1100 rpm, reaction time 3 h and mole ratio of KOH/Nb  It can be seen that the dissolution yield of Nb(V) is about 80% and increases modestly with an increase of the KOH concentration at 150 °C, which is attributed to the fact that the decomposition rate of K According to the above analysis of the results, it is concluded that increase of the KOH concentration allows soluble potassium hexaniobate to be obtained under a certain reaction temperature. The effect of reaction temperature on the dissolution yield of Nb(V) is shown in It can be seen that under a given KOH concentration, the dissolution yield of Nb(V) decreases with increase of the reaction temperature. This is attributed to the fact that the increase of the reaction temperature makes the reaction equilibrium of Eq. The insoluble potassium niobate obtained after Nb The above results further indicate that it is feasible to produce potassium niobate (KNbO Under the conditions of KOH/Ta  The insoluble tantalate was washed by deionized water, dried at 120 °C for 10 h, then analyzed by XRD. The result is shown in It can be seen that all diffraction peaks of the insoluble tantalate may be attributed to KTaO According to the results of the above experiments, the dissolution yield of Nb(V) is higher than 96%, while the dissolution rate of Ta(V) is below 1.6%, under the conditions of 300 °C reaction temperature and 84% wt. KOH. This implies that it is possible to directly separate tantalum and niobium, after the niobium–tantalum ore is leached with highly concentrated KOH solution under the conditions mentioned above. In order to confirm this hypothesis, a series of experiments were carried out to investigate the dissolution behavior of the mixture of Nb   The dissolution behavior of Nb Under different reaction temperature and KOH concentration, Nb Almost all of Ta The dissolution behavior of the mixture of Nb Financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 20306031 is gratefully acknowledged.