A comparative study of the solvent extraction of vanadium(V) from hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide media was separately carried out using Aliquat-336 (methyltrioctylammonium chloride) extractant dissolved in kerosene containing 10% n-octanol as phase modifier. The different parameters affecting the extraction process including acid, alkali, extractant, metal concentrations, phase ratio and loading capacity as well as the temperature were separately investigated. Vanadium(V) species were suggested to be (H2V10O28)4
                     − and (VO3OH)2
                     − in acidic and alkaline solutions, respectively. Based on the obtained results, the extraction equilibria were deduced and the optimum conditions for the extraction of vanadium were proposed. The method was applied for treatment of the spent catalyst used in the manufacture of sulphuric acid industry giving a recovery of 93.0% for vanadium in the whole process.Vanadium is found in over 50 different minerals and is the 22nd most abundant element in the Earth's crust at a mean concentration of 150 g/t. This value is similar to zinc and more than that reported for copper and nickel ( Spent catalyst mass used in the manufacture of sulphuric acid was supplied by AboZabal Company for Fertilizers, Egypt. The chemical composition was determined by energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence (XRF) with SiLi detector and is given in Vanadium(V) or Molybdenum(VI) solutions were each prepared by dissolving a certain weight of vanadium pentoxide or molybdenum trioxide giving 1 g/L in acid or alkali medium with heating. V(V) and Mo(VI) in the aqueous phase were spectrophotometrically determined by xylenol orange method at pH values of 4.5 and 7.0, respectively ( The extraction procedure was performed by shaking equal volumes (5 ml) of the aqueous and organic phases in stoppered glass tubes for 30 min using a thermostated shaking water bath adjusted at 25 °C. Preliminary experiments showed that a contact time of 15 min is sufficient to reach the extraction equilibrium for both metals. To determine the metal concentration, known aliquot volumes were taken from the aqueous phase before and after extraction for spectrophotometric assay. The distribution ratio, D, was calculated from the relation: The sample was ground to a particle size between 200 and 400 µm, since lower grain sizes did not improve leaching efficiencies in preliminary tests. Spent catalyst from the manufacture of sulphuric acid are used in the process of catalytic oxidation of sulphur dioxide to sulphur trioxide and usually consists of a relatively pure mixture of vanadium salts, probably VO(SO Preliminary tests were performed for dissolution of vanadium pentoxide in sodium hydroxide solution and its extraction using various extractants. The results summarized in As previously seen in The effect of the variation of Aliquat-336 concentration within the range 0.15–0.5 M on the extraction of V(V) from 3 M hydrochloric acid solution was studied. It was found that the extraction of V(V) increased by increasing Aliquat-336 concentration. The slope of log-log linear relationship between the extractant concentrations with the corresponding distribution ratios was found to be around four in the investigated system, The extraction of vanadium (1 g/L) from alkaline sodium hydroxide medium was investigated using 0.5 M Aliquat-336 in kerosene. As shown in In order to complete the comparison between hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide solutions from which V(V) was extracted, additional parameters were studied. Therefore, the effect of vanadium ion concentration on its extraction with 0.5 M Aliquat-336 in kerosene from 3 M HCl or 0.1 M NaOH solutions was investigated in the range 0.1–1 g/L. The results obtained are represented in Over a large pH range, it is known that the aqueous solutions of V(V) contain many anionic oxo-species whose condensation degrees range from 2 to 10 ( Therefore, the extraction constant, K  On the other hand, the reaction in alkaline medium (pH The average values of the extraction constants from acidic and alkaline media were calculated and found to be (2.5 The increase of temperature in the range 15–45 °C was found to increase the extraction of vanadium (1 g/L) when extracted by 0.5 M Aliquat-336 in kerosene from both acidic 3 M HCl medium and alkaline 0.1 M NaOH solution. The Van't Hoff equation ( The plot of ln K  As shown in Stripping studies were carried out on organic solution consisting of 0.5 M Aliquat-336 in kerosene containing 10% n-octanol after extraction of 1 g/L V(V) from 3 M HCl or 0.1 M NaOH solutions. The effect of water, mineral acids as well as sodium hydroxide and ammonia on the stripping of metal ion from the loaded organic solvents was investigated and the results are given in Amines are the most common extractants in the extraction of molybdenum and vanadium ( The extraction of molybdenum(VI) from hydrochloric, nitric or sulphuric acid solutions has been investigated using trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO) ( Therefore, molybdenum could be quantitatively extracted using of TOPO from 3 M HCl solution prior to go through the extraction of vanadium from spent catalyst samples. Preliminary experiments were performed on the extraction of vanadium(V) from 3 M HCl solution by TOPO and it was found that the extraction percent did not exceed 3.6%. For spent catalysts containing Mo, Ni, Co, V and Al Molybdenum in the filtrate was quantitatively extracted by 0.1 M TOPO in kerosene at 25 °C with phase ratio Extraction of vanadium from acidic and alkaline media was performed using Aliquat-336 dissolved in kerosene containing 10% n-octanol as phase modifier. The results indicated that the extraction from sodium hydroxide solution is better than from hydrochloric acid medium. However the acidic route of leaching and extraction is used since it leads to avoid the complication of the existence of molybdenum as interfering metal. The data obtained were compared for both media including the different parameters affecting the extraction which studied through this work. The extraction equilibria were deduced and the thermodynamic functions were calculated. The extraction process was applied to the separation of vanadium from spent catalyst used in sulphuric acid industry. Finally, the present approach demonstrates a process, which may solve the environmental related issues by proper treatment methods of generated wastes and at the same time recovering the valuable metals. The authors would like to express their deep thanks to Prof. Dr. H.F. Aly for his valuable discussions throughout this work and to Prof. Y.H. Fawzy for helping in XRF measurements.