Environmental desulphurization has been established as an alternative solution to control acid mine drainage due to the reactivity of sulphide tailings when exposed to open air conditions. In fact, this process placed at the end of the primary treatment circuit greatly reduces the amount of problem tailings by concentrating the sulphide fraction. An acceptable target for sulphide content can be estimated from the acidity potential (AP), neutralization potential (NP) and the net neutralization potential (NNP) of the mill tailings. To produce desulphurized tailings, non-selective froth flotation is the most common method used in previous work. In this paper, the authors have focused the physicochemical properties of the pulp as the main parameters affecting the non-selective sulphide flotation. The pyrite depression due to lime addition during the former process represents the main problem. Several laboratory tests were conducted using a Denver cell to choose the best and most economical collector. Other tests were done to select the best frothing agent. The pH and redox potentials were investigated as parameters of great importance in flotation performance. For studying the sulphide flotation kinetics, two mine tailings are chosen which are characterized by a weak neutralization potential (under 37 kg CaCO3/t). Tailings S and L are cyanide free and contain respectively 5.27 and 10 wt.% sulphur. Collector dosage was optimized for these tailings as well as the flotation time and the results show that tailings L needed more collector than tailings S. Desulphurization costs were estimated to be CND$0.35 per ton (dry tailings), which is very comparable and competitive to existing method for tailings management.Throughout the world, many mining operations concentrate various valuable metals such as copper, zinc, lead, gold and silver, etc., by treating sulphide ores. The mining process generates substantial tonnages of tailings that contain various amounts of sulphides (mainly pyrite). These tailings are managed to avoid the pollution problems caused by natural weathering of sulphides that lead to acid mine drainage. While the methods used to prevent AMD are diversified (under water disposal using dams, dry natural or synthetic covers, paste backfills, etc.), they are usually quite expensive. Over the last few years, froth flotation has been proposed for tailings desulphurization as a new management technique with a view to reduce rehabilitation costs. This method separates the sulphidic fraction so that it can be managed more easily later due to the reduced volume. It can be made into paste backfill or simply disposed in a local area that can be rehabilitated later. Moreover, the desulphurized fraction has the requisite properties for later use as a mine cover. This have been previously demonstrated by column tests conducted for a 1-year period There is extensive literature on sulphide flotation, especially on pyrite. Many authors have worked on sulphide concentration by non-selective flotation for mineral processing purposes (preparation of concentrates intended for gold and/or silver hydrometallurgy) and some for waste management strategy. Regarding the available literature, we are able to mention the work of For non-selective flotation of sulphide mineral, the most common and most investigated reagents are the xanthate-based collectors, which are characterized by their ability to collect for sulphide minerals. The length of their radical chain is the cause of their selectivity In this paper, a number of tests were conducted using a Denver flotation cell on mine tailings. The main objective is to optimize the most important parameters that influence the non-selective sulphide flotation performance placed at the end-circuit of a typical metallic ore processing. Attention was paid to the physicochemical properties of the pulp from the time of its sampling and during the process of aging, conditioning and flotation. To achieve this, some tailings were sampled and submitted to a series tests consisting of optimizing the types and concentrations of the collector, type of froth, pH and oxido-reduction potential and solid percentage. Consideration was given to lowered zinc and copper recoveries. Finally, the paper will give an approximate estimation concerning operating costs related to the desulphurization process regarding the two tailings studied. Two tailings from Canadian mines were chosen for this study because they are considered representative of typical sulphide tailings from hard rock Canadian mines. The tailings were sampled from the outlet of the processing plant as a slurry with approximately 25 solid percentage and were stored with minimal air contact to preserve as much as possible their physicochemical properties. The contents of sulphur, zinc and copper were determined by ICP analysis. The chemical composition of the different tailing samples and the calculated sulphide composition are presented in Grain size analyses were done on the tailings because of the importance of this factor both in flotation processes and in sulphide oxidation. The analyses were done with a laser-based instrument (Malvern Matsersizer). One can see in Flotation requires different types of reagents to condition the superficial tension for the desired minerals (all sulphides in our case) and to assure the collection mechanisms and the proper chemical condition for the pulp. The technical specifications of the reagents tested for flotation experiments are the following. Collectors: KAX-41: Potassium propyl xanthate, from Prospec Chemicals, KAX-51: Potassium amyl xanthate, from Prospec Chemicals, FLEX 31: xanthate derivative, from Prospec Chemicals, SPRI 105 Phosphorodithioate Salt Dithicarbamate, from Prospec Chemicals, SPRI 206 Phosphorodithioate Salt Dithicarbamate, from Prospec Chemicals, AERO 3477 Dithiophophates, from Cytech Canada, AERO 7279 Dithiophosphates+dithiocarbamate, from Cytech Canada, S 7151 Dithiophosphates+dithiocarbamate, from Cytech Canada. Frothing agents: D-200: Polypropylene glycol methyl ether; Dow Chemical, Sasfroth Sc39, 161, Sc26, Sascol 105, from Prospec Chemicals. pH modifiers: Diluted solution of H Diluted solution of NaOH. Slurries were sampled at the mine concentrators in a way that all the initial physicochemical characteristics of the pulp (residual reagents, pH, Eh, etc.) were preserved as much as possible. The target solid percentage was 30 solid % for all test. Time of conditioning was 10 min after simultaneous collector (at various concentrations) and frother additions (16 μl/kg tailings). All flotation tests were carried out in a Denver D-12 lab flotation machine. The used cell volume was 2.5 l. Speed of the rotor-stator was adjusted to 1500 rpm and airflow was fixed at 2.25 l/min. To obtain consistent results, the same operator manually removed the froths with a spatula for all of the flotation tests. The pH was measured and adjusted by adding a diluted H The optimization began by fixing the more efficient reagents to obtain the best desulphurization results. Several types of collector and frothers were verified in the study. To achieve this objective, only tailings L were chosen. The flotation experiments on tailings L were done at three different pH levels (7.5, 9 and 10.5) to test the various collectors cited in the Price (must not exceed CND$2.5/kg), The sulphur recovery (97% is considered as a sufficient recovery, The zinc and copper recoveries (maximum), The weight and sulphur grade of the concentrate (lesser weight and higher sulphur grade). The best results were obtained using xanthates as the collector under alkaline pH conditions. It reached 93% sulphur recovery and approximately 60% and 90% recoveries for copper and zinc, respectively. The concentrate represents 28% of the total tailings weight and has a sulphur grade of 33%. In comparison with other expensive collector, xanthate gives the best price/efficiency ratio. Thus, KAX 41, which is a potassium propyl xanthate, was chosen for the rest of experiments in this study. In the same manner as the collectors, several frothers were tested using the same performances criteria. A concentration of 150 g/t amyl xanthate (78% purity) was used for these tests and the pH target was 10.5. The final choice was Sasfroth Sc 39, which offered the best efficiency in terms of sulphur recovery and concentrate quality. The results are summarized in Pulp aging was investigated as a natural parameter leading to pyrite activation. Pulp was freshly sampled at a mine concentrator L then submitted to chemical analyses of the pulp solution in one hand and to flotation testing at regular time-intervals in the other hand. The pulp geochemistry At the end-circuit of the processing plants, slurries are generally alkaline as it is necessary for copper, lead and zinc mineral flotation as well gold ore cyanidation. The pH is usually higher than 10.5, as this condition is necessary to assure the depression of barren sulphide minerals (mainly pyrite, arsenopyrite and pyrrhotite initially contained in the ore) when using various specific and selective collectors. To reach this goal, the pH is set by adding an alkaline reagent like lime during the different steps of processing. The redox potential of the pulp at end-circuit is relatively low (around–200 mV) immediately after sampling tailings L. It tends to increase with natural aging (as demonstrated in the above section) or during conditioning and flotation steps due to agitation and air bubble diffusion. In this work, pH and Eh were investigated as the main parameters controlling the collector adsorption onto sulphide minerals. In fact, these two parameters control the chemistry of the pulp as well as the surface mineral composition. Some flotation tests using Denver cell at a KAX 41 concentration of 100 g/t shows that the pH has a strong effect on the sulphide recovery as shown in Time and collector dosage required for the flotation of a given pulp can be determined by the production of successive concentrates at various collector dosages. To find the optimal conditions for environmental desulphurization, it is necessary to study the non-selective flotation kinetics of the different sulphide minerals for each tailing sample studied (tailings S and L) and for different collector dosages. Experiments were carried out to investigate the flotation kinetic of the two non-cyanided tailings under the conditions cited above using an amyl xanthate collector. The results are presented in For tailings S, experiments showed that the collector dosage has an influence only at xanthate concentrations under 20 g/t (see Tailing L has more sulphides than the first one studied (see Despite the fact that the main objective of this work was not to extensively develop the economical aspect of desulphurization process, a tentative of cost estimation was done to give at least a general idea. The desulphurization tends to produce a sulphide concentrate and a non-acid-generating fraction which must have enough neutralization potential to neutralize the acid produced by the residual sulphide. The classification criterion used here is based on the net NP/AP The main challenge of the desulphurization consists of optimizing the two most important parameters of the global desulphurization costs, i.e. the flotation time and the collector dosage needed to reach the acceptable sulphide recovery. This two parameters can be estimated by using some mathematical models established in a previous works These models are based on numerous desulphurization kinetic tests conducted on four different mine tailings. The test, where all flotation condition were similar, consisted of varying the collector concentrations The environmental flotation time can be defined as the flotation time needed to obtain desulphurized tailings with the desired environmental characteristics (i.e. without acid-generating risk). Flotation time was optimized using the acceptable environmental sulphur recovery of the tailings (evaluated with NP/AP criterion) and the kinetic model for which the final recovery “Rf” and time constant Thus, the operating costs of desulphurization are CND$0.35 per ton approximately for the two tailings studied. The capital costs of the desulphurization are estimated, for the two mines studied, to be around CND$1 This study demonstrates that environmental desulphurization is possible for the cases studied herein even if they were characterized by low neutralizing potential. Free-cyanide pulps can be desulphurized easily by froth flotation with amyl xanthates. The process generates a sulphide concentrate and non-acid-generating desulphurized tailings. The results allow to choose the adequate collector and frother to reach this objective. Moreover, it has been demonstrated that the pH and redox parameters must be set prior to the flotation because of their crucial role in the collector adsorption on the sulphide surfaces. Natural pulp aging acts as an activating process for pyrite flotation. Through these tests, the relationships between desulphurization parameters have been established. These relationships can be used to estimate the optimal collector dosage and the flotation time needed to obtain a final tailings with acceptable NP/AP. Due to the low neutralizing potential of the two tailings studied, the desulphurization process needs around 20 g/t and less than 100 g/t collector for tailings S and L, respectively. Concerning the required times, they are about 8 min for both tailings. In the investigation of an optimal waste management strategy, this study confirms that desulphurization of mine tailings must be regarded as an alternative to the other existing techniques This work was financed through an industry–university program. All the actors in this proms are acknowledged, particularly Denis Bois. We would like to thank also Nil Gaudet for the technical contribution. Finally, the authors would like to thank all the mine partners who participate in this project.