The impact of temperature on nitrification in biological granular activated carbon (GAC) filters was evaluated in order to improve the understanding of the nitrification process in drinking water treatment. The study was conducted in a northern climate where very cold water temperatures (below 2°C) prevail for extended periods and rapid shifts of temperature are frequent in the spring and fall. Ammonia removals were monitored and the fixed nitrifying biomass was measured using a method of potential nitrifying activity. The impact of temperature was evaluated on two different filter media: an opened superstructure wood-based activated carbon and a closed superstructure activated carbon-based on bituminous coal. The study was conducted at two levels: pilot scale (first-stage filters) and full-scale (second-stage filters) and the results indicate a strong temperature impact on nitrification activity. Ammonia removal capacities ranged from 40 to 90% in pilot filters, at temperatures above 10°C, while more than 90% ammonia was removed in the full-scale filters for the same temperature range. At moderate temperatures (4–10°C), the first stage pilot filters removed 10–40% of incoming ammonia for both media (opened and closed superstructure). In the full-scale filters, a difference between the two media in nitrification performances was observed at moderate temperatures: the ammonia removal rate in the opened superstructure support (more than 90%) was higher than in the closed superstructure support (45%). At low temperatures (below 4°C) both media performed poorly. Ammonia removal capacities were below 30% in both pilot- and full-scale filters.Nitrogen occurs in raw surface water used for drinking water production under the form of organic nitrogen, ammonia, nitrite, and nitrate, all of which are undesirable in drinking water. The European Community has regulated some of these substances in the EC standards for nitrogen compounds in potable water ( Filtration on biological granular activated carbon (GAC) was proved to be efficient in removing biodegradable dissolved organic carbon (BDOC) ( One of the major factors affecting nitrification in drinking water treatment is temperature ( The objective of this study was to evaluate the impact of temperature in GAC filters used for nitrification in the treatment of drinking water, particularly in northern conditions. Experiments were carried out in Quebec (Canada), on first-stage pilot filters and on second-stage full-scale filters. The pilot filters allowed for a good control of experimental conditions, so that the impact of each parameter controlling the process efficiency was studied without interference by the others. Originalities of this work are as follows: The study was performed in northern climate where very cold water temperatures (below 2°C) prevail for extended periods (more than 4 months per year) and rapid shifts of temperature occur in spring and fall. The data were obtained from both first-stage pilot filters and full-scale second-stage filters, enabling a comparison between the two investigated scales. The database originated from the full-scale filters is composed of a large number of ammonia removal profiles within the filters. Samples were taken at various depths in the filter media since all filters studied were equipped with liquid sampling ports. Prior to the field study, a simple and reliable method to estimate the density of fixed nitrifying bacteria was developed ( The study was conducted at the St. Rose water treatment plant in Laval, Canada. The raw water, drawn from the Mille-Iles River, has the following characteristics: high organic loading (DOC between 4 and 10 The pilot ( The pilot filters were fed with settled water from the St-Rose treatment plant (ammonia concentration ranging from 20–160 Additional results (presented on Oxygen measurements showed that this parameter has never been measured as limiting (<4 Nitrification in full-scale second-stage BAC-filters of the St. Rose plant was also evaluated under different conditions. The study involved the monitoring of two filters, one filled with OS GAC, the other one with CS GAC, between July 1997 and May 1998. The CS filter had been in service since 1984 and the OS filter since 1990. The filters were fed with settled, sand/anthracite filtered and ozonated water from the St-Rose treatment plant. Temperature of the feeding water ranged between 2 and 22°C and ammonia concentration between 20 and 120    The results of temperature fluctuations (upper part) and ammonia removal (lower part) in the pilot filters are presented, as a function of time, in The average ammonia removal in columns C1, C2 and C3 was compared to the ammonia removal in column C5. These two sets of filters were operated under identical conditions (carbon support, influent ammonia concentration, pH, oxygen concentration), except for the temperature of the incoming water after day 110. At this moment, a heating system was installed and the heated water fed all the columns except column C5. The ammonia removal in columns C1, C2 and C3 was also compared to the ammonia removal in the column C4: these two sets of filters contained different carbon media (OS and CS GAC), but were otherwise operated identically. The results can be divided into five periods of experimentation: From days 1 to 55, during which columns were functioning at stable temperatures of 20±2°C. The ammonia removal in “C1,C2,C3” was identical (77±4%) to ammonia removal in C5, whereas we observed a significantly lower ammonia removal in the column C4 filled with CS GAC. However, the ammonia removal in the column C4 increased from days 5 to 55 (from 25 to 55%). This indicated that the four OS GAC filters (“C1,C2,C3” and C5) seemed to have reached a maximum ammonia removal and an equilibrium after the first 40 days (before the monitoring started), whereas the colonization continued in the CS GAC medium (C4) showing that the colonization rate of nitrifying bacteria on this medium was slower compared to the rate observed in the OS GAC filters. From days 55 to 110 during which temperature decreased from 20 to 10.5°C, ammonia removal gradually decreased from 77 to 38% for the two sets of OS GAC filters (“C1,C2,C3” and C5) and from 55 to 25% for the CS GAC filter (C4). From days 110 to 146, during which column 5 was operated at river temperatures (ranging from 10.5 to 3°C) while columns “C1,C2,C3” and C4 were fed with heated water (20±3°C). The temperature increased from 10.5 to 17°C on day 111 and an immediate increase of the ammonia removal in the “C1,C2,C3” filters was observed (66% on day 111 and 82.4% on day 112), while the increase was slower in the C4 filter (54% on day 125). Ammonia removal in the C5 filter, which was continuously fed with water at in situ temperature, continued to decrease simultaneously with the temperature. On day 146, the water temperature had dropped to 3°C and the removal of ammonia reached approximately 10%. From days 146 to 258, the water temperature remained stable (±1°C): 18°C for the C1–C4 filters and 4°C for the C5 filter. During this period, ammonia removal in the C5 column increased continuously from 10% (day 146) to 28% (day 258) indicating an adaptation of bacterial populations. Between days 146 and 195, ammonia removals were lower in the C4 column containing the CS GAC than in the columns filled with OS GAC (“C1,C2,C3”). From days 195 to 258, ammonia removals in the C4 and in the C1, C2 and C3 filters became equal, confirming that the colonization time required for the CS medium was longer. From days 258 to 307, ammonia removal in the C5 filter increased with temperature, and on day 307 at 20°C, the ammonia removal became similar to the other columns. The impact of low temperature on fixed nitrifying biomass was tested ( The impact of temperature on nitrification was evaluated in two filters, one filled with OS carbon and one filled with CS carbon. As shown in Samplings of the fixed nitrifying biomass at various depths in the filters were performed simultaneously with ammonia measurements. Results are presented in lower parts of A more detailed monitoring of ammonia removal was performed in the two full-scale second-stage filters during the spring run-off (from March 19th, 1998 to May 7th, 1998), when the temperature in the Mille-Iles River started to rise. Our results were obtained at two experimental scales and with different operation conditions: Pilot filtration columns (first stage) were operated at very short empty bed contact time (3.6 Full-scale filters (second stage) were fed with low particle/floc water (<0.2 NTU) with significantly lower and fluctuating ammonia concentrations (20–120 Maximal removal rates were observed in warm water (⩾16°C) and ranged from 82% (for both OS and CS GAC) in the pilot columns to 98% (OS GAC) and 90% (CS GAC) in full-scale filters. The incomplete nitrification in the pilot columns, despite advantageous conditions (pH, ammonia and oxygen concentrations, temperature) was due to the short empty bed contact time (3.6 When the temperature of the inlet water dropped, an immediate effect on nitrification was observed. Indeed, when the temperature decreased to 3°C, the ammonia removal in the pilot column C5 reached only 10% (day 146). Similar ( However, no biomass loss occurred in the pilot filters after a temperature drop. Indeed, measurements showed, that after a severe temperature change, the nitrifying biomass remained fixed to the filters even after three weeks ( The same observation was made in full-scale filters. At the end of winter ( As observed in Our data suggest that some adjustment to the cold temperature might be accomplished by bacterial nitrifying biomass. Rittman and Snoeying (1984) mentioned such an acclimation of nitrifying populations to the cold temperature. A similar phenomenon was observed for fixed heterotrophic bacteria in GAC filters fed with cold waters for extended periods of time by  These authors mentioned a Full-scale results showed that no difference could be observed between the two types of GAC concerning ammonia removal in warm (complete removal) and in very cold water (no significant removal). At moderate temperatures (4–10°C), however, ammonia removal in the two different carbon media differed. In the OS GAC filter ( In northern climates, period with moderate temperatures are very short (a few weeks). In temperate climates, however, temperatures between 4 and 10°C can prevail for extended periods (several months). In this area, the choice of a suitable type of filtration media will be of importance. The poor nitrification performances in the full-scale GAC filters in cold temperature observed in this study contrasted with previous reports ( The purpose of this paper was to investigate the impact of temperature on nitrification in GAC filters during drinking water treatment. The results were gained through monitoring of pilot (first stage) filters and through observations made in full-scale (second-stage) filters. The study was performed in a northern climate where very cold water temperatures (below 2°C) prevail for extended periods of time (more than 4 months per year) and rapid shifts of temperature occur in spring and fall. Temperature was shown to have a strong direct impact on nitrification. Ammonia removal capacities ranged from 40 to 90% in pilot filters, when temperatures were above 10°C. Full-scale filters removed more than 90% in the same temperature range. In moderate temperatures (4–10°C), first-stage pilot filters removed 10–40% of incoming ammonia, with the two media (OS and CS granular activated carbon). In the full-scale filters, we observed a difference, at moderate temperature, between the two supports. The ammonia removal in the OS support (more than 90%) was higher than in the CS one (45%). At low temperatures, the two media performed poorly. Ammonia removal capacities, in both first- and second filtration stage, were below 30%. This decrease in nitrification performances was mostly due to a loss of the bacterial activity as nitrifying biomass was always fixed on the filtration media even after several weeks in cold water. These results, obtained for the first time on GAC used in drinking water, allowed to explain the rapid spring nitrification restart when feeding water temperature increases quickly. The authors acknowledge financial support from the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada and Pica Incorporated. Special thanks to Pica Incorporated (France) for the analysis of adsorbed metals. A. Kihn is a doctoral research fellow of the Fonds pour la Formation à la Recherche dans l’Industrie et dans l’Agriculture (Belgium).