An all-iron non-aqueous redox flow battery (NARFB) based on iron acetylacetonate (Fe(acac)3) anolyte and N-(ferrocenylmethyl)-N,N-dimethyl -N-ethylammonium bis(trifluoromethane-sulfonyl)imide (Fc1N112-TFSI) catholyte with an open circuit voltage of 1.34 V is designed. Due to the high electrochemical activity of the active species, the resultant battery demonstrates fairly high cycling performance and rate capability with anion exchange membrane FAP-375-PP. The Coulombic efficiency (CE) of 98.7%, voltage efficiency (VE) of 84.5%, and energy efficiency (EE) of 83.4% are achieved over 100 cycles at the current density of 10 mA cm−2. VE and EE can be further enhanced by employing mixed-reactant electrolyte as both anolyte and catholyte, which are 89.2% and 85.2%, respectively. The underlying reasons for the capacity decay are discussed for future optimization.The vigorous exploration of clean, renewable but intermittent energy sources such as solar and wind and their large-scale integration into the existing electrical grid has spurred the development of energy storage technologies to maintain the grid stability and safety [ For NARFBs, the active species in the early research were focused on the organometallics, i.e., metal–ligand complexes such as Ru(bpy) Another organometallic, the metallocene family, has been widely studied as the active species for NARFBs owing to its good electrochemical properties and fast kinetics [ Herein, an all-iron NARFB is designed with iron acetylacetonate (Fe(acac) Fe(acac) Fc1N112-TFSI was synthesized according to the literature [ The solubility of Fc1N112-TFSI and Fe(acac) The CV test was performed on a VersaSTAT3 electrochemical workstation (Princeton Applied Research, USA) with a three-electrode cell at room temperature. A glassy carbon (6 mm in diameter, Aidahengsheng, China), graphite plate (5.24 cm The flow battery performance was tested with a home-designed flow battery system in the nitrogen-filled glove box with LAND battery testing instrument (Wuhan LAND Electronic Co. Ltd., China). The sandwich-structured flow cells were assembled with centrally located anion exchange membrane (Fumasep FAP-375-PP) or porous membrane (Daramic AA-250), and graphite felt electrodes (Morgan WDF-5) symmetrically distributed on both sides. The electrolytes with 10 mL of 0.1 M Fc1N112-TFSI/0.5 M TEATFSI/MeCN and 10 mL of 0.1 M Fe(acac) The cross-over measurement was performed in the H-type cell in which 10 mL of 0.01 M Fc1N112-TFSI/0.1 M TEATFSI/MeCN and 10 mL of 0.01 M Fe(acac) The EIS tests before and after charge/discharge cycling were conducted on the VersaSTAT3 electrochemical workstation at the frequency of 10 The microstructure of the fresh and cycled membranes and electrodes was observed with field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM, Hitachi, s4800) equipped with an energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) unit. The open circuit voltage (OCV) of RFBs is determined by CV with 0.01 M active species in 0.1 M TEATFSI ( Since high diffusion ability of active materials is important to achieve high performance, the diffusion coefficient of active materials was determined by CV at different scan rates. As shown in The solubility of both active species in 0.5 M TEATFSI/MeCN was measured by UV–Vis absorption spectra ( To evaluate the charge/discharge performance of the all-iron NARFB, a flow cell with 0.1 M Fc1N112-TFSI and 0.1 M Fe(acac) The NARFB with anion exchange membrane Fumasep FAP-375-PP ( The lower CE, discharge capacity, and material utilization (40% vs. 56%) of battery with Daramic AA-250 membrane are probably associated with more severe cross-over effect. As shown in Taking all those into consideration, the anion exchange membrane Fumasep FAP-375-PP is more suitable for the present battery system and thus used for the following test. It should be noted that compared with other organometallic NARFBs, the present RFBs show high cycling performance ( The rate capability is another merit for practical application. The rate performance was examined by galvanostatically charging/discharging the battery with 0.02 M Fc1N112-TFSI and 0.02 M Fe(acac) Although the all-iron NARFB exhibits high efficiency and rate capability, its capacity decreases rather quickly with cycling. The cycling stability is always a serious concern for NARFBs [ The EIS of the flow battery after different cycles was recorded ( To further investigate the composition of the deposits on the membrane, the 100 charge/discharge cycled anion exchange membrane FAP-375-PP was immersed in 0.05 M TEATFSI/MeCN and sonicated to accelerate the dissolution of the deposition. The soaking solution was then subjected to CV test. As aforementioned, the cross-over is an important factor responsible for the capacity decay and CE reduction for both anion exchange membrane and porous membrane. Mixed-reactant electrolyte is widely employed to alleviate this issue [ It is worth noting that CE of the batteries with mixed-reactant electrolyte using both membranes decreases compared with their unmixed counterparts. Since cross-over is reduced by using mixed-reactant electrolyte, the relatively lower CE is probably originated from the side reactions. To prove that, the CV curves of the mixed-reactant electrolytes after charge/discharge cycling were recorded. As shown in A high performance NARFB based on all-iron active materials Fc1N112-TFSI catholyte and Fe(acac) The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The work was financially supported by the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at