Introduction
                  Despite the high number of studies evaluating outcomes following tibial plateau fractures, the literature lacks studies including the objective assessment of gait pattern. The purpose of the present study was to evaluate asymmetry in gait patterns at 12 months after frame removal following ring fixation of a tibial plateau fracture.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  The study design was a prospective cohort study. The primary outcome measurement was the gait patterns 12 months after frame removal measured with a pressure-sensitive mat. The mat registers footprints and present gait speed, cadence, as well as temporal and spatial parameters of the gait cycle. Gait patterns were compared to a healthy reference population.
               
                  Results
                  Twenty-three patients were included with a mean age of 54.4 years (32–78 years). Patients presented with a shorter step-length of the injured leg compared to the non-injured leg (asymmetry of 11.3%). Analysis of single-support showed shorter support time of the injured leg compared to the non-injured leg (asymmetry of 8.7%). Moreover, analysis of swing-time showed increased swing-time of the injured leg (asymmetry of 8.9%). Compared to a healthy reference population, increased asymmetry in all gait patterns was observed. The association between asymmetry and health-related quality of life (HRQOL) showed moderate associations (single-support: R=0.50, P=0.03; step-length: R=0.43, P=0.07; swing-time: R=0.46, P=0.05).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Compared to a healthy reference population, gait asymmetry is common 12 months after frame removal in patients treated with external ring fixation following a tibial plateau fracture of the tibia.Fractures of the tibial plateau have been recently reported with an incidence of 10.3/100,000/year The outcomes following complex tibial plateau fractures have been described in several studies as a high risk of joint pain, malalignment, intraarticular soft tissue injuries, posttraumatic osteoarthritis and limitations in activity of daily living and health-related quality of life (HRQOL) Despite a large number of studies evaluating the outcomes following tibial plateau fractures, the literature lacks studies including objective assessment of patient’s recovery regarding functional ability and gait pattern. A single study by Warschawski et al. The recovery of gait function following fractures of the tibial plateau and the underlying gait variables are poorly understood. The literature lacks studies reporting on the development in gait patterns from the time of surgery and onwards. Prospective studies evaluating specific gait variables (pace, rhythm, variability, injured/non-injured asymmetry, cadence and walking speed) in patients treated by a ring fixator following a tibial plateau fracture have not been previously reported. Increased knowledge on specific gait characteristics may contribute to improve surgical as well as rehabilitation programmes and increase the quality of patient information. The purpose of the present study was to evaluate asymmetry in gait patterns at 12 months after frame removal following a bicondylar tibial plateau fracture treated with a ring fixator. The explorative aim was to report the association between asymmetry in gait patterns and patient-reported HRQOL. The hypothesis was that patients treated by ring fixation following a bicondylar tibial plateau fracture would show gait asymmetry at 12 months after frame removal compared with a healthy reference population. The study design was a prospective follow-up study including all patients treated with a ring fixator following a bicondylar fracture of the tibial plateau. This study reports the outcomes 12 months after frame removal. The primary outcome measurement was the gait patterns at 12 months after frame removal. The Danish Data Protection Agency (J. nr. 2008-58-0028) approved the study, which was performed according to the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. The reporting of the study complies with the Strengthening the Reporting of Observational studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) statement All patients treated with a ring fixator following a bicondylar fracture of the tibial plateau between December 2012 and May 2014 at Aalborg University Hospital, Denmark, were included. Patients with bicondylar tibial plateau fractures treated without a ring fixator, who were unable to participate in gait analysis due to physical or mental disabilities, who were unable to walk 2 Basic characteristics regarding age, gender, fracture classification and co-morbidities were registered. Fracture classification was performed according to the AO classification Walking ability and gait asymmetries were measured while walking on a pressure-sensitive mat (GAITRite System The patients were asked to walk on the (6-m-long) pressure-sensitive mat. The test was performed twice (12-m test). The values from each trial were averaged. The patients walked with a self-selected walking speed from a starting position approximately 2 The outcome of the GAITRite system consisted of 21 different gait variables. The mean temporal (step-time, stance time, single- and double-support time, swing-time, cadence and speed) and spatial values (step length, foot angle) were calculated during the 12-m test. Gait speed and cadence represented the general characteristics of the gait pattern. Gait characteristics for the injured and the non-injured leg were evaluated with respect to: single-support, step-length and foot rotational characteristics. The asymmetry between the injured and the non-injured leg was reported as percentage asymmetry (100 Eq5D-5L is a standardised and validated instrument to assess health outcomes The authors have previously reported the one-year development in patient-reported HRQOL in patients treated with ring fixation following a bicondylar tibial plateau fractures and found generally lower HRQOL scores compared to an established reference group All fractures were treated by external ring fixator. The authors preferred to manage proximal tibial plateau fractures with initial screw fixation of articular bone fragments and, if necessary, with exposure of the joint surface. Both autogeneous and allogeneous bone grafting were used. The frame was attached to the bone by both hydroxyapatite-coated half pins and k-wires with olives. After applying the ring fixator, alignments were assessed and corrected. Amendments such as proximal fixation to the femur were used when deemed appropriate ( The assumption of normal distribution of variables was checked visually by QQ-plots. Continuous data were expressed with mean and standard deviation (SD). Categorical data were expressed as frequencies. Asymmetry between injured and non-injured legs is expressed as % asymmetry (100 A total of 29 patients with a tibial plateau fracture all treated with an external ring fixator were included during the study period. Three patients did not wish to participate in the evaluation 12 months after frame removal. During the study period, 1 patient was excluded from the study as he was unable to walk 2 All patients united during the study period. Five of the 23 patients presented with either malalignment >3°, condylar widening >5 Twelve months after frame removal, the basic characteristics of gait show a mean gait speed of 110.3 (SD31.9) cm/s and a mean cadence of 107.6 (SD13.3) steps/min. Compared to a healthy reference population The primary analysis of gait asymmetry is presented in Analysis of the association between gait speed and HRQOL showed a weak and non-significant association (Pearson’s test: R The association between (%) asymmetry of: single-support, step-length and swing-time and HRQOL showed moderate associations (Pearson’s test: single-support: R Although several studies have evaluated the clinical and functional outcomes following fractures of the tibial plateau Gait patterns in healthy individuals are considered almost symmetrical The outcomes following complex tibial plateau fractures are commonly reported to be high risk of joint pain, malalignment, intraarticular soft tissue injuries and posttraumatic osteoarthritis In general, several studies, of a broad variety of conditions, have reported strong associations between asymmetry in gait patterns and decreased function and HRQOL The risk of posttraumatic osteoarthrosis (OA) following complex tibial plateau fractures is well known Walking speed has been reported to influence functional performance and QOL Moreover, gait speed was reported with a weak association to the patients HRQOL (R Findings from the present study indicated that regaining symmetrical gait patterns following a complex tibial plateau fracture is a prolonged process and may be difficult for many patients. This information is important for orthopaedic surgeons and physiotherapists when planning rehabilitation and informing patients on the expected outcome following the treatment of complex tibial plateau fractures. The main limitation of the present study is the observational design, implying that no conclusions regarding causality can be drawn. Moreover, the sample size is limited, which may increase the risk of Type 1 error. However, this prospective study included a consecutive group of patients all treated with an external ring fixator, and provided novel findings regarding the development in gait patterns following a tibial plateau fracture. Finally, the use of standardised objective assessments of multiple gait patterns are a strength of the study. Compared to a healthy reference population, gait asymmetry is common 12 months after frame removal in patients treated with external ring fixation following a tibial plateau fracture of the tibia. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest to report. The authors did not receive benefits or grants in any form from a commercial part related directly or indirectly to the subject of this article. The Department of Orthopaedic surgery and the Department of Occupational and Physiotherapy Aalborg University Hospital, Denmark were acknowledged for proving unrestricted grants.