Percutaneous pinning Extension block Across the PIPJ Plate and screws Volar plate With raft screws Buttress alone Dorsal plate Lateral plate   Proximal interphalangeal joint (PIPJ) injuries should not be underestimated because they can lead to notable loss of hand function. Treatment of PIPJ injuries should focus on stable, concentric joint reduction to achieve early mobilization. Surgical treatment should be adopted only when the expected outcomes are better than that of nonsurgical treatment. Video content accompanies this article at The proximal interphalangeal joint (PIPJ) is the most frequently injured joint in the hand. PIPJ injuries include Ligamentous injuries: volar plate and/or collateral injuries Intra-articular fractures Subluxations or dislocations A combination of the above There are 3 main types of intra-articular fractures of the base of middle phalanx: Dorsal fracture subluxations or dislocations Volar fracture subluxations or dislocations Pilon fractures The primary stability of the PIPJ is provided by its bony articular surface, the proper and accessory collateral ligaments, and the volar plate. Secondary stability is afforded by the flexor and extensor tendons. The fracture pattern at the base of the middle phalanx depends on the direction of the force and position of the joint. Fracture dislocations have been divided into stable, tenuous, and unstable categories. Initial assessment should include a thorough history, including chronicity and mechanism of injury. Physical examination should pay special attention to the stability of the PIPJ, with the use of local anesthesia if necessary. Lateral stability is tested in zero (for the proper collateral ligaments) and 30° of flexion (for the accessory collateral ligaments). Radiological assessment with anteroposterior and true lateral films is crucial to diagnosis of PIPJ injuries. When there is joint subluxation, a V sign is seen, which describes an asymmetric joint space seen on a true lateral radiograph Features to note on radiographs include Percentage of articular surface involvement Articular step or gap Comminution or fragmentation Number of fracture fragments Joint subluxation or dislocation An estimate of the involved articular surface from plain radiographs enables classification of fractures according to their stability and serves as a guide to treatment. The degree of articular comminution The main aim in treatment of PIPJ injuries is to achieve a stable joint for early mobilization. Joint stability is achieved through Concentric joint reduction—this enables gliding motion of the joint without hinging, which occurs when there is joint subluxation. Restoration of stabilizers—this may include both bony and soft tissue stabilizers of the PIPJ. Collateral ligament injuries of the PIPJ are common and may be classified into grades I, II and III injuries. More than 20° of deformity on the lateral stress test in extension indicates complete collateral ligament injury with involvement of at least 1 other secondary stabilizer, such as the volar plate, bony anatomy, or accessory collateral ligament. Grades I and II injuries may be treated nonsurgically, with short-term immobilization in a splint followed by early buddy taping, whereas operative treatment may be considered for grade III injuries. This is still a topic of controversy, however, with some investigators advocating repair only if there is subluxation and closed reduction is not possible, whereas others report that surgical repair is necessary, Collateral ligaments typically fail proximally. If there is enough substance of the collateral ligament on the condyle of the proximal phalanx, it may be repaired directly. Otherwise, a microsuture anchor may be used. Lee and colleagues Although conservative treatment may achieve goals of joint stability and range of motion (ROM), operative treatment carries the advantage of allowing earlier ROM and decreased swelling. Surgical intervention should be balanced against a patient’s needs and risk of complications, such as skin irritation from the suture anchor knot. PIPJ dislocations are classified as dorsal, volar, lateral, or rotatory, depending on the position of the middle phalanx relative to the proximal phalanx. Suspicion is required for patients who report rotatory traction injury. Closed reduction is attempted under local anesthesia. Dorsal and dorsolateral dislocations are reduced with gentle longitudinal traction accompanied by pressure on the base of the middle phalanx. This prevents entrapment of the collateral ligament or volar plate. Reduction of volar and rotatory dislocations is attempted with the metacarpophalangeal joint and PIPJ flexed to relax the entrapped extensor apparatus. Open reduction should be performed as soon as possible to avoid joint contracture, fibrosis, and adhesions. Dorsal dislocations commonly are dealt with via a volar or lateral approach. The volar plate may be interposed in the joint, Volar dislocations are more serious injuries. Reduction may be blocked due to entrapment of the volar plate, Repair of ruptured collateral ligaments with microsuture anchors is beneficial for early ROM, whereas volar plate avulsions are treated more commonly with extension block splinting or buddy taping. Repair of the central slip should be performed routinely to prevent boutonniere deformity. Stable PIPJ injuries are commonly treated nonsurgically, with extension block splinting or buddy taping. There is no universally accepted treatment, however, of unstable fracture dislocations of the PIPJ. Myriad surgical treatment options have been described for unstable PIPJ injuries. Mean PIPJ ROM using various approaches has been reported to be approximately 80°, and there is little difference between the efficacy of these methods. The advantage of the pinning method is its simplicity and ability to maintain an extension block angle more securely compared with a splint. First described by Inoue and Tamura, Another method of pinning involves transfixing of the PIPJ (see Satisfactory outcomes have been reported despite the PIPJ being in slight dorsal subluxation, especially when the middle phalanx heals in a position that restores the concavity of the phalangeal base. Open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) ideally allows for anatomic reduction of the joint and articular fragments, while restoring stability with the crucial volar lip buttress and allowing early ROM. Reducing the articular surface (for example, a central depressed fragment) may prevent secondary osteoarthrosis Various methods of internal fixation have been described—dorsal and volar plating, Interfragmentary screws are indicated for larger fracture fragments, whereas plate fixation is more suited to comminuted fragments. Many types of external fixators have been described, including static Dynamic distraction external fixation makes use of ligamentotaxis through distraction to obtain and maintain fracture reduction. Static external fixators have fallen out of fashion in favor of dynamic ones that allowed early active motion to achieve better clinical outcomes. A biomechanical study found that less traction is required to keep the joint reduced with increased flexion of the PIPJ. Originally described by Eaton and Malerich The PIPJ is exposed via a shotgun approach after mobilization of the neurovascular bundles. The volar plate is incised along its most lateral (from the collaterals) and distal margins (from the base of the middle phalanx), creating a flap that is as broad and long as possible. Complications include angular deformities, Hemi-hamate replacement arthroplasty (HHA) has several characteristics that fulfill the treatment goals of PIPJ dorsal fracture dislocations. Originally described by Hastings Radiographs of a young patient with a malunited right middle finger PIPJ dorsal fracture dislocation are shown in Most investigators recommend early active motion (between 1 day and 2 weeks) Overall complication rate was 35%, of which osteoarthritis is a major concern and reported as a radiological finding in up to 50% of the cases. Volar fracture dislocations are associated with a dorsal lip or central slip fracture, with or without disrupting of the central slip and/or collateral ligaments. They are far less common than dorsal fracture dislocations and usually have worse outcomes with a delay to treatment due to failure of early diagnosis. Although there currently is no classification to describe or guide treatment, strategies follow the same principles as dorsal fracture dislocations with focus on early ROM. These include splinting in extension, closed reduction, and percutaneous pinning, Treatment may be delayed if a patient does not seek immediate medical attention. These injuries are difficult to treat because malunion at the articular surface may have already set in and can impair outcomes. In general, fracture dislocations more than 3 weeks to 6 weeks old VPA, HHA, dynamic distraction external fixator, and silicon or pyrocarbon arthroplasties may be used for treatment of chronic injuries. VPA and HHA, however, require an intact dorsal base of middle phalanx and may not be used for pilon fractures.  Supplementary data related to this article can be found online at