TiB2 and TiB2–TiC composite compacts with 98–99% density are prepared by high-pressure sintering (HPS) of premixed powders and by high-pressure self-combustion synthesis (HPCS) from the elemental constituents. The sintering and synthesis experiments are carried out at 3 GPa in the temperature and time ranges 2250–2750 K and 5–300 s, respectively. A high sintering temperature (2750 K) is required to obtain dense monolithic TiB2 compacts (98% density) by HPS. Compacts with a similar density are obtained at lower sintering temperature (2250 K) when 15 mol% TiC is added to TiB2. The composite compacts have marginally better fracture toughness than that of monolithic compacts. TiB2 and TiB2–TiC compacts (99% density) are also prepared by HPCS from elemental constituents. A minimum ignition temperature of 2250 K is required to make the reaction self-sustaining. The compacts prepared by HPCS have superior fracture toughness to those prepared by HPS. The microstructures and the properties of the compacts prepared by HPS and HPCS are compared. A possible sequence of reaction during the HPCS of TiB2–TiC is proposed.TiB In this paper, the high-pressure synthesis and sintering of TiB The powder mixtures were prepared by ball milling in hexane medium for 24 h (Fritsch Pulverisette-5 centrifugal mill). The milled powder mixtures were dried and degassed at 700 K under vacuum (10 The HPS and HPCS were carried out in a 200 ton cubic-anvil apparatus (anvil face, 10 mm square) capable of generating pressures up to 6.5 GPa and temperatures up to 3300 K. The details of the cell, used in these experiments are reported elsewhere The reaction products in the HPCS compacts were identified by X-ray diffraction. The densities of compacts containing stoichiometric compounds were measured by the volume displacement method. The theoretical density was calculated from the volume fraction of the different phases. Even though the X-ray diffraction patterns and the hardness measurements indicated nearly stoichiometric compounds for the phases, it was not possible to estimate the exact stoichiometry. In addition, due to the presence of oxygen in the reactant mixtures and pick-up of impurities during processing, minor amount of other phases could be present in the compacts. These are undetectable by X-ray studies. Because of these, it was not possible to estimate the uncertainty in the calculated theoretical density. The standard deviation ( The microstructural observations were carried out in optical microscope (Neophot-2) and a JEOL 840A scanning electron microscope (SEM). The hardness and fracture toughness were determined at loads of 1.96 and 49 N, respectively (Shimadzu HSV-20 hardness tester). The fracture toughness was calculated from the equation The measured densities (as a percentage of theoretical density) of the TiB The application of high pressure initially causes densification by particle rearrangement. The stress distribution at this stage is very uneven, being very high in the regions where the grains are in direct contact, and virtually zero in the non-contact regions. The pressure at the point of contacts is much more than the average stress (3 GPa) over the whole compact. The stresses at the contact points exceed the fracture stress of brittle solid particles like TiB On raising the temperature, due to surface diffusion, smoothing of the particle surface takes place. This results in particle rearrangement leading to further densification. In addition, the deformation of the particles at elevated temperatures becomes operative. In covalently bonded solids like TiB The hardness and the fracture toughness values of the sintered TiB The combination of TiB The reaction rate in SHS process depends on the temperature in the reaction zone and the contact surface area between the reactants. Powder mixtures with large surface area require lower ignition temperature to make the reaction self-sustaining. The primary role of pressure in a SHS is to produce dense sintered compacts. The application of high pressure prior to the start of the reaction also establishes an intimate contact between the reactants. This enhances the reaction rate, but also the heat loss through conduction. If the exothermicity of the reaction is low, the conduction heat loss becomes an important parameter in determining the extent of reaction. The reaction between Ti and B forming TiB A minimum ignition temperature of 2250 K was required to make the reaction self-propagating in both Ti–B and Ti–B–C systems. Below this temperature, the reaction was incomplete, and the compacts contained elemental reactants and substoichiometric product phases ( During heating above 1940 K, titanium melts and the liquid thus formed comes in contact with the solid boron and carbon particles. Because of the high exothermicity of the Ti+B reaction, the reaction propagates rapidly giving rise to TiB Since TiB The lattice parameter of TiC Efforts were made to establish the possible reaction sequence in the Ti–B–C system during HPCS. For this, compacts with incomplete reaction were prepared by igniting the powder mixture below 2250 K. The optical micrograph of the etched surface of such a compact is shown in It is interesting to compare the results of the experiments with 300 s holding time with those with no holding, i.e. when the heater power was switched off at the end of the heating period (5 s). Although the reaction was complete in both types of experiments, there was improvement in the density when the temperature was maintained for 300 s. During heating, when the temperature reaches above the melting point of titanium, the volume fraction of the liquid in the compact is about 0.5. This results in the almost complete densification of the compact. As the reaction proceeds, the solid reaction products form with a net decrease in volume. At the later stage of the reaction, the compact attains rigidity due to the large volume fraction of the solid phase and further densification slows down significantly. If the temperature is maintained at this stage, the rigid structure of the product phases deforms resulting in further densification. TiB The authors thank P.M. Jaman for assistance in the fabrication of the high-pressure cells and S. Usha Devi for recording the X-ray diffraction patterns. The authors also thank Prof. M.K. Surappa, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore for providing the facilities for nano-hardness measurements. This work was partially funded by BRNS, India (Grant No. 34/2/96-R&D-II/1066).