Continuous production of Al 6061-T6 particulate using modulation-assisted machining (MAM) is demonstrated. Superimposition of a controlled, low-frequency modulation in conventional machining causes chips to form as discrete particles. By adjusting the conditions, equiaxed, platelet and fiber-shaped particles having narrow size distributions can be produced. Large-strain deformation leads to microstructure refinement and enhanced hardness. The process is applicable to a wide range of alloys and appears to be intrinsically scalable for large-volume production. Recently, a new machining process – modulation-assisted machining (MAM) – that superimposes a low-frequency modulation on to the tool has demonstrated unique control of chip formation  Continuous production of particulate may be achieved by carrying out MAM at sufficiently small Production of particulate employing a sequence of MAM passes is best implemented in a cylinder machining configuration on a lathe. A tool is fed axially along the length of a cylindrical workpiece of diameter Particles with different sizes and aspect ratios are created by varying the modulation and machining conditions. An estimate of undeformed particle (i.e. prior to its detachment) dimensions is obtained as follows. The time taken for each revolution of the workpiece is 1/ A series of experiments was carried out to demonstrate particulate production using MAM. A tungsten carbide tool (zero-degree rake angle) installed on a computer numerically controlled (CNC) lathe was used to machine an Al 6061-T6 cylinder with controlled sinusoidal modulation applied to the tool in the direction of tool feed (undeformed chip thickness). In this configuration the axial feed-rate of the cutting tool per workpiece revolution is the analog of Specific machining and modulation conditions were prescribed to create controlled particle sizes and shapes. The machining conditions spanned workpiece diameters, Particle and bulk Al 6061-T6 samples were mounted and polished for Vickers hardness measurement. The load on the hardness indenter was adjusted to maintain the indentation diagonal length at ∼50   The shear strain (  The Vickers hardness of the particles was 154 The particle shape and dimensions are determined to first order by the tool/workpiece motions, and the level of strain imposed in the particle can be controlled by varying the tool rake angle. Hence, it is feasible to precisely set the modulation and machining conditions to achieve desired particulate characteristics. The ability to control the shape of the particle while simultaneously achieving uniformity in particle sizes is a consequence of the deterministic nature of the particle formation process in MAM. This is to be contrasted with other particle production processes, such as atomization and milling, wherein particle formation is governed at least partially, if not fully, by stochastic mechanisms. In summary, a process using modulation-assisted machining has been demonstrated for production of metal particulate using Al 6061-T6 as the model material system. In this process, a specially designed tool-holder applies low-frequency modulation to the cutting tool in a conventional cylinder machining process. Particles are created by a discrete, mesoscale chip formation process, where the rate of particulate production is We are grateful to the State of Indiana 21st Century Research and Technology Fund, the US Army and Defense Logistics Agency (for Grant W911NF-05-1-0488), the US Department of Energy (Grant 4000031768 via UT-Battelle), Sandia National Laboratories and the NSF (Grants CMMI 0500216 and 0626047, and a Graduate Fellowship to C.S.) for support of this work.