Adopting in-seam boreholes for gas pre-drainage is an important method for ensuring safety coal mine operation. However, borehole collapse often occurs during the process of construction in soft coal seams, especially in downward boreholes. The main purpose of this study is to develop an efficient drilling fluid for coal seam methane drainage boreholes. First, a drilling fluid with a formula of 1 wt.% xanthan gum, and 1.2 wt.% Na-CMC, 0.6 wt.% cellulase and 4 wt.% bentonite, which is simply referred to as the drilling fluid, was developed based on the actual requirements of the construction site. Then, five property tests (viscosity, fluid loss resistance, cuttings carrying capacity, anti-collapse performance and degradability) of the drilling fluid were conducted in the laboratory. Finally, engineering application performances were carried out in Tangshan Mine, China. The results indicate the following: (1) When the xanthan gum concentration is fixed, the viscosity of the drilling fluid improves with increasing Na-CMC concentration. The API filtrate loss of the drilling fluid decreases with increasing bentonite concentration, while the filter cake thickness increases and then stabilizes. (2) The drilling fluid has an efficient performance in the carrying capacity of drill cuttings and the anti-collapse performance of a coal mass. Thorough degradation is completed 300 min after adding cellulase. (3) Compared with traditional clear water, the effective drilling distance of downward core drilling using the drilling fluid increases by two times, and the anti-collapse performance for coal seam methane drainage boreholes is remarkable.Underground mining is the main mining method used in many countries. High gassy coal seams account for approximately 60% of total the coal seams in China ( The timely discharge of drill cuttings, and the cooling and lubrication the drill bit are vital factors during the drilling process ( (a) Soft coal seam; (b) Water-swelling coal seam (modified from In recent years, several studies have been carried out on drilling fluids for the exploration and development of oil and shale gas. Materials used by drilling fluids are mainly classified into water-based materials, oil-based materials and synthetic-based materials ( In this study, the basic performance requirements of the drilling fluid for borehole construction were proposed based on the instability factors causing in-seam borehole collapse. Then, an anti-collapse drilling fluid suitable for drilling in-seam boreholes in coal seams was developed, and its viscosity, fluid loss resistance, cuttings carrying capacity, anti-collapse performance, and degradability were investigated in the laboratory. Finally, an engineering test was carried out in a mine to verify the efficient performance of drilling in-seam boreholes in a coal seam. The stability of an in-seam borehole is the key factor affecting the effective length of an in-seam borehole drilling ( According to the analysis in the previous section, the basic performance requirements of the drilling fluid for boreholes construction include several aspects as shown in If the viscosity is too high, the circulation flow resistance will increase. It is easy to trigger a change in the stress state of the coal around a borehole, causing the borehole instability and collapse. If the viscosity of the drilling fluid is too low, the circulation flow tends to develop into turbulent flow, which will cause serious flushing and erosion of the borehole wall due to the change in stress of the coal body. This will reduce the instability of the borehole wall. Accordingly, proper viscosity is an important performance of the drilling fluid. Apparent viscosity is chosen as the experimental index in the experiment of this paper. The drilling fluid needs to have a strong sealing ability and efficient wall building property. Coal strength will decrease due to hydration expansion and dispersion of clay minerals in coal, which will induce the instability of boreholes and even collapse. Accordingly, during the drilling operation, the drilling fluid needs to be filled in fractures of the coal around boreholes. At the same time, thin and dense mud must be formed to adhere to the surface of the borehole wall, thereby preventing the filtrate from entering the interior of the coal body ( The drilling fluid needs to have a good ability to carry drill cuttings. If the flushing fluid cannot carry the drill cuttings (i.e., coal powder generated during the process of drilling) to the outside of the borehole in a timely manner, drill cuttings will gather together and hinder the normal rotation of the drill pipe, which will cause the drill pipe clamping phenomenon. The drill pipe will even be buried in the coal seam, especially soft coal seams. The precipitation rate of powdered coal in the drilling fluid is an experimental index to investigate the cuttings transport ability. Borehole wall collapse is a common engineering accident during drilling operations. It seriously affects the completion of drilling operations, and sometimes even leads to huge economic losses caused by boreholes discarded as useless. Therefore, a drilling fluid should always balance the formation pressure and at the same time provide enough force to the formation to keep the hole open. Anti-collapse protection is a basic performance of the drilling fluid. In addition, the drilling fluid should not react chemically with the formation. This performance requires coal to maintain good stability in the drilling fluid to avoid deformation when coal is subjected to liquid erosion. The anti-collapse performance of the drilling fluid can be measured by observing the collapse time of a coal pellet in different fluids. During the drilling process of the coal seam, the drilling fluid will adhere to the borehole wall and a “low permeability” layer will be formed within a certain range around the borehole wall. Although it is conducive to maintaining the stability of the borehole wall, the borehole flushing fluid in the coal seam is required to be degradable to ensure that the gas in the coal seam can be extracted through boreholes successfully after the boreholes are formed ( The drilling fluid contains four chemical additives: viscosifier, crosslinker, filtration reducer and breaker. Xanthan gum was selected as the main material component and as a viscosifier. Na-CMC was selected as a crosslinker that promotes the crosslinked structure to further increase the viscosity of xanthan gum. Bentonite was chosen as the filtration reducer to resist fluid loss and cellulase was chosen as the breaker to reduce the viscosity of the drilling fluid by breaking the crosslinked structure, as shown in To make the base fluid, 4.2 g of xanthan gum was slowly added to 400 mL distilled water and the solution was stirred to dissolve fully. Then, the prepared fluid was placed into a beaker. To investigate the effect of different mass fractions of crosslinker on the rheological parameters of the base fluid, concentrations of Na-CMC at 0.3, 0.6, 0.9, 1.2 and 1.5 wt.% were added into the prepared fluid, and the solution was stirred dissolved for subsequent rheological testing. To investigate the effect of the different mass fractions of the filtration reducer on drilling fluid loss resistance, concentrations of bentonite at 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 wt.% were added into the following solution: 1 wt.% xanthan gum and 1.2 wt.% Na-CMC. The cuttings transport and anti-collapse abilities was investigated with the following solution: 1 wt.% xanthan gum, 1.2 wt.% Na-CMC and 4 wt.% bentonite. In addition, the bulky fresh coal block collected from the Tangshan mine (China) was pulverized into 60–80 mesh (0.25-0.18 mm) and 3–5 mm particle sizes and then it was equally separated into 6 portions with each portion approximately weighting 15 g. The 60–80 mesh pulverized coal (30 g) and 30 mL distilled water were mixed and made into two coal pellets. The rheological properties of drilling fluids can be tested by the ZNN-D6B six-speed rotary viscometer, as shown in The instrument used in this experiment is a medium-pressure water loss meter. Under the room temperature conditions and a pressure of 0.69 MPa, the water loss within 30 min of the drilling fluid is recorded as the API filtrate loss. The deposited filter cake on the filter paper was then carefully sieved and measured. The filter cake that accumulated in the fluid particles in the drilling liquid during the water loss process is called a mud cake. The filter cake deposited on the filter paper was carefully sieved and its thickness can be measured with a Vernier caliper. As the filter cake is continuously thickened and continuously compacted under the action of the pressure difference, it will stabilize and protect the wall of boreholes. A solution with a formula of 1 wt.% xanthan gum, 1.2 wt.% Na-CMC, 0.6 wt.% cellulase and 4 wt.% bentonite was selected as the anti-collapse drilling fluid which is simply referred to as the drilling fluid, as shown in The solution with the xanthan gum (1 wt.%) was used as the original drilling fluid in this experiment. Na-CMC was added to increase the structural strength of the drilling fluid, and different samples with Na-CMC concentrations 0.3, 0.6, 0.9, 1.2 and 1.5 wt.% were processed. The shear stress-shear rate curves of the different samples are shown in Apparent viscosity (AV) is the total viscosity exhibited by a fluid in the flow process. The apparent viscosity of the drilling fluid includes both the viscosity caused by internal friction in the drilling fluid and the viscosity caused by the formation of the space grid structure between the clay particles and the polymer molecules. The apparent viscosity of the drilling fluid can show shear-thinning behavior with increasing shear-rates for effective cutting transport to outside of boreholes.  The experiment was conducted by adding small sizes (60–80mesh) and large size(3–5 mm) powdered coal particles into the drilling fluid with fully stirred, and distilled water was selected as the control group. As shown in The experiment was conducted by adding a coal pellet into the drilling fluid and the distilled water separately. As shown in  The engineering application of the drilling liquid was demonstrated at the Tangshan Mine. Tangshan Mine is a high-gas mine located south of Tangshan, Hebei Province, China. The absolute volume of gas emission from Tangshan Mine is 41.84 m During the process of drilling, the construction of the downward in-seam boreholes often suffers from poor cuttings transport, drill pipe pinching, and even borehole collapse. To investigate the on-site drilling effect of the drilling fluid in this case, four drilling boreholes were constructed in the coal seam at the test site to drill cylinder-shaped coal. The distance between boreholes was 1 m, and the radii of them were 113 mm. The coal seam in this area was downward at 22° along the drilling direction, so the dip angle of boreholes was designed as -12° considering the difficulty of construction. For the drilling of Borehole A and Borehole B, served as a control group, and clear water was used as the flushing medium. The drilling fluid was used in Borehole C and Borehole D, which was the test group. The drilling distance of four test boreholes using two fluids was used as the validation index of the effect. The test results are shown in the This study aimed to develop a high-performance drilling fluid to improve the cleaning and anti-collapse performance of coal seam methane drainage boreholes. The experimental method and the engineering test method were used to test the viscosity, fluid loss resistance, cuttings carrying capacity, anti-collapse performance, and degradability of the drilling fluid. (1) The viscosity of the drilling fluid can be greatly improved with the increasing addition of Na-CMC, when the concentration of xanthan gum is fixed. The fluid loss amount decreased with increasing concentration bentonite. (2) The drilling fluid has the ability of efficient cuttings transport, anti-collapse performance and fluid loss resistance with a formula of 1 wt.% xanthan gum, 1.2 wt.% Na-CMC and 4 wt.% bentonite. The degradation can be completed within 300 min by adding cellulase, so the coal permeability around the borehole can be restored. (3) The engineering test shows that compared with the conventional flushing medium (clear water) of drilling in-seam boreholes, the cuttings transport and borehole cleaning efficiency of the drilling fluid for downward boreholes has been greatly improved during the drilling process. The effective drilling distance increased by two-fold with the same drilling technology and under the same geological conditions. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research is financially supported by the Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: