There is great incentive to reduce bentonite use in iron ore pelletization by improving its effectiveness. In order to make bentonite more effective, it is necessary to understand the actual binding mechanisms so that they can be properly taken advantage of. Bentonite use could also be reduced by replacing bentonite with even lower-cost binders, such as high-carbon fly-ash based binder (FBB). While FBBs can be used alone as binders, it was considered possible that mixtures of FBB and bentonite could exhibit superior binding properties. In this study, it was found that bentonite bonds by a physical mechanism, while FBB bonds by a chemical mechanism. These mechanisms were determined to be incompatible. Mixtures of the two binders resulted in reduced dry magnetite concentrate pellet compressive strengths below the industrially acceptable value of 22 N (5 lbf). Activators and accelerators, which were necessary components of the FBB, deactivated the bentonite. The compatibilities and mechanisms of the two binders are explained in this paper. The classical theory of the binding mechanism of bentonite binder is challenged by the bentonite fiber mechanism that was recently identified by the authors.Virtually all of the 62 million metric tons of iron ore produced for the US iron and steel industry during 1998 was pelletized During 1997, 60.2 million metric tons of fly-ash were produced in the United States The utilization of high-carbon fly-ash within this market is important for reducing the volume of currently unmarketable and landfilled fly-ashes, while at the same time reducing pelletization costs. FBB would be a much cheaper alternative to the current bentonite binder or organic binders, because of reduced transportation costs and the lack of competing markets. Currently, transportation more than doubles the final cost of bentonite since it is produced hundreds of miles from pelletizing plants, while fly-ash is produced from power plants located nearby. FBBs also show promise for use in other high volume applications, such as foundry sand mold binders. In order to make bentonite more effective, it is necessary to understand the actual binding mechanisms so that they can be properly taken advantage of. The binding mechanism of bentonite is not completely understood. Until now, it has been explained by colloidal theory that is based on the behavior of bentonite under conditions of high shear and low percent solids. This is unlike the conditions of low shear and high percent solids that exist when bentonite is used as a binder. The authors have determined that bentonite can bond through a mechanism other than that described in the classic colloidal theory. Bentonite has been shown to form fibers on the surfaces of foundry sands by Iron ore concentrates typically contain about 10% moisture and 4% to 5.5% locked residual silica. The concentrates are mixed with binder and often with limestone or dolomite as flux, prior to pelletizing. The pellets are then fired at approximately 1300°C to harden them. Pellet binders are needed to give the pellets sufficient strength to survive the drying and firing steps. Bentonite dosages vary from 0.5% to 1.0% by weight of iron ore concentrate, while flux dosages range from 0% to 10%. Bentonite clay has the following effects (1) Bentonite absorbs moisture, allowing for higher moisture concentrate feeds to be pelletized. Moisture variations can be overcome by altering bentonite dosages. (2) As the bentonite is mixed into the iron ore concentrate and becomes wet, the clay layers expand and disperse, from the hydration of exchangeable interlayer cations, throughout the concentrate transforming into a matrix that bonds the ore particles together. (3) During tumbling, the pellets are formed by particles adhering to each other in layers, which are compacted by the weight of the other pellets into a spherical shape. Bentonite is well dispersed and retains an even distribution of moisture throughout the wet pellet as it grows. (4) During drying, bentonite increases the drying rate by providing a pathway for the moisture to be removed through. (5) It has been reported by Bentonite is a hydrated alumino-silicate clay primarily composed of the smectite class mineral montmorillonite. The crystal structure is shown in  Accelerators such as calcium chloride have been studied in cement and concrete reactions for over 100 years. The action of accelerators is complex, as they have many effects. The normal hardening of cement is the result of continuous calcium silicate dissolution resulting in precipitation of the gluing agent dicalcium silicate hydrate. As calcium chloride exothermically dissolves, hydration reactions are accelerated both because of the increased temperature, and because the lime that is present has a higher solubility in the lower pH calcium chloride solutions than in water Experiments were conducted with two main objectives: To determine whether bentonite and FBB were compatible with each other. To determine the mechanism responsible for the binding action of bentonite in iron ore pelletization. To accomplish this, pelletization experiments and electron microscopy studies were conducted. Magnetite concentrate pelletized in these experiments was obtained from an iron ore concentrator located in the Lake Superior district of the United States. The sample weighed 411 kg (907 lb) and 112 samples weighing an average of 3.7 kg (8.1 lb) were divided by coning, quartering, and incremental sampling (according to The bentonite binder was a montmorillonite-based clay that was mined from the western United States with a particle size of 85% passing 74 μm (200 mesh). It was designated as high performance with a plate water absorbance (PWA) of 706 Fly-ash with a high carbon content (7.27% LOI) and a particle size of 80% passing 53 μm (270 mesh) was obtained from an Illinois power plant. The sample weighed 34 kg (76 lb) and 48 samples weighing an average of 0.7 kg (1.6 lb) were divided by coning, quartering, and incremental sampling and sealed in individual plastic bags. Elemental analyses for the fly-ash and bentonite samples were characterized with X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectroscopy This fly-ash did not meet classification criteria to be characterized as either Class F or Class C, according to the ASTM standard Reagent grade calcium hydroxide was used as an activator and reagent grade calcium chloride dihydrate was used as an accelerator. Glass shot was used during the bentonite binding mechanism study. This silicate glass had a virtually spherical morphology. The particle size was 80% passing 121 μm, with a narrow size distribution of 95% of the material between 62 and 176 μm. A Spex mixer/mill was used without grinding media to mix binder components together before adding the binder to the magnetite concentrate. A kneader–mixer was used to mix the concentrate with binder. A laboratory-scale balling drum, shown in A JEOL 35-C scanning electron microscope (SEM) was used to study the bentonite binding mechanism. Scanning electron microscopy is explained in the literature Mixing of glass shot with bentonite was done by rolling on a rolling cloth, and “mulling” was simulated by hand with a 2.28 kg (5.0 lb) rolling pin. Mulling is a mixing process, where particles are mixed by compressing them, generating high shear forces. It is commonly used in the foundry industry to combine sand with bentonite, although it is not generally used in iron ore pelletization. Before adding the binder to the magnetite, the desired quantities of fly-ash, calcium hydroxide, bentonite, and accelerator were weighed. These were mixed together for 5 min using a Spex mixer. The binder mixture was then slowly added to the magnetite in a kneader–mixer, and mixed at 350 rpm with a 150 rpm orbital motion for 5 min. Binder dosages are reported as percent by weight of the moist magnetite concentrate. The procedure used for forming the pellets was a standard method developed by industry to closely reproduce the conditions that exist in the full-scale plant. The mixed material was delumped through an 2.4 mm (8 mesh) screen before pelletizing. A small amount of the material was then added to the pelletizing drum, rotating at 25 rpm, to create pellet “seeds”. The seeds were moistened with water mist to retain the moisture content while adding additional material to enlarge them into pellets. The pellets were removed from the drum periodically, and screened to control the pellet diameter. This procedure was continued until 1–2 kg (2–5 lb) of finished pellets, screened between 12.7 and 11.2 mm (1/2×7/16 in.) in diameter were produced for testing. The time required for pelletization was approximately 20 min. The finished pellets were then immediately dried at 105°C (220°F), and held at this temperature for 20–24 h to ensure that they were completely dried before testing to determine the dry crushing strengths. The pellets were tested using the industrial procedures given in For each value reported, the mean and standard deviation were determined for 20 pellets. The error bars shown on the graphs represent the 95% confidence intervals (P95) calculated using the This study began by imaging dried iron ore pellets in a SEM to determine how bentonite bonded to the magnetite concentrate. These initial experiments were inconclusive due to the difficulty in distinguishing bentonite from fine magnetite particles. Subsequent experiments used glass shot, which were prepared with 3–6% moisture and 6% bentonite. These components were mixed with a rolling pin to simulate the mulling process; mulling is commonly used to combine bentonite with foundry sands. Binder dosages are reported as percent by weight of the dry glass shot. The compressive strength of the dry pellets is proportional to the bonding strength of the binder and was considered to be the most important measurement of the quality of these inorganic binders. Industrially acceptable pellets have dry crush strengths greater than 22 N (5.0 lbf) per pellet. The industrial bentonite dosage of 0.66% is common for the magnetite concentrate that was used in these experiments. Three sets of pelletization tests were designed to determine the effect of partially replacing bentonite with fly-ash and FBB as follows. (1) The first set of experiments was designed to study the effect of replacing bentonite with fly-ash over the entire bentonite+fly-ash composition range. (2) The second set of experiments were designed to study the effect of 1.0% calcium hydroxide addition while bentonite was replaced with fly-ash over the entire bentonite+fly-ash composition range. A constant fly-ash+bentonite dosage of 0.66% by weight of magnetite concentrate was maintained. (3) The third set of experiments were designed to determine the effect of replacing the bentonite binder with FBB that contained activator and accelerator, over the entire bentonite+FBB composition range. The bentonite at a 0.66% dosage was partially or completely replaced by FBB, at a 0.66% fly-ash+1.0% calcium hydroxide+0.2% calcium chloride dosage, which resulted in a total of 1.86% FBB dosage. Therefore, the binder dosage increased as bentonite became replaced with FBB. The results in When calcium hydroxide was added to pure fly-ash, it “activated” the fly-ash binding. This increased the strength of fly-ash-bonded pellets from unacceptable strengths of 8 N to a barely acceptable 22 N In contrast, at the fly-ash end of the graph, the addition of calcium hydroxide increased the pellet strength from approximately 8 to 22 N. Additional tests were designed to determine the effect of partially replacing bentonite binder with a high-performance FBB containing calcium hydroxide activator and calcium chloride accelerator. The FBB consisted of 0.66% fly-ash+1.0% calcium hydroxide+0.2% calcium chloride accelerator, resulting in a total FBB dosage of 1.86% by weight of the magnetite concentrate. The bentonite dosage with no fly-ash addition was 0.66%, therefore as bentonite was replaced with the FBB, the total binder dosage increased from 0.66% to 1.86%. However, the bentonite+fly-ash dosage remained constant at 0.66%. From the results shown in The significant reduction in pellet strength as the FBB is added to the bentonite binder is most likely from either increased pH or soluble calcium ions, made available from calcium hydroxide and calcium chloride addition. The high-performance sodium-montmorillonite of the bentonite binder may have transformed through cation exchange of Na The binding mechanism of bentonite is not completely understood. Until now, it has been explained by colloidal theory based on observations of bentonite behavior under conditions of high shear and low percent solids, but this is unlike the conditions when bentonite is being used as a binder. The actual mechanism deserves consideration and should be studied to develop a new theory that can finally explain the bentonite binding mechanism under the proper conditions. This study began by imaging dried iron ore pellets in an SEM to determine how bentonite bonded to the magnetite concentrate. These initial experiments were inconclusive because the bentonite could not be resolved from the magnetite. It was difficult to visually distinguish the magnetite from the bentonite particles, because the bentonite was at a very low concentration and the magnetite had fine particles that appeared similar to the bentonite particles. Since the bentonite could not be resolved on the magnetite concentrate, a higher concentration of bentonite on a different substrate that would give better contrast with bentonite was used. Samples were prepared with 6% bentonite on glass shot with a tight size distribution and a smooth spherical surface. Two samples, sample A and sample B, were prepared as follows.   There was an obvious difference between the samples. Sample A remained free flowing and resembled the glass shot alone. However, sample B did not remain free flowing; it had agglomerated into granules.  Sample A Bentonite fibers developed on the glass shot under certain conditions, but they did not always occur. The obvious difference was the type of mixing. It was therefore hypothesized that mulling applied a shear force that developed the bentonite particles into fibers and that mulling the bentonite into the concentrate could result in improved bentonite performance. The dispersion mechanism describes that sodium bentonites disperse from particles, shown in The formation of fibers would be a completely different mechanism than that described in the dispersion theory. In the fiber mechanism, shown in ⋅ Iron ore pelletization with bentonite binder works by a different binding mechanism than with FBB. Bentonite is a physical binder, while FBB is a pozzolanic binder. ⋅ Iron ore concentrate pellets produced with up to 50% of the bentonite replaced by fly-ash exceeded minimum industrial specifications for dry compressive strength. However, the pellet strengths decreased proportional to the amount of replacement. When bentonite was completely replaced with fly-ash, the resulting strength was only 20% of the strength with bentonite. ⋅ The physical binding mechanism of bentonite was incompatible with the pozzolanic binding mechanism of the high-carbon FBB. Calcium hydroxide from the FBB deactivated the bentonite. Pellets produced with strengths of 50 N with bentonite binders were reduced to barely acceptable values of 22.2 N when calcium hydroxide was added at a 1.0% addition. ⋅ Replacement of 25% of the bentonite with FBB resulted in a more significant reduction in dry pellet crush strength when compared to a 25% replacement of FBB with bentonite. Reduction in strength as bentonite was replaced by FBB was most likely from soluble calcium ion addition from the calcium hydroxide activator and calcium chloride accelerator. It is expected that either the high-performance sodium-montmorillonite of the bentonite binder transformed through cation exchange of Na ⋅ Bentonite clay formed fibers on glass shot when prepared under proper moisture and mechanical mixing conditions. ⋅ Bentonite became a more effective binder after it was mixed in a manner that promoted fiber formation, as shown by binding glass shot. ⋅ The present study has raised more questions than it has answered. The remaining questions are: Can stronger iron ore pellets be made after bentonite is developed into a fibrous matrix? Can the bentonite dosage be reduced in iron ore pellets if bentonite fibers are developed within them? Does bentonite fiber development depend on the bentonite characteristics, such as composition, mineralogy, and particle size distribution. We would like to thank the Minnesota DNR, Dr. Ron Wiegel of the NRRI, Mr. Peter Clevenstine of the Minnesota DNR, Paul Rosten and Jim Coburn of Cleveland-Cliffs Ray Potts and Bob Strukel of USX, Jim Wennen, Sarah Blust and Dennis Murr of NSPC, Bob Anderson of Eveleth Mines, and Dr. Tim Eisele of Michigan Tech for their invaluable technical advice. We would also like to thank the following undergraduate students: Kari Buckmaster, Karla Andrade, Frank Perras, Elise Anderson, and Jaime Krull.