Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) affects many organ systems including the skeleton. In children with IBD, bone mineral density (BMD) and bone turnover are frequently low. Disturbances in bone mineralization density distribution (BMDD) are linked to alterations in bone material strength; however, BMDD has not previously been reported in children with chronic inflammatory disorders. The aim of this study was to characterize BMDD based on quantitative backscatter electron imaging in cancellous (Cn.) and cortical (Ct.) compartments from trans-iliac biopsy samples from a cohort of 20 treatment-naïve children at the time of their IBD diagnosis (12 males, mean age 14.5±2.3years). The outcomes were compared to pediatric reference BMDD data and correlation with revisited biochemical and histomorphometric outcomes was analyzed.
                  BMDD in treatment-naïve children with IBD was shifted toward higher calcium concentrations compared to reference: (i) In cancellous bone, the most frequent calcium concentration (Cn.CaPeak+2.8%, p=0.004) and the portion of highly mineralized bone (Cn.CaHigh+52%, p=0.009) were increased. (ii) In cortical bone, the mineralization heterogeneity (Ct.CaWidth+17.0%, p=0.001) and Ct.CaHigh (+30.4%, p=0.006) were increased. (iii) Furthermore, significant correlations with serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP), bone-specific alkaline phosphatase (bsALP), and urinary crosslinked N-telopeptide of type I collagen (uNTX) were observed: the higher CaMean (the average calcium concentration), CaPeak and CaHigh, the lower were ALP, bsALP, and uNTX (p-value from <0.001 to 0.05).
                  Children with treatment-naïve IBD have decreased bone turnover leading to a higher bone matrix mineralization density, findings which may contribute to compromised bone strength.The hallmark of the inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD), namely ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease, is a chronic immune-mediated inflammation of the mucosal lining in various regions of the gastrointestinal tract which can affect various other organs including the skeleton When patients with IBD are treated with glucocorticoids, it is usually difficult to distinguish between the effects of the inflammation on skeletal development per se and those of glucocorticoid therapy. To better understand the impact of the IBD on the skeletal phenotype, a cohort of treatment-naïve youth with IBD was previously studied for bone and muscle mass and biochemical markers of bone turnover, which were found to be lower than normal reference The purpose of this study was to determine the pattern of bone mineralization on the bone biopsies from this cohort of 20 children with treatment-naïve IBD by measuring bone mineral density distribution (BMDD). We hypothesized that IBD has an impact on BMDD. Apart from the characterization of bone mineralization in adults chronic obstructive pulmonary disease We studied trans-iliac biopsies from n Biochemical turnover markers were low as reported previously Histomorphometric outcomes and statistical analysis thereof were reported previously Images obtained from the backscatter electron mode in the scanning electron microscope displayed an atomic number contrast of the target material. Calcium (Ca, atomic number 20) had the highest atomic number of the elements in bone material and therefore dominated this backscatter electron contrast. Consequently, in images of bone samples, the backscatter electron intensities (the pixel grey levels) reflected the local Ca content in the sample. The higher the Ca content, the higher the backscatter electron intensities and the brighter the pixel grey levels in the image ( After image calibration (using carbon with an atomic number 6 and aluminum with an atomic number of 13), the grey-levels in the images were transferred to Ca weight % (wt%) values Statistical analysis of BMDD outcomes and calculation of median and interquartile ranges were performed using SigmaStat for Windows Version 2.03 (SPSS Inc.). For graphs in figures, Sigma Plot 2004 for Windows Version 9.0 (Systat Software Inc.) was used. Comparisons of BMDD outcomes to normal reference BMDD, comparisons of bone characteristics between female versus male patients, and comparison of BMDD among patients with mild versus moderate/severe IBD were analyzed by the non-parametric Mann-Whitney rank sum test. For multiple comparisons Bonferroni correction was considered  The patients with IBD had significantly increased Cn.CaPeak (+ Comparison of BMDD from the subcohort with Crohn's Disease versus reference data revealed similarly a shift to higher calcium concentrations: Cn.CaMean (+ A summary of patients' characteristics and biochemical outcomes is shown in Comparison of girls versus boys revealed significantly higher Cn.CaMean (+ Significant correlations between Cn.BMDD and Ct.BMDD outcomes with ALP, bsALP and uNTX are summarized in No significant correlations of Cn.BMDD outcomes with static bone formation or resorption indices were observed with the exception of Cn.CaLow which showed a significant positive linear relationship with OcS/BS and OV/BV (R In this report, we provide novel data on skeletal characteristics in a cohort of treatment-naïve children with IBD. Our study revealed a shift toward higher bone matrix mineralization in children with treatment-naïve IBD compared to healthy controls. The shape of the BMDD is highly influenced by two processes, which are the mineralization kinetics (the time course of mineral accumulation in the deposited organic matrix) and the bone turnover rate (which determines the average tissue age). Provided that the mineralization kinetics are unaltered, a decreased bone turnover rate will increase both tissue age and average bone matrix mineralization (and vice versa). This relationship between BMDD and bone turnover has been previously demonstrated in adult cohorts and by computed modelling of BMDD Noteworthy, we compared also the BMDD from children with CD (the majority of our cohort) alone to reference and found similar results as observed for the entire cohort. This indicates that the shift of the BMDD to higher calcium concentrations is a robust finding in this cohort and shows that the BMDD changes might be typical of the two/both inflammatory gastrointestinal diseases of autoimmune origin and might be mediated by the malabsorption and the inflammation. The close relationship between the bone matrix mineralization pattern and bone turnover is also confirmed by the strong and negative correlations with biochemical markers such as ALP, bsALP and uNTX. This is interesting, as the biochemical markers reveal a snapshot of bone formation/turnover, thus they are expected to show a great variation with time during growth in children while bone matrix mineralization changes much more slowly. In particular, the correlations revealed the higher the osteoblast activity (indicated by ALP), the higher is the percentage of low mineralized bone areas (undergoing primary mineralization), and the lower is the average degree of mineralization. These correlations indicate also that globally measured bone turnover markers in the serum are predictive of BMDD at the iliac crest. ALP and uNTX showed some inter-individual variation in our cohort, which is the prerequisite for the observation of such a relationship between these serum markers and BMDD. As biochemical bone turnover markers are highly dependent on the growth spurt in children No significant correlations of the BMDD parameters with age (with exception of Cn.CaHigh) were found. This is in line with the lack of the dependency of BMDD on age in healthy individuals in the age range of 1.5 to 23 There was no significant relationship between BMDD variables and LS aBMD by DXA, which is considered a surrogate for bone strength. The non-significant correlation is not surprising as the spine BMD was measured at a different skeletal site that BMDD. Moreover the BMD is arising from two independent parameters - bone volume at the tissue level and material density (the calcium concentration of the bone matrix by BMDD). For potential correlation of BMD with one of the two parameters bone volume at the tissue level (BV/TV) or material density (CaMean), a large variation in one and a small variation in the other parameter are necessary. The trans-iliac biopsy findings in the previous Moreover, no significant dependency of the BMDD on 25OHD In conclusion, the BMDD analysis of cancellous and cortical bone compartments on trans-iliac biopsy samples from treatment-naïve children with IBD points to a slightly higher matrix mineralization compared to healthy children which is likely due to reduced bone turnover. Increased bone matrix mineralization may lead to increased brittleness of the bone material. An important question in this context is whether treatment of IBD with glucocorticoids will augment these deviations in BMDD from normal given the bone turnover-suppressive effects of glucocorticoids, or whether quelling the IBD despite glucocorticoid therapy will lead to a more normal mineralization pattern. Study design: KK, PR, FR, and LMW. Study conduct: PR and LMW. Data collection: BMM, PR, JM, DRM, and LMW. Data analysis: BMM, PR, and LMW. Data interpretation: BMM, PR, and LMW. Drafting manuscript: BMM, PR, and LMW. Revising manuscript content: KK, FR, JM, DRM. Approving final version of manuscript: BMM, PR, KK, FR, JM, DRM, and LMW. BMM takes responsibility for the integrity of the data analysis. The authors have nothing to disclose. The authors thank Daniela Gabriel, Petra Keplinger, Sonja Lueger and Phaedra Messmer for sample preparation and quantitative backscatter electron imaging measurements at the Bone Material Laboratory of the Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of Osteology, Vienna, Austria. This work was supported by the