Background
                  Little is known about the perioperative complication rates of the surgical management of midshaft clavicle nonunions. The purpose of the current study was to report on the perioperative complication rates after surgical management of nonunions and to compare them with complication rates of acute fractures using a population cohort.
               
                  Methods
                  The American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement Program database was queried to identify patients who had undergone open reduction–internal fixation of midshaft clavicle fractures between 2007 and 2013. Patients were stratified by operative indication: acute fracture or nonunion. Patient characteristics and 30-day complication rates were compared between the 2 groups using univariate and multivariate analyses.
               
                  Results
                  A total of 1215 patients were included in our analysis. Of these, 1006 (82.8%) were acute midshaft clavicle fractures and 209 (17.2%) were midshaft nonunions. Patients undergoing surgical fixation for nonunion had a higher rate of total complications compared with the acute fracture group (5.26% vs. 2.28%; P = .034). On multivariate analysis, patients with a nonunion were at a >2-fold increased risk of any postsurgical complication (odds ratio, 2.29 [95% confidence interval, 1.05-5.00]; P = .037) and >3-fold increased risk of a wound complication (odds ratio, 3.22 [95% confidence interval, 1.02-10.20]; P = .046) compared with acute fractures.
               
                  Conclusion
                  On the basis of these findings, patients undergoing surgical fixation for a midshaft clavicle nonunion are at an increased risk of short-term complications compared with acute fractures. This study provides additional information to consider in making management decisions for these common injuries.Clavicle fractures are among the most common skeletal injuries, accounting for up to 10% of all adult fractures. ORIF for acute midshaft clavicular fractures consists of either plate fixation or intramedullary nailing. Perioperative complications that follow primary fixation of clavicle fractures are considered rare, and incidences have been described. We queried the American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement Program (NSQIP) database using The 30-day complication rates for all variables specifically collected in the NSQIP database were calculated for patients after clavicle ORIF for nonunion and acute midshaft fracture. The category “deep wound infection” was a composite of deep incisional surgical site infection (SSI) and organ/space SSI and included any patient who required a subsequent operation to manage a postoperative infection. The category “wound complication” was a composite of deep wound infection, superficial incisional SSI, and wound dehiscence. The category “subclavian vessel injury” was generated by identifying patients who required another surgical service to repair damaged vessels intraoperatively. The category “pneumothorax” was generated by identifying patients with the postoperative diagnosis of pneumothorax and any patients requiring chest tube placement for a pneumothorax. The composite category “total complications” included any 30-day complication specifically recorded in the NSQIP database, subclavian vessel injury, and postoperative pneumothorax. A single patient could have potentially experienced more than 1 complication but was counted only once for the composite calculations. Patient demographics, preoperative comorbidities, preoperative laboratory values, and operative variables were compared between the nonunion and acute clavicle fracture groups using a Student Stata (version 13.0; StataCorp, College Station, TX, USA) was used for all statistical analysis. Continuous variables were tested for normality using the Shapiro-Wilk test. Standard techniques were used including Student A total of 1439 patients undergoing operative fixation for a closed midshaft clavicle fracture were initially identified for inclusion in our study. After exclusion criteria were applied, 1215 patients remained for further analysis ( A total of 34 (2.80%) patients experienced a complication within 30 days of surgery. The nonunion group had a significantly higher complication rate than the acute fracture group (5.26% vs. 2.28%; On multivariate analysis, nonunion was found to be an independent risk factor for any complication (OR, 2.29 [95% CI, 1.05 to 5.00]; In the current cohort, ORIF for nonunion had a >2-fold risk (95% CI, 1.05-5.00) of short-term complications and a >3-fold risk (95% CI, 1.02-10.20) of a wound complication compared with primary fixation. This study, to our knowledge, reports on the complications of the largest group of clavicle nonunions in the orthopedic literature. Whereas operative management of a clavicle nonunion represents a more technically demanding operation, no study to our knowledge has compared the short-term complications between these 2 groups. The 30-day complication rate was 2.28% for patients undergoing ORIF for an acute midshaft clavicle fracture compared with 5.26% for patients with a nonunion ( Leroux et al identified a 2.6% deep infection rate after ORIF for acute fractures within 2 years of the index procedure. In managing acute midshaft clavicle fractures, recent literature supports selecting patients for primary fixation on the basis of the potential risk of nonunion after nonoperativemanagement. The present study is limited by its retrospective design, which, by definition, introduces a selection bias. This bias is demonstrated by the differences observed in the baseline patient characteristics between the 2 groups. Although these data support previously identified risk factors for nonunion, such as female sex and smoking status, it is impossible to determine if these differences in baseline characteristics are responsible for the increased complication rate rather than the technical challenges associated with surgical management of nonunions. We attempted to correct for this bias in our multivariate logistic regression; however, as in all studies of this nature, there may be unidentified confounding variables that were not taken into account in our analysis. Despite this, we believe our cohort of clavicle nonunions has similar characteristics to the patients who would undergo surgical intervention for a clavicle nonunion. As such, the expected complication rates for the surgical management of clavicle nonunions would likely be similar to the ones reported in the present study, regardless of driving cause. The NSQIP database also does not provide operative details, such as surgical technique and implant type. As such, it is possible that one of these operative factors may be responsible for our observed results. In addition, we are unable to report on long-term complications, functional outcomes, and orthopedic-specific parameters, such as fracture alignment and adequacy of reduction. Large-scale, population-sized databases with these parameters could provide additional information to better understand complications and outcomes after ORIF for nonunions and acute fractures. Patients undergoing surgical fixation for a midshaft clavicle nonunion are at an increased risk of 30-day total complications and wound complications compared with patients undergoing ORIF for an acute clavicle fracture. This study provides additional information to consider in making management decisions for midshaft clavicle fractures. The American College of Surgeons National Surgical Quality Improvement Program (ACS NSQIP) and the hospitals participating in the ACS NSQIP are the source of the data used herein; they have not verified and are not responsible for the statistical validity of the data analysis or the conclusions derived by the authors. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundation with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.