A molecular modeling and mechanics method was employed to study the initial stage of the collagen-mineralization process. Collagen was modeled as a collagen-like peptide CH3CO-(Gly-Pro-Pro)10-NHCH3. Calcium ions were placed at a certain distance from specified C=O groups. Molecular mechanics simulations were then carried out to find the optimized structures. Calculation results showed that the calcium ions were attracted to an equilibrium position by the collagen-like peptide. The binding energies for the first, second, and third attracted calcium ion are 145.7kCal/mol, 69.8kCal/mol, and 47.1kCal/mol, respectively. When more than one calcium ion was placed, the special spatial structure of the collagen-like peptide could arrange the attracted calcium ions. Simulation results for three calcium ions showed that the final structure was similar to that in HA crystal.In recent years, with the fast development of biocompatible materials for hard tissue repair and replacement, there have been increasing efforts to produce biomaterials with different structures and functions through self-assembly and the biomineralization process, among which bone tissue is a particularly complex example However, the underlying mechanism charging the collagen-mineralization process is still unclear. Some in vitro experiments involving different biomineralization systems aiming to simulate the in vivo biomineralization process showed the same self-assembly character as natural bone Collagen, a highly organized structure, is composed of collagen fibril, which shows a periodic structure and is made up of five protocollagen molecules. The protocollagen molecule has a triple helix structure of three single Alpha-chains carrying a repeated triplet Gly–X–Y sequence After that, we placed three calcium ions at a certain distance from the specified C=O groups of the optimized collagen-like peptide step by step. For each step, Discover Module was then employed to carry out the molecular mechanics simulations to achieve the optimized structure. During all the simulations, we applied the constraints that the position and structure of the collagen-like peptide were fixed, which could save a lot of simulation time. The simulation parameters are the same as those used in the collagen-like peptide structure optimization explained above. The binding energy As former studies had suggested that the C=O groups should play an important part in collagen-mineralization, we had mainly focused on the possible interactions between C=O groups and calcium ions. Considering that the collagen-like peptide had a periodic structure, we specified seven C=O groups along the longitudinal axis of the collagen-like peptide whose structure has been optimized, as shown in detail in The optimized structure for the system including one calcium ion and the collagen-like peptide is shown in Then, we placed another calcium ion near team (3)–(5) by following the rules explained above. Molecular mechanics simulation gave the optimized structure shown in After the simulations for one calcium ion and two calcium ions, we placed the third calcium ion near team (5–7) by following the rules explained above. Molecular mechanics simulation gave the optimized structure shown in Based on all the simulation results, we can sum up that the collagen-like peptide could effectively attract calcium ions. When more than one calcium ion was attracted, the special spatial structure of the collagen-like peptide could arrange the calcium ions, resulting in a similar structure to HA crystal. The repulsions between calcium ions and attractions between calcium ions and the collagen-like peptide simultaneously played an important part in this process. In this paper, we employed molecular modeling methods to investigate the initial stage of the collagen-mineralization process. Collagen molecular modeling is simplified to a collagen-like peptide CH However, there is still a long road to finally achieving a full understanding of the initial stage of the collagen-mineralization process, because further improvements can still be made to the present model, such as introducing phosphate ions and water molecules. These new factors will certainly increase the complexity of calculations, and will form the subject of our future work. The authors thank Dr. Jun Ma and Dr. Jun Ge in the Biomaterials Laboratory of Tsinghua University for useful discussions. This work was supported by the Specialized Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education of China (No. 20030003029) and the Laboratory Fund of Tsinghua University.