Considerable difficulties persist in modelling the thermodynamics of multicomponent aqueous electrolyte solutions, especially at high concentrations. The widely adopted Pitzer formalism suffers from severe disadvantages, particularly with the combinatorial increase in mixing parameters required in multicomponent systems. As an alternative, the simple mixing rules of Young, of Harned and of Zdanovskii have been employed to predict the properties of mixtures using only the properties of the binary constituents with few or no additional parameters. Among these, Zdanovskii's rule is particularly promising because it constitutes a fundamental criterion for ideal mixing, i.e. when solutions having the same solvent activity are mixed in any proportion, the solvent activity remains unchanged. Many mixtures of strong electrolyte solutions are known from experiment to obey Zdanovskii's rule. This is important because application to aqueous electrolyte systems of practical interest has been hindered due to the process-intensive determination of water activities using the Gibbs–Duhem relation. This paper describes an alternative method which efficiently calculates the water activity of a multicomponent solution obeying Zdanovskii's rule. Some specific examples of the method are presented and various applications considered. In some systems, where deviations from Zdanovskii's rule occur, a single empirical parameter can be obtained and can be easily incorporated into the calculations.Considerable difficulties persist in modelling the thermodynamics of multicomponent aqueous electrolyte solutions, especially at high solute concentrations. This imposes restrictions on the applications of such models, which are needed in a wide variety of practical contexts such as in measurement science, oceanography, biochemistry and hydrometallurgy Although the Pitzer formalism These issues become profoundly problematic with multicomponent systems because of the combinatorial increase in the number of Pitzer parameters needed and because of the relatively few experimental studies made on mixed electrolyte solutions. Reactions between the chemical species in solution, which often dominate in applied systems, add significant further complication. It has been evident for some time that a different, more fundamental, theoretical approach to modelling aquatic chemistry is needed to control the number of modelling parameters and to cope better with extrapolations into multicomponent spaces that have not been experimentally characterised. A useful concept has been to describe the properties of binary systems (i.e. aqueous solutions with only one electrolyte) empirically but to employ simple linear mixing rules to predict the properties of their mixtures Zdanovskii's rule Unfortunately, to exploit Zdanovskii's rule in a conventional manner requires the water activity of the mixture to be determined iteratively by integrating the Gibbs–Duhem relation Several workers including Wang (e.g. The specific goal of this work is to determine the water activity of a multicomponent aqueous solution given its composition, e.g. given the concentrations of A and B in the ternary mixture A–B–H In the simplest case of a ternary mixture, Zdanovskii's rule can be expressed as The method has now been fully implemented as part of our JESS (Joint Expert Speciation System) software package The derivative of water activity for each solute is required in order to construct the Jacobian matrix for Newton–Raphson updates. A number of different schemes were trialled in an investigation of the optimal settings for minimising the number of function evaluations required to achieve convergence. When the Jacobian is calculated every iteration, analytical derivatives are more accurate than numerical but the cost of computation (measured in function evaluations) is greater. The results indicate that although the correct solution is obtained using constant Jacobian approximation, the quality of the solution deteriorates and the number of iterations increases. The best balance between speed and accuracy occurs where numerical derivatives are used. The excess Gibbs energy can be calculated when the activity of the solvent and each of the constituent electrolytes is known. The activity coefficient Some mixed electrolyte systems, for which the water activities have been well characterised experimentally, were used in order to test the predictive performance of the algorithm. (This effectively limited this part of the study to comparisons with simple ternary systems.)  The systems here were chosen to reflect the various types of strong electrolytes which can be treated with this method. The parameters chosen to model the binary electrolytes were those of When solutions of equal water activity are mixed to become multicomponent systems the water activity may vary to some extent, i.e. not behave in full accordance with Zdanovskii's rule. This type of nonideal mixing presents complications on many levels. Some kind of mixing parameter must be introduced to describe the system accurately and optimising such parameters necessitates experimental characterisation of the multicomponent system. The ternary solution may then satisfy a mixing rule which incorporates a deviation from ideality, for instance When experimental data for the osmotic coefficient or water activity are available it is possible to optimise the data and obtain a parameter which reflects the extent of deviation from Zdanovskii linearity and which can be used to make improved predictions. To illustrate this effect we have chosen a simple one-parameter model for describing nonideal mixing, that is  This analysis is similar to the treatment in It is well known that using Pitzer models beyond the concentration range of parameter optimisation can lead to large inaccuracies. This is particularly evident for electrolytes of the 2:1 type investigated in this study. Evidently, the binary solutions must be accurately described for the water activity in the mixture to be determined accurately. Rather than limit the approach only to those ternary solutions whose concentration is sufficiently low to be adequately modelled using published parameters, we have optimised new sets of binary data Pitzer parameters ( Presented in Computational efficiency is of high importance when considering the applicability of Zdanovskii's rule (or other mixing rule approaches) to large multicomponent mixtures, such as those encountered in industrial processes and environmental studies.  It has long been understood that the solvent is a fundamental driver of solution thermodynamics and, in particular, of the activity coefficients of solutes. For this reason, Robinson and Stokes The convergence of the present algorithm will improve if better starting estimates of the binary concentrations can be found. The approximation that the osmotic coefficients for each binary electrolyte are equal is reasonable when no other information is available. On the other hand, when predicting the water activity for the same mixture of electrolytes at different concentrations many times in succession, the rate of convergence can be greatly improved as follows. For a ternary mixture with composition The isopiestic ratio can be used to provide an improved estimate of the binary concentrations for subsequent predictions of water activity. If the mixture composition is  In cases where the desired mixture concentrations are known in advance, e.g. in the production of look-up tables or comparison with experiment, the evaluations can proceed in order of decreasing water activity, thereby allowing new starting binary concentrations to be calculated using the slope of the previous evaluation, greatly reducing the subsequent number of iterations. In physical terms, there is a unique mixing path with constant water activity between any two binary (single salt in water) electrolyte solutions. When expressed in molal concentrations, this constant water activity mixing path may be linear (i.e. in accord with Zdanovskii's rule) or, to some modest extent, curved. In either case, the present algorithm seeks to find the concentrations of the binary solutions The authors gratefully acknowledge Prof. Walter Bloom of the School of Chemical and Mathematical Sciences, Murdoch University, for some helpful suggestions during the preparation of the manuscript. At each stage in the algorithm the estimated binary concentrations are related to the concentration in the mixture via The algorithm which finds the water activity of the mixture is given by the following steps. Estimate the binary solution concentrations, adhering to the constraint Σ Evaluate the water activity for each binary solution at the given concentration. Stop if the water activity calculations have converged to a single value. Estimate new binary concentrations and go to Step 1. Details of each step of the algorithm are as follows. The initial partition is chosen to reflect the dominance of each solute. If This is a reasonable starting point since ln For a system of symmetric electrolytes this has the effect that the estimated concentrations for the binary solutions will each be equal to the total concentration of the mixture, and this will give the exact answer for solutes whose water activities vary identically with concentration. Of course, the better this initial approximation the faster the algorithm will converge (see Section The water activity of a solution can be obtained from the osmotic coefficient The algorithm terminates when the water activity values calculated at Step 1 are sufficiently close to one another. A convenient and simple measure of closeness is the range of the water activity values over all binary electrolyte solutions, i.e. The objective is to adjust the concentrations of the binary solutions Consider the case of a ternary mixture and let the The first derivative on the right hand side can be determined either numerically or analytically from Eq. The method of binary concentration adjustment outlined above is equivalent to the Newton–Raphson method for finding the solution of a system of equations The relationship for a ternary solution which holds at isopiestic equilibrium with its pure binary components is