The flotation of fine pyrite has been studied in a 0.1 m×1.9 m agitated column. The variables studied were agitation, air and slurry feed rates. The recovery and selectivity were determined for various size fractions as a function of the column operating variables. The results obtained indicate that particles less than 25 μm may be selectively recovered provided the agitation rates are kept below 400 rpm. Increasing the airflow rate at a fixed agitation rate of 400 rpm resulted in a decrease in the selectivity. The loss of selectivity at higher agitation and airflow rates is attributed to the increased entrainment of fine gangue particles. The results obtained suggest that maximum external power input of about 0.3 kW/m3 is required for separation of the fine pyrite.The supply of high-grade mineral deposits continues to decline globally and it is becoming increasingly necessary to process complex low-grade ores. Typically, the mineral value in these ores is finely dispersed within the matrix. Liberation of the mineral value must be accomplished by fine grinding. It is therefore important to develop flotation and other separation processes that can operate efficiently at fine sizes. Unfortunately, there are both economic and technological challenges for efficient separation at fine sizes. Fine particles present a high specific surface area and are not therefore readily amenable to separation by flotation. It is for this reason that the feed to flotation circuits in most traditional mineral separations is deslimed. However, in some applications, the need to meet product specifications may necessitate processing at fine sizes. For example, at the Cleveland Cliffs, Inc., the iron ore is ground to 85% passing 25 μm to liberate the silica. The finely ground ore is beneficiated by flocculation and cationic flotation. Similarly, in the base metal industry, fine grinding is often employed to effect liberation of the mineral value. The present study evaluates the effectiveness of an agitated flotation column for fine pyrite separation. A major development in fine particle flotation has been bubble column flotation (flotation columns and their variations, including the Jameson cell). Several studies have shown that flotation columns can be effectively deployed in fine particle flotation (e.g., see In order for fine particles to be collected in a flotation system, they must collide with and adhere to the air bubbles. Unfortunately, fine particles typically lack the inertia to collide with air bubbles and instead follow the liquid streamlines. It can be shown that solid particles will follow the liquid streamlines if ( Pilot plant studies were carried out in a 0.1-m-diameter stirred flotation column. The height of the column (measured from the air sparger to the cell lip) was 1.9 m, with the feed introduced 0.25 m from the cell lip. Gold-bearing pyrite ore was conditioned in an agitated tank and introduced into the column using a variable speed peristaltic pump. Frother (Dowfroth 200) and collector (sodium mercaptobenzothiazole) were added to the conditioning tank at 90 and 100 g/ton, while the solid feed concentration and conditioning time were fixed at about 17 wt.% and 6 min, respectively. The pulp level was monitored and controlled by measuring the pulp conductivity and PID control of the tailings pump speed, respectively. The feed material contained 1.8% pyrite with approximately 62% of the pyrite present in the minus 25 μm size fraction (see Agitation rate (0 to 900 rpm), Superficial air velocity (1 to 1.99 cm/s), Superficial pulp velocity (0.52 to 1.06 cm/s). The effect of agitation rate on flotation response is shown in In order to confirm these trends, a detailed analysis of the concentrate was carried out and the results are presented in The power consumption in the agitated column was determined and the results are shown in The size-specific recovery and grade data clearly show that agitated and unagitated column cells are effective in fine particle flotation. In traditional column flotation, wash water is employed to suppress the entrainment of fine gangue particles. The use of wash water allows the columns to be operated under positive bias where the tailing flow rate is higher than that of the feed. While wash water was not employed in our study, it is noted that the product recoveries and grades were quite high. For example, at the optimum agitation rate of 400 rpm, the pyrite recoveries in the fine, intermediate and coarse fractions were 74%, 96% and 89%, while the corresponding pyrite grades were 75%, 91% and 83%, respectively. The results obtained in our study are consistent with those of The variation of concentrate flow rate and grade with slurry feed rate was studied at a fixed gas velocity of 1.49 cm/s at two agitation rates (0 and 400 rpm) and the results are shown in From the concentrate flow rate and grade, the pyrite recoveries were computed. On average, agitation at 400 rpm produced a 13% increase in pyrite recovery. For a valuable product, the increase in recovery at comparable product grades may justify the increased cost associated with agitation of the column cell. The effect of gas velocity on fine pyrite flotation was studied at a slurry velocity of 0.51 cm/s and agitation rate of 400 rpm. The variation of pyrite recovery and grade with gas velocity is shown in As indicated earlier, the specific power consumption at the optimum agitation rate was estimated to be of the order of 0.3 kW/m In column flotation, a major expense is related to air consumption. It is evident from the foregoing that the limit of fine particle flotation will be an economic one. If fine grinding is needed for liberation, column flotation (agitated and unagitated) may be the only viable process options. The additional expense associated with the operation of the agitated column cell may be justified by the increased recovery of the product. The direct power requirements in the operation of agitated and unagitated column cells are modest. However, the capital expenditure and power requirement for the air compressor farmhouse may be considerable. This means that in comparing column cells with other flotation technologies, these costs must be included in the cost model. For example, the power draw at the optimum agitation rate was determined to be of the order of 0.3 kW/m The column operational parameters employed in the present study (froth depth, wash water use) were different from those employed in conventional flotation. For example, the froth depth in our study was only 5 cm and wash water was not used to suppress fine gangue recovery. The rule-of-thumb in column flotation is that deep froths and wash water are necessary to effect fine gangue rejection. However, the results of the present study show that high product recoveries and grades are possible without deep froths and application of wash water. In order to investigate if there is a relationship between froth characteristics and grade, the concentrate grade is plotted as a function of froth solids concentration and the results are shown in Fine pyrite flotation has been carried out in an agitated column cell. The optimum agitation rate for the separation was determined to be 400 rpm, with the product grade dropping sharply at higher agitation rates. At the optimum agitation rate, the average velocity gradient was estimated from the measured specific energy dissipation rate to be about 540 s 