The present investigation has been conducted in order to determine the influence of both the chemical composition of the bath and current density employed, on the adhesion, hardness and wear resistance of electrolytic Sn–Ni coatings deposited on a steel substrate. The micro-scratch test method was employed to evaluate the coating adhesion. Three scratches were performed at progressive loads. The subsequent observation of the surface damage by means of optical microscopy allowed the determination of the critical load, defined as the smallest load at which coating delamination will occur. The composite hardness of the system was determined by means of Vickers indentation and represented as a function of the relative indentation depth (R.I.D.). The absolute hardness of the coatings was computed by using a model published previously in the literature by one of the authors. The evaluation of the wear resistance was carried out through an accelerated wear test, without lubricant, under a ball-on-disc configuration, using a ball of AISI 52100 steel as a static counterpart. The wear scar morphology was studied by Scanning Electronic Microscopy (SEM) techniques coupled with the energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDS). The results indicate that the Sn–Ni coatings obtained by means of the chloride–fluoride bath (CF) have apparently a higher adhesion to the steel substrate and wear resistance, in comparison with the coatings which were obtained by using the pyrophosphate bath (PF), irrespective to the current density value employed during deposition. However, the hardness results indicate that the coatings obtained from the pyrophosphate bath have a better endurance against indentation loads. Such a behavior has been partially explained in terms of the different microstructural features that characterized both coatings. The CF deposits were observed to present an elongated columnar grain structure free of cracks, whereas the PF coatings were observed to have an equiaxial structure with a high crack density. The present study has allowed the conclusion that the CF coatings have an overall better performance than the PF coatings.The metal finishing industry has taken advantage of the physical properties of electrodeposited Sn–Ni coatings for many years. As indicated by Rafaey et al. As indicated by Jalota As reported by Augis et al Brooman Usually, Sn–Ni alloys are electroplated from a chloride–fluoride electrolyte solution consisting of stannous chloride, nickel chloride and ammonium bifluoride Because of the corrosive and toxic nature of the hydrofluoric acid vapors that evolve from the chloride–fluoride solutions, a pyrophosphate bath has also been used for the deposition of these alloys Thus, the present investigation has been carried out in order to study the adhesion, hardness and wear resistance of an electroplated Sn–Ni coating deposited onto a steel substrate, employing both a chloride–fluoride (CF) and a pyrophosphate bath (PF), using current densities of 1.5, 2.0, and 2.5 A/dm The substrate material used in this study was an AISI 1006 steel sheet on which the Sn–Ni coatings were electroplated. Specimens of 70 The Sn–Ni coatings were deposited from two standard baths: (a) A chloride–fluoride based solution (CF) of the following composition: 50 g/L of stannous chloride (SnCl Before depositing the Sn–Ni plating, the samples were subjected to both mechanical and electrolytic cleaning. The latter was carried out with a 10% sodium carbonate solution at a temperature of 60 °C. The specimens were subsequently rinsed with distilled water, stripped with a 10% sulfuric acid solution at a temperature of 60 °C for 10 min and finally rinsed again with distilled water. The subsequent electrodeposition stage for the co-deposition of the Sn–Ni coatings was divided in two different parts. Initially, the coatings were produced in Hull cell, employing a 267 mL glass cell. A constant current of a 1 A was applied for 10 min. The optimum current density and deposition temperature were determined by means of the statistical interpretation of the data obtained with both electrolytic baths. The second stage consisted of the deposition in a simple glass electrochemical cell of rectangular shape, with dimensions of 70 In order to determine the adhesion of the coatings, three coated samples produced with each electrolytic bath were tested. For this purpose, a CH-2000 CSEM scratch test equipment was used. The tests consisted in the application of a shear stress at the substrate-coating interface. A progressive constant load was applied by the spherical diamond indenter tip (Rockwell C) through the surface of the coated sample. The indenter tip gives rise to an increase in the elasto-plastic deformation of the substrate-coating interface until cohesive or adhesive damage occurs on the surface of the specimen. The minimum load at which coating failure (delamination) occurs is defined as the critical load ( The failure criteria that were employed for determining the critical loads The friction coefficient of the Sn–Ni coatings obtained under different processing conditions were evaluated at room temperature without any lubrication, employing a 2-115 CSEM tribometer and computerized data acquisition system, according to the ASTM G-99-95 standard. The conditions employed in these tests can be summarized as follows: load applied, 1 N; sliding distance, 200 m; ball material, AISI 52100 steel; ball diameter, 6 mm and sliding speed, 0.1 ms The computation of the cross sectional area of the scar was carried out by means of New Zygo 2000 profilometer and the appropriate software. The wear resistance of the coatings was calculated by determining the wear volume. The morphology of the wear scars was also evaluated by means of SEM techniques, employing an S-2400 Hitachi microscope. Microindentation tests were conducted according to the ASTM standard E 384, employing a Leco microhardness tester with a Vickers indenter. Loads in the range of 25–1000 g were applied, taking ten measurements for each one. The coatings obtained by means of both electrolytic baths were an intermetallic compound with a similar chemical composition. However, the coatings obtained by employing the CF bath, were observed to be more uniform and to present a finer grain structure. The coatings obtained from the PF bath were observed to have a large number of cracks, as shown in An important aspect concerning the characterization of the coatings is the determination of their absolute hardness. Also, it is important to describe the change in the composite hardness of the substrate-coating system with the relative indentation depth (R.I.D.). The R.I.D. is defined as the ratio Each figure compares the corresponding hardness curve for the coatings obtained, employing the two different electrolytic baths, at the same current density. For ease of comparison and determination of the absolute hardness of the coatings, the experimental data of each curve have been modeled employing the approach earlier proposed by Puchi-Cabrera Both  Where   Also, it can be appreciated that as the current density increases above 2.0, the absolute hardness of the coatings increases significantly, regardless of the bath employed during the electrodeposition. Such an effect could be due to the refinement of the grain structure of the coating with the increase in the current density of the electrodeposition process. All the values that were determined for the absolute hardness of the deposits are in the range of approximately 6–10 GPa, which are close to those reported in the literature for this kind of coatings The results obtained from the scratch tests are summarized in Taking into consideration the ductile nature of the substrate (low carbon steel) and the brittle nature of the coatings (intermetallic compound), it is observed that the magnitude of the critical load is relatively low, in comparison with those observed in other coated systems. Therefore, it is believed that for the loads applied in the present work, plastic deformation of the substrate occurs, which affects the values of the critical load. The above suggests that the scratch test is just a reference method for those systems composed of a hard coating deposited onto a soft substrate, in comparison with those systems where the substrate provides an appropriate support to the hard coating, as reported by Staia and D’Alessandria The morphological characteristics of the scratch tracks corresponding to the coatings obtained with a current density of 1.5 A/dm The wear tests that were conducted showed that the coated systems obtained from the CF bath have in general a lower friction coefficient and a higher wear resistance than the systems obtained from the PF bath.  The above explanation would resolve the apparent contradiction that has been found, in the sense that the coatings which display a better performance under indentation loads (PF), do not also show a better behavior in the scratch and wear tests. For the same deposition conditions, the CF bath has shown to have a greater coating power than the PF bath, which explains the significant difference in coating thickness, as presented in The model advanced by Puchi-Cabrera Nevertheless, in spite of this improved capability, the presence of cracks could be a serious drawback for the applications of these coatings where corrosion resistance and/or good appearance are required, as for example in decorative uses. Our preliminary estimation of the corrosion resistance of both coatings by means of potentiodynamic polarization measurements, indicate that the CF coatings have a smaller corrosion rate than the PF coatings. Also, as shown in Therefore, the present results allow the conclusions that the CF coatings have an overall better performance than the PF coatings, although more studies are being conducted currently in order to have a better understanding of the processing-structure-properties of this kind of deposits. The Sn–Ni coatings electrodeposited from a chloride–fluoride (CF) based solution present a somewhat better adhesion and wear resistance, in comparison with the coatings obtained from a pyrophosphate (PF) bath. However, the PF coatings display a higher capability to withstand indentation loads than the CF deposits. This behavior can be partially explained in terms of the different microstructural features that characterized both coatings. The CF deposits present an elongated columnar grain structure free of cracks, whereas the PF coatings have an equiaxial structure with a high crack density. In general, it has been observed that as the current density during deposition increases, the adhesion, wear resistance and absolute hardness of the coatings also increase. The critical loads that characterize the adhesion of the coatings to the substrate are observed to be relatively low, in comparison with other coated systems. However, it is important to point out that the lack of support and load-bearing capacity offered by the mild steel substrate to the Sn–Ni coatings could hinder the precise determination of the critical load that characterizes these systems by means of the scratch test. The wear mechanism observed in the coatings investigated is mainly of an abrasive-type, with wear volumes in the range of 0.03–0.05 mm The present investigation has been conducted with the financial support of the Venezuelan National Council for Science, Technology and Innovation (FONACIT) through the project UCV-F 2001000600. The authors also wish to express their gratitude to the Foundation for the Development of Science and Technology, Estado Bolívar (Fundacite Bolívar), the Center for Advanced Materials and Corrosion (CENMACOR-UCV) and the Corrosion Center (UNEXPO, Estado Bolívar).