Nitrogen content in austenitic manganese steels is usually not reported nor standardized. The present work has found that it typically ranges between 130 ppm and 200 ppm in solution. Microstructural evolution has been studied by optical microscopy, using mainly differential interference contrast mode. Work hardening was analyzed under compression conditions using Hollomon's fitting and Vickers microindentation hardness measurements at different deformation levels. Even low contents of nitrogen in solution exhibit a significant effect on the slope of stress–strain curves, with strain-hardening exponent values of 0.7, 0.57 and 0.41 for 720 ppm, 130 ppm and 71 ppm of nitrogen, respectively. It was also found that the nitrogen content influences the microstructure of deformed coarse grained polycrystalline austenite, leading to twining and shear bands at the upper level of nitrogen, while it was not clearly found in the samples with lower nitrogen content.The use of nitrogen as an alloying element to strengthen austenitic steels is a very successful processing technology developed several decades ago Hadfield steel's work hardening behavior has been attributed to the interstitial solution of carbon, twinning, deformation by slipping and stacking faults produced by slip–twin interaction The sizes of slip bands and twins have been reported ranging from 0.005 μm to 0.3 μm and 0.005 μm to 10 μm thick, respectively, depending of the initial grain size It is well recognized that cold working process involving tension, compression, impact, rolling, etc., promotes high texturing and at the same time, high heterogeneity in deformation both in the macroscopic and in the microscopic levels Several investigations have been recently reported regarding microstructural evolution of Hadfield steel, identifying slip and twin planes, their quantification and modulation, by means of TEM The main purpose of this work is to establish the nitrogen-in-solution influence on work hardening under compression conditions. Optical microscopy is used as a main tool for characterization considering the remarkable features of industrial inters of Hadfield steel (Wear Steel ASTM A280 type A) whose coarse grains allow detailed studies of the microstructure evolution by this technique. Since nitrogen content of these industrial steels is low (between 130 ppm and 200 ppm), similar ranges are analyzed here. Wang et al. The present work shows that previous research on microstructural evolution of Hadfield steel with lower grain size is applicable to coarse grained cast Hadfield steel under compression. Due to this characteristic the observation is accessible when optical microscopy analysis is used as compared with TEM. The Hadfield steels studied were obtained by adjusting the chemical composition in conventional melting using classified scrap of mild steels and standard silicon and manganese ferroalloys. Casting was performed in an industrial facility in order to obtain a steel base under conditions similar to those for pieces for mining or wear applications. Melting was performed in a medium frequency induction furnace, Inductotherm Power Trak 150, with nominal capacity of 170 kg of Fe. The specimens were extracted from “Y” blocks of 1 1/2 in. Then to vary the nitrogen content, the Hadfield steel base was re-melted in a controlled atmosphere and thermally cycled in an Astro furnace with an alumina crucible, in order to assure the same conditions on the three steels obtained. The chemical compositions, denominations and partial pressure N All the specimens obtained from every alloy were heat treated together in order to obtain the austenitic microstructure without the precipitation of carbides and to achieve similar grain size distributions and average sizes ( The stress–strain curves were obtained from cylindrical compression samples at room temperature according to ASTM E9M Standard The analysis of the microstructural evolution was made on transversal and longitudinal sections of compression specimens extracted from the three steels in all conditions of deformation. Each specimen was carefully metallographically prepared to avoid extra deformation induced during preparation. Polished samples use etched with a special solution of 10%HCl, 15%HNO The same metallographic specimens were used for X-ray diffraction in order to calculate the stacking fault energy as a function of deformation and content of nitrogen. Values like lattice parameter (  The experimental stress–strain curves under compression for steels studied are presented in For each equation calculated by Hollomon's fitting (Eq. Hutchinson and Ridley  The micrographs were taken from longitudinal and transversal section extracted from the samples with different levels of strain and nitrogen content. From  In general, the evolution of microstructure observed here follows a behavior reported in other studies of austenitic manganese steels It also should be considered that, the twin–slip interaction mechanisms occur basically in two different ways: twining–slip and twin–twin interactions. They can be found like a common behavior in single and polycrystalline fcc metals ( From Is well known that, when deformation is increased, it generated a great quantity of dislocations, which are accumulated around the twin planes developing greater twin–slip interactions. If the threshold deformation (~ It is necessary to point out that slip–twin interaction observed by Rittel and Roman and others researchers In order to find the effect of nitrogen content on work hardening in Hadfield steels and its correlation with the developed microstructure, the explanation is more qualitative than quantitative, because a better approximation needs to be made with experimental TEM dataset. Just then, it can be observed with a high accuracy the distribution and volumetric fraction of twin–slip interaction and other crystalline defects. The last is related to the refined substructure, with smaller thick bands and twin size. All of this should explain the higher work hardening at higher nitrogen content. It was found that Hadfield steels for industrial applications have a small quantity of nitrogen in solution, between 130 ppm and 200 ppm, which is responsible for an increase in work hardening. The low nitrogen content (71 ppm of nitrogen) produces a decrease in hardness and the work hardening exponent under compression in comparison to standard Hadfield steel. The higher nitrogen content produces a higher work hardening coefficient and produces twin–slip interaction, as detected by optical microscopy. By means the model proposed by Hutchinson and Ridley, it can be supported that at higher nitrogen content, in addition to dislocation and slip deformation, mechanisms such as twinning and stacking faults develop. At low deformations the nitrogen increases twin–slip interaction. At higher deformations, the nitrogen favors secondary twining and consequently the rate of hardening is increased. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from MECESUP — Chile and DIGEGRA of USACH, in addition to very important collaborations with Tecnometal S.A. (Chilean Foundry) and CCHEN (The Chilean Commission of Nuclear Energy).