Oedogonium hatei was developed into an effective and efficient adsorbent for the removal of Ni(II) ions from aqueous solution. The adsorption studies of untreated and treated algal biomass (with 0.1M HCl) were compared in batch mode. Optimum biosorption conditions were determined as a function of pH, biomass dosage, contact time, and temperature and the Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms were found applicable in terms of relatively high regression values. The maximum monolayer adsorption capacity of the biosorbents (untreated and acid-treated algae), as obtained from the Langmuir adsorption isotherm, was found to be 40.9 and 44.2mg/g, respectively at 80min contact time, 5.0 pH, 0.7g/L algal dose, and 298K temperature. The thermodynamic parameters showed that the adsorption of Ni(II) ions onto algal biomass was feasible, spontaneous, and exothermic under the studied conditions. Kinetics of adsorption followed both first- and second-order rate equations and the process involving the rate-controlling step is complex involving boundary layer as well as intraparticle diffusion processes. The FTIR results of algal biomass showed that biomass has different functional groups and these functional groups are able to react with metal ion in aqueous solution. Biosorbent could be regenerated using 0.1M NaOH solution, with up to 70% recovery. The performance of this biosorbent was then compared with many other reported biosorbents for nickel removal and it was observed that the proposed adsorbent is effective in terms of its performance.Heavy metals continue to pose a serious threat to biota, due to their acute toxicity, nonbiodegradable nature, and buildup of high concentrations in water bodies all over the world. Hence, developing strategies for their control and reducing the levels of heavy metals to their permissible limits in waste waters are major challenges for environmental scientists. Nickel(II) ion is one such heavy metal frequently encountered in raw wastewaters streams from industries such as electroplating, battery manufacturing, mineral processing, steam–electric power plants, paint formulation, porcelain enameling, and so on A number of workers have used different adsorbent systems, developed from various industrial waste materials, for the removal of toxic heavy metals and organic waste pollutants A variety of different biomass types including bacteria, fungi, algae, yeast, and aquatic plants as the biosorbent have been studied by various investigators for Ni(II) biosorption From a thorough literature survey, very few investigations have been reported for biomonitoring nickel pollution with green filamentous algae  All reagents used were of AR grade either from Merck, Germany, or SD Fine Chem. Ltd., India. Stock solution (1000 Similarly, to observe the effect of pH the initial values of pH of the metal solutions were adjusted to 2.2–7.0 with 0.1 To obtain adsorption isotherms the biosorbents under study (0.7 Successful application of the adsorption technique demands development of inexpensive, nontoxic, readily available adsorbents of known kinetic parameters and sorption characteristics. Therefore, kinetic studies of biosorption were carried out at two initial nickel concentrations (100 and 200 The recycling of an adsorbent is a most important aspect for an economical technology. Adsorption–desorption experiments were carried with 0.1 To establish the accuracy, reliability, and reproducibility of the collected data, all the batch isotherm tests were replicated thrice and the experimental blanks were run in parallel. Check standards and blanks were run. Multiple sources of National Institute of Standard and Technology (NIST) traceable standards were used for instrument calibration and standard verification. All jars, conical flasks, and containers used in the study were prepared by being soaked in a 5% HNO The physical and chemical properties of the algal biomass were determined by the standard methods as reported in our earlier publications One of the most important factors affecting biosorption of metal ions is acidity of solution. The acidity of the medium affects the competition ability of hydrogen ions with metal ions to active sites on the biosorption surface Negligible biosorption could be found at lower pH range 2–4. The low level of nickel(II) uptake at lower pH values could be attributed to the increased concentration of hydrogen (H Decrease in biosorption at higher pH (pH The dependence of biosorbent loading on the biosorption of Ni(II) ions was studied by varying the amount of adsorbent from 0.1 to 1.0 The amount of adsorbent significantly influenced the extent of Ni(II) adsorption; i.e., the biosorption of metal ions increased with increasing biomass loading on both types of alga, i.e., untreated and acid-treated alga, and almost constant (changed by about 10%) at a higher dosage than 0.7 The analysis of adsorption data is important for developing an equation which accurately represents the results and which could be used for design purposes. Out of several isotherm equations, the Langmuir, Freundlich, and Temkin isotherms were used to fit the experimental data. The linear regression was used to determine the most fitted model among all the three above written isotherms. The Langmuir isotherm assumes a surface with homogeneous binding sites, equivalent sorption energies, and no interaction between sorbed species. In mathematical form, it is written as The Freundlich isotherm is an empirical equation based on an exponential distribution of sorption sites and energies. In mathematical form, it is represented as The Temkin isotherm takes into account the interactions between adsorbents and metal ions to be adsorbed and is based on the assumption that the free energy of sorption is a function of the surface coverage. The isotherm is From the slopes and intercepts of the plots of The values of Langmuir, Freundlich, and Tempkin isotherm constants are given in Further, the Langmuir parameter, If the The effect of temperature on the adsorption of nickel(II) is investigated at three different temperatures (298, 308 and 318 For an increase in temperature from 298 to 318 The free energy change (Δ The values of these parameters are summarized in The sorption kinetics is significant in the treatment of wastewater, as it provides valuable insights into the reaction pathways and mechanisms of sorption reactions. Since biosorption is a metabolism-independent process, it would be expected to be a very fast reaction. Experimental kinetic data for the free biomass coincided with this expectation, with more than 90% of Ni The experimental biosorption kinetic data were modeled using pseudo-first- and pseudo-second-order kinetics, which can be represented in their nonlinear forms, as follows: Pseudo-first-order model, Pseudo-second-order model, In order to assess the nature of the diffusion process responsible for the adsorption of nickel on biosorbent, attempts were made to calculate the coefficients of the process as explained by Chabani et al. In the present study, repeated batch operations were performed to examine the reusability of the algal biomass The batch studies conducted in the present study provide significant information regarding the biosorption of Ni(II) ion onto untreated and acid-treated The adsorption equilibrium data fit the Langmuir and Freundlich models better than the Temkin model at all the temperatures studied. The sorption kinetics followed both the first and the pseudo-second-order rate equation. The thermodynamic calculations indicated the feasibility, exothermic, and spontaneous nature of the biosorption of Ni(II) ions onto The results of this study will form the basis for the development of cost-effective and robust indigenous technology for biosorption of nickel from aqueous solutions. Hence, this organism has a potential for future use as a biosorbent particularly when metal concentration in the waste streams is not very high. However, pilot-scale experiments need to be conducted so that commercial exploitation of The authors are thankful to MHRD, New Delhi, for providing financial assistance for this work.