Zinc is one of the impure elements in acidic solutions obtained from gallium sources; therefore, flotation studies were performed to investigate the removal of Ga(III) from Zn(II) using sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) as an anionic surface-active agent. In this study, the effect of different pH values on the percentage removal of Ga(III) and Zn(II) was studied. It was observed that the distribution of hydrolysis species and change in pH, had a significant effect upon the separation of Ga(III) from Zn(II). Also, the selective separation of Ga(III) was dependent on the recovery of water from the froth. The results showed that the optimal selective separation could be obtained at low pH values when the species of Ga3+ was predominant and the precipitation of Ga(III) was at a minimum. The effect of pH on the characterization of the sublate (insoluble complexes formed in scum layer) and the complexation of SDS with hydrolysis species were studied by scanning electron microscopy coupled with energy dispersive X-ray (SEM/EDX) spectroscopy and Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy. In order to obtain more information about the mechanism of selective separation, the interaction of Ga(III) and Zn(II) with SDS was investigated using turbidity technique.Gallium is in group 3A of the periodic table and a trace-metallic element in the Earth’s crust (approximately 16.9 Gallium(III) nitrate hydrate 98+ [Ga(NO The selectivity coefficient corresponding to the charge exchange equilibrium at the interface was also calculated using the following equation ( Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra of separated solids were studied to elucidate the effect of pH on the complexation of SDS with hydrolysis species (ions). The FTIR spectra of separated solids were obtained on a Bruker FTIR spectrometer using KBr discs in the spectral range of 4000–400 To characterize the sublate, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was applied. The separated samples were coated with a thin layer of gold and studied with SEM. The interaction of Ga(III) and Zn(II) with SDS was investigated at pH 2.1, where the main species in solution were Ga The speciation diagrams of hydrolyzed Ga(III) and Zn(II) species as a function of pH are shown in Previous studies have indicated that the solubility of Ga(III) at different pH values significantly influences the separation mechanism when ion flotation was used ( The results showed that, with higher Ga(III) precipitate, the removal of more than 97% of Ga(III) could be achieved. It then rapidly decreased to 59% as the pH increased to 7. The increasing level of Ga(III) removal with increasing percentage of Ga(III) precipitate [colloidal Ga(III) solid] was attributed to increasing electrostatic interactions between Ga(III) and the anionic head of SDS. It can be observed in The selectivity of the ion-flotation process was affected by the recovery of ions and water in the froth ( FTIR spectra of SDS before and after the complexation are shown in With increase in pH from 1 to 5, compounds of Ga(DS) To investigate the effect of pH on the characterization of the sublate, the morphology of the complexes was studied by SEM.  According to the previous studies, the selectivity sequence for adsorption and interaction of metal cations with anionic surfactants in ion flotation is related to the ionic charge and ionic potential (ratio between the ionic charge and the ionic radius) of metal cations ( According to the ionic charge, ionic potential, and percentage precipitation of Ga(III), the percentage removal of Ga(III) should be higher than that of Zn(II) ions until pH 5.2 when anionic surfactants is used. On the other hand, increasing removal of Zn(II) with increasing in pH until 5.2 was attributed to the following: With increasing in pH, the water recovery was increased. Therefore, entrainment of Zn(II) on a bubble and the wake of an ascending bubble were increased according to During mineral flotation, entrainment is a transfer process of gangue and valuable mineral particles (the hydrophilic gangue mineral particles and hydrophobic valuable mineral particles) to the froth phase without direct attachment to bubbles. Three mechanisms, namely, boundary layer theory, bubble wake theory, and bubble swarm theory, have been reported for the entrainment ( At high pH values, higher amounts of Zn(II) are removed with increasing in pH. Which was attributed to the adsorption of Zn(II) ions at the surface of colloidal solid Ga(III) or co-precipitation of Zn(II) ions with Ga(III) according to Further removal of Zn(II) over Ga(III) at pH 7 was attributed to the following: At pH 7, the dominant species were Ga(OH) The Ga(III) removal (59%) at this pH was also attributed to the presence of low amount of colloidal solid Ga(III) and its interaction with SDS according to Different mechanisms (foam fractionation, ion flotation, precipitate flotation, and adsorbing colloid flotation) occurred with changes in pH: The precipitation of Ga(III) and Zn(II) ions occurred through metal hydroxide formation which caused precipitate flotation or in the presence of a suitable anion (collector, ligand, sulfide, carbonate, etc.) which caused ion flotation. At pH 5.2, because of predominant Ga(OH) Likewise, with increasing in pH until pH 5.2, Zn(II) metal may be co-precipitated with Ga(III) or Zn At pH 2.9, the percentage of colloidal solid Ga(III) was very low, but the interaction between ions and SDS led to the formation of insoluble complex. So, the process is termed “ion flotation”. At pH 1.9, there was no sublate observed in the solution. It can be concluded that the foam fractionation is occurred. This phenomenon is because of the interaction of SDS and Ga(III) which is a soluble complex. The results showed that foam fractionation (homogeneous ion flotation) is the most selective process because the selectivity coefficient corresponding to pH 1.9 is the highest value. The study of the interaction between Ga(III)/Zn(II) and SDS will allow us to obtain more information about the mechanism that leads to the selective separation of Ga(III) from Zn(II). To investigate the effect of pH on the selective separation of Ga(III) from Zn(II), the interaction of Ga(III) or Zn(II) ions with SDS was analyzed at pH 2.1 using turbidity technique.  As discussed in the previous sections, different mechanisms (foam fractionation, ion flotation) may occur during ion-flotation, owing to the solubility of the collector–colligend product shown in  The results indicated that selective separation of Ga(III) is possible with recovery of 87%, which only includes 3% Zn(II). Different mechanisms (foam fractionation, ion flotation, precipitate flotation, and adsorbing colloid flotation) occurred with changing pH value. At low pH values, the process of ion flotation occurred and the order of selectivity was dependent on the ionic charge and ionic potential of the ions. At high pH values, increasing of Zn(II) removal with increasing in pH was attributed to the adsorption of Zn(II) ions at the surface of colloidal solid Ga(III) or co-precipitation of Zn(II) metal with Ga(III). It should be mentioned that, under these conditions, the process of adsorbing colloid flotation occurred. The turbidity of 1 Turbidity studies showed that a critical aggregation concentration (cac,  These results showed that the solution conditions (pH) affect the micellization process. The cmc of SDS at pH 2.1 is 3.8 The authors would like to thank