Printed circuit boards incorporated in most electrical and electronic equipment contain valuable metals such as Cu, Ni, Au, Ag, Pd, Fe, Sn, and Pb. In order to employ a hydrometallurgical route for the recycling of valuable metals from printed circuit boards, a mechanical pre-treatment step is needed. In this study, the metallic components from waste printed circuit boards have been enriched using a mechanical separation process. Waste printed circuit boards shredded to <10mm were milled using a stamp mill to liberate the various metallic components, and then the milled printed circuit boards were classified into fractions of <0.6, 0.6–1.2, 1.2–2.5, 2.5–5.0, and >5.0mm. The fractions of milled printed circuit boards of size <5.0mm were separated into a light fraction of mostly non-metallic components and a heavy fraction of the metallic components by gravity separation using a zig-zag classifier. The >5.0mm fraction and the heavy fraction were subjected to two-step magnetic separation. Through the first magnetic separation at 700Gauss, 83% of the nickel and iron, based on the whole printed circuit boards, was recovered in the magnetic fraction, and 92% of the copper was recovered in the non-magnetic fraction. The cumulative recovery of nickel–iron concentrate was increased by a second magnetic separation at 3000Gauss, but the grade of the concentrate decreased remarkably from 76% to 56%. The cumulative recovery of copper concentrate decreased, but the grade increased slightly from 71.6% to 75.4%. This study has demonstrated the feasibility of the mechanical separation process consisting of milling/size classification/gravity separation/two-step magnetic separation for enriching metallic components such as Cu, Ni, Al, and Fe from waste printed circuit boards.Recovery (%) = Ni–Fe (g) in the magnetic fraction or Cu (g) in the non-magnetic fraction / Ni–Fe (g) or Cu (g) in whole waste printed circuit boards Grade (%) = Ni–Fe (g) in the magnetic fraction or Cu (g) in the non-magnetic fraction / metal components (g) in the magnetic fraction or metal components (g) in the non-magnetic fraction The generation of waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) has been increasing continuously year by year. The desire of consumers to purchase the most advanced models with new functions and design leads to the short lifespan of electrical and electronic equipment (EEE), a direct consequence of which is the ever-increasing generation of WEEE ( Printed circuit boards are a major part of EEE, containing most electronic components, such as resistors, relays, capacitors, and IC chips. Overall, printed circuit boards typically consist of ∼40% metallic, ∼30% plastic, and ∼30% ceramic elements, although their actual composition varies slightly depending on the specific class ( Waste printed circuit boards, which contain various valuable metals together with hazardous material, are thus considered both an attractive secondary resource and an environmental contaminant. Many studies have been carried out with regard to the recycling of waste printed circuit boards with a view to recovering resources and at the same time preventing environmental contamination ( Many studies have been conducted on mechanical pre-treatment for the liberation and separation of the metallic components from waste printed circuit boards ( In this work, a fundamental study has been carried out on the mechanical pre-treatment that is necessary to recover metallic concentrates from waste printed circuit boards. Liberation is obviously the core process in the mechanical pre-treatment. A stamp mill has been used to liberate the metallic components through grinding. The distribution of metallic elements has been investigated in relation to the particle size of the milled printed circuit boards. The milled printed circuit boards were separated into a heavy fraction of metallic components and a light fraction of non-metallic components by gravity separation using a zig-zag classifier. Thereafter, the magnetic and non-magnetic fractions were separated from the heavy fraction by two magnetic separations at 700 Waste printed circuit boards disassembled from obsolete printers were used for the experiments. The total metal content in the waste printed circuit boards was approximately 39%; an average composition in terms of the metallic elements is shown in A schematic diagram of the mechanical pre-treatment process investigated for enriching the metallic components from waste printed circuit boards is shown in In order to liberate the metallic components, the printed circuit boards were milled using a stamp mill (Han-Gook Gyeong–Chang Machinery, Korea). The milled printed circuit board particles of <5.0 Two magnetic separations were performed to separate the magnetic and non-magnetic substances from the milled printed circuit boards. The milled printed circuit boards of particle size >5.0 Samples of 510 The hand-cut waste printed circuit boards (5  Gravity separation was carried out using a zig-zag classifier to separate the metallic and non-metallic components of the mill printed circuit boards of different particle sizes: <0.6, 0.6–1.2, 1.2–2.5, and 2.5–5.0 It was observed that the grade of the metallic components was improved slightly from 45–55% to 50–60% by the gravity separation of >0.6 Two magnetic separations were carried out to separate the magnetic and non-magnetic substances from the milled printed circuit boards. The milled printed circuit boards of size >5.0  The second magnetic separation was performed on the non-magnetic fraction rejected from the first magnetic separation using a hand magnet at 700  After the mechanical separation consisting of a sequence of milling of the waste printed circuit boards, gravity separation, and two-step magnetic separation, respective copper and nickel–iron concentrates were obtained. Results relating to the enrichment of copper and nickel–iron are shown in The amount of the metallic components separated in the light fraction by gravity separation was approximately 12% based on the whole printed circuit boards, and 85% of the metallic components were distributed in the <0.6 Valuable metals have been recovered from waste printed circuit boards by a mechanical separation process consisting of milling, size classification, gravity separation, and two-step magnetic separation. The following conclusions can be drawn from the present study. When printed circuit boards were milled in a stamp mill, utilizing the up-and-down reciprocating motion of the hammer, copper, tin, and lead were distributed in the finer fraction of the milled printed circuit boards, while 85% of the nickel was concentrated in the coarser fraction with particle size >5.0 This paper is based on work supported by the Resources Recycling R&D Center (Korea) under the project entitled “Development of total recycling technology for WEEE”.