A novel composite kidney stone phantom has been developed. This stone phantom is producible with mechanical properties mimicking the range of tensile fracture strength and acoustic properties of human kidney stones and is an inorganic/organic composite material, as are natural kidney stones. Diametral compression testing was used to measure tensile fracture strength, which determines the acoustic comminution behavior of kidney stones. Ultrasound transmission tests were made to characterize the acoustic properties of these stone phantoms. Both the tensile fracture strength (controllable from 1 to ∼5 MPa) and acoustic properties (
                        
                           
                              C
                           
                           
                              L
                           
                        
                      = 2700–4400 m/s and 
                        
                           
                              C
                           
                           
                              T
                           
                        
                        =
                        1600
                        –
                        2300
                        
                        
                           m/s
                        
                     ) of these composite phantom stones match those of a wide variety of human kidney stones. These artificial stone phantoms should have wide utility in lithotripsy research.Renal calculi (kidney stones) occur in 12% of men and 5% of women by the age of 70 and that number is rising ( A number of different stone phantom compositions have been described.  BegoStone is a commercially available material (BEGO USA, Smithfield, RI) that has long been used in dental applications, and the use of this inorganic material as a kidney stone phantom has been described ( The composition of BegoStone Plus has not been reported in the literature, and therefore both x-ray diffraction and spectroscopic analyses were carried out to detail the chemical nature of this material. A commercial service (St. Louis Testing Laboratories, St. Louis, Missouri, USA) carried out the spectroscopic analysis. A Phillips diffractometer using 0.154 nm (Cu Because the acoustic properties, as well as the tensile fracture strength properties, are important in lithotripsy, ultrasonic, acoustic wave speeds, both longitudinal and transverse, of stone phantoms were measured over a range of compositions using the ultrasound pulse transmission method developed by The stone phantoms were prepared in the form of right circular cylinders using a polytetrafluoroethylene mold so that the stones, as fabricated, could be released from this mold directly without the need for a mold lubricant. The mold was filled with BegoStone Plus, water, and albumen that have been mixed uniformly together. Since albumen was only about 15% organic material, the remainder being water, this water must be accounted for in computing the final BegoStone–water–albumen composition. After initial setting, the stone phantom was slowly heated to 90 The tensile fracture strength of both natural and artificial kidney stones has been determined using the diametral compression testing method ( Most brittle materials are not tested for their tensile fracture strength, which is usually lower than their corresponding compressive fracture strength ( The mechanical testing procedure used and a sample as fractured by this test are shown in  Spectroscopic analysis of BegoStone Plus identified its major elements as calcium and sulfur with minor amounts of potassium and iron. Converting these detected elements to CaSO The tensile fracture stress, The results of approximately 100 diametral compression tests of phantom stones having a variety of different proportions of the ternary BegoStone Plus, water, and albumen system allowed the generation of an equation relating phantom stone composition to mechanical properties using three variable least-squares analysis with Gauss–Jordan reduction. This ternary data reduction technique has been used previously to relate lattice parameter to composition in ternary alloy systems ( Phantom stone compositions suitable for mimicking the mid-range properties of different types of human stones are given in The acoustic measurements show that these composite kidney stone phantoms exhibit longitudinal wave speeds ranging from about 2700 m/s to 4400 m/s and transverse wave speeds ranging from about 1600 m/s to 2300 m/s. These stone phantoms therefore approximate the wave speeds that have been measured for natural kidney stones ( The new inorganic/organic composite kidney stone phantoms described here can be produced with both mechanical and acoustic properties that mimic the range of these properties measured for human renal calculi. These ternary composite kidney stone phantoms should have wide utility in a variety of lithotripsy studies. This work was supported in part by NIH through grant RO1 DK052985. The assistance of B. Dieckman, W. Young, D. Bartlett, and E. Esch is gratefully acknowledged.