 The relationship between shipments (tonnage) of non-ferrous and ferrous powders is about one to four but, in terms of market value, aluminum, silver and zinc are all close to the value of iron powders [ Non-ferrous powders are produced by mechanical, chemical and electrochemical methods. Mechanical methods comprise the groups of disintegration of solids and atomization of melts. The disintegration of solid metals and alloys is carried out by machining, milling in impact mills, ball, vibration and edge-runner mills, medium agitating mills (attrition mills), jet mills etc. General chemical methods comprise the reduction methods, precipitation from solution, hydrometallurgical processing in leach autoclaves, carbonyl process and hydride/dehydride process. The electrolytic methods include electrolysis of aqueous solutions, cementation process and melt electrolysis ( The shape and size of particles depend on the method of powder production and may vary within wide limits. In Atomization is the most common method that allows the production of powders over a wide range of compositions and in a wide variety of powder particle sizes, from 1 μm to a few millimeters. While ferrous powders are currently produced by water atomization of liquid steel, the methods of non-ferrous powder production are multifarious. Chemical and electrolytic methods are widely used for producing high-purity non-ferrous powders.  Mechanical alloying is a simple and efficacious technique to synthesize both equilibrium and non-equilibrium phases of commercially and scientifically advanced materials obtained from initial elemental powders. The exclusive advantage of mechanical alloying consists of the possibility of the synthesis of unique alloys that are not accessible by any other technique, because mechanical alloying is a completely solid-state process and, therefore, limitations specified by the state diagrams do not apply here. Mechanical alloying is realized commonly by means of the high-energy ball milling technique. Spray granulation, is when granules are formed by atomizing a binder solution into a fluidized powder bed [ Powder particle size is a dominant characteristic of a metal powder designated for subsequent use in PM. The area of application of powders dictates the size range required. In The main problems in production and processing of metallic nanopowders are caused by their high reactivity, explosibility owing to very high specific area, and agglomeration of particles. In The powder characterization and testing described in The fundamentals of the main methods of non-ferrous metal powder production, including mechanical methods, chemical and electrolytic methods and physical-chemical methods, are described and discussed in In Production methods and techniques of copper and copper-base powders, aluminum and aluminum alloy powders, advanced aluminum alloy powders, magnesium and magnesium-base powders, titanium powders, nickel powders, zinc powders, refractory metal powders, rare metal powders, noble metal powders, and many other non-ferrous metal powders are described and discussed in 