We assessed the effects of applying stabilized sewage sludge (SSL) and composted sewage sludge (CLV), at 5 and 10% to an acid mining soil. Limed soil (NCL) amended or not with SSL and CLV was incubated for 47 days. We studied the cations and organic and inorganic anions in the soil solution by means of ion chromatography. Liming led to big increases in Ca2+ and SO4
                     2− and to significant decreases in K+, Mg2+, NH4
                     + and NO3
                     −. Addition of both organic amendments increased some cations (NH4
                     +, K+, Mg2+, Na+) and anions (Cl−, NO3
                     − only with CLV and PO4
                     3− only with SSL) and provided a greater amount of low-molecular-weight organic acids (LMWOAs) (SSL more than CLV). Incubation led to decreases in all cations, particularly remarkable for Ca2+ and Mg2+ in SSL-10. A decrease in NH4
                     + was associated with variations in NO2
                     − and NO3
                     − resulting from nitrification reactions. During incubation the LMWOAs content tended to decrease similarly to the cations, especially in SSL-10. Chemometric tools revealed a clear discrimination between SSL, CLV and NCL. Furthermore, treatment effects depended upon dose, mainly in SSL. Amendment nature and dose affect the quality of a mining soil and improve conditions for plant establishment.Mining areas constitute degraded ecosystems resulting from mineral extraction for over long periods of time giving rise to large areas of derelict land. Intensification of mining causes a ecological impact at local and regional scales. Mining wastes can be stabilised by revegetation policies ( In Andalusia (Southern Spain) mining activities date from pre-Roman times. Intensive deforestation have led to degraded and abandoned land incapable of sustaining commercial agriculture, as well as destruction of the natural vegetation. In the Riotinto mining area, located in the Iberian Pyrite Belt, acidification of soils occurred due to oxidation of the metallic sulphides (pyrite) transported by acidic mine drainage and to atmospheric deposition of wind-blown dust ( Urban sewage sludge constitutes an economical alternative and contributes to solving the problem of waste disposal. Furthermore, composted residues have become an attractive option, because degradation–transformation reactions during the composting process turn the organic matter into a more stable humus-like product ( Although the benefits of lime and organic residues addition are initially evident, the incubation process leads to changes in soil solution composition, with possible implications for retention or availability of nutrients or other compounds ( We therefore attempted to evaluate the changes in the soil-solution composition of an acidic mine soil amended with organic residues from urban sewage sludge. An understanding of the chemistry of the soil-water-plant interface is important with regard to optimising revegetation strategies ( We collected the soil (NC) from an abandoned mine in the Riotinto mining zone, in the vicinity of the village of Nerva, Huelva province (SW Spain) ( We employed two organic amendments from wastewater treatment plants: stabilized sewage sludge (SSL) and composted sewage sludge with remains from olive pruning (CLV). Both SSL and CLV share, respectively, a neutral pH (6.9 and 7.0), have a humification index (HIX) of 0.43 and 2.16, as well as high OC content (35.5 and 16.0%) and electrical conductivity (2.8 and 4.2 dS m Prior to addition of amendments, soil was first limed (NC After 12, 29 and 47 days of incubation, subsamples were taken from each tray and frozen prior to measure ion concentrations in soil solution. Prior to sampling, we thoroughly mixed each soil sample to ensure homogeneity and representativeness. Based on the evaluation of sequential extraction schemes for soils, sediments ( Following extractions, we performed determinations of all ionic compounds in 18 samples with the use of an isocratic high-efficiency Ion Chromatography-Conductivity Detector (IC-CD) (Metrohm AG, 792 Basic IC, Herisau, Switzerland) with the Metrohm Chemical Suppression Module to increase sensitivity in the anion response. We determined nutrients (NO Calibration curves were constructed with the use of concentration ranges similar to the level of ions in real samples. We employed Fluka certified standards at 1000 ppm –TraceCERT We calculated the limits of detection and quantitation (LOD and LOQ) as the concentration corresponding to a signal 3 and 10 times the standard deviation of the intercept of the calibration curve, respectively. The chemical suppression module in the chromatograph reduced the habitual LOD values ( The accuracy of the chromatographic determinations was established by the international Certified Reference Materials BCR-409 supplied by the Institute for Reference Materials and Measurements (Geel, Belgium) from 18 replicates over six non-consecutive days, that is to say, six inter-day replicates averaged for three intra-day replicates. The recoveries for all elements ranged from 90.3 to 110% with values within the range of the Association of Analytical Communities ( On the basis of the results, basic and multivariate statistical analyses were applied to the analytical data. ANOVA was used to detect significant differences ( Subsequent to the PCA, we applied a Hierarchical Cluster Analysis to the standardized matrix of samples, using Ward's Method as the amalgamation rule and Euclidean distance as the metric. Concentrations of Li Native and limed inorganic soil solution composition – non-amended soils – was dominated by the anions SO Soil pH is an important factor influencing the solubility of P, which becomes more available at a pH value of 6.5–7.5 ( Regarding N species, NH The composition of the organic acids shows that the concentrations of phthalic and acetic acids were not modified by liming ( The increase in oxalate ion in the soil solution (2-fold, In short, elevation of pH by liming favours uptake by plants of Ca We employed a Principal Component analysis to identify the key parameters describing data variability from the results. We first performed a validation of variables, observing communalities, the ratio number of variables/cases, possible missing data and comparing the results of the standardized/non-standardized matrix. Subsequently, fourteen analytical variables were selected: Cl PC2 (variance of 20%) was formed by NO PC3 (variance of 11%) explains the high content of NO Finally, PC4 (variance of 9%) explains the relationship between time (  Samples were classified by cluster analysis, which revealed two main clusters of samples at >75% relative Euclidean linkage distance, one of them made up of SSL On the first collection date, cation content tended to increase with amendment dose, with the exception of Ca Incubation time led to a decrease in the soil solution concentration of all cations ( As for anions, we found no relationship with amendment dose for CLV ( The behaviour of NO If all the ions in the soil solution were to be uptaken by plants, problems would arise with SO In all cases, amendment addition increased the total content of LMWOAs when compared to limed soil ( Although LMWOAs are present in the soil solution, they are also adsorbed on the soil surface. According to With regard to the incubation process, results showed that total LMWOA content tended to decrease in SSL-amended soils ( Additionally, the decline with incubation time of some organic acids, which are present at a higher concentration in 10% SSL-amended soil, coincides with the decline observed for cations. This decline may be due to the formation of some cation-LMWOA complexes ( Soil fertility is related to nutrient concentration in the soil solution, from which plants obtain mineral nutrients through root uptake. Therefore, high nutrient concentrations in the soil solution should be available during the plant growing stage. Addition of organic amendment favours uptake by plants of NH Organic amendments from fresh or composted sewage sludge induced a drastic change in soil solution composition with a possible impact for future plant development. The multivariate analysis showed that soil solution content is mainly affected by the addition of ions from the corresponding organic amendments, but we observed a dose-dependent effect only for SSL. Nitrite may accumulate in the soil solution after addition of CLV, as a result of nitrification reactions and consequently, levels of nitrite, nitrate and ammonium will depend upon the composition of the pure amendments. Furthermore, the amount of LMWOAs tended to increase with the dose of organic wastes (SSL and CLV), with higher levels of acetate and formate, aliphatic organic acids of short chain length. With respect to incubation time, results show that the LMWOAs content tended to present a general decrease in SSL-amended soil, mainly due to the decrease in oxalate and acetate. Additionally, soil incubation resulted in a decrease in soluble cations, particularly in SSL-amended soil, a fact that could be linked with the overall decrease in LMWOAs. Finally, organic acids, which because of their lability can be utilized by most soil microorganisms and which play a key role in the mobilization of nutrients from the rhizosphere, represent only between 0.13 and 0.58% of the total soil solution, even in soil amended with organic residues. We thank the