The influences of solids concentration, molecular weight of dispersant, particle size and distribution, and temperature on the rheological behaviour of limestone slurries have been investigated. The results reveal that when the solids concentration of a limestone slurry (<100 μm) is increased from 60 wt.% (35.71 vol.%) to 78.5 wt.% (57.49 vol.%), the rheological behaviour of the slurry is transformed from a weakly dilatant characteristic to a pseudoplastic one with a yield stress, which is in combination with a thixotropic property at a higher solids concentration (i.e., ≥75 wt.% or 52.63 vol.%). At a certain shear rate, the apparent viscosity and the relative viscosity of the slurry increase exponentially with solids concentration. The extrapolated Bingham yield stress increases rather sharply in a power-law form with increasing solids concentration when the solids concentration of the slurry is larger than 70 wt.% (i.e., 46.36 vol.%). An attainable maximum packing solids fraction (ϕ
                     m) is predicted as ϕ
                     m
                     =64.6 vol.% at the certain limestone–water suspension system. A polymeric dispersant named Dispersant S40 with a molecular weight of 5500 appears most effective for the reduction of the apparent viscosity of limestone slurry due to its good electrosteric stabilization and effective avoidance of depletion flocculation. The smaller the particle size and the narrower the size distribution, the more evident the pseudoplastic property of limestone slurry is with a larger yield stress and a larger apparent viscosity at a given shear rate in the range of 12 to 1200 s−1. Also, a statistic model describes a relationship between the particle size and distribution and the apparent viscosity of the slurries at a given solids concentration (i.e., 70 wt.% or 46.36 vol.%). However, a sufficient additive dosage of Dispersant S40 (i.e., ≥0.1 wt.%) significantly decreases or even eliminates the rheological differences of limestone slurries (apparent viscosities and extrapolated yield stresses) resulting from the difference in particle size and distribution. Besides, the apparent viscosity of limestone slurries decreases with increasing temperature in the range of 13 to 55 °C, regardless of the absence or the presence of Dispersant S40.From a diagnostic point of view, the rheological behaviour of a mineral slurry is indicative of the level of interparticle interaction or aggregation in the slurry and therefore it is a useful variable to be controlled in industrial processes such as transportation of slurries, dewatering and wet grinding ( The objective of this work is to investigate the effects of solids concentration, molecular weight of dispersant, particle size and distribution, and temperature on the rheology and flowability of limestone slurries. A limestone material (93.7% CaCO Three polymeric dispersants with various molecular weights, i.e., BCX-476, Dispersant S40 and BCX-552 (CDM AB, Sweden) were used in this study. A limestone–water slurry was prepared by the addition of 30 kg of limestone powder into a certain amount of water for a pre-determined solids concentration of each slurry sample. The slurry was stirred as the limestone powder was added into water, and the stirring was continued for 15 min to make the slurry uniform after the completion of adding limestone powder. If a chemical with a given amount was added, the slurry was stirred for 15 min again after the addition of the chemical to make the chemical disperse uniformly in the slurry. About 200 ml slurry was taken from each sample, which was used to analyse the particle size and distribution and to measure the rheological behaviour of the slurry. The slurry samples were aged for 4 hr, and then were shaken at an intensity of 225 min A rotational viscometer was used for the determination of slurry viscosities and shear stress–shear rate curves. The viscometer is the Bohlin Visco 88 BV (Bohlin Reologi UK Ltd., UK). It employs a concentric cylinder geometry with a rotating inner cylinder and a stationary outer cylinder. The concentric cylinder system can be configured in 8 different measurement systems (3 DIN, 2 ‘Wide Gap’, 3 ‘Infinite Sea’), corresponding to SYSTEM knob 1 to 8 on the instrument, and its design allows the measurement of samples to be made in situ (e.g., in a container) as well as on the laboratory bench. Any inner cylinder has 8 different rotation speeds to be chosen, which is from 20 to 1000 rpm (in agreement with a SPEED setting value 1 to 8 on the instrument), corresponding to a shear-rate range of 4 to 1200 s The viscometer (Bohlin Visco 88 BV), which is widely used for industrials, including coatings, foods and pharmaceuticals, directly measures the rotational speed of a rotor (a rotating inner cylinder), The influence of solids concentration on slurry rheology is significant since various ranges of solids concentrations can lead to different types of flow curves, as shown in Clearly, the slurry rheological behaviour is transformed from a weakly dilatant characteristic (shear-thickening) to an evidently pseudoplastic (shear-thinning) one with a yield stress when the solids concentration is increased from 60 wt.% (35.71 vol.%) to 78.5 wt.% (57.49 vol.%). At a solids concentration Besides, the viscosity of the limestone slurry increases exponentially with increasing the solids concentration at a certain shear rate ( These are two primary factors in wet ultrafine grinding operation, i.e., a high solids concentration and the presence of excessive fines, leading to the formation of agglomerations or flocculations and hence the development of a yield stress of slurry. This causes an increase in energy consumption for the operation (  Clearly, the yield stress is eliminated when the addition amount of dispersants with three different molecular weights exceeds 0.02 wt.%. In the case of BCX-476 and Dispersant S40, the viscosity of the slurry at a given shear rate almost stays constant in a wide range of dispersants concentration (about 0.1–0.8 wt.%) for 70 wt.% of the limestone slurry. A similar phenomenon was observed for kaolin suspensions with sodium tripolyphosphate and sodium polyphosphate (   The slurries exhibit a pesudoplastic flow with an evident shear yield stress in a lower range of shear rate, followed by a transition to an approximate Bingham plastic flow (with a higher extrapolated Bingham yield stress) in a higher range of shear rate. Furthermore, the degree of pseudoplasticity is more evident, the viscosity at a given shear rate and the yield stress of the slurries increase, and the onset of the Bingham plastic flow shifts to a higher shear rate at a finer particle size with a narrower size distribution. The extrapolated Bingham yield stress exponentially increases and decreases with increasing the distribution modulus ( When In addition, when 0.04 wt.% of Dispersant S40 is added into these three slurries, the rheological behaviours of the slurries are transformed from pseudoplastic flows with a yield stress to dilatant ones ( The slurry temperature varies during milling tests due to the release of lattice energy of ground minerals from comminution and the heat energy from the friction between milling media and a ground slurry. In a stirred media mill, the temperature of a ground slurry fluctuates from 14 to 60 °C depending on various grinding conditions ( The influences of solids concentration, molecular weight of dispersant, particle size and distribution, and temperature on the rheological behaviour of limestone slurries with various particle sizes have been investigated systematically. The rheological behaviour of a limestone slurry with a size of < The financial support from the Swedish National Energy Administration and Hesselmanska Stiftelsen in Sweden (MinFo's Process Technology Program) is acknowledged. Professor Anders Sellgren at the Luleå University of Technology is greatly appreciated for fruitful discussion and valuable comments. The authors are grateful to Dr. Britt-Marie Antti at the paper mill in Piteå (Kappa Kraftliner Piteå, Sweden) for her kind help in the slurry viscosity measurements.