The paper describes the background to development of a methodology to characterize frothers based on two-phase tests using gas holdup and froth height as the hydrodynamic and froth parameters, respectively. The data showed patterns, that frothers could be grouped into classes, and could be moved from one class to another by chemical modification. As a result of this better understanding of the interdependence of hydrodynamic/froth parameters and chemical properties, frothers based on ethoxylated butanol (ButOH–nEO, with n
                     =1.5–3) were identified as potential substitutes for MIBC. Batch flotation tests and a plant trial showed successful substitution but one application suggested that the new frothers were more sensitive to the contribution of particles in froth stabilization. Inspection showed the new reagents gave a more soap-like froth than MIBC. Ethoxylated butanols offer a range of properties; by changing the number of ethoxy (EO) groups products could be made slightly weaker or stronger than MIBC but the chemistry cannot provide hydrodynamic/froth characteristics similar to frothers like glycols and glycol ethers.Frothers play several roles in the flotation process. They help to establish the hydrodynamics in the pulp zone (e.g., bubble size and gas hold-up) for particle collection and help create froth that has the stability to hold collected minerals, allow drainage of water and entrained particles, be mobile enough for product removal then decaying quickly to assist downstream operations (such as pumping). A large number of compounds have froth producing properties but cannot be used as flotation frothers because their hydrodynamic, frothing or decay properties do not provide adequate operability. The most widely used commercial frothers are: (a) natural oils such as terpineol (as in pine oil) and cresols, (b) C Most known frothers do not possess all the desired properties, and operators must make trade offs when selecting a frother. Attempts to improve performance have focused on the modification of known frothers by reactions with alkylene oxides and by blending known frothers to derive synergies and offset the detrimental properties. Little has been done to invent novel frother chemistries using alcohols that are not already known frothers. Most of the work has focused on reaction products of either C A class of frothers is introduced resulting from the reaction of aliphatic alcohols C The background to the testing of the new frother chemistries is described, which led to identifying ethoxylated butanols (ButOH– The need is to capture the frother’s role in setting both pulp zone and froth zone properties. The typical set-up used is shown in Several characterization options have been evaluated; two are described below. Various froth depths were employed with measures of overflow rate correlated against gas hold-up ( Two points emerging from The ranking corresponded to the qualitative understanding that the glycols give more watery froths than the alcohols ( Adding an ethylene oxide group (EO It was the last observation that set in motion a train of thought that by modifying (e.g., by ethoxylation) alcohols from C1 to C4 that are not normally considered as frothers a new class of frother chemistries could be created. A disadvantage to using overflow rate was that frother concentrations much higher than common in flotation practice (typically <10  Included are results for the new frother chemistry, the reaction products of n-butanol with ethylene oxide designated ButOH– One use of the charts is to identify possible substitute frothers, i.e., ones giving similar gas hold-up and froth height. Given tightening supplies, an alternative for MIBC is a practical example. From Among the batch tests, one on Doe Run (Pb/Cu/Zn) ore was followed up by a plant trial and is the case selected here. The batch grade-recovery results for Pb (a) and Cu (b) are given in The only chemistry in sufficient supply at this juncture was ButOH–3EO. It was substituted for MIBC for a 1-h trial at Doe Run’s Buick mill. About 20 While successful over several batch trials in one test on a flash flotation duty the ButOH– The finding prompted a return to the laboratory. By altering conditions the two-phase froth could be enlarged for inspection. As the work has become more widely known it was brought to our attention that an ethoxylated butanol may be in use for PGM recovery in S. Africa (a Sasol product) and that there was a commercial supplier, Isfahan Copolymer Co., whose PEB 70 product refers to polyethoxylated butanol. No further details are currently at hand, although the apparent success on PGMs may indicate again that the ethoxylated butanol frothers are favoured by fine particle systems. The frother characterization procedure combines a hydrodynamic property, gas hold-up, and a froth property, froth height, measured on a two-phase system. These two parameters are monitored as a function of frother concentration and can be presented as ‘charts’ of froth height vs. gas hold-up at a given concentration or over a range of concentration. This recognizes the dual function of frothers: control of conditions in the pulp and the froth. Other techniques continue to emphasize just frothing properties (e.g., shake test ( The proposed technique is straightforward, at its most simple requiring only a bubble column with pressure taps to give gas hold-up and a ruler for froth height. It made tractable evaluation of an exhaustive list of known and new frother chemistries. Any drift over time (e.g., due to sparger blockage) was readily detected by testing standard strength frother concentrations at intervals. One objective of the database being built is to explore a structure-property relationship; perhaps a numeric index can be derived to quantify frother ‘strength’. A drawback is that the gas hold-up and froth height values depend on the gas velocity and the type of sparger used. A way to normalize the data is needed. (The use of local tap water may be considered another issue but that is largely unavoidable, certainly at the volumes required.) A complication that has recently emerged is that, in developing the procedure, gas hold-up was considered a surrogate for bubble size but subsequent work has questioned this ( The work identified distinctive characteristics. The alcohols tend to give relatively low rate of change in gas hold-up with concentration compared to the glycols. This may convey an advantage to alcohols in that close control over concentration is not demanded to maintain acceptable hydrodynamic conditions. On the other hand, the glycols more readily generate froth than alcohols which may prove an advantage in some situations. For both these frother types the effect of increasing concentration appears to be first to decrease bubble size (increase gas hold-up) then to increase froth height. Using the characterization schemes enables a rapid assessment of new frother chemistries and blends with potential opportunities for operations to control bubble size and froth properties. The test work should extend to other reagents noting that several collectors, for example, can have frother properties. The work illustrated an application: identifying ButOH– Laboratory tests and one plant evaluation showed successful substitution, indicating that characterization in the two-phase system offers an adequate place to start. However, subsequent experience indicated that the new frothers were apparently more sensitive to particle stabilization of froth. It may be possible to identify this feature noting the froth textural differences between ethoxylated butanols and MIBC and suspected differences in water overflow rate. Selecting a solid as a standard is probably not possible (in the sense that it would be universally accepted). The impact of solids should be considered with respect to both the main frother functions. Solids probably have relatively little impact on bubble size produced ( The evolution of a method of characterizing frothers is described leading to the use of froth height vs. gas hold-up in two-phase (air–water) systems. One application was described, identifying a substitute for MIBC from among a new class of frothers based on the reaction products of n-butanol and ethylene oxide, the ButOH– The authors wish to thank the technical assistance of and numerous discussions with members of the McGill team, notably J. Quinn, M. Leroux, P. Moyo, F, Azgomi, S. Gélinas, J. Nesset, C. Gomez and R. Rao, during the development of the procedures and concepts. Funding was under the NSERC Chair program at McGill, sponsored by Vale Inco, Xstrata Process Support, Teck Cominco, Agnico-Eagle, Shell Canada Energy, Flottec, SGS Lakefield Research and COREM. The assistance of Sasol in supplying the F130 chemistries is gratefully acknowledged, as are the personnel at Flottec and Amtel for the batch test work and the plant personnel for the tests at Doe Run.