Process monitoring and control in technology and industry is incomplete without full understanding of all sources of variation, and pharmaceutical manufacturing is no exception. The power of multivariate data modeling and error treatment is not optimal when sampling errors are not adequately identified, quantified, and reduced to below a relevant a priori acceptance threshold. Process data are affected both by analytical measurement errors as well as sampling and/or PAT sensor acquisition errors. The latter partially unrecognized or unknown categories typically dominate over analytical errors by factors of 10–20+ if proper sampling competence is not brought to bear in the design, implementation, maintenance, and operation of the total process measurement system. It is not sufficiently known that PAT signal acquisition gives rise to identical error types, as does physical sample extraction; the latter is well understood and solutions abound from the theory of sampling (TOS). This chapter brings forth the critical analogy between PAT sensor application and conventional physical sample extraction in pharma and shows how variographic process characterization forms a necessary and sufficient on-line approach for total error management which is critical before chemometric calibration and prediction. Without proper sampling error treatment (identification, reduction, or elimination), multivariate data modeling in pharma will incorporate unnecessary, significantly inflated data uncertainties that will compromise the ultimate monitoring and prediction objectives. This chapter presents a brief outline of the necessary elements of TOS to identify typical sampling issues, errors, and effects in need of proper management before multivariate data analysis.FSP: Fundamental sampling principle SSI: Sampling scale invariance PSC: Principle of sampling correctness (bias-free sampling) PSS: Sampling simplicity (primary sampling+mass reduction) LDT: Principle of lot dimensionality transformation (LDT) LHC: Lot heterogeneity characterization (0,2,3-D, 1-D) SUO: Composite sampling SOU: Comminution SOU: Mixing/blending SOU: Representative mass reduction (subsampling) This contribution is dedicated to  Is the pharmaceutical industry different from other industries? “Yes, absolutely”—it deals with the treatment of patients and the need for high-quality products that do their job at the highest possible success rate is There is a natural tendency to focus on However, there is a complex pathway from the original lot to be characterized to the analytical results, be this a However there exists a dangerous, forgotten source of errors in PAT. Indeed, there are always significant   Sampling of the lot (blend) shown in This situation will be Whenever there is a significant lot heterogeneity, compared to the individual sample volume, there will always be a smaller or larger There is in fact a severe The above illustration is purposefully simplistic, but highly relevant and significant nonetheless. This basic FSE effect on the total measurement uncertainty has been demonstrated for all types of material systems for over 60 years, as described in an overwhelming amount of the TOS literature; see “Representative Sampling – Horizontal Standard” ( The key message of this chapter is that the theory of sampling is oriented toward The “inexplicable” situation of significantly varying analytical values often means that fingers are pointed at the laboratory or at the near-infrared (NIR) spectrometer and its calibration, etc., but usually without reason. What is experienced here has very little, or nothing, to do with the performance of the analytical method, the data analytical modeling or the laboratory performance, but rather is a clear sign of the fundamental sampling error effect illustrated above (FSE). The FSE is always encountered to a larger or smaller degree when dealing with mixed materials (heterogeneous materials), i.e., with analytes subject to a significant spatial distributional heterogeneity (DH). This effect will be progressively more pronounced at lower and lower analyte concentration levels. The FSE effect will always be present to various degrees for other average concentration levels, other material heterogeneity manifestations, other grain sizes aggregates, and other sample sizes. Single samples, The fundamental issue of the interrelationships between grab sampling (never permitted within TOS), the FSE effects, and practical sampling of significantly heterogeneous materials is fully described in the TOS literature, since 2013 headed by the new standard DS 3077 “Representative Sampling – Horizontal Standard” ( However, it is in fact also easy to sample properly in the case of significant heterogeneity—enter The illustrations in  Only a spatially well-deployed Repeated execution of a specific sampling procedure from the same lot, e.g., 10 times, will result in spread of analytical results that can be summarized by the relative coefficient of variation, calculated as a standard deviation relative to the average of the 10 analytical results, expressed in percent (%). This estimate represents the relative sampling variability (RSV). This systematic approach is called a replication experiment (RE) (see  A comprehensive illustration of comparisons between grab and composite sampling is given by RE can always be deployed to characterize any sampling procedure addressing any lot material, but should, strictly speaking, only be applied in the absence of incorrect sampling error effects (ISE) (see, e.g., Heterogeneity is a fundamental characteristic of all materials, lots, consignments, batches—not only in pharma, but universally in science, technology, and industry. Heterogeneity has to be properly The constitutional heterogeneity (CH) comes about whenever the material in question is not made up of strictly At a higher scale level, After mixing and sample extraction there remains a small degree of spatial heterogeneity associated with the individual dosage, or tablet extraction volume. This, however, is of no consequence as long as between-tablet/dosage uniformity can be demonstrated to satisfaction. The theory of sampling has dealt with the phenomenon of heterogeneity for more than 60 years (theoretically as well as in practice), and the authoritative conclusion from sampling scores of types of very different materials (including the gamut of materials in pharma) is that homogenous materials do The job of TOS is to deliver to the process technicians and engineers, the analyst, and the data analyst the proper tools with which to The analytical aliquot is the ultimate result of a multistage process, which accumulates errors at all stages from primary sampling and over all stages of mass reduction (subsampling). It is futile being on the lookout for materials for which the heterogeneity curse is not present. It is This chapter provides a framework with which to handle all cases in a consistent manner, the basis of which is that all materials, lots, consignments, etc. are  In this endeavor a basic competence regarding “how to” sample in a The general composite sampling procedure, which should always be patterned on the specific spatial heterogeneity at hand, is able to solve all grab sampling issues (  TOS emphasizes the need to characterize the heterogeneity of the materials before a rational sampling plan can even begin to be contemplated. TOS is adamant on the need for There are significant efforts to develop guidelines for the validation of It is most emphatically not acceptable to simply In contrast, TOS’s approach is sheer ingenuity in simplicity and power: make all individual sampling stages, equipment, and procedures strictly representative, et voila! The situation depicted in There is therefore a complete However, PAT methods do provide significant opportunities to improve sampling. With PAT methods where mixtures are moving or flowing, a two-step sample composite approach has been suggested ( With respect to multivariate calibration, PAT’s challenge is to engineer a proper There are, however, highly significant advantages in the studies summarized below, even if not reaching the above fully representative goal. The background always is also that calibration blends cannot be considered homogeneous (even after significant mixing) ( The effectiveness of this two-step approach was demonstrated in a recent study ( The use of the same two-step composite sampling approach is also illustrated in another recent study where real-time NIR spectroscopic methods were used to develop a 25% (w/w) naproxen formulation ( These interesting results show that the drug concentrations reported by NIR spectrometers are not representative of the  The role of proper sampling in process monitoring and control in pharma has been introduced in a series of recent publications ( Measurement uncertainty (MU) is the traditional framework for estimating the uncertainties stemming from accumulated specific Based on the above introduction to TOS it is clear that there is a critical need to progress to the full MU The first demand of any sampling procedure is that competent work has been carried out with the purpose of eliminating the so-called A key tenet of TOS is that only a sampling process, characterized by being both accurate and precise, can deliver representative increments and samples ( Process monitoring and control in technology and industry are understand the sources of variation, detect the presence and degree of variation, understand the impact of variation on the process and ultimately on product attributes, control the variation in a manner commensurate with the risk it represents to the process and product. Process data are always affected both by analytical measurement errors as well as sampling and/or PAT sensor acquisition errors. The latter categories can dominate analytical errors by factors 10–20+ if/when proper process sampling competence is not brought to bear in the design, maintenance, and operation of the If a PAT measurement system is not based on appropriately matching Sampling errors must be screened away before performing multivariate calibrations for batch and continuous manufacturing. Sampling errors are In pharmaceutical processing, production, and manufacturing it is essential to eliminate, or reduce maximally, all A This chapter calls for a process monitoring paradigm shift in chemometrics and provides examples and case histories from the pharmaceutical industry to illustrate opportunities for improving pharmaceutical manufacturing using the theory of sampling, supported by a comprehensive reference selection. There are many misconceptions regarding sampling and sampling errors, e.g., “How many samples are needed?” Or in the process realm: “How often is it necessary to sample?” The issue is perhaps best illustrated by the ill-reflected question most often met with: “How large a sample is necessary to be representative?” This is unfortunately the The key issue here is that the objective of the sampling is Examples would be: “How often should the process measurement system ‘sample’ (either by extracting samples or as sensor signals) to secure a total MU “How many (samples/signals) are needed to counteract sufficiently the internal heterogeneity of the particular lot material in question (as expressed by a relative sampling coefficient of variation RSV [X%]?)” Observe how a criterion for acceptable answers is built into the pertinent question. What constitutes an The need for representative sampling is also a critical success factor for a multivariate calibration. Two sets of representative samples, the training set and a test set (a validation set), are needed. The calibration and validation sets must be sampled from the process stream that is to be serviced by a working PAT system in the future. The performance of the PAT sensor depends on the quality of its calibration, and indeed equally on its validation ( This “support mismatch error” was first discussed 25 years ago by one of the earliest practitioners of near-infrared spectroscopy and chemometrics: the largest source of error will be the “systematic error in the difference between the material analysed by the optical and reference methods” ( The traditional reasoning that has at its root the faulty notion that Similarly, when a multivariate calibration model is considered ready for prediction, but the visual “Predicted vs. Reference” plot looks like the left-hand panel in Since the pool of data analysis Representativity in the primary sampling stage is never up for negotiation ( If the incorrect sampling errors (ISEs) have not been eliminated the analytical results will unavoidably contains significant (inflated) uncertainty contributions that can The difference between accuracy and precision is well known within the analytical realm. Both these attributes need to be optimized to qualify an analytical process. The upper panel in However, the critical determinant is the relationship between the final analytical result and the Consider a multistage sampling process from pharma. A replication experiment was performed using a 15% (w/w) acetaminophen (APAP) blend to study the variation of sampling stages when using NIR spectroscopy to monitor a powder blend ( The above features are often considered a surprising outcome if the conventional MU The conclusion to the above dilemma reached by TOS is logical, rational, and radical: The theory of sampling’s conclusion is to demand that all sampling processes must be designed, and performed, so as to For good order, there are no other, even remotely complete “theories of sampling” available, only TOS. We can now treat process sampling with considerable ease, since the five basic sampling errors, incorrect (3) and correct (2), are associated with process sampling in precisely the same fashion; there are only two specific process sampling errors in addition ( In 2010 the absence of TOS was pointed out for the first time in the discussion of PAT ( Development of PAT systems that meet the fundamental sampling principle is still one of the principal challenges. Full compliance with FSP requires that an Despite such structural limitations, today’s widespread practice of Thus IDE and IEE are unfortunately still common sampling errors associated with conduits/chutes where NIR spectrometers have been installed to monitor continuous manufacturing processes ( Pharmaceutical companies are moving towards analyzing powder blends Feed frame analysis of powder notably avoids sampling from preselected positions in a blender as traditionally performed with a sample thief. All parts of a batch have the same opportunity of being selected as a sample when NIR spectra are obtained of a powder blend within the feed frame, providing a measurement that is directly representative of the tablet that a patient will consume ( However, the feed frame is also a challenging site for PAT measurements. The powder is characterized by crests and troughs (caused by the paddles). The variation in the surface-to-probe distance affects the signal-to-noise ratio of NIR spectra. One specific study observed better signal-to-noise ratios when the spectra were obtained for the troughs ( Variographic analysis is a powerful tool for extracting information from real-time analytical results, obtained for one or more critical process parameters within the PAT context. In a For each lag, a measure of the corresponding variance, Variograms can be calculated either using the raw concentrations or by using transformation into so-called  The variogram is a.o. characterized by (1) the effective Variograms are not defined for a lag=0, since this would correspond to extracting the exact same sample twice. However, the first points of the variogram (typically the first 3–5 lags) can be MPE contains extremely valuable information as it is composed of The nugget effect-to-sill ratio carries crucial information regarding the proportion of the total observable “process variance” that is in fact Variographic analysis can almost be said to be custom-made for continuous manufacturing of pharmaceutical products. In continuous manufacturing, material and product are continuously charged and discharged from the system throughout the duration of the process ( Due to space limitations, this chapter can only present the above brief initiation to variographics, but the reader will be well served by a recent comprehensive open access tutorial on variographics ( In current PAT developments within pharma a critical question often remains whether each individual increment extracted, or spectroscopically characterized, is representative? Even double compositing only works to its full intent when based on fully representative increments. The theory of sampling (TOS) therefore constitutes a necessary and sufficient element also in the multivariate data analysis and modeling realm. Based on a basic heterogeneity initiation, this chapter has presented an overview of the necessary elements of TOS to identify the origin of typical sampling errors and uncertainty effects in need of proper management before multivariate data analysis can be claimed to be optimal. TOS is in fact the missing link in measurement uncertainty (MU), which is severely compromised if not incorporating As an aside, there are no essential differences between pharma and other process and manufacturing industry sectors. There is in fact nothing special about pharma, except for very strict uniformity and customer protection demands. This similarity allows the reaping of a host of benefits from the enormous experiences collected outside pharma, a point stressed with force in this chapter. Key examples from pharma have illustrated the benefits of TOS-based process monitoring and variographic process characterizations of wide applicability potential. Accompanying the present introduction, a comprehensive literature curriculum is added with which to become more familiar with TOS and the powerful variographic process monitoring facilities: The “Horizontal” Standard DS 3077 lists a set of normative references and contains a standalone EXCEL macro variographic freeware for up to 100 sequential data ( The column “SAMPLING” can be found in the open access periodical SPECTROSCOPY EUROPE (also SPECTROSCOPY ASIA) The periodical TOS FORUM (open access) is the scientific communication platform of The International Pierre Gy Sampling Association The periodical NIR News contains sampling-related features on many occasions. For the fullest professional coverage there exist “Proceedings from the World Conference on Sampling and Blending (WCSB)” from eight conferences (2003–2017), in various states of direct accessibility, e.g.  Active pharmaceutical ingredient. Drug substance intended to perform a pharmacological activity. Constitutional heterogeneity. The heterogeneity observed between individual units (grains/fragments) of a material. CH can only be reduced by comminution or crushing of the material. Distributional heterogeneity. The heterogeneity observed between different material groups-of-units, i.e., between different increments of a material. DH expresses spatial heterogeneity. DH can be reduced by mixing and/or composite sampling; DH will also be reduced after comminution and mixing. Fundamental sampling error. The minimum sampling error that can be obtained when all other sampling errors have been eliminated. Grouping and segregation error. GSE is a reflection of the distributional heterogeneity (DH) if not sampled representatively. This error occurs because of segregration and/or (local) grouping of material units. GSE can be reduced by mixing or by composite sampling, in which GSE is progressively reduced as a function of a higher number of increments ( The fundamental unit in practical sampling. Increments result from singular sampling extraction operations, specifically with the intention to be aggregated to form composite samples. Incorrect sampling error. ISEs occur due to structurally inferior or nonoptimized sampling procedures. ISEs can only be eliminated when sampling complies with the principles of the theory of sampling (TOS). The presence of noneliminated ISE leads to a detrimental sampling bias. Measurement uncertainty. MU should always be understood as MU An estimate of the total analytical error (TAE) for a specific method of analysis, following the principles of MU s.s. An estimate of the total sampling error (TSE) for a specific sampling method. Global estimation error. GEE=TSE+TAE (correspondingly: MU Multivariate statistical process control. The use of the latent variable space for statistical process control to achieve, e.g., fault detection and diagnoses or upset detection in processes. Process analytical technology. A system based on process understanding to design, analyze, and control manufacturing through timely measurements during processing of critical quality and performance attributes of raw and in-process materials and of operational parameters to ensure final product quality. Number of increments sampled to be aggregated to form a composite sample. Replication experiment. The accumulated variance from each step in a sampling procedure can be quantified by extracting and analyzing a number of replicate primary samples. RE experiments should “cover” the entire spatial geometry of the lot. Relative sampling variability. The relative standard deviation obtained for the results of a replication experiment. RSV is expressed as a coefficient of variation (CV). the sum of errors due to laboratory measurement of aliquots, MU Theory of sampling. The complement of governing principles and best practices (sampling unit operations [SUO]) needed to overcome the effects of material heterogeneity to provide sampling representativeness when followed. International standard that codifies TOS’s principles and practices. This standard is augmented and completed in  Gy’s major breakthrough was to take on the overwhelmingly complex phenomenon of heterogeneity in full earnest. In this quest he identified no less than eight sampling errors that cover everything that can go wrong in sampling due to heterogeneity. He then meticulously worked out, over a period of 25 years, how to However, although complex, TOS can in fact be made easily accessible. There are many systematic elements of the TOS, which make mastering possible at a less in-depth level. For example, the eight sampling errors originate from only three sources: the Representative sampling is a multistage process, covering the full pathway from primary lot sampling (commodity, batch, consignment, product, process) to analysis of the ultimate test portion, including secondary, tertiary … subsampling stages. Representative sampling is predicated on the fundamental sampling principle (FSP), which states that Pointedly, the same principles govern at all sampling stages, i.e., the fundamental sampling principles are Note how this multistage process is distinctly opposite to the grab sampling approach still common in the pharmaceutical industry, where powders have been primarily The theory of sampling can be put on a relatively simple axiomatic footing. Table A4.1 shows that the entire theory can in fact be summarized as but six governing principles (GPs) and four sampling unit operations (SUOs). This systematic framework outlines four SUOs which are the only practical agents, the only concrete procedures at the disposition for any sampling process: (1) composite sampling; (2) comminution; (3) mixing/blending; and (4) mass reduction; but not just In 2013 the world’s first universal standard for representative sampling was published, termed a “horizontal standard” ( Lots of all manifestations (containers, vessels, reactors, blenders, etc.) can be treated in an identical, systematic fashion: The general demand is for a representative primary sample and that the relevant essential characteristics hereof (concentrations, grain size distribution, a.o.) is retained in the analytical aliquot. This can only be guaranteed if/when all sampling procedures follow TOS’s principles and unit operations to the letter. There is no allowance for exception, the singular objective being strict adherence to these procedures lest representativity is impossible. Perhaps stringent and complex at first sight, the systematics of TOS (six GPs, four SUOs) ( As an example, GP no. 4, the principle of sampling simplicity (PSS), specifies the multistage nature of In this perspective, mass reduction, wherever it takes place, or as part of PAT approaches (  A logical and rational way to proceed is therefore to treat all materials as if they were