Seasonal changes of the mineral components Na, K, Mg, Ca, Mn, Fe, Al, Si and ash were investigated in the L1 horizon of an acidic beech (Fagus sylvatica L.) forest using litterbags (1 mm and 45 μm mesh-size) buried for up to 467 days in the forest floor. The element dynamics in this surface horizon were compared with the concentration and the total amount stored in a complete sequence of horizons (L1, L2, F1, F2 and H) taken from a moder profile in the Solling area. In the 1 mm litterbags with free access of the mesofauna, the concentrations of all cations were increased in comparison to the 45 μm treatment. This increase was highly significant, especially with regard to Fe and Al. The concentrations of these two cations were closely related to Si during the decomposition of fresh leaf litter in the L1 horizon. Si is the dominant element of ash in the litterbags and down the profile. The total amounts stored in the forest floor revealed that the Fe and Al input considerably exceeded the input by litter fall, and dry and wet deposition due to incorporation of mineral soil material. The input of soil material was also indicated by a decrease in the molar Si/Al ratio from 17 to 6 and in the relation of nutrient cations to ash from 30% to 2.5%.Large amounts of organic matter accumulate on top of acid forest soils in temperate regions In the study reported here we investigated the dynamics of the mineral ash components in L1 material exposed for a period of 15 months in litterbags in the uppermost layer of an acidic beech ( The study site is situated on the plateau of the Solling mountains (Lower Saxony, Germany), 500 m above sea level (9°34′ E, 51°46′ N) with dystric Cambisols Samples of the organic layer were taken on 27 November 1991 from five randomly selected 360 cm The litterbags were constructed from 30 × 30 cm nylon gauze with a mesh-size of 45 μm (excluding most of the meso- and macrofauna) and 1 mm (free access to most of the mesofauna). However, some mesofaunal organisms might also have been excluded from the 1 mm mesh litterbags as the mesofauna comprises organisms with a diameter from 100 μm to 2 mm An aliquot of each substrate was air-dried and homogenised by grinding in a centrifugal mill with a 0.25 mm mesh Effects of the mesh-size treatments on the concentrations of individual elements and ash as well as on the Si/Al ratio and the proportion of nutrient cations to ash were tested by means of a one-way ANOVA using the decomposition period (sampling date) as repeated measures for appropriately transformed data. After application of the χ In the 1 mm litterbags, the concentration of all cations other than K exceeded those in the 45 μm litterbags ( Factor PC1 (plant derived components) had strong (>0.7) loadings on Mg, Ca, Mn and K, while factor PC2 (soil components) had strong loadings on Fe, Al and Si. Na had no strong loadings on either of the two principal components ( The forest floor consisted of 6.5 kg m This can be demonstrated by decreased ratios of Si/Al and the proportion of nutrient cations to ash down the profile and by the comparison of the annual input rates with the amounts stored in the forest floor. The ratio of the organic C stored at the end of November in the 5 horizons of the forest floor (2500 g Cm Comminution enlarges the specific surface of the substrate and thus promotes microbial decomposition, making it an important function of mesofaunal organisms in the decomposition of litter and in the processes of releasing nutrients The composition of the mineral material found in the forest floor is the result of different input and output processes. All elements are added to the forest floor by litter fall, root growth, mycelial colonisation, by dry and wet deposition of solutes and dust, and as particles by soil animals The K concentration decreased from 5.7 mg g In contrast to the nutrient cations, the The Si/Al ratio was 60 (±9 standard deviation, In the 1 mm litterbags with free access of most mesofaunal organisms, especially the soil-derived cations Fe and Al increased highly significantly in comparison to the 45 μm litterbags. However, the Fe concentrations in the 1-mm litterbags were three times lower at the end of the litterbag experiment than the respective concentrations observed in the L2 horizon at the initial sampling (compare We would like to thank the late Professor Brunk Meyer for useful discussion and Ulrike Hill for her technical assistance.