The flocculation activity achieved with aqueous solutions of polyacrylamide and acrylamide/acrylate copolymers is shown to be highly dependent upon the solution age. Continuous flocculation with a standard kaolin slurry in a Couette mixing device, giving settling rate and in-line chord length distributions, allows the comparison of different flocculant properties and make-up conditions. The multiple-stage ageing process proposed by Owen et al. [Owen, A.T., Fawell, P.D., Swift, J.D. and Farrow, J.B. (2002), The impact of polyacrylamide flocculant solution age on flocculation performance. Int. J. Miner. Process., 67, 123–144.] for nonionic flocculant stock solutions is found to also apply for the wider range of products, although the relative effects of each stage varies, depending on the flocculant form and molecular weight. For powder-based products, the initial wetting, swelling and dispersion of the solid polymer is influenced by the powder size, such that activity may be extremely poor even after several hours. Emulsion-based flocculants effectively eliminate this stage, but both forms of the high molecular weight flocculants require at least an additional 24 h to achieve maximum activity. This is attributed to the slow disentanglement of highly agglomerated polymer. The practical implications for flocculant make-up and use in mineral processing are discussed.The aggregation of dilute suspensions of fine particles through the addition of high molecular weight water soluble polymer flocculants has been extensively studied for a wide range of applications, such as wastewater sludge treatment ( All studies of flocculation are complicated by the fragile nature of the very low density aggregates formed, which makes sampling for any Hindered settling rates are normally obtained from batch cylinder (or “jar”) tests, in which flocculant and slurry are mixed (by inversion, impellers or with plungers) and the rate of mud-line fall recorded. The intensity and duration of applied shear has a dominant effect on aggregate formation (  Often neglected in flocculation studies is the complication of performance variability arising from time-based changes in the physical properties of the applied flocculant solutions. While such changes take place on much longer timescales than those involved in the flocculation process itself (hours or days, compared to seconds), failure to consider the effects of solution ageing can significantly impact upon the comparison of flocculant products and flocculation conditions, or result in excessive product consumption in plant applications. The properties of flocculant solutions may also be greatly affected by the applied shear during make-up and transport—this will be the subject of a separate publication, and will only be considered briefly here. Studies into the instability or ageing of polyacrylamide solutions have either detected no ageing ( Almost all of the above studies have focused on long term ageing over periods of up to 100 days. This is of no interest in hydrometallurgy, where residence times from the start of flocculant make-up through to dosing are typically in the range from 20 min to a day. Several groups ( This first stage is clearly of the greater relevance to flocculation performance achieved in real applications, and yet has rarely been studied in detail. It was recognition of this that led to our first examination of flocculant solution ageing ( A Shear Vessel was used to measure settling rates as a function of dosage at a fixed rotation rate with polyacrylamide homopolymer stock solutions (0.50 wt.%) aged from 1 to 144 h (  While acrylamide homopolymers have been the subject of most ageing studies, acrylamide/acrylate copolymers are much more widely used in industry. The incorporation of the acrylate functionality provides chain extension in solution at pH In addition, powder flocculants have been replaced in many applications with emulsion-based products, which offer simpler and potentially more reproducible make-up. Polymerisation in the presence of an oil phase (straight chain hydrocarbons) and surface active agents (e.g. partial esters of common fatty acids) leads to a water-in-oil emulsion, with the active polymer contained within aqueous droplets. The emulsion is not miscible with water and needs to be inverted or “broken” through strong agitation on dilution. As the polymer is already dissolved within the aqueous phase of the emulsion, maximum activity is expected to be achieved much more rapidly than for the powder products, but, as far as the authors are aware, this has never been studied in the open literature. This paper extends the Kaolin (12.5 kg, RF grade Commercial Minerals, Perth, Australia) in deionised water (60 L) was recirculated for 5 h through an in-line mixer (Sulzer SMV4DM25, Wohlen, Switzerland) by means of a self-priming centrifugal pump. It was then pumped into a stirred 375 L baffled tank and diluted to 45 g L The  A commercial high molecular weight 30% anionic polyacrylamide emulsion ( Stirring was maintained at this speed for 2 min after which it was reduced to 500 rpm for 20 min. At the end of the 20 minute period stirring was stopped and the now inverted emulsion transferred to a jar and sealed. No further agitation of the stock solution occurred. A second stock solution was also prepared with 5 min of stirring at 1000 rpm followed by 20 min at 500 rpm. At various time intervals (1, 3, 5, 24, 48, 72 and 144 h) after the initial inversion of the neat solution, 20 g of the 0.50 wt.% solution was added to 780 g of deionised water to give a working concentration of 0.0125 wt.%. The container (1 L in volume) was put into a shaker in a vertical orientation such that when agitated the solution was in a continuous swirling motion. This solution was agitated at 145 rpm for 20 min on a tabletop shaker to ensure a homogenous solution. Flocculant solution viscosities (0.010 wt.% in water, pH 7) were measured with a Brookfield viscometer fitted with a UL adaptor. Particle size distributions for the powder flocculants were obtained on a Malvern Mastersizer, using isopropyl alcohol as the carrier phase. The particle and aggregate dimensions of suspensions at different stages of flocculation were examined Using version 6.0 acquisition software, scans (2 seconds duration) were continuously measured over the full range of chord lengths (1 to 1000 μm), split into 90 channels in a logarithmic progression. Both unweighted and square-weighted chord lengths were obtained. The unweighted chord length distribution is number-sensitive and provides a good indication of the presence of fines. Applying a length square-weighting to the chord length distribution accentuates the volumetric contribution of the aggregates within the slurry. Distributions are presented as line graphs for ease of comparison — in reality they should be histograms over the full 90 chord length channels. For weighted distributions, the counts in each channel are weighted at the channel midpoint. The Shear Vessel ( Flocculant inlets (ports 1 to 4) are positioned on one side of the outer cylinder, allowing the reaction time under the applied agitation to be varied (for this study, only port 2 was used). The slurry inlet port is positioned on the opposite side. Slurry was pumped from the feed tank to the Shear Vessel using a peristaltic pump (“Feed slurry pump”, Masterflex® 7550-62 L/S: Tygon tubing size 16) at a constant delivery rate of 200 mL min The flocculated slurry flows through a glass analysis column fitted to the base of the cylinders — this column may be isolated (through the closure of two valves) for the measurement of settling rates, with continuous flow maintained through the diversion line. The FBRM probe was inserted below the analysis column at an angle of 70° to the flow, allowing material to be suitably presented to the probe window but preventing any solid build-up. The subsequent underflow peristaltic pump ensured a controlled flow rate, set at 95% of the total incoming flows. This allowed for ∼ Our previous study ( The effect of the interval between stock preparation and dilution on activity was examined for a high molecular weight nonionic powder flocculant. Following dilution of the 1 hour old stock solution, significant improvement in activity was observed over a 5 hour period. Further ageing to 24 h gave no additional benefit, with some evidence of even a slight reduction in activity. In contrast, diluted solutions of the 24 hour old stock solution displayed no improvement in activity after an additional 2 h of ageing, followed by a steady decrease in activity for 24 and 72 hour periods. While  The dosage response for all flocculants display the same general behaviour, with at first a very slight increase in settling rate as a function of dosage, but then a dosage is reached above which the slope becomes much greater. In reality, aggregation does take place at the lower dosages, but the initially formed aggregates are too small to significantly affect the settling rate over practical timescales. The onset of faster settling reflects both (i) the “cluster–cluster” mechanism of aggregation, with the initial small aggregates bridging to form larger structures, and (ii) the expectation from Stokes Law that settling rate is proportional to the square of aggregate size. Such behaviour is seen in The relative chain lengths of the polymers may also contribute to different ageing behaviours by affecting solution viscosity. The introduction of anionic groups along the polymer chain will also increase viscosity.  The initial particle size of the powder products is a significant factor that influences the make-up and ageing of flocculant solutions, and yet has not been considered in previously published studies. The focus on commercial products in this study meant that it was not possible to vary particle size independently of other flocculant properties. However, the smaller particle size (and therefore the greater exposed surface area) of the low molecular weight flocculant must strongly influence the initial stage of the dissolution and dispersion process, shown as Stages (a) and (b) in Dosage curves for the high molecular weight anionic flocculant ( The effect of ageing was also examined in the same manner for a high molecular weight 30% anionic emulsion-based polymer flocculant. Such a distinct ageing effect is surprising, as it is normally assumed that little or no ageing is required for any emulsion-based product, once inversion has been carried out. A potential concern with these results is that the duration of strong applied shear may have been insufficient to properly invert the emulsion. However, To further demonstrate the impact of shear during emulsion inversion, the FBRM chord length distributions of flocculated suspensions were compared for stock solutions of different ages.  The above results confirm that prolonged shear of the emulsion led to degradation of the polymer, and support the belief that (i) inversion was complete, and (ii) the observed ageing behaviour for the emulsion flocculant was not a consequence of any inefficiency in the inversion process. The extent of the ageing effect was a surprise in view of the expectation that the polymer, already dissolved within the aqueous droplets, should be readily liberated and available on inversion of the oil phase. Ageing to reach maximum activity would certainly not be expected if the polymer within these drops was already at or near its most active (i.e. fully dispersed) state. However, it must be remembered that the emulsion was diluted by a factor of 200 to produce a stock solution with an active polymer concentration in the range 0.1 to 0.2 wt.%. As much of the neat emulsion consists of the diluting organic phase, in reality the factor of dilution for the aqueous droplets is at least doubled. It is therefore highly improbable that the aqueous droplets within the emulsion contain dispersed polymer — the solution viscosity would become prohibitively high at a tenth of the concentrations involved. Rather, the polymer must be tightly coiled, and in all likelihood, extensively entangled. It appears that the use of an emulsion-based flocculant product effectively eliminates Stage (a) of the ageing process shown in  The high molecular weight flocculants all aged in a similar fashion, whether powder or emulsion, anionic or nonionic. All achieved their maximum activity near 72 h, with a very slow decline in activity at longer durations, consistent with reconformation of the individual polymer chains to reduced solution dimensions (Stage (d) in The low molecular weight anionic flocculant behaved quite differently, achieving maximum activity after only 5 h, although the magnitude of the ageing effect was much less. The lower particle size for the flocculant powder is likely to be a factor, but the behaviour of the emulsion products suggests the shorter polymer chain length may be having a large effect on progression through to Stage (c), i.e. disentanglement to discrete polymer chains proceeds rapidly. This flocculant also displayed the greatest loss of activity through Stage (d). This may not in fact fully reflect a greater reduction in solution dimensions than is seen for the other products, but rather that the reduction for the lower molecular weight flocculant has a greater impact on the product's relative capacity to achieve successful polymer bridging between particles. Most mineral processing operations will have different methods of stock flocculant preparation, using different agitation regimes, make-up liquors of different ionic strength and different temperatures, all of which will affect polymer dissolution in some way. However, the general trends described above are still expected to apply. While there is clearly a benefit from ageing most concentrated flocculant solutions for 24 h or more, it is rarely practical and in many cases physically impossible for such ageing periods to be approached, due to a lack of storage capacity. Rather than advocating extended ageing, the aim of this work has been to highlight the dangers of very short durations between flocculant make-up and application within a thickener. Ageing times between 1 and 5 h are typical of most mineral processing operations, although in some situations such times have been as short as 20 min. While flocculation will still be possible, the required dosages will be substantially increased — for very short times, possibly by more than 100%. Surprisingly, such behaviour is also to be expected for emulsion flocculants, although the increase in flocculant demand will not be as great. The higher flocculant demand in itself will contribute to even shorter ageing times when storage capacity is limited. Perhaps of greater concern is the fact that higher flocculant demand can be detrimental to overall thickening performance. While acceptable settling rates can be achieved from flocculants that have not been optimally aged, the presence of extra flocculant can lead to a higher yield stress within the bed and underflow, as well as increasing the risk of residual flocculant having a negative impact on liquor filtration and other downstream processing. Flocculation performance measured within a laboratory under optimal conditions often exceeds that achieved in full-scale thickener feedwells, to which the usual first response is to increase the flocculant dosage. Feedwell performance can be influenced by a wide variety of factors, many related to the complex hydrodynamic flow patterns developed. For example, the shear conditions may be too intense or, conversely, insufficient to ensure adequate contact between flocculant and slurry. Although engineering modifications can be made to feedwells to enhance hydrodynamics and overall performance (e.g. The time-dependent ageing of aqueous solutions formed from a number of anionic flocculants was established by comparing their activities with a standard kaolin slurry. The multiple-stage ageing process proposed by While the use of emulsion-based flocculants avoids the initial dissolution stage, giving usable activity almost immediately after make-up, their solutions still exhibit a significant degree of ageing. This is attributed to the concentrated aqueous polymer solutions dispersed through the emulsion product being in a highly agglomerated state — on inversion, this polymer still needs to undergo slow disentanglement to reach maximum activity. This process appears to be influenced more by the polymer molecular weight than the product's initial form. This research has been supported under the Australian Government's Cooperative Research Centre (CRC) Program, through the Parker Centre for Integrated Hydrometallurgy Solutions. This support is gratefully acknowledged. Terry Redman (Mettler Toledo AutoChem) is also thanked for his useful advice.