This paper applies Drift Flux theory for the first time to explore the relationship between the liquid and solids flow through fluidized beds in the context of desliming of dense minerals. At low solids fluxes the process is not flux curve constrained. Here continuity considerations indicate the net liquid flux through the lower bed is upwards, ideal for the removal of slimes from the underflow product. Moreover, the liquid split to the underflow is also lower, further reducing the slimes content of the underflow. At higher solids fluxes the net liquid flux becomes downwards and eventually the system becomes flux curve constrained. Under these circumstances slimes entrainment to the underflow increases significantly. In order to operate at these higher solids fluxes, and achieve efficient desliming, Split Fluidization should be used. Here additional fluidization liquid is added at a higher elevation, producing a net liquid flux in the upwards direction through the zone above the Split Fluidization entrance level. Desliming experiments covering a range of solids fluxes were conducted to investigate the effects of increasing solids flux and Split Fluidization. This study shows that a system of parallel inclined channels, a key feature of the Reflux Classifier, permits the introduction of this additional liquid while preventing the ultra fine product from being entrained to the overflow reject stream, thus permitting the efficient removal of slimes. Experiments were conducted using an iron ore feed with particles smaller than 0.50mm in diameter. Efficient desliming at a relatively high solids feed flux of 20t/m2
                     h was achieved, but to efficiently deslime at 40t/m2
                     h significant Split Fluidization was found to be essential.With unprecedented demand for resources such as iron ore there is increasing need to beneficiate the fine particles. Existing technologies such as spirals produce an iron ore product typically in the size range from 0.1 to 1.0 Desliming, which is essentially a form of particle size classification, can be achieved using mechanical screens, or hydrodynamically using hydrocylones or fluidized bed hydrosizers. Mechanical screens, which provide a separation dependent on the physical size of the particle, suffer from a low capacity and the effects of wear, which in turn can cause a significant shift in the separation size. At ultrafine sizes, of order 0.050 Upward current classifiers, which are increasingly used to deslime fine product, present a number of difficulties. These devices operate as liquid fluidized beds, with water used to both fluidize the particles and wash or elutriate the ultrafine particles from the bed. Hence the ultrafines are transported upwards towards the outer overflow launder. One key concern is the tendency for fine, high grade particles to be entrained to the overflow, resulting in a loss in recovery. Therefore the upwards velocity needs to be kept below a critical level. Fluctuations in feed solids rates and pulp density are, however, unavoidable due to variations in the size distribution of the overall plant feed. With a significant fraction of the feed solids withdrawn in the downwards direction as an underflow stream, there is also a strong tendency for the water that discharges with the solids to entrain ultrafines with the underflow. Clearly, conventional upward current classifiers must operate within very tight constraints in order to limit a loss of the finer iron ore to overflow, and to limit entrainment of ultrafines such as clays into the underflow product. The Reflux Classifier, which is a novel fluidized bed system, is usually used in gravity separation.  The study of inclined sedimentation has led to a number of important advances in suspension mechanics. Lubrication theory predicted that smooth spheres should achieve a vanishingly small velocity during their approach towards an inclined surface. The Reflux Classifier also provides a basis for effecting sharp size classification, as demonstrated in a previous study involving particles of fine silica ( In this paper, a rational approach to understanding the benefits of Split Fluidization is introduced for the first time, based on Drift Flux theory. The corresponding solids flux curve analysis is used to describe the constraints that link the settling particles and the fluid flow. Of specific interests are the direction of the interstitial water through the fluidized bed, and the fraction of the total water fed to the system that reports with the finite size particles to the underflow. The present study used the Split Fluidization approach, focusing on the benefits of introducing additional water either as part of the feed or separately at a lower position between the feed and fluidization entry positions. This additional water increases the tendency of valuable ultrafine particles to entrain and become lost via the overflow reject stream. In order to address this concern, a Reflux Classifier incorporating inclined channels, was used with the objective to retain these valuable particles as part of the product while promoting the process of desliming. The basic hypothesis of this applied study was that the quality of the desliming achieved would depend on the overall water split between the underflow and the overflow, and on the washing of the slimes from the feed. In order to understand the effect of the fluidization on the process of desliming, it is useful to consider the feed as a binary system consisting firstly of settling particles of one finite size and density, and secondly non-settling particles, of a negligible size, which simply flow with the water. Thus in effect this notional binary feed can be considered in terms of the settling of a mono-component feed. Hence, any reference to the feed solids in this analysis corresponds to the particles of finite size only, and not to the slimes; the slimes are simply treated as being part of the fluid, and to split in accordance with the fluid. The following analysis is applicable to any upward current classifier including the Reflux Classifier shown in Feed slurry enters the separator continuously at a volumetric solids flux, We are interested here in establishing an understanding of the system constraints that govern the direction of this interstitial flow. Clearly, as the volumetric solids feed flux increases, the volumetric underflow rate must also increase in order to preserve a fixed bed height. The liquid flux, The particle settling velocity, In accordance with continuity considerations ( Clearly,  The gradual volume addition of particles to the batch system at a feed flux, In order to preserve the suspension height, the suspension must discharge to the underflow according to the operating lines shown in Ultimately, as the volumetric feed flux of particles increases, the system becomes flux curve constrained. This first occurs when the tangent formed from the feed flux, When the system is flux curve constrained, the minimum allowed bed concentration is The minimum concentration,  The water split, This analysis shows that high quality desliming should be possible using a relatively low solids feed flux, ideally unconstrained by the flux curve. Some of the experiments conducted in this study address this hypothesis, with the interstitial liquid moving upwards through the bed. In industry, however, the objective is to operate at the highest possible feed flux in order to reduce the capital investment. This analysis shows that a high feed flux leads to a downwards flow of interstitial liquid through the bed and a high liquid split to underflow. In this study we examine the potential to overcome this problem. Consider a desliming operation at a relatively high feed flux, constrained by the flux curve. Here, the interstitial liquid flux proceeds in the downwards direction. This problem can be solved by introducing additional fluidization, referred to as Split Fluidization,  Fine iron ore feed, less than 0.50 The fluidization water, Once steady state was reached, the underflow and the overflow were sampled for specific time periods. The feed sample was obtained by firstly riffling one of the bags of semi-dry feed and combining with a portion of the slimes, matching the proportion used in the experiment. All three samples were weighed and then de-slimed using laboratory sieves at 0.038 A series of experiments was conducted as shown in The initial two experiments, Runs A, and B, were conducted at a solids feed flux of about 20 In the next three experiments, Runs C–E, the solids feed flux was increased significantly to a solids loading of about 40 It should be noted that additional feed water helps to reduce the water split, It is useful to compare the settling characteristics for these experiments with the solids flux curves shown earlier in this paper. Clearly the feed used has a broad particle size range while the flux curve theory is based on particles of one size. The geometric mean for a particle diameter range of 0.1–0.5 Separation performance was established by determining the partition curve as a function of the particle size. The partition number is the probability that a particle of diameter The performance of the desliming was quantified using partition curves. The curves are shown in Given the broad range of experimental conditions used in this study it was difficult to judge the required underflow rate needed to target a separation at 0.080   In order to establish the solids throughput limit, Run F was conducted using an intermediate solids flux of about 30 Run G was conducted using the high solids feed flux level of 40   The numerator, which is based on the solids flux and solids volume fraction, provides a measure of the liquid flux reporting to the underflow, while the denominator is based on the overflow flux of liquid. Reasonable agreement with the actual water split values in The coarser particles in the solids flux that report to the underflow will entrain other finer particles including slimes. These finer particles will achieve a degree of association with the coarser particles by locating behind the falling particles and via lubrication forces and adhesion. Particles 0.050 While much of the focus of this study was on the lower zone of the Reflux Classifier, the system of parallel inclined channels played a very significant role, insuring the retention of the fine high density particles, especially those near the separation size of 0.10 It is evident in The inclined channels of the Reflux Classifier provide substantial segregation area and hence a mechanism for the retention of relatively fine particles. The asymptotic throughput advantage, applicable to inclined channels of infinite aspect ratio ( Consider a particle 0.040 Thus particles smaller than 0.100 The overall separation produced is governed, in the end, via the setting of the underflow pump which controls the precise fraction of the feed solids that are permitted to report to the underflow. Thus the internal processes within the Reflux Classifier simply provide a sorting mechanism, delivering the fastest settling particle to the underflow ahead of progressively slower settling particles. Once the required solids-split to the underflow has been reached, the balance of the feed must ultimately pass to the overflow. Finally, it is noted that in the alternative application of gravity separation, where the objective is to separate particles primarily on the basis of density, Split Fluidization should not be applied, given the water injection will tend to create a zone of lower bed density, permitting the larger, lower density, particles to settle downwards. A series of experiments was conducted on the desliming of a feed of fine iron ore, nominally less than 0.50 The University of Newcastle holds international patents on the Reflux Classifier and has a Research and Development Agreement with the company Ludowici Australia. The authors thank the Australian Research Council, Australian Coal Association Research Program, and Ludowici for their support for this work.