Demand for cobalt is increasing worldwide, primarily as a result of its use in rechargeable batteries, super-alloys, and the chemicals industry. Extraction and recovery of cobalt from primary ores and waste materials using (novel) bioprocessing approaches has been suggested to have significant potential as a means to secure the supply of this critical metal in future years. While bioleaching of cobalt-bearing sulfide ores has been carried out in one full-scale operation (at Kasese, Uganda), bioprocessing of cobalt-bearing oxidised ores, such as limonitic laterites, has hitherto received little attention. In the present work, reductive bioleaching of three limonitic laterite ores was carried out in anaerobic bioreactors, maintained at pH 1.8 and 35°C, and compared with oxidative acid leaching in control aerobic bioreactors. Elemental sulfur was added as electron donor for the acidophilic bacteria used in both aerobic and anaerobic bioreactors. Reductive bioleaching enhanced the extraction of cobalt from all three ores, by a factor of up to 6-fold, compared to acid leaching under aerobic conditions. Extraction of cobalt from the ores closely paralleled that of manganese, suggesting that the most of the cobalt was liberated via the reductive dissolution of manganese (IV) minerals present in the limonites, catalysed directly and/or indirectly by the bacteria present (predominantly Acidithiobacillusferrooxidans and Sulfobacillusthermosulfidooxidans).Significant increases in the demand for cobalt, which had a global market value of ∼$2.1 billion (US) in 2013, are occurring as a result of its use in super-alloys, rechargeable batteries and a range of catalytic processes ( Bioprocessing has previously been used to extract cobalt from mineral tailings deposited as waste material during copper mining of a sulfidic ore in Kasese, Uganda ( Here we describe experiments in which three cobalt-containing limonite ores, two originating from central Asia and the other from eastern Asia, were subjected to both reductive and oxidative bio-processing in pH- and temperature-controlled bioreactors, at pH 1.8 and 35 Three cobalt-bearing limonitic laterite ores were bio-processed at low pH and mesophilic temperatures in the current study. Two of the ores were obtained from Shevchenko, Kazakhstan (SHLM7 and SHLM11), and the third from the Acoje mine in the Philippines, by partners in the COG A mixed culture consortium containing mesophilic and thermo-tolerant species of iron-oxidising, iron-reducing, and sulfur-oxidising acidophilic bacteria was set up and grown in a shake flask containing 200 Two bioreactor vessels (2.3 The composition of the bacterial communities in PLS at the end of the bioleaching periods were determined by filtering liquid samples through sterile 0.2 Ferrous iron in solution was determined colorometrically using the Ferrozine assay ( In each of the three experiments, two bioreactors were operated in parallel – one gassed with OFN to induce anaerobic conditions and the other maintained as an aerobic system, though all other operational parameters (temperature, agitation etc.) were identical. Changing the gas supply from air to OFN resulted in a major change in solution chemistry, from one that was oxidising (dominated by soluble ferric iron) to one that was reducing (dominated by ferrous iron). As shown in Cobalt was leached effectively from all three limonitic ores under reducing conditions (  With the SHLM7 limonite, addition of acid was required from the onset of reductive bioleaching to maintain the pH at 1.8, whereas alkali was required in the case of oxidative bioleaching ( The bacterial communities present at the end of the bioleaching periods were far less diverse than those present in the initial inocula. The abundance of limonitic laterite ores, particularly in tropical areas, represents a significant, though currently unexploited, reserve of cobalt. In contrast to sulfidic cobalt ores, these are generally dominated by oxidised iron and manganese minerals, such as goethite (αFeO·OH) and asbolane (Ni, Bioreactors, operated in parallel, allowed the direct comparison of oxidative and reductive bioleaching, both carried out using acidic solutions, for each limonite sample. In the presence of oxygen, sulfuric acid generated by the microbial oxidation of elemental sulfur (Eq. Since alkali addition was required to maintain pH at 1.8 throughout the oxidative bio-processing of SHLM7 limonite, reaction Addition of sulfuric acid was required to maintain pH homeostasis in all reductive experiments. This was anticipated since, as shown in Eq. The reductive dissolution of manganese (IV) minerals is also an acid-consuming reaction (Eq. Dissolution of several of the gangue minerals that comprise the Shevchenko and Acoje limonites present another source of acid consumption; these include serpentine, antigorite, amphibole, clinochlore, smectite and montmorillonite. Acid consumption is a major potential cost associated with the reductive bioprocessing of limonitic ores. However, as illustrated in the present study, it should be possible to balance acid consumption and acid production in a sulfur/limonite slurry by controlling access to oxygen, either by intermittent aeration or by maintaining concentrations of dissolved oxygen at low levels. This issue will be investigated in future studies. Cobalt was very effectively solubilised from all three limonites under reducing conditions. The strong correlation between cobalt and manganese release suggests that the former was mostly associated with manganese (IV) minerals such as asbolane, as previously described by The dissolution of manganese (IV) minerals, whether mediated by reductive bioprocessing, by acid or a combination of both, appears therefore to be the There were interesting differences between the bioleaching of two other transition metals (nickel and iron) from the three limonite ores tested. Microbially-mediated extraction of nickel was significantly greater for both the Shevchenko limonites when bioleached under reducing conditions, but similar yields of soluble nickel were obtained by bioleaching the Acoje limonite under either oxidative or reductive conditions. The percentage of iron leached from the ores (generally <10%) under reducing conditions was small compared to the percentage of other transition metals that were leached. This was perceived as a positive phenomenon, as the potential for efficient leaching of target metals (cobalt and nickel) while at the same time minimizing the amount of ferric iron minerals solubilised is advantageous both in terms of sulfur consumption and downstream-processing (soluble iron has to be removed at least partially in a flow circuit; This work has demonstrated that it is possible to effectively bioleach cobalt from limonitic ores under acidic, relatively low temperature, reducing conditions, using bacteria that couple the oxidation of elemental sulfur to the reduction of oxidised cobalt-bearing minerals. Extraction of cobalt was far more efficient in anaerobic than in aerobic bioreactors, and appeared to be closely correlated with the dissolution of manganese (IV) minerals present in the limonites. The cobalt that was extracted was soluble in the reduced acidic leach liquors, facilitating its downstream recovery. A microbial processing approach for extracting base metals from oxidised ores such as limonites has many potential advantages (for example, in terms of environmental impact and carbon footprint) over current high pressure/temperature processing technologies. This work was supported by the