This article is designated for anybody, who is interested in the membrane process, for example, learners, young researchers, or practitioners. Existing knowledge from the literature was summarized in order (i) to provide a comprehensive overview of existing methods for characterization of polymeric membranes and (ii) to serve as the suitable additional study source. For selected cases, the detailed analysis of related theoretical roots is presented and thoroughly discussed from the physical chemistry point of view.At present, current material research grows rapidly hand in hand with related polymeric membrane development. An extension of membrane application possibilities raises the need of a thorough knowledge of material properties. An elucidation of the cause-and-effect relationship in the sequence membrane fabrication→membrane morphology→membrane performance represents the indispensable component of membrane research and development. Therefore, a membrane characterization constitutes a very important issue because it provides reliable data in terms of structure and mass transport properties. By knowing them, membrane users are then able to conveniently choose those membranes that satisfy their requirements and to decide the optimal conditions under which the membranes are used. Generally, membrane materials can be divided into three main groups with respect to their structure and their functionality: (i) porous membranes, (ii) dense (homogeneous) membranes, and (iii) ion-selective membranes. Each group of membrane materials requires different approaches and techniques for their detailed characterization. These methods for the determination of chemical composition, surface, and internal morphology and physicochemical properties can be classified into the following categories: Pore size and pore size distribution methods Spectroscopic methods Microscopic methods Thermal properties, mechanical properties, and other methods Further, commonly used methods for each category are summarized in The importance and advantages of the membrane separation processes have been recognized during past decades. From the second half of the 20th century, membrane separation has grown into a widely used separation technology. At this moment, there are a number of membrane separation processes: microfiltration, ultrafiltration, nanofiltration, reverse osmosis, pervaporation, gas/vapor separation, and membrane distillation. All of these membrane processes use noncharged, either porous or nonporous (dense), membranes. Charged or ion-selective membranes used in membrane processes with a gradient of electric potential are electrodialysis, membrane electrolysis, electrofiltration, and electrodeionization. In case of porous membrane materials, the pores can be assumed as the voids permanently formed within a dense solid matrix, so that pore dimensions significantly exceed the characteristic scale of molecular dimensions or structural fluctuations. The fixed morphology and transport within the matrix differentiates porous membranes from dense ones, in which the transport occurs directly in a homogeneous dense material. The separation of particles by size using a membrane is governed by the following two mechanisms: the separated material (particles) passes through a kind of void formed temporarily by the thermal molecular motion of the polymer constituting the membrane. This is called the “solution-diffusion mechanism,” the particles with a radius smaller than the radius of the pores in the membrane can pass only through permanent pores and are separated according to the molecular size. This is often called the “molecular sieving mechanism” ( The first morphological parameters to consider when characterizing a porous membrane are the pore size and the pore size distribution. These two characteristics directly govern most applications of porous membranes; however, the determined values of these properties may vary depending on the characterization methodology. The geometrical structure of pores is of great concern. IUPAC macropores with widths exceeding about 50 nm; mesopores of widths between 2 and 50 nm; micropores with widths not exceeding about 2 nm. In the vast majority of porous media, the pore sizes are distributed over a wide spectrum of values called “pore size distribution.” It is a probability density function giving the distribution of pore volume by a characteristic pore size. If the pores were separated objects, then each pore could be assigned a size according to some consistent definition, and the pore size distribution would become analogous to the particle size distribution ( However, the one-dimensional pore width is not the only relevant parameter; the average three-dimensional geometry of the pore must be taken into account. The pore state and structure mainly depend on the origin. The pores can have the shape of cylinders closed at one end or open at both ends, cone shape, slit shape, or they can have a narrow opening and a wide body—these so-called “bottle-necked” blind pores and open cylinders may be the reason of the adsorption hysteresis. However, actual pore size and shape is usually not exactly defined and it is necessary to adopt some model of morphology of the pores. The easiest model of the porous medium that has been suggested is the pure capillary pattern, where equal cylindrical and straight pores are assumed. This model can be made more complex, and thus more realistic, by accepting that the pores have unequal sizes that are statistically distributed. An even more realistic picture of the membrane structure could be reached if constriction (inclination of the pores) and tortuosity (existence of no straight pores) were supposed. Another factor influencing porosity and pore size distribution is the membrane fouling. When fouling occurs, porosity and pore size distribution decrease. Small pores become blocked, and large pores decrease in size. The number of small and large pores decreases and the number of medium-sized pores increases. Pore size affects membrane performance in several ways. In general, the fouling influence is most prevalent in membranes with low porosity and high heterogeneity. The liquid situated in the pores (capillaries) behaves differently from the fluid in the bulk phase. The phase equilibrium between two bulk phases ( In world of very small dimensions, curvature of the phase boundary plays an important role. This effect is usually described by the “mean curvature” of the interface, defined as the ratio of the surface area of a small element to its volume, and is equal to an average reciprocal principal radii of the curvature. In special case of spherical interface, the mean curvature is According to the classical Laplace–Young equation for two-phase system with curved interface ( The behavior of liquid in narrow capillaries is a direct consequence of this changed equilibrium conditions. Equilibrium position of the meniscus of liquid in the capillary inserted into a liquid is given by a balance between the gravitational and capillary forces—by Laplace relation. If 0°< For 90°< The curvature of the phase boundary influences the equilibrium conditions. The conditions describing thermal and chemical equilibria, Considering the one-component two-phase system, chemical potentials are equal to the molar Gibbs energies and in equilibrium Using Gibbs equations The temperature in both phases is the same: Contrary to the Clapeyron equation, where d( At constant temperature d Assuming that the molar volume of liquid can be neglected in comparison with the molar volume of vapor, The integration from the conditions characterizing the system consisting of macrophases divided by a flat interface, that is,    Wetting liquid: As can be seen from the Kelvin equation In case of a wetting liquid in a narrow capillary or a slit, where the contact angle is acute, that is, cos The influence of phase boundary curvature is especially important in the range of very small dimensions, as shown in The influence of the interface curvature on the boiling, melting, and sublimation temperatures can be illustrated by equilibrium In case of condensed phases, the temperature of the phase transition The influence of curvature on the temperature of the phase transition can be demonstrated on the example of phase in equilibrium Integration from the system with flat interface (  The dependence of melting temperature on pore width represents the theoretical background of thermoporometry—the method for the determination of the pore size and pore size distribution. The change in melting temperature can be on the order of tens to hundreds of degrees for materials with nanometer dimensions. In case of vapor–liquid and vapor–solid equilibriums, a comparison of systems with various curvature of the interface at the same pressure in the continuous phase is shown in Integration from Material in capillary: Integration from Material in capillary: where The boiling temperature of the liquid containing small bubbles is higher than that of pure liquid, material from various grooves on the solid surface sublimes at higher temperature than its normal value. Vapor condenses on small solid or liquid particles at lower temperature than on the flat surface of a condensed phase, which leads to the formation of supersaturated (supercooled) vapor. Wettability of the membrane surface plays a key role in many processes. To describe relative affinity of various liquids to the solid surface general terms, lyophobicity (in case of water hydrophobicity) and lyophilicity (in case of water hydrophilicity) were introduced. Wettability is a measure of unbalanced molecular interactions between the two phases in contact. Together with surface charge, the surface wettability influences the biocompatibility and biological performances of materials for medical applications. The value The contact angle For very small drops ( The influence of line tension can be important for systems with very small wetting line radii, for example, at heterogeneous nucleation, or capillary condensation in porous solids. Owing to the simplicity, the contact angle measurement is a widely utilized method in the evaluation of the membrane surface lyophobicity. Only small pieces of membranes are needed for measurement and the measurements are fast to perform. Although sometimes accurate values of the contact angles are difficult to obtain due to the nonideality of the surface, the contact angle can be used as a relative index of membrane lyophobicity/lyophilicity. The most widely used technique for contact angle measurement is a direct measurement of the tangent angle at the three-phase contact point on a sessile drop profile. The tilting plate method This method is a widely used technique that indirectly measures contact angle on a solid sample. The Wilhelmy balance method can be modified to measure the capillary rise Numerous methods have been developed to determine the contact angle and liquid surface tension from the shape of a sessile drop, pendant drop, or captive bubble. The direct goniometric method is advantageous because of its simplicity. The image of the liquid drop or bubble is taken by a video or digital camera. In the simplest case, the contact angle may be directly measured on the printed picture or, assuming that the liquid drop is part of a sphere, calculated from the drop radius The axisymmetric drop shape analysis (ADSA) method Instead of forming a liquid sessile drop above the solid surface, an air bubble can be formed beneath the solid sample surface immersed in the testing liquid. Even though the contact angle measurements are not complicated, their interpretation may often be complicated. Young equation The fundamental problem associated with the equilibrium contact angle is related to the structure and topography of the solid surface, as the real solids are usually rough and may be heterogeneous. The values of contact angle may be also influenced by the presence of various impurities, adsorbed gases, and vapor on the surface or by possible interactions between the liquid and solid surface (chemical reaction, dissolution, or swelling). Surface roughness can strongly affect wettability and values of the contact angles. As can be seen from To characterize the geometrical nonideality of a surface, a roughness parameter ε defined as The surface of a solid composed of various materials is heterogeneous. An important case of heterogeneity of the surface represents the drop on such a rough surface that is energetically disadvantageous for the liquid to fill the pits ( The apparent contact angle can be then calculated as Surfaces characterized by the so-called “hierarchic structure” ( The value of the contact angle, which is formed on contact of the liquid with the solid surface, depends on the conditions. When tilting the hard surface ( The contact angle hysteresis can be observed also during immersing and emerging the solid object into a liquid (e.g., when using Wilhelmy plate) ( The Young equation describes the equilibrium in the system solid surface–liquid phase–gaseous phase. As the gaseous phase consists of saturated vapor of the liquid, it is correct to consider surface energy of the solid in equilibrium with saturated vapor of the liquid A drop placed on entirely clean solid surface ( One of the conditions on which the Young equation Even though the sine component is supposed to be compensated by the rigidity of the solid phase, so that it does not deform the surface, there is a question if the real surface is in the state of thermodynamic equilibrium. However, considering that Young equation contains a difference Another measure of surface wettability can be the wetting heat. The more heat is evolved during the wetting of the solid surface, the more intensive are the interactions between the liquid and the solid. The wetting heat (energy per unit area) is therefore an important characteristic of surface nature, that is, its lyophobicity or lyophilicity. Calorimetric values of the wetting heat can serve also to the testing of reliability of the contact angle calculated from the Young equation. The wetting heat can be also calculated from surface thermodynamics using Young equation Both values of the wetting heat, the experimental and the calculated should be the same. Any differences between the calorimetric value of heat of wetting and the value calculated using the experimental values of surface tension and wetting angle from Eq. Intrusion methods are based on the behavior of wetting and nonwetting liquids in capillaries. The bubble-point method ( However, water can be replaced by another liquid, for example, by an alcohol ( The bubble-point method gives only limited information. The flow permporometry (bubble-point with gas transport) combines the bubble-point concept with the measurement of the gas flow through the emptied pores. This nondestructive technique involves the expulsion of a fully wetting fluid from a saturated porous medium by increasing the gas pressure, with higher gas pressures relating to smaller pore diameters. At first the gas flow through a dry membrane is measured as a function of the pressure and generally a straight line is obtained ( It should be remembered that the Hagen–Poiseuille law in that simple form only holds for flow through cylindrically shaped straight pores. Real pores, however, do not often meet the assumption of cylindrical pores, straight, parallel to each other, perpendicular to the membrane surface, and of the same length equal to the membrane thickness. These assumptions obviously oversimplify the pore structure. The pores are often tortuous and their length is greater than the membrane thickness (tortuosity is defined as the ratio of actual pore length to the membrane thickness). As the measured pressure corresponds to the pressure required to displace liquid at the most constricted part of the pore ( An important pore characteristic, a measure of the size of majority of pores and fluid permeability, is the mean flow pore diameter. It is a diameter at which 50% of flow occurs through pores larger than the mean flow pore diameter and the rest of the flow is through smaller pores, and can be determined from the mean flow pressure corresponding to the intersection of wet curve and half-dry curve ( This method is based on the same principles as the gas flow bubble-point method, but avoids its limitations. Instead of a gas a second liquid is used to displace the liquid, which has already been present in the pores of the membrane. Mercury porosimetry is generally accepted as the most useful available method that allows the pore size analysis to be undertaken over a wide range of mesopore–macropore widths from ca. 3 nm to ca. 0.4 mm. It may provide a means of assessing the surface area and particle size distribution and also investigating the tortuosity, permeability, fractal dimension, and compressibility of porous materials. Furthermore, it is possible to obtain useful information relating to the pore shape, network effects, and the skeletal and bulk density. As shown in the previous parts, the nonwetting liquids tend to recede in capillaries and must be forced to fill them. Since mercury does not wet most substances and its surface tension is high, it is often used as the porosimetric medium. The pressure applied to the mercury compensates the pressure difference over the mercury meniscus in the porous body. The relationship between the applied hydrostatic pressure of mercury Although in almost any porous body the assumption of cylindrical pores is not met, Eq. The value of 485 mN m Washburn equation assumes that the surface tension and contact angle are constants. For strongly curved surfaces, however, they are a function of curvature and may vary with the nature of the surface irregularities. Moreover the contact angle prevailing during mercury intrusion (advancing contact angle In a typical porosimetry experiment, the sample in the cell of the dilatometer is evacuated to remove air, residual moisture, or other liquids, from the pore system. A complete evacuation is important in order to avoid air pockets and contamination issues. Mercury is transferred into the sample cell under vacuum and dilatometer is placed into an autoclave completely filled with oil or another hydraulic. The pressure in the autoclave is then gradually increased and the volume change registered by the dilatometer. Steadily increasing pressure enables the mercury to enter the pores in decreasing order of width. After reaching the maximum possible value, the applied pressure is decreased to ambient in small steps, and the volume of mercury leaving the sample is then again measured at each step. The scheme of a dilatometer is shown in The results are displayed in the diagram of cumulative mercury volume versus applied mercury pressure, called porogram. The Washburn equation The total volume of all pores having radii between Assuming constant surface tension of mercury and contact angle, the Washburn equation The values of d To force a volume element of mercury d Porograms can show a great variety of shapes depending on the characteristics and distribution of pores, and voids if present, in the sample. A key factor in mercury porosimetry is the pore shape. Essentially all methods of data treatment assume cylindrical pore geometry. The real pore shape is however quite different and the cylinder pore assumption can lead to major differences between the analysis and reality. Mercury porosimetry overestimates the volume of the smallest pores. This is due to bottle-necked shape and interconnected pores In nearly all mercury porosimetry experiments, a hysteresis between the intrusion (increasing pressure) and extrusion (decreasing pressure) runs is observed: at a given pressure, the volume indicated on the extrusion curve is larger than that on the intrusion curve, and at a given volume, the pressure indicated on the intrusion curve is greater than that on the extrusion curve. Very often entrapment occurs, that is, mercury remains contained in the porous network, as can be seen on porograms shown in The entrapment phenomenon is believed to be associated with kinetic effects during mercury extrusion, coupled with the tortuosity of disordered pore network and the surface chemistry of the material. Several explanations of this phenomenon like the existence of contact angle hysteresis, the presence of the bottle-necked pores, or the percolation-connectivity model were proposed. An example of the results of one experimental run The inserts A through E illustrate how mercury is forced into smaller and smaller pores as pressure is increased. When the pressure is reduced below the pressure at which the pore filled, pores empty. But the bottle-necked pores (in Trapping of mercury as shown in insert F occurs during extrusion when the pressure is reduced back to the same pressure as in insert B. Considering the whole porous network, the connectivity effects similar to bottle-necked effects between the pores must be taken into account. To fill a pore with mercury, it must not only be equal to or larger than the corresponding “pore size” at the applied pressure, but also a continuous path of mercury leading to that pore must be available. Large internal voids, which are surrounded by smaller pores, will not be filled unless the pressure is sufficient to fill a pathway toward that pore. During the extrusion process, the reverse process occurs, and certain pores or islands of pores will remain filled with trapped mercury, once they no longer have a continuous mercury path toward the sample surface. Intrusion into and extrusion out of uniformly sized cylindrical pores should ideally happen at the same pressure. During the extrusion process in real pores, new mercury interfaces have to be created as the mercury retracts from the pore system At the same time the potential can be expressed in terms of the intruded and extruded volumes. This expression for the pore potential is equal to the work differences between intrusion and extrusion and can be expressed as the hysteresis energy. On intrusion into a pore (contact angle Other types of hysteresis have been reported, for example, the hysteresis at high pressure, where mercury atoms get pushed into the crystal lattice. The mercury wetting can be irreversible due to adhesion to the walls at high pressures, and as a result after retraction, part of the imbibed mercury remains distributed as a film on the wall of the large pores. Mercury porosimetry is a relatively rapid method, covering an extensive range of pore sizes. It is particularly advantageous for macroporous samples and for upper range of mesopores which do not require excessively high operating pressures. The main drawback of this method is that membrane structure may be distorted due to the very high pressure that must be used to analyze small pores (e.g., to fill a pore with a diameter of 3.5 nm the pressure of 400 MPa is needed) and moreover it is destructive for the membranes, given that some mercury remains always entrapped. The largest measurable pore size is limited by the height of the sample, which determines a minimum “head-pressure,” for example, a 1 cm sample height is approximately equivalent to a pore of 1 mm diameter. In addition, properties of the sample may affect the reproducibility and create difficulties in giving an unambiguous interpretation of the result. Mercury porosimetry does not actually measure the internal pore size, but it rather determines the largest connection (throat or pore channel) from the sample surface toward that pore. Thus, mercury porosimetry results will always show smaller pore sizes compared to the image analysis method results. For obvious reasons it can also not be used to analyze closed pores, since the mercury has no way of entering that pore. One of the key limitations to mercury porosimetry is that it measures the smallest entrance of a pore and not the actual inner size of the pore. Thermporometry (i.e., differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) combined with porometry) is based on the observation that the temperature of the phase transition solid–liquid of a pure substance in the form of very small particles or confined in the capillaries depends on the curvature of the phase boundary. The curvature of the solid–liquid interface depends closely on the size of the pore and the solidification temperature is thus different for different pore sizes. By recording a solidification thermogram of a pure substance inside a porous material, the pore size can be determined from the temperature at which the substance solidifies and the pore volume can be determined from the amount of energy involved at a specific Δ In a typical thermoporometry experiment, a wetting liquid is imbibed into the porous material under study, thereby filling all accessible voids by capillary action and then an excess of liquid is added ( The phenomenon is described by the Gibbs–Thomson equation, the general form of which was derived in previous sections. Considering melting of pure substance in cylindrical pores of the studied material, the Gibbs–Thomson equation has the form Deriving the Gibbs–Thomson equation, an implicit assumption that over the temperature interval, Δ Almost any compound can be used as probe liquid. Numerous organic compounds are used by various authors (e.g., acetonitrile In principle, both the freezing as well as the melting point depressions can be used to determine the pore radius. Nevertheless, the melting point depressions are more reproducible and therefore most often used for experimental data treatment, as the pore widths calculated from freezing point depression is largely influenced by the delayed nucleation. The pore size for spherical pores can be calculated from the solidification as well as from the fusion process, as the curvature of the solid surface does not change for solidification and melting. The temperatures of melting and freezing are the same, dependent, or the pore radius. However, in case of cylindrical pores, only the calculation from the melting temperature depression is possible. The solid phase begins to grow taking the shape of pores, that is, the walls of a cylinder. The mean curvature is then equal to 1/ Thermoporometry is not as traditional, and its use is not as widespread as the gas adsorption or mercury intrusion porosimetry. The effects of specific interactions between the testing liquid and the porous solid are largely unknown and may lead to uncertain interpretation of calorimetric signals. To determine pore size distributions, the temperature dependence of physical parameters such as surface tension, contact angle, molar volume, and enthalpy of fusion must be known. However, literature values for these parameters often vary, leading to difficulty in the direct transformation of calorimetry curves into absolute pore size distributions. Thus experimental work often resorts to the calibration using reference materials that have been carefully measured by other methods, such as mercury intrusion porosimetry or nitrogen adsorption. Many studies have noted that a layer of nonfreezable liquid usually exists along the walls of a porous material. For example, nominal water layer thicknesses between 0.5 and 2.0 nm in silica hydrogel materials has been reported, Thermoporometry is applicable to pores with radius ranging between 2 and 200 nm. The lower limits are set by the assumptions made in the thermodynamic description of the process which are no longer valid for temperatures lower than −40°C. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) cryoporometry, similar to DSC thermoporometry, relies on the fact that liquid confined within the pores of materials exhibits a melting point that is lower than the normal (bulk) melting point by a temperature difference that is inversely proportional to the pore width as given in the Gibbs–Thompson equation. In contrast to the DSC-based method, one does not detect the actual melting as manifested by heat transfer but instead measures the fraction of liquid molten at any particular temperature. This measurement is performed by the spin-echo pulse sequence During the experiment, the sample of the investigated porous material filled with the wetting liquid is at first cooled so that all liquid freezes. This is verified by the lack of spin-echo NMR signal. Then, the temperature is stepwise raised and at each new temperature a new spin-echo experiment is performed. With increasing temperature, as liquid confined to larger and larger pores melts, the spin-echo NMR intensity increases. The derivative of the resulting temperature-intensity curve provides the pore size distribution. NMR cryoporometry has an advantage over DSC thermoporosimetry in that DSC measures transient heat flows and thus has a minimum rate at which the measurement may be made. The NMR method returns an absolute signal that may be measured arbitrarily slowly, or in discrete steps, to obtain improved resolution or signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio. NMR cryoporometry offers the advantage of a more direct measure of the open pore volume. Cryoporometry is well suited to studying structure on a scale of about 2 nm to 2 µm. A porous material, saturated with liquid which is then cooled, will produce a distribution of melting temperatures that depends on the pore size distribution. Since supercooling is a common phenomenon, the true melting temperature characteristics are more reliably determined by raising the temperature after freezing all the liquid. Measurement of the fraction of liquid as a function of temperature yields the pore size distribution. The pore volume Porous as well as nonporous membranes can be characterized by conducting adsorption–desorption tests. Since pores can be of various sizes, these are classified by IUPAC An adsorption isotherm, that is the dependence of the adsorbed amount of a compound on its relative pressure, Porous membrane materials are customarily characterized by measuring adsorption–desorption isotherms of nitrogen at its normal boiling point (ca. 77 K). These isotherms are commonly analyzed with the use of BET model, whose name abbreviates Brunauer–Emmett–Teller. Mesoporous membrane materials show capillary condensation, which is also used for their characterization by means of the nitrogen adsorption method. The surface of the mesopores serves as the monolayer–multilayer adsorption at low relative pressures, while at higher relative pressures filling of the pores with liquid nitrogen becomes increasingly significant. To relate the amount of the condensed vapor to the actual relative pressure and to the size of the pores, the Kelvin model As another pore geometries and the existence of pore size distributions can be assumed, evaluation of the experimental data becomes more laborious and influenced by the initial assumptions. Furthermore, the adsorption curve, that is, the evolution of the adsorbed amount with increasing relative pressure, often differs from the desorption curve, observed upon gradual decreasing of the relative pressure. This hysteresis commonly results from capillary condensation and the differences between the adsorption and desorption curves are mainly influenced by the geometry of the mesopores. Compared to the porous membranes, sorption in dense nonporous membranes is commonly measured with the compounds that are intended for the particular separation. Indeed, the ability of the membrane material to sorb the molecules of a compound is one of the two qualities that determine the permeation flux through the membrane. The permeation flux can then be modeled using the solution-diffusion model, see Section If sorption is measured in a polymer below its glass transition temperature, type II isotherm is commonly observed. A suitable model for this type of isotherms is, for example, the dual mode sorption model This model assumes Henry-like dissolution of the sorptive in the bulk polymer (constant Transportation of mass in membrane materials is naturally influenced not only by the macroscopic properties of the process and of the membrane, such as applied pressure difference or thickness, but also by its internal structure. In passive membranes, that is, in membranes not having additional sources of energy, flux of a medium through a membrane is proportional to the applied driving force ( Porous membranes can have a variety of pore geometries, sizes, and distributions of the pores in the membrane, and are commonly used as separation layers in micro- and ultrafiltration processes and as porous supports in asymmetric membranes. The separation properties of such membranes are naturally mainly determined by the characteristics of the contained pores rather than by the chemical composition. If the pores are large compared to the free path of the diffusing compounds, Poiseuille (viscous) flow becomes the main mechanism of the transport of mass through the membrane occurring upon applying pressure difference. If the molecules in the considered mixture are of comparable sizes, such as in mixtures of gases, viscous flow is not accompanied with any separation. Clearly, separation of the molecules can be positively influenced by reducing the pore diameter. Knudsen diffusion becomes important if the mean free path of the molecules, Unlike porous membranes, dense membranes do not virtually contain any pores and the mass transport through them occurs via the solution-diffusion mechanism. Sorption of compounds in dense membrane materials was discussed in the previous section. The focus is thus given here to the diffusion mechanism. Diffusion is a statistic process, whose first observation is ascribed to Robert Brownovn, who observed Although these equations provide a certain basis for analyzing and predicting the transmembrane fluxes, pronounced dependences of the parameters, diffusivity, solubility, and permeability, on the experimental conditions, such as feed pressure or thermal history of the membrane, were observed for numerous membrane materials. In order to express the separation properties of a membrane, separation factor, commonly termed also as selectivity, has the form In order to practically compare separation properties of various membrane materials, ideal separation factor is commonly plotted against the permeability of the more permeable gas from the considered mixture in a log–log diagram. In this type of plot, which is commonly referred to as Robeson plot, For the determination of permeability coefficient of penetrating species in dense membranes, the measurement cell of used devices is usually divided into two compartments by a membrane of known area and thickness as shown in The transport of gas/vapor through membrane at constant temperature is governed by the change (gradient) of pressure, concentration, volume, or mass. From the transient part of the permeability measurement, the diffusion coefficient ( The permeability coefficient In further text, the pressure in permeate cell compartment A different class of methods (for instance, the so-called time-lag method) is utilized without sweep gas, which leads to the following equation In both equations, the notation is the following: The widely used unit of permeability coefficients is Barrer The apparatuses (permeameters) with sweep gas are sometimes referred as flow or differential permeameters. In this case, the permeability coefficient is determined using Eq. The advantage of these methods consists in a possibility to directly measure the flux through a membrane, which results in precise determination of flux in the steady state. Moreover, due to the usage of a sweep gas, the pressure can be maintained at the same level on both sides of the membrane. This not only minimizes the influence of pressure driving force but also allows to study less mechanically stable membranes. Furthermore, using high sweep gas flow rates, the effects such as concentration polarization or high stage cut can be easily mitigated. Besides these, the usage of sweep gas enables to maintain very stable boundary conditions over long periods of time, which allows the determination of membrane permeability for vapors of low volatile organic compounds. And at last but not least, these methods allow the measurements to be carried out over very long periods of time (months or even more). In Using the following formula, the final permeability of flat membrane is evaluated from the known concentration of measured compound in the sweep gas after the steady state is reached. The second possible experimental setup is that without sweep gas. In this case, the penetrant is not swept away from the permeate compartment but it is accumulated there and the increase of the measured compound is observed. Such situation is schematically depicted in In more detail, The experimental arrangement without sweep gas is sufficient for the measurement of gas permeabilities when driving force An example of a possible setup of a permeameter without sweep gas is schematically depicted in Further, the value of permeability can be evaluated from the slope of concentration increase The sorption coefficient is defined analogically to Henry law by the following formula: The determination of sorption coefficient is usually carried out in a measuring cell, filled with the measured compound, in which is placed the studied membrane (see Methods for the determination of sorption coefficient can be divided into two groups: (i) methods where the increase of the sorbed amount inside the membrane are observed (i.e., gravimetry, see The detection of the change of mass of membrane+sorbate can be carried out using various detectors, for instance, McBain quartz spiral balance, Further, the pressure decay method is usually used for the determination of sorption of pure gases into polymeric membranes or ionic liquids up to very high pressures. The determination of diffusion coefficient is for the ideal behavior possible from the solution of Fick׳s second law of diffusion. Experimentally, diffusion coefficient is determined either from the transient parts of experiments or from direct experiments such as NMR spectroscopy or positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy. Analytical solutions of Fick׳s second law are known only for the models with constant parameters and with analytically described boundary conditions. In the case of step change of concentration at the membrane boundaries, the solutions are stated for instance in Refs. The analytical solution of PDEs is usually carried out using either separation of variables or Laplace transformation. The solution is then obtained in the form of a sum of infinite series, which, in order to be practically used, has to be limited to some reasonable number of terms (usually 5–10 terms are sufficient). The series obtained via separation of variables converges quickly for long times and the series obtained via Laplace transformation for short times. Due to this fact, the two different series can be combined into one, where the initial part is described by the solution by Laplace transform and the rest by the solution from separation of variables. At first, let us start with the solutions of Fick׳s second law for the transient part of permeation experiments. Before the start of the permeation, no sorbed penetrant is assumed to be present inside the membrane. At the start of the experiment, the concentration on one of the membrane boundaries is suddenly increased to the concentration In Ref. For the evaluation of diffusion coefficient, the data are usually normalized to the steady state flux, which is Eq. In Ref. The supposed time dependency of Eqs. In order to get the diffusion coefficient easily, one can use one of the simplified forms of the Eqs. In order to determine diffusion coefficient from methods with accumulation (see Section and from Eq. Again, these equations can be used for fitting the experimental data obtained by the respective methods. The supposed time dependency is shown in Eq. In case that the diffusion coefficient is determined from the measurement of transient sorption, before the start of the experiment, no sorbed penetrant is inside the membrane. At the start of the experiment, the concentration on both sides of the membrane is suddenly increased to the concentration In Ref. For the evaluation of diffusion coefficient, the data are usually normalized to the equilibrium value, which is The normalized formula is obtained by dividing Eq. In Ref. Again, these equations can be used for fitting the experimental data obtained by the respective methods. The supposed time dependency is shown in Also in the case of sorption, it is possible to determine the diffusion coefficient in a simpler way. Similarly to the half-time method derived for permeation experiments, the half-time The biggest advantage of using numerical methods for solving PDEs is that one can solve almost any available model equation. On the other hand, in comparison with analytical solutions, the numerical computations are time-consuming and must be conducted with special care. When using models with concentration-dependent diffusion coefficient (nonlinear PDEs), the computational time rapidly increases with the number of adjustable parameters. Specific implementation of numerical solution of the concrete diffusion model starts with the form of its PDE and the number of dimensions of the computation domain. It is possible to implement a numerical solution (using the finite difference or finite element method) from scratch but it is not advisable as it is very time-consuming and error prone. Thus some specialized software would more suitable for common PDEs. The membrane characterization represents an essential part of membrane research and engineering. A proper knowledge of material properties and behavior represents a crucial factor for material utilization and for a choice of the optimal operation conditions as well. And extended understanding of the relationship between membrane structure, chemistry, morphology, transport properties, and membrane performance is a prerequisite for the successful application of material in membrane separation processes. This text does not aim to map out everything in this field, it would be impossible in the given range. However, it offers to the reader a certain insight into the theoretical roots and aspects of selected characterization techniques and methods. Their actual rapid development goes hand in hand with a number of newly prepared membrane materials. It may be expected that many methods that are considered today as too sophisticated, costly, or time-consuming may become more affordable in the future. 