Inverse gas chromatography (IGC) is an alternative technique to determine the specific surface area of natural fibres. Natural fibres have a complex surface chemistry and unique microstructure that challenge the current capabilities to perform surface characterisation. This study investigated the influence of multiple parameters on the measured Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) specific surface area for samples of flax, kenaf and BioMid® cellulose fibres using IGC. The BET surface area of kenaf and flax differed with 0.51m2
                     g−1 and 1.35m2
                     g−1 respectively, the former being similar to the cellulose fibres (0.54m2
                     g−1). The data was calculated under conditions where the BET equation showed good linearity (R
                     2
                     ⩾0.995). Repeatability was excellent so that two runs sufficed to obtain representative BET surface area values. The findings showed the choice of solvent was important for all specimens to avoid any misleading data comparison due to molecular orientation effects that impact the adsorbent–adsorbate interactions. The higher surface area of the flax sample, and its higher variability, was correlated with a higher surface roughness observed under optical microscopy. Packing the chromatography column with long or chopped fibres produced results that were statistically insignificant.Bast fibres have been traditionally destined for the textile industry and this remains the primary application with constant innovations for technical clothing, textiles etc. However, the last decades have seen a significant trend to utilise natural fibres in other sectors, particularly the automotive industry Diversification into novel applications places new demands on the fibre processing and properties. One of the major issues is that natural fibres are generally hydrophilic and consequently are inherently incompatible with hydrophobic commodity polymers. Natural fibres also suffer from considerable batch-to-batch heterogeneity and particularly dimensional variability, which directly affect the tensile properties. Natural fibre moisture sensitivity is another issue for the biocomposite durability. The compatibility, dispersibility and reinforcement capability of natural fibres are related to the fibre surface energy and to its specific surface area. Bast fibres have a complex 3D microstructure with multiple membranes enclosing the lumen. The chemical composition and the molecular arrangement vary between the layers and depend on the fibre specie. The fibre location within the plant stem and the growth conditions also play a major role in the physico-chemical structure, creating fibres with unique and complex surfaces Traditional methods used to determine the fibre surface energy involve the measurement of contact angles. Various approaches reviewed by Williams Inverse gas chromatography is an alternative tool to study surface energies. IGC is based on solid–gas interactions and the affinity between gas probe molecules and the fibre surface molecules is quantified. It is a versatile technique to characterise samples of any shape, as long as the specimen can be packed in the column and molecular interactions can occur. IGC exists since the early 50s and it has been applied mostly to pharmaceutical industry IGC requires the specific surface area to determine the surface energy, especially as this can depend on surface coverages. Usually, the specific surface area of a solid is determined by BET method which uses nitrogen sorption An alternative and preferred technique for measuring the BET surface area of low surface area natural fibres would be to use IGC at room temperature. This paper systematically studies the influence of various parameters that may affect the measured specific surface area using BET theory with IGC. On the basis of the results of this study, a procedure applicable to natural fibres is proposed. The BET theory was developed with nitrogen but is applicable to other gases such as those used in IGC. Five types of isotherms can occur depending on the adsorption scenario Two types of bast fibres and one type of cellulose fibre were used in the study. The Canadian linseed flax (variety unknown) specimen was supplied by Composites Innovation Centre (CIC), Winnipeg, Manitoba (Canada). The fibres were not retted and have been mechanically decorticated by a lab scale scutching machine The strategy to study the influence of experimental parameters on the output BET value involved four criteria. The experimental approach is detailed in the following paragraphs and summarised in Various diffusion processes can drive the elutant molecule flow in a column packed with porous material. These scenarios depend on the column dimension, the sample porosity, the packing homogeneity and the flow rate Various solvents can be used to run a BET experiment with IGC, the requirement being non-polar adsorbates where surface and no bulk sorption occurs. Octane, heptane and cyclohexane are common adsorbates. Whether the nature of the solvent affects the BET value of natural fibres or not has not been clarified so far and few authors specify which gas probe has been used to determine the specific surface area. For the sake of clarity and to know if data obtained from various solvents can be compared, the impact of the solvent choice on the output value was investigated. Among the common adsorbates used for the BET experiment, octane and cyclohexane were selected for two main reasons. The latter showed better retention peaks than other solvents, for instance, hexane and heptane had too low retention times. The second reason is that octane and cyclohexane differ in their molecular structure and chemical properties, which facilitates the observation of effects due to molecule geometry. The variability of the BET specific surface area measured using octane was investigated within a batch of natural fibres. The specific surface area is expected to fluctuate as the diameter, porosity and the surface profile vary between fibres. Little information is currently available as to whether the specific surface area changes and to what extent. A chromatography column usually contains ca. a gram of fibres i.e. a relatively small amount of material. It is necessary to estimate how variable the BET value is for grading procedures. Another variable rarely specified is the sample packing. Unlike powder particles, natural fibres can be packed in the column in multiple ways. For instance, post-processed fibres are usually chopped and well separated compared with fibres as received. Short and long fibres may behave differently in the inverse gas chromatography column. In this experiment, the fibres were cut into “short” fibres of  2 All experiments were conducted with an Inverse Gas Chromatograph Surface Energy Analyser (IGC SEA) from Surface Measurement Systems (London, UK). This commercial equipment is set-up for pulse chromatography; a precise amount of adsorbate is transported by the carrier gas through the column containing the fibres. Adsorption followed by desorption occur at the fibre surface and an elution peak results. The configuration of the IGC SEA is schematised in The BET theory was applied to determine the specific surface area of the fibres according to the following procedure: The retention time was determined as the time corresponding to the peak centre of mass (CoM) rather than the time of the maximum FID signal. The peak CoM was preferred as most of the elution peaks were asymmetric. The solvent vapour pressure The linearised BET equation was fitted to the isotherms (amount adsorbed vs. relative pressure) in the range of 0.05  With standard deviations less than 5% for all samples, the BET experiment showed excellent reproducibility. One run should suffice to determine the BET specific surface area of a fibre specimen but it is suggested that two runs be completed to avoid any possible outlier. The BET surface area of BioMid BET values calculated with different solvents are shown in Note that flax and kenaf fibres showed a large difference between octane and cyclohexane BET experiment compared to BioMid As expected, the variability within the bast fibre batches was more pronounced than for the BioMid  The BET specific surface area of kenaf and flax fibres differed, with an average of 0.51 The BET values obtained by IGC SEA showed a noticeable dependence on the elutant properties. For all specimens, the specific surface areas calculated from octane measurements were higher than those from cyclohexane. This phenomenon is likely an effect of molecular orientation. Sample packing also affected the BET surface area values but no clear trend could be established. It is possible that chopping the unretted flax fibres either shredded the fibre ends or removed lightly adherent cuticle/epidermal material on the surface increasing the accessible surface area. Based on these findings, the following protocol for determining the BET specific surface area of natural fibres by IGC is proposed: Pack the chromatography column with the sample as is. Chopping fibres may induce non negligible effects. Consider BET values obtained with the same solvent only for direct comparison. For accurate calculation, consider the linearised BET equation over a coverage range ( Since repeatability is excellent (commercial equipment), two runs per column should be sufficient to ensure confident results, assuming none of the data is an outlier. These experimental data highlight the structural heterogeneity between different species of bast fibres, in term of both chemical and physical singularities. Further data acquisition on natural fibres is necessary to strengthen these models and extend the database to get consistent references. However, the current results have demonstrated the potential of IGC for characterisation of natural fibre surfaces. The authors encourage the development of inverse gas chromatography for fibre grading as a complementary technique to traditional methods. This study was undertaken as part of a collaboration between the Composites Innovation Centre (CIC) and the Cooperative Research Centre for Advanced Composites Structures Australia (CRC-ACS) research project, established and supported under the Australian Government's Cooperative Research Centre Program. The author acknowledge the CRC-ACS Project P1.1 team and the CIC for their access to equipment. The technical support from Surface Measurement Systems to develop the IGC experimental work is also gratefully acknowledged.