This paper presents the results of a numerical study on the mixed convection of Cu-water nanofluid in a T-shaped cavity in the presence of a uniform magnetic field. Some sections of the bottom walls of the cavity are heated at a constant temperature and the other walls are thermally insulated. The nanofluid at a relatively low temperature enters from the bottom and exits from the top of the cavity. The governing equations are solved numerically with a finite volume approach using the SIMPLE algorithm. The effects of parameters such as Reynolds number (10 ≤ Re ≤ 400), Richardson number (0.01 ≤ Ri ≤ 10), Hartmann number (0 ≤ Ha ≤ 80), solid volume fraction (0 ≤ φ ≤ 0.06), and cavity aspect ratio (0.1 ≤ AR ≤ 0.4) on the fluid flow and the thermal performance of the cavity are studied. The results indicate that the presence of nanoparticles enhances the heat transfer except at Re = 100 and Ha < 10 as well as Re = 400 and Ha < 60, where pure water has a slightly higher heat transfer rate compared to the nanofluid. The influence of nanofluid on the heat transfer enhancement increases as AR increases. For Ri = 0.01 and 1, the maximum heat transfer rate is obtained at AR = 0.4; however, for Ri = 10, the maximum heat transfer rate occurs at AR = 0.1.aspect ratio, magnetic field strength, experimental constant, Eq. specific heat, J kg The diameter of solid nanoparticles, The diameter of pure fluid, nm gravitational acceleration, m s length of heat source, m Hartmann number, thermal conductivity, Wm length of cavity, m length of entry section, m dimensionless length of entry section, local Nusselt number average Nusselt number of heat source average Nusselt number ratio ( fluid pressure, dimensionless pressure, Peclet number, Prandtl number, Reynolds number, Richardson number, temperature, inlet flow temperature, heated wall temperature, Brownian motion velocity, ms inlet flow velocity, ms velocity components in x, y directions, ms dimensionless Velocity components, Cartesian coordinates, dimensionless coordinates, thermal diffusivity, m thermal expansion coefficient, K solid volume fraction effective electrical conductivity, μS/cm Boltzmann constant, J K dimensionless temperature, ( dynamic viscosity, Ns m kinematic viscosity, m density, kg m cold effective pure fluid, water hot wall average nanofluid nanoparticle Mixed convection heat transfer has always been of great interest because of its wide applications in different areas such as cooling of electronic devices cooling, chemical processing equipment and solar energy collectors In integrated electronic circuit boards with increasing package density, an effective heat removal process is required to ensure satisfactory operation of high heat generating components. Numerous innovative heat transfer strategies have been proposed and the fluid flow and heat transfer characteristics of such strategies have been experimentally and numerically investigated as detailed by Incropera In recent years, studies on nanofluid flow and heat transfer in cavities and enclosures have attracted considerable attention. Nanofluids are fluids containing nanometer-sized particles; these fluids are engineered colloidal suspensions of nanoparticles in a base fluid, which have a better suspension stability compared to millimeter or micrometer sized ones. Nanofluids have novel properties that make them potentially useful in many applications. They exhibit enhanced thermal conductivity and the convective heat transfer coefficient compared to the base fluid The study of magnetic field has important applications in physics and engineering. Heat and mass transfer problems in the presence of magnetic field effects have attracted great interest of engineers and scientists for decades A review of earlier studies indicates that the mixed convection of Nanofluids in a T-shaped cavity placed in a magnetic field has not been investigated. The results of this study can be useful in the thermal design of electronic equipment, which can be inadvertently under the influence of magnetic field. In this article, a numerical study of the mixed convection heat transfer of Cu-water Nanofluid in a T-shaped cavity under the influence of magnetic field has been considered. The effects of parameters such as the Reynolds number, the Richardson number, the Hartmann number, the solid volume fraction of nanofluids and the cavity aspect ratio on the heat transfer rate of the cavity have been investigated.  It is assumed that the flow is incompressible, steady, Newtonian and laminar as the viscous dissipation in the energy equation has been neglected. Moreover, the liquid and solid nanoparticles are in thermal equilibrium flowing at an equal velocity. The induced magnetic field produced by the motion of an electrically conducting fluid is negligible compared to the applied magnetic field. It is also assumed that the Joule heating is neglected. The equations that govern the conservation of mass, momentum and energy can be written as follows Variables Based on these dimensionless variables, the continuity, momentum and energy equations for the laminar and steady-state mixed convection of nanofluid in the presence of magnetic field can be written in non-dimensional: Fully-developed conditions are considered at the exit section of the cavity and no-slip boundary conditions ( The thermophysical properties of pure water (base fluid) and the Cu nanoparticles, at a fixed temperature of 25 °C, are presented in The thermal diffusivity of the nanofluid is The heat capacitance and the thermal expansion coefficient of the nanofluid are  The diameter of solid nanoparticles is The effective electrical conductivity of nanofluid was presented by Maxwell The local Nusselt number over the heat transfer walls is calculated by: The mean Nusselt number over the heat transfer walls is: A FORTRAN computer code is developed to model the considered geometry. The governing equation In order to validate the developed computer code, a comparison has been made between the results of the present study and those from other references. Firstly, a square cavity with a nanofluid entering and exiting through vertical walls of the cavity has been considered and the results of the average Nusselt number are compared with the results of Shahi et al. After examining the performance of the computer code, it is necessary to examine the dependency of the simulation results to the grid structure. For this purpose, the effect of the number of grid points on the average Nusselt number has been investigated. A sample of the results for This section presents the effects of parameters such as Reynolds number (10 ≤ In this section, the effects of Reynolds and Hartmann numbers on the heat transfer rate of the cavity at different values of the solid volume fraction are examined. It is assumed that the cavity aspect ratio is     In   In this section, the results are presented in terms of the Richardson number (  In    This paper presents the results of a numerical study on the mixed convection heat transfer inside a T-shaped cavity that allows entering and exiting a nanofluid (pure water also considered). The cavity is under the influence of a magnetic field. The governing equations are solved using the SIMPE algorithm and the results of flow and temperature fields as well as the heat transfer rate are presented for different values of