Multi-axial forging of Al was carried out at room temperature in a confined channel die as a means of achieving severe plastic deformation (SPD). The microstructures of the 3, 6 and 9 pass samples were quantified using electron back scattered diffraction to obtain the distribution of boundary spacing and fraction of high angle boundaries. Subsequent compression tests at room temperature were carried out to determine their strength and strain rate sensitivity. Softening was observed beyond 6 passes both in terms of the pressing stress as well as the subsequent compression tests. Beyond 6 passes the fraction of high angle boundaries increased and the geometrically necessary dislocations (GND) density decreased. It was estimated that during SPD, Al had a higher hardening contribution due to GND and subgrain walls than that due to Hall–Petch type grain boundary strengthening. It was shown that as the fraction of high angle boundaries increased with increasing deformation, the dislocation strengthening term decreased and the Hall–Petch term increased, resulting in a net softening effect.Severe plastic deformation (SPD) is a well established technique for the refinement of grains to submicron levels (e.g. see Refs. Multi-axial forging (MAF) in a channel die is another deformation path which is capable of imparting SPD Annealed commercially pure Al (99.8% Al, 0.02% Mn, 0.03% Fe, 0.07% Zn) was multi-axially forged in a confined channel die along 3 orthogonal axes ( The grain size, grain boundary misorientation and in-grain misorientation were quantified using electron back scattered diffraction (EBSD) in FEI Quanta-200 HV scanning electron microscope with a TexSEM Laboratories (TSL) orientation-imaging microscopy system. Two scans were carried out on each sample, first a coarse scan with 500 Compression tests with strain rate changes were carried out at room temperature on the 0, 3, 6 and 9 pass samples in a screw-driven universal testing machine. The starting nominal strain rate was 10 The nominal true flow stress EBSD map ( The distribution of misorientation angles The distribution of the boundary spacing of all The grain average misorientation (GAM), also referred to as in-grain misorientation, represents the average of the misorientation angles between neighboring points excluding those across boundaries (i.e. excluding points with 0 pass Al had the lowest yield strength of 50 The strain rate sensitivity The progress of grain refinement during MAF showed the initial breakup of grains and the formation of subgrains as seen in the 3 pass sample ( On increasing the severity of deformation from 6 to 9 passes the boundary spacing showed an increase rather than a decrease as seen by the EBSD maps in The yield stress In the present study misorientations with Conventionally, softening during deformation is either associated with flow localization or is attributed to a modification in microstructure through discontinuous dynamic recrystallization (DDRX), where the formation of strain free grains causes flow softening. SPD processes in Al are usually neither associated with DDRX nor do they show macroscopic flow localization. Grain refinement during SPD is usually explained either by continuous dynamic recrystallization (CDRX), or by geometric dynamic recrystallization (GDRX) This interrelation between The above discussion shows that the softening observed during SPD of Al at ambient temperatures is a result of the different strengthening contributions of dislocations and boundaries. The fact that the boundaries themselves do not deform or absorb dislocations as they do at high temperatures was verified by the apparent activation volumes, which were in the range of 200 Multi-axial forging of Al using a confined channel die was demonstrated as a viable technique for imparting severe plastic deformation and producing an ultrafine grained microstructure. With increasing severity of deformation subgrains formed, which with increasing deformation transformed to grains with high angle boundaries. Beyond 6 passes of MAF in a channel die (an equivalent strain of 4.6) Al showed softening, evident from the reduction in pressing stress and subsequent uniaxial compression tests. With increasing deformation from 6 to 9 passes the geometrically necessary dislocation density reduced and fraction of high angle boundaries increased. Thus the hardening component of the dislocation density term (including low angle boundary walls) reduced and the hardening component of Hall–Petch term due to high angle boundaries increased. In SPD Al the major hardening was estimated to be due to dislocations (and low angle boundaries) rather than grain boundaries. As the boundary orientations transformed to high enough values in going from 6 to 9 passes, the boundaries switched from dislocation strengthening to Hall–Petch strengthening resulting in the observed softening.