Background
                  A posterolateral column fracture of the tibial plateau (PLCF) is not uncommon, especially lateral and bicondylar tibial plateau fractures. Currently, there is no consensus on the methods of surgical treatment for PLCF, including the surgical approach or the fixation strategy. Though various posterior approaches have been explored and can allow posterior buttress plate fixation, the necessity of a posterior approach with fixation for PLCFs is increasingly questioned. Meanwhile, there is no literature to analyse the morphological features of PLCFs. None of the available surgical techniques can solve all of the problems of PLCFs.
               
                  Methods
                  From February 2016 to June 2016, an inconsecutive series of 16 patients who suffered Schatzker type II tibial plateau fractures involving the posterolateral column were selected based on an analysis of the morphological characteristics of PLCFs. The patients were all treated by lateral rafting plate fixation with magic screw implantation through the extended lateral approach.
               
                  Results
                  According to PLCF morphology, 4 patients had mild slope-type depression fractures (MSDF) of the articular surface, and the other 12 patients had block-type splitting fractures (BSF). After a 12-month follow-up period, there were no complications related to the fixation technique and no significant changes in limb alignment. At the final follow-up, the average range of motion (ROM) of the affected knees was 2.3°−125°, and the average HSS score was 94.2.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The selected patients who suffered Schatzker type II fractures involving the posterolateral column could be successfully treated via lateral rafting plate fixation with the magic screw technique. For PLCF treatment, magic screw fixation is a valuable technique that may reduce the utilization of posterior approaches and posterior fixations.A tibial plateau fracture is an intra-articular fracture that always involves various degrees of splitting, depression and displacement, which may influence the stability and movement of the knee joint According to the TCC system, the posterior column of the tibial plateau is divided into two sub-columns, the posteromedial and posterolateral sub-columns. Several scholars thought that PLCFs were relatively uncommon, accounting for 7%-10% of all tibial plateau fractures From February 2016 to June 2016, 45 consecutive patients with Schatzker type II tibial plateau fractures were surgically treated at our single level I trauma centre, including 27 cases with posterolateral column involvement. Patients with pathological, outmoded, and open fractures, neurovascular injury of the lower extremities, or osteofascial compartment syndrome were excluded. Patients with multiple injuries (injury severity scale, ISS, greater than 16) or with accompanying fractures in other body parts were also excluded. Each patient underwent preliminary management before admission, including distal bony skeletal tractions or leg braces. In the emergency phase, all the patients underwent a standard radiologic protocol of X-rays, CT scans and image reconstructions. In addition to the Schatzker classification, all fractures were also classified according to the TCC based on CT images. Fractures of the tibial plateau include two possible components Each patient’s demographic information, pre-injury status, and mechanism of injury were recorded at admission. All patients underwent definitive surgical treatment only after detumescence of the local soft tissue, such as striae appearance. This study was designed as a prospective cohort study. Approval from the institution’s ethical review board was obtained prior to the initiation of the study. After thoughtful consideration and the receipt of informed consent from the patients, 16 patients who sustained Schatzker type II tibial plateau fractures were ultimately selected and surgically treated via lateral rafting plate fixation with magic screw implantation through the extended lateral approach. All of these patients were operated on by the first authors (SH and HQF) and the corresponding author (ZW). After the induction of general or spinal anaesthesia and antibiotic prophylaxis, the patients were placed in the supine position on a radiolucent table. Before the start of surgery, the bony traction devices and braces were removed. The injured limb was maintained in a slightly flexed position at 30 To enhance the exposure and reduction of the PLCF, the knee was extended with internal rotation and inversion of the lower leg. Different reduction manoeuvres were performed for different PLCF morphologies. In BSFs, a point reduction clamp could be used in an antero-posterior pattern and the cortical fracture rim could be surveyed for reduction. In MSDFs, a cortical window could be created on the anterolateral tibial metaphysis 3–5 After reduction, Kirschner wires were inserted in a lateral-medial pattern for temporary fixation ( The magic screw was implanted from anterior-inferior-medial to the posterior-superior-lateral direction obliquely and could provide extra support for the PLCFs ( Reduction quality, implant location and screw lengths were consistently confirmed using fluoroscopy. ROM and joint stability were assessed before the incision was closed. The deep fascia was not sutured and the subcutaneous tissue and skin were routinely sutured over suction drains. Within 24 Early ROM and non-weight bearing movements were emphasized. Continuous passive motion exercises were initiated on the second day postoperatively. Three days later, the patients were encouraged to participate in active motion rehabilitation without weight-bearing under the guidance and supervision of the surgeons. Partial toe-touch weight-bearing was allowed in the fourth to sixth weeks. Full weight-bearing was not allowed until radiographic signs of bone healing were observed or the clinical criteria were fulfilled, including a painless fracture site without tenderness, usually at 12 weeks after surgery. All patients were followed regularly on a monthly basis for the first six months and for one year after surgery. Standard radiographs (AP and lateral X-ray images) were obtained at each appointment ( At the final follow-up appointment (a minimum of 12 months), the ROM of the knee joint was measured and the Hospital for Special Surgery (HSS) score was used to evaluate knee function. An inconsecutive series of 16 patients who suffered Schatzker type II tibial plateau fractures involving the posterolateral column were selected ( The average time to surgery was 3.4 The average radiographic bony union time was 13.6 weeks (range, 12–16 weeks) and the average full weight-bearing time was 16.2 weeks (range, 12–20 weeks). All of the cases were followed for at least 12 months, and the average follow-up time was 14.2 months (range, 12–16 months). No occurrences of wound infection, plate loosening or breakage, nonunion, secondary valgus deformity, or reduction loss were observed in any of the patients. No patient suffered from soft tissue irritation from the hardware or penetration of the articular surface by the magic screw. No significant differences in the TPA, PSA or articular step-off were observed on the radiographs between the immediate and 12-month postoperative evaluations. At the final follow-up, the average ROM of the affected knees was 2.3°–125.7° (range, −5°–135°) and the average HSS score was 94.2 (range 90–98). The posterolateral column is one part of the posterior column of the tibial plateau. A posterolateral single-column fracture may be encountered Until now, various approaches and fixation patterns have been developed to surgically treat PLCFs A number of surgeons have used or modified various lateral or anterolateral approaches (as summarized in By literature retrieval, most of studies which focused on surgical treatment of PLCFs were case series or case reports and technique trick. However, few analyses have been conducted for the morphological features of PLCFs Currently, the most available fixation methods for PLCFs include two categories: the posterior buttress plate and lateral rafting plate fixation. Posterior buttress plate fixation can be performed through posteromedial or posterolateral approaches, which have been biomechanically proven to be the strongest fixation methods for BSF-PLCFs The fixation pattern of the magic screw was proposed based on clinical practice and has been verified by the biomechanical test. After much deliberation, we hold that the indications for the magic screw should be unequivocal and that cases should be carefully chosen for the use of this technique. According to the principle that fracture fixation should resist the injury mechanism, magic screw implantation along the longitudinal axis of the limb could resist the shearing force on BSF of the posterior column and reduction loss on the MSDF of articular surface. Placing the rim or rafting plate closer to the articular surface may be preferred for LSDFs or comminution of PLCFs. Technically, the tip of magic screw should be implanted beneath the articular surface, but might also perforate the posterior cortex in BSFs. After articular reduction of the MSDF, it must only be implanted subchondrally. In terms of Schatzker classification, this fixation method was originally designed only for Schatzker type II fractures. Whether this technique could be effectively used to fix PLCFs in Schatzker type V and VI or other types of fractures, it may need further adjustment and validation. At the present stage, the fixation method also requires a detailed analysis in managing Schatzker type II fractures. If the main depression area is located anteriorly, then the lateral rafting plate should be implanted anteriorly. But for the moment, the strength for fixation of PLCF may not be sufficient, so the magic screw can provide additional support (as shown in The primary limitation of this study is the small sample size with no comparison group. The original intention of this fixation strategy that we proposed was to reduce the utilization of posterior approaches in the treatment of PLCFs, thereby reducing the operation risk, and to improve the therapeutic effectiveness of treatment. None of the available surgical techniques can solve all the problems of tibial plateau fractures. Therefore, a biomechanical test has been performed to verify the fixation stability of this technique, and the indications of this technique for PLCF was carefully determined prior to the study. Certainly, more improvements or adjustments are expected in the future. We look forward to accumulating more cases by multicenter trial and conducting case-control studies or historical controlled studies to validate the effectiveness of this fixation strategy. In conclusion, the selected patients who suffered the Schatzker type II fractures involving the posterolateral column could be successfully treated by lateral rafting plate fixation with the magic screw technique. According to the morphological analysis, PLCFs can be categorized based on the features of splitting and depression. For PLCF treatment, fixation with the magic screw is a valuable technique that may reduce the use of posterior approaches and posterior fixations. No benefits in any format have been or will be received from a commercial party related directly or indirectly to the subject of this article. No funds were received in support of this study. The authors declare no conflict of interest to declare.