A novel hybrid cation exchange membrane (CEM) composed of a blend of polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF), sulfonated PVDF(S-PVDF) and doped polyaniline (PANi) as additive was prepared. PANi was synthesized with different molecular weights to optimize the performance of membranes for water softening. The membrane properties such as thermal behavior, membrane structure, membrane morphology and miscibility, ion exchange capacity (IEC), permselectivity, water uptake, contact angle, cell resistivity, current efficiency and electrodialysis (ED) performance were evaluated. Addition of doped PANi increased the bivalent selectivity of the cation exchange membrane. The highest bivalent selectivity and best removal of Ca2+ and Mg2+ were achieved for PANi with Mw
                     ≈45,000gmol−1 and polydispersity index (PDI)≈3.2.Electrodialysis (ED) is a separation technology that has been used for over 50 years for the production of potable water from brackish water The electrochemical properties and selectivity of ion exchange membranes play a key role in the performance of the ED process A novel cation exchange membrane (CEM) based on sulfonated polyvinylidene fluoride (S-PVDF) blended with polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) has recently been developed To develop the bivalent selectivity of membranes and using these membranes in water softening (requiring the reduction of Mg It was found that camphorsulfonic acid (CSA) is an organic dopant that increases the solubility of PANi in the NMP solvent F. D. R. Amado et al. Since molecular weight and molecular weight distribution are the key features of any polymer and markedly affect the physical and mechanical properties of the films or fibers made from the polymer PVDF (grade Solef The sulfonation of PVDF was carried out according to previously reported procedures Emulsion polymerization of aniline was carried out by adapting the procedure described earlier S-PVDF/PVDF/PANi membranes were prepared by performing co-dissolution in NMP. A 10 The S-PVDF solution was first added to the PVDF solution under stirring in an appropriate amount to form S-PVDF/PVDF blend with an S-PVDF share of 50%. Then the PANi solution with an appropriate amount of CSA (1.25 Each membrane was named according to the PANi type that was used in the composite membrane. The base membrane without any PANi was named S-50. Gel permeation chromatography (GPC) was used to estimate the number average molecular weight (M Molecular masses were measured on aGPCsystem using a Waters 610 fluid pump, Waters 2414 RI detector, Merck Hitachi column oven L-7300, Waters 717 Plus autosampler and with set of columns PSS GRAM (10 The doping amount of PANi and thermal behavior of composite membranes were evaluated by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) in the range of 20–750 The compactness and crystallinity of membranes were evaluated by X-ray diffraction (XRD). The XRD studies were performed on a Philips X-ray diffractometer (PW1830 model) using a CuKα radiation source (1.542 A scanning electron microscope (SEM) ((Philips XL30 FEG, the Netherlands) was used to visualize the morphology and miscibility of the membranes. SEM images were taken in high vacuum condition at 20 All membranes were dried in vacuum at 60 The contact angles of water on membranes were determined at room temperature with a Kruss device (DSA 10-MK2, Germany) according to the plate method The value of the counter-ion transport number in the membrane phase ( The permselectivity (P The ion exchange capacity of the membranes was estimated by a conventional titration method For the ED experiments, a BerghofBEL-500systemwas used, which included two commercial anion exchange membranes (AEM) and two synthesized cation exchange membranes (CEM). The AEMs were placed in 1 The ED performance was evaluated by a conductivity measurement (using a CDM 83 conductivity meter) of the diluate each 30 The current efficiency for three cations and in constant voltage experiment was calculated using the following equation (adapted by The molecular weight data of different synthesized PANi are shown in TGA was used to evaluate the thermal behavior of the composite membranes and indicate the amount of doped CSA in the PANi structure in addition to sulfonic groups in the S-PVDF structure ( For all samples, three transitions of mass loss in two separate temperature ranges can be seen. The first mass loss, around 100–120 HSO X-ray diffraction was used to evaluate chain ordering and crystallinity in the prepared composite membranes. The XRD patterns of composite membranes with different PANi's are given in The S-50 membrane does not show any crystalline peak but two homogeneous amorphous peaks are observed. By the addition of PANi, two new crystalline peaks appear in the patterns, with the degree of crystalinity increasing for B20, B0 and B-10, respectively. B016 has very small crystalline peak and the structure is more open than other PANi contained membranes. The difference in crystallinity can be firstly related to the amount of CSA doped in the PANi chains, which can inhibit the ordering of chains. Therefore, it appears that by increasing the doping agent amount, the crystallinity will decrease. Secondly the molecular weight of PANi is important that the higher molecular weight causes more regular chains B016 has PANi with the highest amount of doping agent, low molecular weight and the highest PDI. So, all the parameters have negative influence on crystallinity and this membrane is almost amorphous. B20 contains PANi with the lowest doping agent and lowest PDI that are supportive for high crystallinity but the molecular weight is too low that decreases the chain ordering and results a moderate crystallinity. Although, B0 has PANi with the highest molecular weight and low PDI, but a high amount of CSA between the chains, inhibit the chains alignment and causes a moderate crystallinity but quite higher than B20. Comparing B20 and B0, can conclude that molecular weight has more influence than doping agent amount on crystallinity. Eventually, B-10 with a high molecular weight (close to B0) and low amount of doping agent (close to B20) shows very high chain ordering and the highest crystallinity, while it has higher PDI than B0. This can deduce that the synergic influence of molecular weight and low doping agent covers the negative effect of higher PDI. The role of different parameters of PANi on the crystallinity of different membranes is summarized in Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) is a useful technique to determine miscibility and morphology of polymer blends This observation is proved generally by XRD spectra that a distinct shoulder can be seen for PANi containing samples, but this distinction can not be determined well.  As shown in The IEC of different composite membranes is given in According to this table, the addition of doped PANi to the composite membranes increases the IEC, since the sulfonic group of CSA can act as cation exchange group. The exception to this rule is B20, where the IEC is very low. This might be attributed to the structure instability of the B20 membrane and the dispersion of oligomers and low molecular weight doped PANi chains in the solutions during the IEC measurement The data of transport number and permselectivity are presented in It is interesting to note that the permselectivity for S-50 is quite similar to B-10 and B0 and is only slightly lower for B016 and B20. Permselectivity therefore does not change by the addition of PANi to the composite membrane. As discussed previously In the final step, the performance of the synthesized membranes was evaluated by electrodialysis (ED) by assessing the change in solution conductivity in the diluate, the current efficiency, the cell resistance and the cation selectivity after 2 As presented in For more in-depth evaluation of the membrane performance, each cation flux through the membranes and their selectivity was studied. As shown in To explain the selectivity of these membranes, the diffusion theory of cations through a CEM can be applied. Firdaous et al. Another important phenomenon was described by Van der Bruggen et al. The role of the hydration energy was discussed by Horne As shown in The current efficiency follows the IEC, but if the membrane contains too many cation exchange groups (IEC is too high), the cation hindering will restrain the increase of the current efficiency. As presented in Novel composite cation exchange membranes were synthesized by the addition of doped polyaniline (PANi) to an S-PVDF/PVDF membrane by different molecular weight and PDI of PANi. TGA was used to estimate the amount of doping agent in the PANi structure. XRD showed that the membrane structure is related to the presence of sulfonic groups and PANi molecular weight. The combination of structure information by other membrane properties as water uptake, IEC and permselectivity helped to determine the relation between membrane properties and ED performance. The membranes made with higher molecular weight of PANi resulted in a higher bivalent selectivity, especially PANi synthesized at −10 The authors gratefully acknowledge the department of Earth and Environmental Sciences (E&ES) of KU Leuven for TGA and XRD analysis and Mrs. Hajar Khakrand from the department of Electrical Engineering (ESAT) for 3D design of the membrane potential measurement set-up.