A eutectic lead–tin alloy was prepared by melting the commercially pure metals and cast in cylindrical molds with 10mm diameter. The billets were processed by 4 passes of ECAP using a die with 90° between channels through route A and rolled to a final thickness of ∼1mm. The microstructure was determined by optical microscopy. Tensile tests were carried out at room temperature in the strain rate range between 10−4 and 10−2
                     s−1. The results show the elongation to failure increases at low strain-rates. The strain-rate sensitivity parameter was determined and a maximum value of ∼0.4 was observed at the lowest strain-rate.Superplasticity refers to properties of high neck-free elongations in materials after tensile tests, at high temperature. The strain rate sensitivity The eutectic Pb–62%Sn alloy may exhibit superplasticity even at room temperature. Experiments show that Pb–62%Sn specimens with fine grain size exhibited higher ductility than their coarse grained counterparts. Large elongations are observed at low strain rates (<10 The Pb–62 The microstructure of the material was evaluated after ECAP and rolling. A sample was cut from the rolled sheet, mounted using polymeric resin, ground with emery paper up to 4000 grit size, followed by polishing in Al The microstructure of the Pb–62% Sn alloy consists of a distribution of two phases which are distinguished using optical microscopy. The distribution of the phases exhibits a slight alignment to the ECAP and rolling direction, which is attributed to the elongation of the phases in this direction.   The variation of flow stress with strain rate is shown in The present results show that the eutectic alloy processed by casting followed by ECAP and rolling exhibits a very refined grain structure. The average grain size is within the range of a few micrometers, which is one of the requisites for superplastic behavior. The neck-free appearance of the specimen, the slow reduction of the flow stress in the engineering stress vs. strain curve and the high strain rate sensitivity observed at the lowest strain rates support the occurrence of superplastic deformation at room temperature in this material. However, the relatively low elongation to failure, 190%, observed at the lowest strain rate is out of the range of usual elongations for superplasticity. Thus, a brief discussion on reported elongations for similar alloys is given below. El-Danaf et al. Despite the similar grain sizes and testing conditions, the specimen geometry reported in the literature are significantly different from the present experiments, specially the gauge aspect ratio. The ratios of the gauge cross-section by the gauge length are ∼1.2 where It is worth noting that the minimum strain rate used in the present experiments was 1.0 It has also been reported that pre-straining the lead–tin alloy at faster strain rates reduces the elongations observed at posterior deformation at low strain rates The strain rate in superplasticity, where  The eutectic lead–tin alloy exhibits a fine grain structure ( Tensile testing at room temperature showed increased elongation to failure at low strain rates with a maximum elongation of 190% at 10 The elongation to failure is lower than the observed in the literature but agrees with a model for elongation of samples subjected to tensile creep. The reduced elongation is attributed to the reduced gauge cross section by gauge length ratio. The experimental data agrees with the model for grain boundary sliding creep. The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The authors acknowledge the financial support from