In several industrial Lithium-ion batteries recycling processes, a thermal treatment with oxidative atmosphere is used to separate the battery components and to remove the organic components. This method is often combined with hydrometallurgical processes with the aim to increase the metal recovery rate or to improve the efficiency of the existing processes. Despite such efforts, the effects of a thermal treatment in an oxidative atmosphere on the microstructure and composition on cathode and anode materials has not been explored.
                  In this manuscript, spent batteries which cathode active material has the composition Li(NixMnyCoz)Oz, i.e. NMC-LiBs, were subjected to thermal treatment at 400˚, 500˚, 600˚, and 700 °C for 30, 60, and 90 min. The microstructure and the composition were studied using XRD and ICP-OES. Thermodynamic calculations were performed to forecast the trend of the carbothermic reduction of active materials. It was observed the formation of gas and organic oil by-products from the decomposition of the polypropylene separator and the polyvinylidene fluoride binder. The identification of the composition of these by-products has great importance since they have a corrosive and toxic behavior. It was observed the fluorine behavior during the thermal treatment and its presence in the oil by-products.The main properties that have made the lithium-ion batteries (LiBs) extensively used for portable electronic devices and electric vehicles ( The increased market for LiBs leads to the growth in demand for the materials used in those batteries, such as Co, Mn, Ni, Cu, Al, and Li. This increased demand aggravates an already present issue of shortage of resources, in particular Co and Li. Since 2011, Co has been inserted in the first list of the European critical raw materials for their economic importance and for the high-risk associated with its supply. Li is instead not yet considered critical but it is predicted that the increasing demand of Li A solution to overcome shortages in these resources supply and the dependency on temporary price fluctuations on the global market can be the recycling of spent batteries. The recycling processes usually start with the discharging of the batteries to reduce their hazard level resulting from residual stored energy, which could otherwise activate further reactions and over-heating. The following unit operations are the mechanical, pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical treatments ( In the battery recycling, mechanical treatment is often used to separate the components of the cells, described above, to recover the coating of anode and cathode, the so-called black mass, as free of organic components and contamination as possible ( In comparison to the pyrometallurgy, hydrometallurgical method has many advantages such as lower energy consumption, less hazardous gas emissions, higher material recovery rates, and the ability to recycle Li, Mn, and Al ( Even if the thermal treatment with oxidative atmosphere as thermal pretreatment is already applied in the industrial recycling of LiBs, there is a lack of knowledge about the effects of the thermal treatment on the microstructure and composition of the battery material and about the by-products formed during the treatment. A thorough investigation about the formation of gas and organic residue during the treatment is necessary, especially for industrial scale processes, because of these substances can be toxic, reduce the efficiency of the process and/or be corrosive, damaging the used equipment. An example is the harmful or corrosive gas containing HF that can be generated by the evaporation or decomposition of the electrolyte and binder during the thermal pretreatment. During the recycling processes, the batteries are subjected to external heating or fire and mechanical treatments that can cause thermal runaway due to the exothermal reactions. Generation of the heat causes the evolution of toxic gases and corrosive gases, such as CO. In a previous work ( At elevated temperature, the fluorine present in the electrolyte and in other components of the battery, such as the PVDF binder, can form HF. Sun et al. ( However, in literature quantitative measurements of HF in the gas emitted from Li-ion batteries are described only in case of failure of the batteries cells ( In this work, thermal treatment of NMC-LiBs was performed in the presence of oxidative atmosphere. Thermodynamic calculations were performed to predict which reactions would occur during the process. In the theoretical modeling the black mass was considered to be a homogenous mixture of LiMn The lithium battery cells were provided by VOLVO CARS (Sweden). For the thermal treatment with oxidative atmosphere experiments, manually crushed mixture of anodes and cathodes was used. Crushing was performed using a puncher with a circular shape of 2 mm of diameter on an equal number of cathode and anode. For qualitative and quantitative analysis, 6 cells were dismantled by the removal of the plastic cover. Cathodes and anodes were manually separated from the separators and the particular components were subjected to material analysis. The thermal treatment with oxidative atmosphere experiments was carried out in a quartz tube, with dimensions 700 mm length and 30 mm diameter with a cone 34/35 and socket 34/35, inserted in a tubular furnace (Nabertherm GmbH Universal Tube Furnace RT 50-250/11 - RT 30-200/15). A constant flow of around 340 ml/min of air regulated by a flow meter was provided to the furnace and the outgoing gas was bubbled through a glass cylinder filled with 100 ml of MilliQ water in order to collect water-soluble gas components such as HF. The samples were heated at 400, 500, 600 and 700 °C. The sample was inserted in the tube to the center of the furnace and kept there for 30, 60 or 90 min. The loss in sample weight was examined by weighing the samples before and after the experiment. Experiments were carried out in triplicate. To determine the behavior of pure active materials, samples of graphite (to simulate the effect of graphite from the real batteries) mixed with pure metals oxides (LiCoO The dissolution of the electrode materials was carried out using aqua regia (Merck Millipore Nitric acid 65 % - EMD Millipore Hydrochloric acid 37 %) at approximately 80 °C using magnetic stirring. The obtained solutions were filtered. The undissolved fractions were washed, dried and weighed, and analyzed with X-ray diffraction (XRD). The liquid fraction was diluted 100 and 1000 times using 0.5 M HNO An X-ray diffractometer Siemens D5000 was used. The XRD analysis was carried out with an accelerator voltage of 40 kV and a current of 40 mA. The X-ray wavelength used corresponds to the characteristic Cu-Kα-radiation and a 2Θ range from 10° to 80° was included in the scans. Sample rotation with a rotation speed of 15 rpm was used in order to avoid the preferential orientation of crystals. The obtained diffraction data was evaluated using EVA software using the JCPDS database ( Thermodynamic calculations were performed using the software HSC Chemistry 9, developed by Outotec Oy (Finland). To simplify the thermodynamic consideration and to forecast in detail the mechanism of the carbothermic reaction between Co, Mn, and Ni with C, the calculations for the reduction of the metal oxides were carried out individually for each metal. The instrument used is a Perkin Elmer Spectrum Two FT-IR Spectrometer - Standard Detector that is equipped with a LiTaO3 detector, which has a range between 15,700 – 370 cm-1. The sample holder is a cell equipped with gas-tight taps and whose ends are closed with flat-glass walls in KBr, transparent to IR. Since the gas density is low, the optical path is quite long, about 10 cm. A LECO CS744 instrument was used for the determination of the total carbon content in the samples before and after the thermal treatment. This instrument is equipped with an induction High-Frequency furnace with an integrated oxygen lance floods crucible with high-purity oxygen, to promote complete combustion of the carbon present in the samples, and with a wide-range IR detector. 0.1 g of each sample was mixed with 2 g of a tungsten/tin blend accelerator to facilitate the ignition. The MilliQ water used to wash the outgoing gas from the furnace which was subsequently analyzed with a Dionex DX100 Ion chromatograph in order to measure the concentration of anions. The column used was a Dionex IonPac™AS4A-SC RFIC™ 4 × 250 mm Analytical. The eluent was a solution of 1.7 mM of NaHCO The average weight of each cell was 553.1 ± 0.2 g, and it consisted of 19 layers of anodes and 18 layers of cathodes. The plastic cover weight was 23.0 g ± 0.9. The weight fractions of the components of the cells are shown in In the XRD spectra of the cathode active material ( The XRD diffractogram of a sample composed of a mixture of material from both electrodes is shown in The high temperature and presence of the oxygen induce combustion of the graphite and organic materials resulting in the formation of CO It was expected that the C in the samples would not be completely consumed by the thermal treatment with oxidative atmosphere. Its concentration was sufficient to provide a carbothermic reduction of the metal oxides. Their interaction with C, CO and O LiCoO The HSC 9 database does not provide thermodynamic data related to LiMn LiMn Thermodynamic data related to LiNiO According to the Boudouard reaction, the formation of CO starts at around 400°C and became dominant respect the reaction of the formation of CO It was measured how the weight of the samples changs after the thermal treatment by varying the temperature and time of the treatment ( On the other hand, the weight of the sample does not change significantly by heating at 600 or 700 °C for 60 or 90 min. The weight change is ∼27 % and ∼35 % at the respective temperatures and does not change by increasing the time of treatment. This result could be due to the complete removal of the C content during the first 30 min at 700 °C and 60 min at 600 °C. To confirm this hypothesis, the residual carbon contents in the samples were measured. The data in It follows from the thermodynamic considerations that one of the main products of the thermal treatment should be CO It was expected to detect the presence of HF in the gas phase in the FTIR spectra but the signal of H All the FTIR spectra obtained show CO During the heat treatment, the high temperature led to the decomposition of the organic substances that are present in the samples. These substances evaporated and were transported in the final part of the quartz tube by the constant gas flow. There is a section of the quartz tube that is outside the oven and therefore is colder, so this is the location where the organic substances condense, covering the internal part of the tube. The organic by-products have a brown-yellow color and a density similar to oil. They represent probably a mixture of many decomposition products, therefore, the identification of the exact composition was complex. However, it was observed that this oil consisted of a less polar fraction, soluble in petroleum ether (Fraction 1), and a more polar one (Fraction 2), soluble in acetone. Therefore, the oil was collected by firstly washing the tube with acetone, then with water and ether. To collect the Fraction 1, petroleum ether was added to a part of the oil to dissolve the less polar fraction. This solution was then filtered leaving it to filter for gravity through a glass Pasteur pipette with an inner lining of cotton as a filtering material. To collect the Fraction 2 was used the same procedure dissolving a part of the oil in acetone and then filtering it. A sample for each of the two collected fractions was sent to the Medac LTD laboratory for determination of the contents of carbon, hydrogen, and fluorine. As can be seen from The increase of the temperature and time of treatment promotes the oxidation of the carbon content that determines a rise in the metals concentrations in the samples ( It was shown that the weight reduction of the samples treated at 700 °C and 600 °C stopped at a treatment time of 60 min ( A decomposition of the LiPF It is possible to calculate a mass balance for each element considering the weight of the samples before and after treatment, showed in In general, no significant differences are observed among the samples. This result indicates that during the process there is no formation of metal volatile species. The ICP-OES analysis of the organic by-products obtained through the thermal treatment and washing gas solutions shows no presence of the metals. Thus the formation of organometallic complexes was not confirmed. The effects of the treatment on the black mass crystalline compounds were also studied through x-ray diffraction analysis. The presence of CO and CO The air flow causes strong oxidation of the Cu foil. The two strong peaks at 2Ɵ 35.5 and 38.7 degrees correspond to the most prominent diffraction peaks of the CuO: It was expected that the Al (melting point 660 °C) would melt in the samples treated at 700 °C, covering the black mass. Instead, comparing an untreated cathode with one treated at 700 °C for 90 min, evidence of the melting of Al was not observed. One of the reasons for this is probably the presence of Al The signal at 2Ɵ = 18˚ that is common for all three lithium-metal oxides is observable for samples treated at all temperatures, which shows that it was not possible to obtain a complete decomposition of these species during the treatment. This is probably due to the kinetics of oxidation of the carbon compared to the kinetics of the carbothermic reduction. The presence of O The treatment at 700 °C for 1.5 h with an excess of graphite caused the decomposition of LiCoO The trend of the ΔG The presence of Li In the present work, the effects of thermal treatment with oxidative atmosphere on the composition of Li-ion battery cell materials and their dependence on treatment time and temperature were investigated. The novelty of this work is that, compared with other reports about battery recycling, it has been defined how the thermal treatment utilizes the carbon already present in the NMC battery. It was demonstrated how this carbon present triggers a carbothermic reduction of the metal oxides of the cathode active material. Also the behavior of the organic components, was followed and determined, due to their hazardous potential. The data show that the increase of the temperature and time of treatment promotes the removal of graphite and organic components. The treatment performed at 600 °C for 90 min with a constant flow of air of 340 ml/min causes the almost complete decomposition of the graphite and organic species. Indeed, the content of carbon reaches ∼1 w%, starting from an initial 41 w%. These graphite and organic components can be a problem for the leaching and solid-liquid separation processes because of their hydrophobicity, so this thermal treatment can be used to simplify and improve the hydrometallurgical recycling of metals from LiBs. It was observed that the organic components decompose releasing a gas composed mainly of CO In this manuscript potentially toxic or corrosive compounds formed during incineration have been identified. The results show the presence of fluoride containing compounds in both gas phase and liquid organic by-products, this is a crucial finding for risk assessment and management of Li-ion battery recycling. It was observed that during the treatment, the C triggers a carbothermic reduction of the cathode active material. Co, Ni, and Mn compounds are reduced to lower oxidation and/or more soluble state. The reactions gave CoO, Co These results can be useful for the optimization of current processes of recycling of the electrodes material and offer useful information for the development of future processes at the laboratory and industrial scale.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research was supported by the