This work assesses the potential of an adsorptive material, nanometer TiO2, for the separation and preconcentration of trace indium ions from various aqueous media. The adsorption behavior of nanometer TiO2 for indium ions was investigated. It was found that the adsorption percentage of the indium ions was more than 96% in pH 3.5–4.0, and the desorption percentage of In(III) ions was more than 99% in pH≤1.5. Good relative standard deviate (1.5%) and lower analytical detection limit (0.45 µg•mL−1) were obtained. The adsorption equilibrium was well described by the Langmuir isotherm model with monolayer adsorption capacity of 4566 µg g−1 (25 °C). The accuracy of the method is confirmed by analyzing the certified reference material (GBW-07405, GBW07406). The results demonstrated good agreement with the certified values.Indium is a crystalline, very soft, ductile, and malleable metal that retains its high plastic properties at cryogenic temperatures. It generally increases the strength, corrosion resistance, and hardness of an alloy system, when indium is added. It is also used in electrical contacts, liquid crystal displays, low-pressure sodium lamps, alkaline dry batteries, and semiconductors ( Indium is widely spread in nature, generally in very low concentrations. The direct determination of extremely low concentrations is limited with not only low sensitivity, but also matrix interference. For this reason, the preliminary separation and preconcentration of trace indium from matrix is often required. The most widely used techniques for the separation and preconcentration of trace indium include liquid–liquid extraction ( The main requirements with respect to substances to be used as solid-phase extractants are as follows ( Nano material is one of functional materials, which has attracted much attention due to its special properties ( The aim of this work is to investigate the adsorption characteristics of indium ions on nanometer TiO Cary 5000 UV–Vis–NIR spectrophotometer (VARIAN) was used for the determination of indium ions. A Mettler Toledo 320-S pH meter (Mettler Toledo Instruments (Shanghai) Co. LTD) was used to measure the pH of solutions. KQ-100 Controllable Serial-Ultrasonics apparatus (Kunshan apparatus company, China) was adopted to disperse the solution of nano-TiO Nano-TiO The certified reference material yellow red soil (GBW07405 and GBW07406) used in this experiment, was provided by State Technology Supervision Administration. Stock solution of In (III) (1 mg mL EDTA-triethanolamine-NaOH solution: 10.0 g EDTA, 50 mL triethanolamine (98%) and 25.0 g sodium hydroxide were dissolved in a 1000 mL flask with doubly distilled water. The stock solutions of the various metal ions (mg mL Some volumes of In (III) standard solution were put into 25 mL volumetric flasks, 0.2 mL 2% PVA, 0.3 mL 0.05% SAF, 1.5 mL 0.5% CTMAB and 1.5 mL pH 5.5 HAc-NH Portions (1.0000 g) of GBW-07405 or, GBW07406 were transferred into corundum crucibles, and 2.0 g of sodium peroxide were added into every corundum crucible. After stirring to make them uniform, then putting a layer of sodium peroxide (about 1.0 g) on the top of each sample, heated about 6–7 min at 750 °C. After cooling to room temperature, transferred them into 250 mL beakers containing some EDTA-triethanolamine-NaOH solution, then adding 2.50 mL of magnesium salt solution (10.0 mg MgO/mL) and 2 mL of hydrogen peroxide, heated to boil and kept 15 min. Took them down, then added 1 mL of hydrogen peroxide to dissolve brick red cuprous oxide which maybe exist. After cooling 30 min, samples were filtrated with alkali-resisting middle speed filter paper. The deposition was washed seven times with 1% sodium hydroxide solution and then washed three times with doubly distilled water. Put the filter paper with deposition into the initial beaker, then added 0.1 mol L The adsorption experiments were carried out in a series of 50 mL Erlenmeyer flasks containing 100 mg nano-TiO The adsorption percentage was calculated based on the following equation, The adsorption capacity for nano-TiO Adsorption isotherm studies were carried out with different initial concentrations of In(III) while maintaining the sorbent dosage at constant level in the range 0–50 °C. The effect of different sorbents on the adsorption behaviour for the In (III) in aqueous solution was studied and shown in In this study, knowledge of pH was important because the pH of solution influences the distribution of active sites on the surface of nano-TiO  It is found from The influence of the sample volume on recoveries of indium was also examined. For this purpose, indium was preconcentrated from volumes of 10, 20, 25, 50 and 100 mL of sample solution containing 150 μg indium by applying the procedure mentioned above. The maximum sample volume can be up to 25 mL with the 95% recovery and the enrichment factor was 25 with 1.0 mL HCl elution ( The comparison adsorption behavior was made, based on the method stated above. It was shown that for the experiments carried out for over five times, the oscillation average adsorption percentage was 92.3%, the average adsorption percentage of ultrasonic oscillation for 1.5 min was more than 96.0%, and the static average adsorption percentage was 87.7% after 60 min. The effect of oscillation adsorption was larger than static adsorption, and the ultrasonic adsorption was the most significant. It was also shown that In (III) ions could be adsorbed fast and quantitively by nano-TiO Nano-TiO The adsorption behaviour of the nano-TiO A modified Langmuir equation conformed to this kind of adsorption isotherm as represented below: Here, Some experiments were carried out in order to examine the effects of common coexisting ions on the adsorption of the studied ions on nanometer TiO From measurements made under the optimum conditions described above, the calibration graph was linear in the range 0.3–20 µg /25 mL. The calibration equation is The detection limit (evaluated as concentration corresponding to three times the standard deviation of 11 runs of blank solution) of this method for In(III) is 0.45 µg mL The stability and potential regeneration of nano-TiO Since it was found that the proposed preconcentration method was useful for the preconcentration of trace indium, the method was applied to the determination of indium (total indium) in soil reference material (GBW07405, GBW07406) to evaluate the accuracy of the developed procedure. Indium concentration found as mean of seven determinations at 95% confidence level was 4.16 This method was suitable for the preconcentration and direct determination of In (III) in soil with a high selective adsorbability for In (III) at certain pH, high precision and concentration factor and low detection limit. Moreover, the effects of coexisting interfering ions in the determination of In (III) could be eliminated by the selective adsorption, elution and sample preparation. So this method can be applied to detect In (III) in soil or other environmental samples. The authors greatly acknowledge the Education Department of Liaoning Province Science Foundation (No. 20060363 and No. 2007T053) of China for financial support. The authors also thank our colleagues and other students participating in this work.