The effects of reducing fat level from 20% to 12% and 9%, substituting pork fat with olive oil and adding locust bean/xanthan gum (0.5% and 0.6%) on emulsion stability, jelly and fat separation, processing yield, cook loss, texture and sensory characteristics of frankfurters were investigated and compared with control samples. Addition of locust bean/xanthan gum produced a significant increase in hydration/binding properties, characterised by lower cook losses, increasing yield, better emulsion stability and lower jelly and fat separation. The substitution of pork fat by olive oil did not affect these parameters. Indeed, results showed that reducing fat levels together with increasing moisture and locust bean/xanthan gum addition do not affect the sensory or textural properties, but olive oil addition produces a decrease in hardness and an increase in adhesiveness, however the overall acceptability was not affected.The relationship between dietary fat and the development of cardiovascular disease and hypertension ( Olive oil is the most important oil in Spain and its consumption has beneficial effects on human health ( Therefore, the use of olive oil in meat products to replace animal fat could be beneficial to health. Some research works have been carried out both on fermented sausages ( However, the role of fat is an important consideration in any formulation because it plays a major role in the texture, juiciness and flavour of comminuted meat products. Fat is vital in the rheological and structural properties of meat products and in the formation of a stable emulsion. Technological aspects associated with the processing of low-fat meat products include problems with texture, flavour and mouthfeel ( Approaches used to minimise problems related to fat reduction include the use of different systems like increasing the other raw materials (lean and/or water) or addition of fat substitutes. The first method is ineffective for the formation of a stable emulsion, giving problems of sineresis, texture and flavour. The second method is the most used and effective ( Hydrocolloids can be classified in four broad groups: starch and derivates, celluloses and derivates, gums and others. Gums are the most numerous group: carrageenan, alginate, pectin, xanthan gum and galactomanan (guar gum and locust bean gum) belong to it. Many studies have been carried out on these products and their application in comminuted products, but galactomanan and xanthan gum have received less attention. Xanthan gum is a microbiological hydrocolloid. It is soluble in hot and cold water. Even when this gum is used in low concentration, it forms a pseudoplastic and viscous solution ( Locust bean gum is obtained from carob bean ( No research has been done using locust bean and xanthan gum or their combination in low-fat-meat products. The only research paper found in the literature is related to the use of locust bean in low fat ground beef ( Four different frankfurter formulations ( Fresh lean pork, pork backfat and pork dewlap were obtained from local meat-processing plants and frozen at −20 °C until used. Also, olive oil (0.4°; Carbonell, Córdoba, Spain) was used. Meat and fat were thawed slowly (24 h, 4 °C) to a temperature 0 °C. Olive oil was frozen at −20 °C the day before manufacture and tempered at 20 °C for 30 min to reach −6 °C in order to increase the oil viscosity. Raw materials were chopped and ingredients were added in a bowl cutter (Talsa T-2473) in the following order: First, soy protein (SUPRO 500, Proanda, Sevilla, Spain) was added with a third of the ice (low speed). Lean, phosphates (E 451i, E 450i; Proanda, Sevilla, Spain) and salt (99.4% sodium chloride with 0.6% sodium nitrite (E-250), Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) were added with a further third of the ice to facilitate protein solubility and produce the emulsion (chopped at high speed). Fat (or olive oil) was added with the rest of the ice. All ingredients were mixed until a homogeneous mass was formed. Finally, the other ingredients were added (low speed and temperature under 10 °C): sodium lactate (E 325, Panreac, Barcelona, Spain); sodium ascorbate (E 301, Panreac, Barcelona, Spain); dextrose ( Immediately after chopping, the batter was mixed under vacuum (60 cm Hg) for 4 min ( Representative samples from each treatment were homogenized and analyzed, for percentage fat (ether-extractable), protein and hydroxyproline according to standard The jelly and fat separation was measured as described by The following empirical procedure was carried out to measure emulsion stability based on a method proposed by Frankfurters were weighed before heat processing and smoking and after chilling at +2 °C for 24 h. The processing yield was determined from their weights and expressed as a percentage of the initial weight. Cook loss values were determined by calculating the weight difference of five links of frankfurters before and after cooking, as described in the Materials and Methods, using the following equation: Texture of the cooked frankfurters was determined using a Texture Analyzer (Model XT2i; Stable Micro Systems, England) as described by A 40-member untrained panel evaluated the frankfurters during the first week of storage by a hedonic test. Samples were prepared by frying the frankfurters in a pan until the surface turned brown. Warm 1 cm long pieces from each treatment were randomly distributed for evaluation. The panellists were instructed to classify the four samples according to their overall acceptability, the reasons for preference or rejection of the samples were requested. Data for chemical analysis (moisture, fat, protein and collagen) and textural attributes (hardness, springiness, adhesiveness, cohesiveness, gumminess and chewiness) were analysed by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). The statistical significance of each factor considered was calculated at the The sensory analysis data were analysed by the Friedman test and the existence of significant differences was established at Proximate analysis indicated that the fat levels of the frankfurters were close to the targeted values of 20%, 12% and 9% fat ( The moisture content was inversely proportional to the fat content, the frankfurter with an 8.84% fat had the highest level of moisture, 70.84%. This was the result of fat substitution by moisture in the low fat products. The reduced and low-fat frankfurters had moisture contents ranging from 66.66% to 70.84% which was significantly higher than the control samples. There was no significant difference in protein levels between all the products. Collagen content was also analysed, revealing a good meat quality in the products. Registered levels of collagen were significantly higher for two of formulations due to the use of meat batches that were richer in collagen. Jelly and fat separation, processing yield, cook loss and emulsion stability are indicative of hydration/binding properties which represents the ability of the meat emulsion to retain moisture and fat upon further processing ( Jelly and fat separation of the batters ( Frankfurters prepared with olive oil had no significant differences in jelly and fat separation to those made with the same animal fat content. This result differs to the study of Regarding emulsion stability, the presence of locust bean/xanthan gum caused a decrease in total expressible fluid (%TEF), statistically significant for the low-fat frankfurters ( The percentage of fat separated in the expressible juice (%Fat), showed that locust bean/xanthan gum causes a decrease in the amount of fat separated. Controls showed the highest fat separation, probably due to their higher fat content, while the lowest percentage obtained belonged to the low-fat frankfurters. Frankfurters prepared with olive oil had a lower percentage of fat separated than those made with the same animal fat content, this difference being statistically significant, showing an important ability of the mixture used to retain monounsaturated fat in the protein matrix.  Reducing the fat content of the frankfurters from 12% to 9% caused a significant increase in cook loss, but this was always lower than for the control sample. The results of the present research are consistent with the increased weight losses seen when the reduction of fat is accompanied by an increase in the proportion of moisture, and protein levels remain essentially the same ( The addition of olive oil did not produce significant differences in cook losses compared with frankfurters made with the same content of animal fat. Differences between jelly and fat separation results and cook loss values can be explained by the higher temperature used for the former (90 °C) compared with 72 °C used in determination of cook losses. At higher temperatures (90 °C) locust bean develops its maximum viscosity, retaining more water, and is thus more effective in reducing jelly and fat separation. On the other hand differences between cook losses and emulsion stability (%TEF) could be due to the slow and extended heat treatment during cooking. In both cases the temperature used was similar (72 °C versus 70 °C) but in the first case the target temperature was attained after 45 min (15 min at 55 °C, 15 min at 60 °C and steam cooking to an internal temperature of 72 °C) and then the product was cooled. In the second case a small quantity of batter was heated at 70 °C, reaching the temperature very quickly and thus improving the formation and strength of the gel and increasing the moisture retention as the percentage of locust bean/xanthan gum increased. These results differ from other studies that showed that %TEF increased when cook losses increased ( No significant differences were found between the controls and the low-fat frankfurters with regard to processing yield but addition of locust bean/xanthan gum slightly increased processing yield. The highest values for processing yield were found at the 0.5% level of locust bean/xanthan gum. These results agree with the results of No differences where found between frankfurters made with olive oil and animal fat. These results confirm the work of Formulations of reduced and low-fat frankfurters had higher levels of polyphosphate (+0.05%) but lower levels of soy protein (−0.65%) and potato starch (−1%). The improvement in hydration/binding properties observed in this work can be attributed to the absorption by the mix of the excess water added during formulation. The effect of locust bean/xanthan gum addition and replacement of pork fat by olive oil on the textural properties of the frankfurters is given in Olive oil addition together with fat reduction caused a significant decrease in hardness and the related parameters of chewiness and gumminess, which could be due to the fact that monounsaturated fat has lower hardness at high temperature. This result agrees with the results of There was a significant reduction in cohesiveness on fat reduction. These results agree with other studies that reported lower cohesiveness at fat levels below 12–14% when fat is replaced mainly by water ( Higher adhesiveness values corresponded to the lower fat contents ( There was no significant difference between the controls and low-fat frankfurters even when olive oil was present in the mixture although the frankfurters with 12% fat had higher values for overall acceptability ( Some panellist preferred the controls mainly for their consistent texture, adequate juiciness and good flavour. Some panellist however found it too hard, especially the skin. Frankfurters with low fat levels were juicy, with an acceptable meat or smoky taste but sometimes did not have a homogeneous texture. The most noticeable comments on the frankfurters made with olive oil were their characteristic taste and soft texture that were reasons both to choose and refuse it. The mixture locust bean/xanthan gum was an effective additive for reduced and low-fat frankfurters, because it increased the hydration/binding properties, characterised by lower cook losses, increasing yield, better emulsion stability and lower jelly and fat separation. On the other hand the addition of locust bean/xanthan did not affect the textural properties and the overall acceptability of the product. Substitution of pork fat by olive oil in reduced-fat frankfurters, when locust bean/xanthan gum is also added, did not reduce the hydration/binding properties. However it produced a decrease in hardness and an increase in adhesiveness. Sensory analysis showed that the overall acceptability was not affected by olive oil addition.