Dipping Mo into Al liquid with saturated Si, a dense Mo(Si, Al)2 layer was formed on the Mo surface. Microstructure observation and chemical composition analysis of the Mo(Si, Al)2 layer reveal that the intermetallic layer consists of needle-like grains with diameter of submicrons and Al–Si liquid at their grain boundaries. Mo(Si, Al)2 grains are grown by the dissolution-precipitation process in the Al(Si) liquid located between Mo(Si, Al)2 and Mo. The product layers at the corners of Mo had radial cracks because the Mo(Si, Al)2 layer generated at the interface between the Mo(Si, Al)2 layer and Mo. Addition of Cr into the Al–Si liquid bath can prevent the formation of radial cracks.Disilicides of refractory metals such as molybdenum, tungsten and tantalum have great potential for use above 1500 K under an oxidizing atmosphere. In particular, molybdenum disilicide, MoSi Yanagihara et al.  To apply this reaction as a coating process, the formation of radial cracks at the corners must be prohibited. Addition of other elements into the Al–Si bath may change the mechanism of the formation and growth of Mo(Si, Al) Cold-rolled Mo plates (purity: 99.9% and size: 10×10×1 mm) were used as samples for the dipping experiments. The Mo samples were ultrasonically cleaned in acetone and dried in air. The samples were suspended from Mo hooks and immersed in the alumina crucible containing molten Al saturated with Si and Mo. The Al–Si bath consisted of 72.4 mol% Al, 26.8 mol% Si and 0.9 mol% Mo to saturate Si and Mo in the liquid bath, and prepared at 1073 K for 3.6 ks. The dipping experiments using the Al–Si–X bath (X=Cr, Nb, Ta and Ti) were carried out at 973 K with the Mo plates. The chemical composition of the Al–Si–X bath was 69.7 mol% Al, 25.8 mol% Si, 0.9 mol% Mo and 3.7 mol% X. The bath was saturated with Si, Mo and X in the liquid phase. The bath was prepared at 1073 K for 3.6 ks. After being dipped in the bath for a certain period of time, the samples were removed from the bath and cooled in the furnace. Microstructure of the dipped samples was evaluated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and electron probe microanalysis (EPMA). Quantitative analysis of chemical composition was carried out using EPMA with 1 μm in the spot size. Phase identification of the product layer was carried out by using X-ray diffraction (XRD).   Fractured surface of the product layer is shown in  Thickness of the Mo(Si, Al)    The reaction interface is located between the product and Mo, because the radial cracks form at the surface of the product layer at the corner of the plate. Growth of the product layer obeys the linear rate law, that is, the reaction process is rate-controlled. This growth behavior means the Al and Si pass through the product layer to the product/Mo interface and Al and Si reach at the interface at a much higher rate than the reaction rate. Their results are similar to the previous studies As observed in the fracture surface of the product layer ( The Al(Si) liquid phase is also located between the Mo substrate and Mo(Si, Al)  As shown in In the initial stage of dipping, added Cr, which is in the particle form, dissolves partially into the Al(Si) liquid and forms the (Cr, Mo)(Si, Al) The dipping of Mo into the Al liquid with solid Si was investigated to reveal the mechanism of the formation of Mo(Si, Al) Addition of Cr into the Al–Si bath prevented the formation of radial cracks in the Mo(Si, Al)