A new thermal desorption spectroscopy (TDS) apparatus was used to identify the hydrogen trapping peaks, and to measure the hydrogen concentrations in 3.5NiCrMoV steel after hydrogen charging electrochemically, and in gaseous hydrogen. The hydrogen concentration increased with (i) increasingly negative charging potential and (ii) increasing hydrogen gas pressure. The equivalent hydrogen fugacity versus charging overpotential was derived. There was a difference in the diffusible hydrogen traps activated during electrochemical and gas phase charging, attributed to the difference in the hydrogen fugacity. A two-site model for Sieverts’ Law explained the positive Y-intercept, as the density of already filled hydrogen traps.Hydrogen is considered a future clean energy vector [ Steels can be susceptible to hydrogen embrittlement (HE), such as the conventional high-strength steels [ Some steels that might be considered for the hydrogen economy were found to be susceptible to HE [ Hydrogen can be trapped by lattice defects [ Thermal desorption spectroscopy (TDS) is a powerful technique to study hydrogen-trap interactions. TDS typically measures the amount of hydrogen desorbed from a specimen subjected to controlled heating [ The TDS apparatus used in this study was custom-designed at Griffith University [ The two common methods for hydrogen charging are: (i) electrochemical charging and (ii) gaseous charging. Electrochemical hydrogen charging typically involves the application of a cathodic potential to a specimen, immersed in an acidic or alkaline solution, to liberate hydrogen at the specimen surface. Gaseous hydrogen charging involves exposing a specimen to gas phase hydrogen at a high pressure. Past studies have related the equivalent gaseous hydrogen pressure or fugacity, The present work builds on the study by Liu et al. [ The characterisation of hydrogen in the 3.5NiCrMoV steel after: (i) cathodic hydrogen charging in two aqueous electrolytes, and (ii) gaseous hydrogen charging, The relationship of the electrochemical charging potential to an equivalent gaseous hydrogen pressure or fugacity, The identification of hydrogen traps in the steel  Quantitative hydrogen calibration used commercial hydrogen standards (purchased from LECO Australia Pty Ltd) (i) developed for the calibration of instruments for measuring the amount of hydrogen by hot extraction, and (ii) factory verified against NIST (National Institute of Standards and Technology) standards. These calibration standards were 4 mm in diam x 8 mm in length, and had a nominal mass of 1 g. They were available with nominal hydrogen contents of 1 μg g The hydrogen calibration consisted of running a series of TDS-GU evaluations using the commercial calibration standards under the repeatable conditions, as summarised in The Appendix contains details of the TDS-GU calibration, the investigation of the influence of adsorbed water, and a discussion of instrument calibration and corrections. The 3.5NiCrMoV steel was a commercial, quenched-and-tempered, martensitic steel, supplied to strength and ductility specifications, by a commercial supplier. Cathodic hydrogen charging was performed using a three-electrode electrochemical cell. The steel specimen was the working electrode, platinum was the counter electrode, and Hg/Hg at −1628 mV at −1090 mV To ensure complete hydrogen saturation of the steel, the charging duration was 24 h [ At the end of the charging period, the specimen was removed from the electrolyte, dried with inert gas, and immediately loaded into the TDS-GU apparatus. Gaseous hydrogen charging was performed using a fabricated hydrogen charging apparatus, which comprised a specimen chamber and chamber containing the hydrogen source. The specimen was placed inside the specimen chamber, the specimen chamber was evacuated, flushed with hydrogen, and evacuated using a rotary pump. Hydrogen was introduced into the specimen chamber by heating an attached high-purity metal-hydride hydrogen source (multi-substituted AB  The procedure for specimen loading and TDS-GU analysis was as follows. From a high vacuum state, the loading chamber (LC) was brought to atmospheric pressure. Ultra-high-purity (UHP) nitrogen was injected into the LC chamber to speed up reaching atmospheric pressure, and to minimize water adsorption onto the LC chamber walls. The LC door was opened when atmospheric pressure was reached. The specimen was loaded into the LC. The stream of UHP nitrogen inside the chamber was maintained while the LC door was open to prevent water contamination of the LC. The mounting of the specimen on the specimen holder was also done adjacent to the LC loading door so that the escaping nitrogen gas protected both the specimen and the specimen holder. Once the specimen was loaded into the LC in the specimen holder, the LC door was closed, and the LC chamber was evacuated. High vacuum was typically achieved within 40 min. A dwell time of exactly 120 min was adopted; i.e. from end of hydrogen charging to specimen loading into the LC to transferring to the analysis chamber (AC), in order to facilitate desorption of all surface contaminants from the specimen surface (particularly adsorbed water), and to ensure uniformity of results between measurements. At the end of the dwell time, the specimen was transferred to the analysis chamber, AC. The AC was stabilised for 12.5 min before the main gate valve was throttled to a fixed position of 30% open. There was an additional 2.5 min stabilisation time prior to commencement of the TDS-GU analysis. To start the TDS-GU analysis, the furnace was turned on and was set to the desired temperature of 870 °C. The heating occurred at the set temperature ramp of 2 °C min Comparative measurements were carried out on a commercial TDS apparatus at Ghent University, designated as TDS-C using the 3.5NiCrMoV steel discs supplied from the same batch as analysed in the TDS-GU, 8 mm in diam x 2.5 mm in thickness, sent by airmail from Australia to Ghent. These samples were cathodically hydrogen charged (i) as received from Australia, and (ii) after regrinding and repolishing to 1 μm. Cathodic hydrogen charging was for 24 h in 0.1 M NaOH at 25 °C at −1.6 V The commercial TDS-C was supplied by Bruker. The hydrogen was detected by a mass spectrometer that measured current (micro ampères) versus cycles. A specifically developed software program calculated, taking into account the calibration, the amount of hydrogen present under the peak. While doing this calculation, the baseline was simultaneously subtracted. To analyse the raw data, these results needed to be converted to wppm/s by integrating the whole peak and taking into account the heating rate. Additionally, the cycles were converted to temperature by the data generated by the thermocouple, which was in contact with the sample.  To allow assessment of the different trapping states for hydrogen corresponding to the measured peaks, deconvolution of the spectra was performed using the ORIGIN 9 software. Each spectrum was fitted to three Gaussians peaks. An iterative trial-and-error process was followed until the numerical fitting converged for the data of    No hydrogen was detected using the TDS-C at Ghent University for as-received 3.5NiCrMoV steel after cathodic hydrogen charging for 24 h in 0.1 M NaOH at 25 °C at −1.6 V Some specimens were polished to 1 μm diamond, subjected to cathodic hydrogen charging, and retested using the TDS-C.    The peak at 340 °C was again attributed to surface-adsorbed water. Again, analysis was limited to peaks corresponding to diffusible hydrogen that were at temperatures below 300 °C. The intensity of these peaks, and therefore the hydrogen concentration, increased with increasing charging pressure, and the peak position moved to lower temperatures. The shape of the spectra for the hydrogen gas charged steels was slightly different from the electrochemically hydrogen charged counterparts; indicating the possibility of some trapping centres being inactive.  The TDS-C data indicated that the details of surface preparation had a large influence on the amount of hydrogen absorbed by the specimen from 24 h cathodic charging in 0.1 M NaOH. No hydrogen was absorbed for the as-received specimens, whereas a significant amount of hydrogen was adsorbed for the freshly polished specimens. These data indicate that the surface oxide that forms on the surface of the 3.5NiCrMoV steel at room temperature was sufficient to prevent hydrogen absorption during 24 h cathodic charging in 0.1 M NaOH at −2.2 V Given the significant influence of specimen preparation, the data measured with the TDS-C were in good agreement with the data measured using the TDS-GU in regard to the amount of hydrogen absorbed by the 3.5NiCrMoV steels in the hydrogen peaks in the temperature range from room temperature to 200 °C, as is clear from a comparison of There were no hydrogen peaks above 200 °C in the TDS-C spectra, The TDS peaks above 200 °C measured using the TDS-GU were thus attributed to hydrogen that arose from the catalytic decomposition at the specimen surface during the TDS measurements. This catalytic decomposition produced hydrogen evidently from hydrogen-containing compounds on the specimen surface. These hydrogen-containing compounds are thought to be both adsorbed water (H The TDS-GU did measure these peaks at temperatures above 200 °C, and these peaks do relate to hydrogen, as the TDS-GU detector measures hydrogen. The TDS-C does detect hydrogen associated with the specimen at temperatures above 200 °C, and such measurements have been published. However, it was observed experimentally, that the TDS-C did not detect any peak at temperatures above 200 °C after electrochemical hydrogen charging under conditions similar to those that had produced the hydrogen peaks in the TDS-GU. There are two possible reasons. These hydrogen peaks are thus attributed to the catalytic decomposition of hydrogen containing compounds at the specimen surface (i.e. at the surface of the steel) in the ultra-high vacuum of the TDS-GU to produce hydrogen. It is possible that this catalytic decomposition does not occur on the specimen surface in the carrier gas of the TDS-C. It is also possible that the sensitivity of the TDS-C is not sufficient in this temperature range to detect these peaks. Egress of diffusible hydrogen starts at the end of the charging [ The following mathematical model was developed to estimate the amount of effused hydrogen in the steels prior to TDS-GU analysis. A thin plate of thickness, The solution to Fick’s second law is [  The analysis leading to  The amount of diffusible hydrogen desorbed from the hydrogen charged specimen was obtained by performing a numerical integration (using ORIGIN 9) of the area below the desorption peaks at temperatures less than 300 °C. The total hydrogen concentration was given by the sum of the hydrogen associated with the peak at 114 °C plus the hydrogen associated with the peak at 160 °C plus the hydrogen associated with the peak at 210 °C. The hydrogen associated with the peak at 114 °C represented hydrogen so weakly trapped that it diffused readily out of the specimen, thus the amount of hydrogen originally in the specimen was higher than that associated with the measured peak area, so this must be corrected as described. In contrast the other two peaks represent hydrogen much more deeply trapped, so that essentially no hydrogen was lost, and no correction was needed. Thus the total hydrogen originally in the specimen equaled (the amount originally in the specimen associated with the 114 °C peak given by the measured 114 °C peak corrected for hydrogen lost) plus (the amount originally in the specimen associated with the 160 °C peak given by the measured 160 °C peak which needs no correction for hydrogen lost) plus (the amount originally in the specimen associated with the 210 °C peak given by the measured 210 °C peak which needs no correction for hydrogen lost).   Deconvolution of the diffusible hydrogen spectra indicated that only the 114 °C peak increased directly proportional to the applied overpotential. It is reasonable to assume that this trap was responsible for the diffusible hydrogen that effused at room temperature from the steel, because it was the weakest due to having the lowest peak temperature. Conversely, the traps at the higher temperatures (i.e. 160 °C and 210 °C) were associated with more-highly trapped hydrogen. Measurement of the area under the 114 °C peak gave the concentration of hydrogen associated with this trap.   Sieverts’ law indicates that the concentration of the dissolved hydrogen in a steel, The information from the TDS-GU measurements can establish the relationship of charging potential to hydrogen fugacity. This begins with the regression line obtained from the plot of hydrogen concentration vs The final step is to match the derived equivalent pressures, from  The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has produced an extensive data base regarding the equations of state (EOS) for hydrogen, including the isothermal density of hydrogen, Sezgin et al. [  The right hand Y-axis of The relevant peaks in the TDS-GU spectra of the 3.5NiCrMoV steel after electrochemical hydrogen charging were present at temperatures less than 300 °C. While there is paucity in published TDS-GU spectra for 3.5NiCrMoV with which to compare the current results, the spectra from steels having the same martensitic microstructure may be relevant. Sun et al. [ The nature of the trap site (e.g. dislocation, grain boundary, lath boundary, etc.) in the steel is not determinable in the present work, since it requires the measurement of trap activation energies, which requires performing measurements at multiple heating rates. On the other hand, Sun et al. [  The relatively higher hydrogen uptake of the steels charged in the acidic Na The deconvoluted spectra in   A comparison of the de-convoluted peaks in The ability for hydrogen to occupy high-energy traps in the steel would be related to the chemical potential of the hydrogen during charging as the hydrogen entered the steel lattice. This implies that the hydrogen formed during electrochemical charging had a higher chemical potential than the hydrogen present during gaseous charging. This is consistent with the higher equivalent fugacity/pressures during the electrochemical charging than in gaseous charging, as indicated by Sieverts’ Law may be derived by equating the chemical potentials of hydrogen in the gaseous and solid phases. Fukai [ with a value of 2.033 × 10 To calculate the chemical potential of hydrogen in the steel, suppose that The hydrogen atoms are indistinguishable. It is assumed that only one hydrogen atom may occupy a given site. Therefore Fermi-Dirac statistics are used to distribute the hydrogen atoms over the two types of site: where Eq. At the lowest applied pressures, the trap sites fill preferentially, so the first term in Eq. which, when equated to the gaseous hydrogen chemical potential in Eq. The terms multiplying When the pressure increases sufficiently that the trap sites are filled, the second term in Eq. which leads to Sieverts’-Law behaviour when the hydrogen concentration is measured with respect to the trap concentration: Therefore a finite intercept on the concentration axis of a Eq. The TDS analysis in Thus, The Sieverts’ constant from Thus, the interpretation of the equivalent charging pressure from There is nevertheless, the interpretation of the higher-temperature peak at 210 °C in the TDS spectra after electrochemical charging. This TDS peak corresponds to a deeper trap, thus it would be expected that this trap would be filled first, before filling of the traps with lower energy. Thus, the reason for that not being accessed by the gas-phase charging is unclear. It is possibly related to kinetics (diffusion pathways), since the free energy available in the electrochemical case is much higher, due to the higher hydrogen fugacity. It is also possible that this trap had a high activation energy, which would explain why it was not filled by lower-fugacity gas charging. An aim of this study was to determine the relationship of hydrogen fugacity to charging potential during electrochemical charging. These relationships are presented in  A newly-designed, high-sensitivity TDS-GU was used to measure the amount of hydrogen in 3.5NiCrMoV steel after (i) electrochemical charging in 0.1 M NaOH and 0.1 M Na The hydrogen concentration in the steel increased with (i) increasingly negative charging potentials and (ii) increasing hydrogen gas pressure. This increase in hydrogen concentration was due to an increase in the hydrogen fugacity. The equivalent hydrogen fugacity versus charging over-potential was derived for 3.5NiCrMoV steel charged in the two different electrolytes. There was a difference in the diffusible hydrogen traps activated during electrochemical and gas phase charging, attributed to the difference in the hydrogen fugacity. A two-site model for Sieverts’ Law explained the positive Y-intercept as the density of already filled hydrogen traps at room temperature. The manner of filling of the lower energy trap sites as shown by TDS underpins the extrapolation of the Sieverts’ Law line from the gas phase charging data to the electrochemical hydrogen charging data. This research is supported by an  The results showed good linearity within the range of the certified values of the standards; i.e. from 0.9 μg g To evaluate the actual hydrogen desorbed from a specimen, the calibration line needed to be corrected to offset the contribution from this adsorbed water. The corrected calibration line was obtained by drawing a parallel line that crossed the origin, as shown in Despite water adsorption on solid surfaces being well known [ The following experiments examined the contribution of the adventitious water on the specimen surface to the hydrogen spectrum.  The next spectra (AO, triangles) was for the same pin, but without unloading the sample from the apparatus; and therefore without exposure to the atmosphere. The pin was expected to be completely desorbed of hydrogen and water, and indeed, the spectra (triangles, sample AO) show the absence of any peaks corresponding to hydrogen and water. The obtained spectra may be considered as a true instrumental background, with the rise at the highest temperature probably due to hydrogen desorbed from the quartz furnace tube. The next spectra (A1, circles) involved the pin removed from the TDS-GU, exposed to the laboratory atmosphere for 1 min, and retested. Finally, the same pin was exposed to laboratory atmosphere for 7 h and then re-tested (A2, diamonds), while the sample stage was kept under UHV condition. The resulting spectra of A2 (diamonds) showed that there was a considerable hydrogen spectra, which could be completely attributed to adsorbed water, since the specimen contained no hydrogen. Furthermore, the water signal was quite comparable to that of the fresh pin (A, squares). These results indicate the ease with which water adsorbs to the specimen surface and provides a considerable spurious hydrogen TDS-GU spectra at ∼300 °C. Therefore the procedure adopted for TDS-GU measurements aimed to minimize the effect of water on the experimental results. The TDS-GU measurements required: (i) a proper calibration; (ii) consideration of the hydrogen from the adventitious water adsorbed on the specimen surface; and (iii) accounting for hydrogen lost between the end of hydrogen charging and the start of TDS-GU analysis. The calibration of the TDS-GU ensured accurate results within a hydrogen concentration range of 0–5.3 μg g The experiments to understand the effect of hydrogen from the adventitious water adsorbed on the surface of the test specimens lead to the following conclusions. Firstly, the UHV environment of the TDS-GU analysis chamber did not contribute to the water signal. This would be expected and is necessary to ensure that the TDS-GU yields reliable data. Secondly, the water contribution arose from exposure of the test specimens to the laboratory atmosphere. Thirdly, even brief exposures to the laboratory atmosphere lead to water contamination, and are enough to affect the resulting TDS-GU spectra. These conclusions highlight the necessity of minimizing contact between specimen and the atmosphere to minimize the size of the water peak. This statement similarly applies to the sample stage and holder. Some of the measures to control water adsorption included: (i) keeping a protective shroud of UHP nitrogen on the specimen during handling outside of the loading chamber; (ii) keeping the specimen holder in high vacuum at all times and minimizing unnecessary retrievals; (iii) minimizing the process time between the charging/cleaning stage and the TDS-GU loading stage, and (iv) a 120 min dwell-time in the loading chamber. The current results lead to conclusions similar to those by Silvestri et al. [ The third important correction was to account for the amount of desorbed hydrogen between the end of hydrogen charging and the start of TDS-GU analysis. The diffusion models proved that a considerable amount of hydrogen was indeed lost during the pre-analysis stage. Depending on the hydrogen diffusion coefficient, specimen thickness, and dwell times, this loss could range from 10% to up to 40% of the total hydrogen in the specimen. There is an inherent conflict between (i) the requirement to increase the dwell time of the specimen in the vacuum of the TDS-GU to decrease the amount of adventitious water adsorbed on the surface of the test specimens, and (ii) this increased dwell time causing an increase loss of hydrogen from the specimen by diffusion. This conflict has not been addressed herein. There is also the issue that the present configuration of the TDS-GU is such that detection of hydrogen peaks at temperatures above about 250 °C may be problematical, because of the water peaks. This was not an issue in the present study because the measurements using the TDS-C showed that there were no hydrogen peaks in this temperature range.