Selective extraction of Zn(II) from industrial leach solutions containing Fe, Ni and Co is still a challenging task. In this paper solvent extraction of Zn(II) with D2EHPA and 5% saponified D2EHPA from sulphuric solutions has been performed. Experimental tests carried out on concentrated solutions allowed to select the operative conditions that allow to obtain both high Zn(II) extraction yield and selectivity. On the basis of the experimental results, a separation process has been proposed for the selective recovery of Zn from a solution containing 60 g/L of Zn. Zn extraction with saponified D2EHPA has been carried out in two different steps. In the first one 2 M D2EHPA has been used for extracting Fe(III) and part of Zn, while in the second one 1 M D2EHPA has been used for recovering the remaining Zn with less than two theoretical stages.Solvent extraction is one of the most effective technique to selectively separate metal ions from aqueous solutions. Economic and environmental benefits could be achieved with this technique: the first arising from obtaining purer product and lower energy consumption in the subsequent electrowinning process, the latter coming from the lower quantity of effluent to be discharged. The most widely used extractant for zinc is di-2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid (D2EHPA), because it presents a selectivity/cost ratio significantly high, as well as high extraction yields compered to all other extractants studied to date. Industrial applications are mainly used in the secondary zinc industry, i.e. the modified Zincex process ( One of the main reasons that hinders the application of zinc extraction from industrial leach solutions by means of D2EHPA derives from the cationic exchange mechanism characterizing this extractant. Acid extractants are presented as hydrogen-bonded dimer in non polar diluents and then they need to be saponified by means of acid/basic reaction to increase their effectiveness and avoid the increase of the solution acidity due to hydrogen ions releasing during extraction ( Organophosphorus acids have been extensively used for solvent extraction of metals, particularly Zn. In particular 2-ethylhexyl phosphoric acid-2-ethylhexyl ester (EHEHPA), di(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) and bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)phosphinic acid (Cyanex272) have been used, for their selectivity, to extract several metallic ions with high extraction yields ( Aim of this work is to perform a selective recovery of Zn from high Zn concentration industrial leach solution coming from a battery recycling plant mainly treating Zn batteries. This solution, which also contains Fe, Ni and Co was treated by using saponified D2EHPA and solvent extraction operative conditions were conveniently selected. In fact the purpose of this work is therefore to properly modify the D2EHPA in order to obtain high extraction yields and to buffer the system around the extraction pH. The overall result would give a double advantage: it would be possible to reduce the number of extraction stages and it would not be necessary to neutralise the aqueous raffinate. In fact this operation constitutes a discontinuity of the process and results in a disadvantage for plant management. The leach solution was provided by an industry located in southern Italy that deals with the secondary raw material recycling. The leachate was provided by the manufacturer, without additional information, except the fact that it derived from the leaching of a concentrated Zn mineral. The solution should be used for developing a selective separation process for industrial applications. That industrial sulphuric leach solution at 0.7 pH and containing 60,7 g/L Zn, 8,24 g/L Ni, 3,63 g/L Co and 0,76 g/L Fe was used in the experimental tests in order to evaluate the system behaviour, while many tests were performed with a synthetic aqueous solution prepared by dissolving analytical grade reagents: ZnSO The leach solution pH was increased by adding concentrated KOH. D2EHPA (bis-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid) organic extractant was diluted with commercial grade kerosene. The organic phase was saponified by a 10 M KOH solution obtained by dissolving pellets of potassium hydroxide in distilled water. Equal volumes (25 ml) of the two phases were shaken at room temperature in separatory funnels for a time interval determined on the ground of kinetic tests made to reach the thermodynamic equilibrium. The two phases were separated after the mixture was settled. The concentrations of metal ions in the aqueous raffinate were measured by A.A.S. (atomic absorption spectroscopy) UNICAM Solaar model 969, while those in the organic phase were obtained from the difference between the initial concentration of the considered metal ions in the leach solution and that in the raffinate. Considering both the high concentration of metal ions in the sulphuric leach solution and the cationic exchange mechanism for metal extraction by means of D2EHPA, preliminary tests were performed by using D2EHPA 2 M in kerosene, although the stoichiometry suggested the use of D2EHPA 3 M. However, being D2EHPA a very viscous compound, a proper quantity of inert diluent is needed to obtain in the organic phase acceptable mass transport properties. Thus, no concentration higher than D2EHPA 2 M can be used to have an adequate viscosity and density. First Zn(II) extraction kinetics for reaching the thermodynamic equilibrium between aqueous and organic phase were determined. Before shaking the two phases for different times ( In order to evaluate the efficiency and selectivity of the system by using 2 M D2EHPA in kerosene, pseudo-“S” curves were plotted as a function of the solution initial pH. Extraction tests were performed by using an industrial leach solution at pHs up to 2.6. Ni(II) and Co(II) were not extracted, while the extraction yield of Fe(III) and Zn(II) are shown in More information about Zn(II) and Fe(III) extraction efficiency from the considered aqueous solution by using 2 M D2EHPA in kerosene can be obtained from The selectivity obtainable by means of 2 M D2EHPA in kerosene can be better visualised by observing The subsequent step of this study was the solvent saponification in order to verify its effectiveness in terms of selectivity and extraction yield. The literature reports that the organic phase begins to have surfactant properties when about 70% of it has been neutralized ( is immiscible with the organic. After adding a 3%vol KOH however the micelles are formed: hydrogen bonds form between D2EHPA and water and thus there is no longer immiscibility between the two phases with a complex formation. On the ground of literature data, solvent saponification was performed by adding 14%vol of 10 M caustic solution. In that way about 70% of 2 M D2EHPA in kerosene was neutralised. Extraction tests carried out on leach liquor at 0.2 pH by using this saponified solvent highlighted the formation of a gelatinous salt containing potassium (42%) and sulphur and minor amount of zinc, cobalt and nickel. It was supposed that, due to the high concentration of D2EHPA and consequently to the high quantity of KOH required to neutralize 70% of it, the local pH of the aqueous phase during extraction increased excessively. On the ground of these results the amount of added potassium hydroxide was decreased. A solvent was then prepared by saponifying about 52% of 2 M D2EHPA in kerosene. Even this time, solvent extraction tests produced the precipitation of a gelatinous salt. The potassium content of the salt decreased from 42 to 30%. These tests indicated that it could be advantageous to decrease the saponification degree of D2EHPA.  To better understand the effectiveness of saponified D2EHPA, From both figures it is evident that, for a given pH the extraction yield is higher by using the saponified D2EHPA. Moreover by working at a pH of about 0.7, Fe(III) is completely extracted, while Zn(II) extraction yield reaches its maximum value (about 30%). Although the use of the saponified D2EHPA increases the extraction selectivity and efficiency and allows the extraction at lower pH, thus avoiding the neutralization of the very concentrate leach liquor with subsequent possible precipitation of metals, a two-step process would be needed to separate each metal ion from the industrial aqueous solution. After a first extraction stage that allowed to extract 100% Fe(III) and a small percentage of Zn(II), the aqueous raffinate pH increased and hence preliminary experiments have been carried out on synthetic solutions simulating the aqueous raffinate at different pHs. By considering the results obtained in the previous experiments, the solution composition was 45 g/L Zn, 8,24 g/L Ni and 2,42 g/L Co. Fe(III) was not considered in tests with the synthetic solution because it is completely extracted in the first stage and it can be periodically stripped from the organic phase by using the process described in a previous works ( Considering that the metal ion concentration in the aqueous raffinate coming from the first extraction stage is lower, the use of 1 M D2EHPA seems to be more appropriate. The comparison between Zn(II) extraction yields obtained by using 1 M D2EHPA and 2 M D2EHPA in kerosene is reported in Then the Zn(II) distribution coefficient obtained with D2EHPA 1 M in kerosene without saponification reaches its maximum value at pH 5, while that obtained with saponified D2EHPA reaches its maximum value at lower pH. D For explaining the behaviour of the two solvents, with and without saponification, it could be helpful to consider what happens in the aqueous solution during extraction: in order to have high efficiencies during the extraction process it is important that the aqueous solution pH remains within a suitable range.  Several aqueous solutions, containing different concentrations of Zn(II) and the same concentration of Ni(II) and Co(II), were shaken with 5%vol of saponified D2EHPA (1 M) in order to obtain the equilibrium curve. Although in the previously performed extraction tests both Ni(II) and Co(II) have never been extracted, their presence in solution may affect the extraction process. For that reason they have been added to the solution. The Zn(II) equilibrium curve was reported in the McCabe and Thiele diagram ( From McCabe and Thiele diagram it is possible to calculate that in the considered system less than two theoretical stages are sufficient to extract all the zinc from the zinc leach solution.  The mineral or secondary material is leached by using an aqueous sulphuric solution obtained by mixing the exhausted electrolyte, the aqueous raffinate after crystallization of the nickel and cobalt sulphates and a small amount of concentrated sulfuric acid, whose quantity is regulated by a pH controller to maintain the leach solution pH at 0,6. After liquid-solid separation, Fe(II) in the leach liquor is oxidised, by air bubbling, to Fe(III), then the leach liquor is sent to a first solvent extraction step, where D2EHPA 2 M, saponified with 5% by volume of KOH 10 M, extracts all the Fe(III). The organic stream (red line) is sent to a selective stripping stage of the zinc with a weak acidic solution (green line). After the addition of potassium, whose stripping takes place preferentially with respect to that of the zinc, the organic stream is sent back to the extraction stage. Given the low iron content in the leach liquor, the organic stream can do several cycles before losing its extraction power. When the Fe(III) content of the organic stream becomes too high a Fe(III) stripping process under vacuum is performed. The aqueous raffinate, which is iron free, is lead to pH = 1.3 and it is sent to zinc solvent extraction carried out by D2EHPA 1 M saponified with 2% by volume of 10 M KOH. The loaded organic (fuchsia line) is sent to the zinc stripping stage with 1 M sulphuric acid and then, after potassium reintegration, it is recirculated to the extraction stage. The aqueous stripping stream is sent to a concentration process that can be done by using evaporators. Afterwards its pH is adjusted, by adding sulphuric acid, in order to reach the ideal conditions for Zn electrowinning. The exhausted electrolyte is recirculated partly to the leaching stage and partly to the stripping stage. The aqueous raffinate obtained from the Zn(II) extraction stage (blue line) is sent to the nickel and cobalt crystallization and afterwards it is recirculated to the leaching stage. Experimental tests carried out in this work allowed to perform a selective recovery of Zn from an industrial leach solution by using saponified D2EHPA and by selecting the operative conditions to be used during solvent extraction. The results showed that less than two theoretical stages are sufficient to extract all the zinc, while Ni(II) and Co(II) remain in the aqueous raffinate. In order to regenerate the organic phase Fe(III), which is extracted together with Zn(II), must be periodically stripped by means of reductive stripping in vacuum. A block flow diagram that shows all the process stages and all process streams has been proposed.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.