A process for the recovery of lithium and cobalt from the waste of lithium ion batteries using sulfuric acid and hydrogen peroxide was proposed, and metal leaching performance was investigated. The proposed procedure consisted of mechanical separation of metal-containing particles and a chemical leaching process. The effects of leaching agent, of the size of metal-bearing particles, and of incineration as a pretreatment for the leaching, were examined here.
                  Two stages of crushing and sieving resulted in satisfactory separation of the metal-bearing particles from the waste. Sulfuric acid leaching with hydrogen peroxide in a concentration of 15 vol.% gave a full recovery of the metals within 10 min of processing time. The leaching was carried out at a temperature of 75 °C and with an agitation of 300 rpm for a pulp concentration of 50 g/L in a batch extractor. It was also found that incineration of lithium cobalt oxide particles to remove carbon and organic binder before chemical leaching significantly reduces the leaching efficiency.Demand for secondary batteries has steadily increased in recent times as portable electronic appliances such as cellular phones and laptop computers have come into wide use. Along with the development of such portable devices, the technology of secondary batteries–their power source–has rapidly improved in tandem with their applications. In consequence, the amount of secondary battery waste is increasing along with the proliferation of the portable devices. With the disposal of the spent batteries, mostly by landfill, soil contamination follows from the leakage of organic electrolyte as well as heavy metals such as copper and nickel contained in the batteries. Lithium ion batteries consist of heavy metals, organic chemicals and plastics in the proportion of 5–20% cobalt, 5–10% nickel, 5–7% lithium, 15% organic chemicals and 7% plastics, the composition varying slightly with different manufacturers. When the lithium battery wastes are properly processed, valuable metals such as cobalt and lithium can be recovered. From the viewpoints of environmental preservation and recovery of valuable resources, the recycling of spent lithium ion batteries is highly desirable. The current status of the recycling process has been reviewed in several studies ( Unlike other batteries, lithium ion batteries often blow up during the recycling process due to radical oxidation when lithium metal produced from battery overcharge sustains a mechanical shock from exposure to the air ( In this study, a sulfuric acid leaching process for the recovery of lithium and cobalt from lithium ion battery wastes was proposed and its performance was evaluated. The effects of leaching agent, particle size and incineration on acid leaching were investigated to find the optimum condition for metal recovery. The procedure includes a thoroughgoing process of mechanical separation of lithium cobalt oxide particles, which can be applicable in commercial recycling of lithium ion battery waste. Though the hydrometallurgical process of battery recycling has been well developed, preprocessing by mechanical separation has not been so deeply studied as to facilitate the scale-up of the laboratory process for commercialization. In this experiment two reagent grade chemicals were used. Sulfuric acid (Junsei Chemical Co., Japan, Code No. 83010-1230) was utilized for leaching, and hydrogen peroxide (Junsei Chemical Co., Japan, Code No. 23150-0350) was employed as a leaching agent. A series of mechanical processes were carried out to yield enriched particles of lithium cobalt oxide. The procedure involves crushing, sieving, magnetic separation, fine crushing and classification in sequence. Because the majority of valuable metals such as cobalt and lithium are contained in lithium cobalt oxide particles, this study focused on a complete mechanical separation of these particles. In addition, for the purposes of commercialization, the separation has to be conducted in an automated machine process. Though fine crushing of the particles is not required for the leaching process with a high concentration leaching agent, it does help attain a complete removal of aluminum foil from the lithium cobalt oxide particles. The experimental procedure is illustrated in The sizes of crushed aluminum and copper electrode plates and steel battery casing were adjusted for easy classification of active material from the cathode, lithium cobalt oxide particles. Vibration sieving and magnetic separation were performed in order to separate aluminum and copper electrodes, steel casing and plastic packaging. After large pieces of the materials were separated with a vibrating sieve of 850 μm, a magnetic separator removed pieces of steel casing. The active material of the cathode is contained in the bulk of non-magnetic particles from the magnetic separator. In order to eliminate small pieces of aluminum foil attaching to the particles of lithium cobalt oxide, a fine crushing followed. The second vibration sieving separates the pieces of aluminum foil completely. The leaching experiments were conducted in the apparatus shown in The effect of hydrogen peroxide concentration on the leaching of lithium and cobalt was investigated for a given set of leaching variables: kind and concentration of leaching agent, leaching temperature and pulp density. During the leaching experiment, samples were taken at scheduled intervals. Each sample was vacuum filtered and divided into filtrate and cake. The amounts of cobalt and lithium in the filtrate were measured to compute leaching efficiency. Chemical analyses for leachate and cake were performed with an atomic absorption spectrophotometer (Perkin-Elmer, U.S.A., model M3100) and an inductively coupled plasma spectrometer (Jobin Yvon, France, model JY38Plus). Chemical analysis of particles was carried out with an X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku, Japan, model Ru-200). The leaching efficiency of the metal components is defined as the ratio of the amount of a component in the leachate to the total amount in the mechanically separated particles of lithium cobalt oxide. Lithium ion battery wastes were crushed with a crusher fitted with a set of rotational and fixed blades. A primary crushing was performed with a sieve of 20 mm hole size installed at the inner side of the crusher, and fine crushing was done with a sieve of 10 mm hole size. Materials from the primary crushing were separated with three different sizes of sieve, 106 μm, 200 μm and 850 μm, in order to classify three different groups of particle size, and then to examine the effect of particle size on the performance of acid leaching. Undersized products obtained from the 850 μm sieve consisted of lithium cobalt oxide particles and carbon, while oversized products were plastic packaging, steel casing, aluminum foil, copper foil and separator. Because the oversized products include the plastic and steel casings of the batteries, no lithium cobalt oxide particles are contained in them. The undersized products were classified with two sieves of 106 μm and 200 μm to investigate their lithium and cobalt content and the effect of particle size on leaching. Their contents are listed in The dissolution of cobalt oxides in acid solution was studied by Because polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) binder does not dissolve in acid solution, it remains in the cake after filtration. Also, carbon does not dissolve in acid solution, and instead it floats on the solution; from filtration it is separated in the cake. The electrolyte lithium hexafluorophosphate (LiPF To investigate the effect of particle size on leaching, tests were performed with three different sizes of particles. The initial pulp density, sulfuric acid concentration and amount of hydrogen peroxide were 50 g/L, 2 mol/L, and 10 vol.%, respectively. Leaching temperature was 75 °C with an agitation of 300 rpm. The leaching efficiency of cobalt for particles with over 200 μm diameter was as low as 80%, as illustrated in This outcome indicates that an acid leaching with sulfuric acid at a concentration of 2 mol/L and 15 vol.% of hydrogen peroxide gives full recovery of lithium and cobalt from lithium ion battery wastes when a leaching temperature of 75 °C with an agitation of 300 rpm is applied to the leaching at a pulp density of 50 g/L. The smaller the particle size, the easier the dissolution is and the greater is the leaching efficiency. Yet a high concentration of hydrogen peroxide helps the leaching of large particles, to give complete leaching by converting less dissolvable Co(III) into more dissolvable Co(II) with evolved oxygen from hydrogen peroxide. However, fine crushing is necessary to eliminate aluminum foil contained in the lithium cobalt oxide particles from the primary crushing. The particles from crushing and mechanical separation include carbon and organic binder, which cause a problem in the filtration process of leachate after acid leaching. Incineration of the particles was carried out at 900 °C in a furnace for an hour. The removal of the carbon and organic binder was observed from the results of X-ray diffraction analysis as seen in A novel process for the recovery of metal from spent lithium ion batteries was proposed for possible application to a commercial scale plant. The process includes mechanical separation of lithium cobalt oxide particles and a hydrometallurgical procedure for lithium and cobalt recovery. The performance of the proposed process was examined by an evaluation of leaching efficiency. The effects of leaching agent concentration, particle size and incineration were examined to find an optimum condition for metal recovery. The experimental outcome indicates that a concentration of 15 vol.% of hydrogen peroxide in sulfuric acid leaching is enough for full recovery of lithium and cobalt, with fast leaching. Though particle size does not affect the leaching efficiency as long as the concentration of leaching agent is high enough, fine crushing helps to remove aluminum foil attached to the lithium cobalt oxide particles. Incineration for the removal of carbon and organic binder from the separated lithium cobalt oxide particles significantly reduces leaching efficiency, suggesting that the treatment should not be included in the metal recovery process. Financial support from the Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Energy of Korea through the CANSMC is gratefully acknowledged.