To investigate the ecological mechanism of sea-grass beds (area 1), shallow waters/tidal flats without sea-grass near the mouth of a river (area 2), and an oxygen-depleted offshore area (area 3), we developed a numerical model, which could represent the biochemical and physical processes of the coastal marine ecosystem comprised of the above three areas. The model can represent the dynamics of coupled cycle of carbon, nitrogen, phosphorous, and oxygen, dividing organic matter into five compartments viz: fast-labile POM, slow-labile POM, refractory POM, labile DOM, and refractory DOM. In addition, this model formulated three bacterial mineralization processes: oxic mineralization, suboxic mineralization, and anoxic mineralizaition. This model was applied to the “Jinno area (Jinno ecosystem)” of Atsumi Bay, Japan, where three types of areas (areas 1, 2, and 3) are all represented. The model reproduced the dynamics of the present field condition of the three areas accurately. From the analysis of the model results, we could indicate the characteristic processes of nutrient cycling in each different areas of an ecosystem. Biological fluxes, driven by suspension feeders, epiphytes and epifauna, were the main fluxes in area 1. Biological fluxes were also the main fluxes in area 2, but were largely driven by suspension feeders. In addition, physical fluxes of re-suspension in area 2 stood out compared to the other areas. Denitrification in area 2 is much larger than in areas 1 and 3. This is because the ratio of suboxic mineralization per all mineralization in that area is higher than in other areas. We also estimated the turnover rate of biological processes and physical processes in each area of the Jinno ecosystem to quantify the characteristics of nutrient cycling in each area. The turnover rate of biological or physical processes was defined as the ratio of the total biological or physical fluxes of a compartment to the mass of a compartment. The turnover rate of areas 1 and 2 were higher than area 3. The high turnover rate in area 1 is mainly due to the biological processes, whereas biological and physical processes were both important in area 2. This result means that the important driving force of nutrient cycling in sea-grass beds are the biological processes. Understanding the characteristics of the processes that cycle matter (carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, and oxygen) through an ecosystem becomes the first step in drafting an environmental management plan.Recently, much attention has been paid to the functions and effects of shallow waters on the water quality of estuarine areas. In Japan, shallow waters close to urbanization areas often become targets of development because they can be reclaimed, at relatively low cost, and they are usually convenient for industrial use. On the other hand, shallow waters play an important role in buffering against the impact of red tide (rapidly increasing of phytoplankton) and oxygen-depleted water in estuaries In this paper, we introduce a new ecosystem model that is based on our former model The new simulation system is composed of two models, the new ecosystem model named TRÄUMEREI and the hydrodynamics model The hydrodynamic model simulates the three-dimensional physical field in the estuary and demonstrates the long-term variability of flow field, salt and heat transport. The numerical development and algorithm of the hydrodynamic model are well described by When the TRÄUMEREI model is calculated, outputs of the hydrodynamics model at each time-step (flow velocity, temperature, turbulent kinetic energy, tidal level, etc.) are used. By coupling TRÄUMEREI with the hydrodynamic model, this simulation system can estimate the water quality of the estuary including the effect of physical processes completely. The TRÄUMEREI model was developed to evaluate both the physical and biochemical processes in the estuarine lower trophic ecosystem in terms of coupling of carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus and oxygen cycles. The major material fluxes that are treated in each mesh/box of the model are shown in In this section, we present model equations and computational schemes based on our model. The general equations for pelagic system is as follows: The equations and the computational scheme for benthic system in the TRÄUMEREI model have several improved factors from the NCME model in order to include the effects of differences of porosity in vertical directions and to clear the contribution rate of several diffusion processes that come from different causes. To lead the model equations for benthic system, the following two diagenetic equations (a) Diagenetic equation for dissolved material (b) Diagenetic equation for particulate material In addition to these diagenetic equations, we have the mass balance expression Here, following assumptions are made for these equations Average density of total solid does not change with space or time, in other words, The equilibrium expression for simple linear adsorption: Adsorptive property does not change with space or time, in other words, If In addition, if From these equations and assumptions, we can obtain two equations as follows. For dissolved material   From spatial integration of The equations for suspension feeder, deposit feeder, benthic algae, sea-grass, seaweed, epiphytes and epifauna are as follows The major biochemical reactions and rate expressions used in our model are given in Treatment of dissolved oxygen in the benthic system is different from other compartments, though dissolved oxygen in the pelagic system is treated with the same equation and schemes of other pelagic compartments. In the benthic system, the oxygen layer and the anoxic layer are defined. Vertical construction of meshes/boxes is described in When the new ecosystem model (the TRÄUMEREI model) is applied to the Jinno area of Atsumi Bay, the hydrodynamic model is also calculated (refer to On the hydrodynamics model simulation, first, we started to calculate over the large area including Ise Bay, Kinuura Bay and Atsumi Bay The new ecosystem model (the TRÄUMEREI model) simulation was applied to meshes around the Jinno area The boundary conditions mostly used in our model system are four tidal level components: M2, S2, O1, K1 which are results of the harmonic analysis of tide, the concentration of compartments, salinity and water temperature, surface wind, air temperature, nutrients, fresh water discharge from river, and intensity of light. They are prescribed based on field measurements at the pertinent observatory. Most of the data are interpolated by the Spline method or linear interpolation. Initial values of compartments in the new ecosystem model were set on April 1, 2000. The time-dependence of these boundary conditions becomes the forcing function of the simulation. The simulation time of the new ecosystem model covers the time-period from April 2000 to March 2001 and the time step is set 10 min to the new ecosystem model, and 20 sec to the hydrodynamic model. Time series of the output data of the hydrodynamic model, which is used to the new ecosystem model, is picked up to adjust the time step of the new ecosystem model. Equations for biochemical reactions in Coefficients concerned with activity of organism, The simulated state variables for each compartment of the model were compared with the time series of measurements recorded at every monitoring station in Jinno. Here, the comparison between the calculated values and observed values in ( To investigate the differences of the ecological mechanism of sea-grass beds (henceforth referred to as area 1), shallow waters without sea-grass near the mouth of river (henceforth referred to as area 2), and an oxygen-depleted offshore area (henceforth referred to as area 3), we analyzed the nutrient cycling for each area. We assumed that the averaged results of each set of meshes (     The differences in thickness of the diffusive boundary layer (DBL), which was tuned according to the quantity of the horizontal velocity, has an influence on the NO An overall image of nitrogen cycle for each area is described in the following: In sea-grass beds (area 1), suspension feeders fix fresh organic matter at the bottom of sea-grass beds. Most of the fixed organic matter has a fast mineralization rate and mineralizes quickly. As a result, they supply the nutrients for production of sea-grass, benthic algae and epiphytes. In addition, transparency of sea-water becomes clear and penetration depth of light becomes deeper due to feeding of suspension feeders. For these reasons, we suggest that the biological processes associated with suspension feeders are important for the production of sea-grass. In shallow waters without sea-grass near the mouth of a river (area 2), there are many suspension feeders and many feeding of fresh organic matter as in area 1. Thus, fresh organic matter in the pelagic system is transported to the benthic system. However, because of high rates of re-suspension caused by the kinetic energy of water inflow, the fresh organic matter is re-suspended, and does not settle in the benthic system for a long time. However, some re-suspended fresh organic matter is consumed by suspension feeders and is transported to the benthic system again. In the oxygen-depleted offshore area (area 3), there are few macro benthos as they cannot survive without oxygen so the turnover rate of several compartments is low. From these observations, sea-grass beds have a remarkable vertical cycle of nitrogen by biological processes due to suspension feeders and photosynthesis by sea-grass and epiphytes. Furthermore, shallow waters without sea-grass near the mouth of the river also has vertical cycle of nitrogen through physical and biological processes associated with re-suspension and feeding by suspension feeders. However, the oxygen-depleted offshore area has no remarkable vertical cycle of nitrogen. To estimate the ecological mechanism (nutrient cycling) quantitatively from another viewpoint, we analyzed the turnover rate of biological processes and physical processes from The purpose of defining the above values (turnover rate) is to indicate the driving forces of nutrient cycling quantitatively. The calculated turnover rate in each area in June is given in The turnover rate of biological and physical processes in shallow waters with sea-grass (area 1) and in shallow waters without sea-grass near the mouth of a river (area 2) is higher than in the oxygen-depleted offshore area (area 3) except for 〈C〉 in The turnover by physical processes (mainly caused by re-suspension) in area 2 stands out compared to areas 1 and 3, while the turnover of inorganic matter by biological processes in area 1 is high compared to areas 2 and 3. The high turnover rate of biological processes for inorganic matter in area 1 comes from the high activity both of the production by excretion of living matter and the consumption by photosynthesis of sea-grass, epiphytes, and benthic algae. In contrast, in area 2, the turnover rate of biological processes for inorganic matters is lower than area 1 and the turnover rate of physical processes is higher than area 1. The result associated with the turnover rate of biological processes comes from the fact that in area 2, there exists only the high production of inorganic matter caused by the excretion of living matters, and that there is low consumption by photosynthesis because there are no sea-grass beds and epiphytes. The result of the high turnover rate of physical processes reflects the high physical exchange between the pelagic and the benthic systems by vertical mixing or between system and out of system by horizontal advection or diffusion. In area 1, the turnover rate of biological processes for every classification of compartments 〈A〉 to 〈E〉 is higher than that of physical processes according to the result of comparisons between This paper describes a model developed to simulate shallow water ecosystems including emerged/submerged areas. The model includes the concept of multi-G and represents bioturbation, irrigation and compaction processes individually. In addition, vertical and horizontal spatial variation of porosity can be considered. Bacterial mineralization processes are divided into three pathways: oxic mineralization; suboxic mineralization; and anoxic mineralization. This model can indicate the dynamics of an estuarine ecosystem in terms of carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus and oxygen and mass of these elements are conserved in the each cycles. This new model was applied to the Jinno area of Atsumi Bay, Japan, and the long-term variation in water quality in the Jinno area was simulated. The simulation covered the period from April 2000 to March 2001. From the model results, the model could clarify the ecological mechanism of sea-grass beds, shallow waters without sea-grass near the mouth of a river, and an oxygen-depleted offshore area. In sea-grass beds and shallow waters without sea-grass near the mouth of a river, the turnover rates were high compared to the oxygen-depleted offshore area. The driving forces of nutrient cycling in sea-grass beds, and shallow waters without sea-grass, mainly came from biological processes. Here, it is important to note that in the case of shallow waters without sea-grass close to the river, the force of nutrient cycling from physical processes play a fairly large part compared to the other two areas. Developing this new model means having a good tool to estimate (predict) the effect or the possibility of coastal environmental management, including the re-creation of artificial sea-grass beds. We would like to thank Teruaki Suzuki at Aichi Fisheries Research Institute and Jun Hirosaki at Fuji Research Institute for their useful comments and discussion. We also thank Linda Worland and Asako Yanagihara for their critical review of the manuscript. Part of this research was supported by the Program for Promoting Fundamental Transport Technology Research from the Corporation for Advanced Transport & Technology (CATT).