Degradation studies were conducted with the fungicide 14C-dithianon under standard conditions for 64 days in soil. The compound is characterized by mineralization losses of approx. 33% and the formation of non-extractable (bound) residues of approx. 63% in 64 days. The microbial activity of the soil was stimulated by an amendment of corn straw simulating post-harvest conditions. This addition of straw decreased the mineralization of the compound initially. At the end of the incubation period, however, the mineralization rate was higher in the straw amended soil compared to the control. The addition of straw increased the amount of radiocarbon in the desorption solutions. Thus higher amounts of incorporated radiocarbon could be found in the biomass of the amended soil. Model calculations show that the straw amendment has a sustained influence on the mineralization of the compound. Potential mechanisms of the effect of dissolved organic matter on the sorption/desorption equilibrium are discussed.The environmental fate of pesticides is strongly influenced by climatic parameters (e.g. temperature, humidity, aeration), by abiotic soil parameters (e.g. texture, clay minerals, pH) and biotic soil parameters (e.g. microbial biomass, biological diversity, plant cover) ( The degradation behaviour of the foliar fungicidal ingredient The radiolabelled foliar fungicide dithianon ([5,6,9,10- The degradation of dithianon was investigated for 64 d in an orthic luvisol (Typische Parabraunerde; A After the aqueous desorption of each soil aliquot using 0.01 Aged residues were produced by incubating the soil with The surface tension of the DOC-containing desorption solutions was measured using an automated ring tensiometer (Lauda Dr. R. Wobser GmbH, Lauda-Königshofen, Germany) and compared to the surface tension of deionized water. Microbial activity was quantified by measuring the reduction of dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) ( The incorporation of radiocarbon of Balances of radiocarbon for each sampling day are presented in Detailed investigations of the desorption solutions are presented in The mineralization curves of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons ( The lasting effects of the straw addition can also be seen regarding the incorporation of radiocarbon into the biomass of the soil ( The changes of the mineralization rates and the incorporation of radiocarbon leads to the conclusion that despite the advanced fixation at the end of the studies more radiocarbon was bioavailable in the straw amended soil. The bioavailability and the microbial degradation of pesticides are mainly determined by the amount of molecules in solution as shown by Harvest residues, as a readily available carbon source, simulated by an amendment of corn straw to the soil had a sustained effect on the complete degradation of This project has been part of a cooperation with CYANAMID (Schwabenheim, Germany).