To compare the in vitro effectiveness of Low-Level Laser Therapy (LLLT) and Low Intensity Pulsed Ultrasound (LIPUS) on bony cells and related stem cells.
                  In this study, we aim to systematically review the published scientific literature which explores the use of LLLT and LIPUS to biostimulate the activity or the proliferation of bony cells or stem cells in vitro. We searched the database PubMed for LLLT or LIPUS, with/without bone, osteoblast, osteocyte, stem cells, the human osteosarcoma cell line (MG63), bone-forming cells, and cell culture (or in vitro). These studies were subdivided into categories exploring the effect of LLLT or LIPUS on bony cells, stem cells, and other related cells. 75 articles were found between 1987 and 2016; these included: 50 full paper articles on LLLT and 25 full papers on LIPUS. These articles met the eligibility criteria and were included in our review.
                  A detailed and concise description of the LLLT and the LIPUS protocols and their individual effects on bony cells or stem cells and their results are presented in five tables.
                  Based on the main results and the conclusions of the reviewed articles in the current work, both, LLLT and LIPUS, apply a biostimulatory effect on osteoblasts, osteocytes, and enhance osteoblast proliferation and differentiation on different bony cell lines used in in vitro studies, and therefore, these may be useful tools for bone regeneration therapy. Moreover, in consideration of future cell therapy protocols, both, LLLT and LIPUS (especially LLLT), enhnce a significant increase in the initial number of SCs before differentiation, thus increasing the number of differentiated cells for tissue engineering, regenerative medicine, and healing. Further studies are necessary to determine the LLLT or the LIPUS parameters, which are optimal for biostimsulating bony cells and SCs for bone healing and regenerative medicine.Alterations in bone metabolism, such as osteoporosis (OP) and diabetes mellitus (DM), seem to delay callus maturation, and consequently, decelerate fracture healing ( The hastening of the fracture healing process would have many benefits for patients ( Within this context, several different factors such as administration of parathyroid hormones (PTH), low –level laser therapy (LLLT), and low-intensity pulsed ultrasound (LIPUS) have been investigated in an attempt to minimize the time to bone consolidation. Among these, the effects of treatments such as the administration of PTH can be cited ( Research in cell biology depends on the laboratory methods that can be used to study cell structure and physiology ( Laser is important in basic sciences, but mainly so in the diagnosis and treatment of the different pathologic conditions of the patients. It is electromagnetic radiation ( LLLT is the application of light to a biological tissue to promote tissue regeneration. It has a photochemical effect; according to this effect, the light is absorbed and causes a chemical change ( The term ultrasound refers to the propagation of an acoustic wave. Depending on the frequency, and the level of acoustical energy, uses can be considered as diagnostic or therapeutic ( There exist a few review articles about the effects of LLLT and LIPUS on in vivo studies. There were not, however, any review articles which compared the in vitro effects of LLLT and LIPUS on bony cells and SCs. The present review paper provided an overview of the progress made on the roles of LLLT and LIPUS in experimental in vitro studies pertaining to bony cells or SCs as well as a comparison of the effects of these agents. In this investigation, we aimed to systematically review the use of LLLT and LIPUS to stimulate the activity or proliferation of bony cells or stem cells in vitro in scientific literature published between 1967 and 2016. We first searched PubMed database for LLLT or LIPUS, with/without bone, osteoblast, osteocyte, stem cells, the human osteosarcoma cell line (MG63), bone-forming cells, and cell culture (or in vitro). Then, the selection of published studies in the English language was done by evaluating the titles and abstracts of all the selected studies. Next, the full papers of possibly appropriate papers were found for last evaluation. Finally, these papers were sectioned into types on the basis of the effect of LLLT or LIPUS on bony cells, SCs, and other related cells. All the in vitro studies using LLLT or LIPUS on demarcated cell lines by using the outlined evaluating tests and reaching clear findings were incorporated. Finally, 75 articles were found in between 1987 and 2016. 50 full papers articles for LLLT and 25 full papers of LIPUS met the eligibility criteria and were included in our review. A detailed and concise description of the LLLT protocols and their effects on bony cells or SCs as well as their results are respectively presented in Heymann et al. reported the positive effects of LLLT on cell bioavailability in benign and malignant bone cells ( Pyo et al. concluded that LLLT induces the expression of bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP-2), osteocalcin(OCN), and the transforming growth factor beta-1 (TGF-β1) in 1% hypoxic-cultured human osteoblasts ( Jawad et al. suggested that the use of LLLT may play an important role in stimulating osteoblast cells for improved bone formation ( Stein et al. concluded that LLLT stimulates the proliferation and maturation of human osteoblasts in vitro ( Fallahnezhad et al. concluded that laser radiation could increase the viability and the proliferation rate of healthy, and the osteoporotic bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BMMSCs), which can be very valuable in regenerative medicine for the treatment of OP and osteoporotic fractures in patients ( Huertas et al. concluded that LLLT could be very valuable in tissue regeneration in different clinical settings ( Tassinary et al. reported that therapeutic ultrasound increased the proliferation of preosteoblast-like bone cells ( Li et al. concluded that LIPUS controls the proliferation and the differentiation of osteoblasts via osteocytes in vitro. The amplified secretion of Prostaglandin E2 (PGE 2) from osteocytes may helpful for this process ( Huang et al. concluded that BMPs-2, 4, and 7 may be facilitated by LIPUS during the fracture healing process ( Warden et al. reported that LIPUS has a direct effect on bone formation. This may contribute to the beneficial effect of LIPUS on fracture repair ( Fifteen bony cell lines and related bony cell lines in 39 studies of laser groups were identified. Six types of SCs in 11 studies of laser group were found. The majority of cell line studies (23 of 39) employed wavelengths within the infrared spectrum (808–1064 nm). The most popular wave lengths of stem cell lines studies (6 of 11) were within the red spectrum (632.8–635 nm). The majority of laser studies reported power; these for bony and related cells ranged from 0.002 to 1.0 W, with the reported use of higher output associated with the use of the red spectrum (1.0 W for 780 nm, Ref. no: 54). Power for stem cells ranged between 0.003 and 1.5 W, with the reported use of higher output associated with the use of the Nd:Yag laser (1064 nm, 1.5 W, Ref. No: 65). Despite the fact that power density (irradiance) represents an important parameter in LLLT ( The majority of laser studies reported a continuous wave of LLLT. In a few studies, (12 of 49) frequency ranged from 1 to 30 kHz. Most of studies show the positive effects of LLLT on bony cell lines, related bony cell lines, and stem cell lines, with three exceptions of bony cell lines and related bony cell lines, and one exception of SC that shows that there is no effect of LLLT on the cells. Nine bony cell lines and related bony cell lines in 18 studies of the LIPUS groups were identified. Five types of SCs in the seven studies of the US group were found. The frequency used in bony cells and other related cell lines of ultrasound papers were between 0.045 and 1.5 MHz. The majority of studies (11 of 18) employed 1.5 MHz. The frequencies used in stem cell lines of ultrasound papers were between 1.0 and 1.5 MHz; most of the studies selected 1.5 MHz. In most bony cells and other related cell lines in ultrasound papers (12 of 18), only 30 mW/cm The pulse repetition rate was not reported in seven studies of the ultrasound group. However, in some of the bony cells and other related cell lines in the papers exploring the ultrasound group (10 of 18), 1.0 kHz were used. The pulse repetition rate that was used in the SC lines of the ultrasound papers were between 0.01 and 30 kHz. The most commonly applied pulse repetition rates among these studies were 1 and 30 kHz. In all the studies of bony cell lines, related bony cell lines, and SCs in the ultrasound group, positive effects of LIPUS were reported. Using the findings of many cellular and molecular analyses, the present review article study demonstrated that both the LLL and the LIPUS were able to stimulate the different cell lines of osteoblasts, osteocytes, osteosarcoma cells, and SCs. LLLT is safe ( The United States Food and Drug Administration approved the use of LIPUS for accelerating conservatively-managed fresh fracture healing in 1994 and for treatment of established nonunions in 2000 ( Based on all the results and conclusions of the reviewed articles, LLLT and LIPUS appear to exert a biostimulatory effect on osteoblasts and osteocytes, and enhance osteoblastic proliferation and differentiation on different bony cell lines used in in vitro studies, and therefore, may be a useful tool for bone regeneration therapy ( In addition and in consideration of future cell therapy protocols, both LLLT and LIPUS (but more specifically LLLT) permit a significant increase in the initial number of stem cells before differentiation, thus increasing the number of differentiated cells for tissue engineering, regenerative medicine, and healing ( Considering that one of the most common treatments for lesions in the musculoskeletal system is the use of nonhormonal anti-inflammatory drugs, which have serious side effects (such as gastrointestinal ulcers, cardiovascular problems, etc.), further conservative managements, such as LLLT and LIPUS, are gaining importance as alternatives ( We believe few negative results of LLLT were due to some technical problems during these experiments ( Based on the main results and the conclusions of the reviewed articles in the current work, both LLLT and LIPUS apply a biostimulatory effect on osteoblasts, osteocytes, and enhance osteoblast proliferation and differentiation on different bony cell lines used in in vitro studies, and therefore, these methods may be useful for bone regeneration therapy. Moreover, considering the future cell therapy protocols, both LLLT and LIPUS (especially LLLT) permit a significant increase in the initial number of SCs before differentiation, thus increasing the number of differentiated cells for tissue engineering, regenerative medicine, and healing. Further studies are necessary to determine the LLLT or LIPUS parameters that will be optimal in biostimsulating bony cells and the SCs for bone healing and regenerative medicine. The Authors acknowledged that there was no financial support for this paper. The Authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.