A new method is presented for the rapid dissolution of enargite enhanced by the addition of pyrite as catalyst in acidic ferric sulfate media. At atmospheric conditions the effects of the ratio of pyrite (FeS2) to enargite (Cu3AsS4), temperature, solution potential, iron concentration, sulfuric acid concentration, particle size, and pulp density were evaluated. The best conditions were found to be at 80°C with a pyrite to enargite ratio (Py:En) of 4, which gave complete copper extraction within 24hours. The dissolution rate appears to be insensitive to changes in iron and acid concentrations. Elemental sulfur formed a porous layer on the surface of enargite particles, while pyrite surfaces remained clean. Arsenic presented the same dissolution rate as copper and all of the arsenic reported to solution, predominantly in the form of As(III).Copper minerals containing arsenic such as enargite (Cu Various treatments have been proposed to enable the processing of enargite-containing ores and concentrates. Some past studies proposed the separation of enargite from other valuable minerals such as chalcopyrite by flotation using electrochemical control and other means (  In many studies, enargite dissolution in acid media has been shown to be slower than chalcopyrite ( A more detailed study of natural and synthetic enargite dissolution by By this reaction, only 50% of the copper was extracted from finely ground enargite (− Chloride media has been studied for enargite leaching by several authors. Biological leaching of enargite has also been investigated ( High pressure leaching of enargite concentrates containing pyrite has been also investigated. In summary, previous studies have shown that oxidative leaching of enargite in sulfuric or hydrochloric acid media, with and without bacteria, at atmospheric pressure is inefficient. Those studies in general agree that the dissolution of enargite forms majority elemental sulfur, but there is no consensus as to whether this sulfur layer is porous or non-porous, or whether this layer contributes to enargite passivation. In addition, no studies reported in literature investigated enargite leaching at controlled solution potentials. A range of suitable potentials to be applied could be obtained by electrochemical studies of the sample to be leached. Even though there are a number of electrochemical studies of enargite ( However, in our laboratory, with a combination of simple electrochemical measurements on particles, an appropriate control of the solution potential, and the addition of a sulfide that is usually found in copper concentrates, we observed a catalytic effect of pyrite on the dissolution of enargite. This same effect has also been observed for the dissolution of chalcopyrite, resulting in the conception of a new process ( Three different sulfide minerals were used in the present study: chalcopyrite (CuFeS The reagents used to prepare the test solutions consisted of ferrous sulfate (FeSO A three-electrode electrochemical cell was used. An XYZ motorized micromanipulator was mounted on one side of a conventional stereo microscope that provided the means for accurate positioning of the working electrode. The working microelectrode was made by joining together an electrochemically activated carbon fiber 25 The tip of the working electrode was contacted with a single sulfide particle placed on a disk of glass frit immersed in electrolyte solution. The glass frit was inside a 100 Chalcopyrite (Cp), Pyrite (Py), and Enargite (En) particles were selected using an optical microscope. Then an energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) analysis was performed under a scanning electron microscope (SEM) to confirm purity of the particle The experimental leaching apparatus is shown in The scanning electronic microscope (SEM) Hitachi S3000 VP-SEM with EDX was operated at variable pressure and backscattered mode conditions with an energy of 20 Electrochemical tests consisting of cyclic voltammetry (CV) and the measurement of open circuit potentials (OCP) were conducted on sulfide particles of approximately 100 Increasing sulfuric acid concentration and increasing temperature both caused a significant decrease in the OCP of all of the sulfides. In spite of the clear effect of temperature and acid concentration, the differences in rest potential between the different sulfide minerals were always maintained. Pyrite had the highest OCP at 398 Enargite is a semiconductor that passivates during leaching to form a sulfur layer on its surface. To provide evidence for the formation of the sulfur layer, a cyclic voltammetry test was applied to a single particle of enargite. Considering that enargite is a semiconductor as well as chalcopyrite and many other sulfides, it can be stipulated that the dissolution of this mineral is a galvanic corrosion process. For this to occur, both cathodic and anodic sites must occur on the mineral surface. Often certain surface regions such as impurity atom sites, dislocations, grain boundaries, etc., become anodic, while the remainder of the surface becomes cathodic. The actual dissolution occurs at the anodic sites while oxidant is reduced at the cathodic sites. The electrical circuit is then completed through the conducting enargite. Apparently, during the first steps of leaching enargite presents both anodic and cathodic sites, but after the compact sulfur layer has formed, the dissolution rate begins to decrease. This leaves enargite particles with almost no cathodic sites on its surface with which to continue its electrochemical dissolution. It has been demonstrated previously, in a mixture of two different sulfide minerals, that significant oxidation occurs on one of the sulfides while a measure of galvanic protection is conferred on the other (  In order to demonstrate the effectiveness of pyrite addition during enargite acidic ferric solution leaching, a set of experiments was performed using the enargite sample from Butte (Montana) with additions of the Huanzala (Peru) pyrite. Seven tests were run in 1.5 When enargite leaching was conducted in the absence of pyrite, the leach rate was very slow and apparently reached a plateau after 25 Adding pyrite to the system increased the dissolution rate. This increase was particularly dramatic at a Py:En ratio of 4:1 or more. When this Py:En ratio was used the enargite leaching was essentially complete after 24 To study the effect of sulfuric acid on enargite dissolution, three different experiments were performed with sulfuric acid concentrations of 120, 60, and 40 The baseline test of this study was based on 25 To study the effect of the total iron concentration on the dissolution of enargite, and also the effect of pyrite recycle, two different experiments with 7 and 20 The results of these four experiments are shown in Comparing both of the pyrite recycle experiments, it can be seen that total iron content also did not influence these tests. On the other hand, copper extraction after 50 Leaching caused the decrease in pyrite surface area. Apparently, the solution potential of these tests was high enough to cause pyrite leaching. ICP analysis showed an increase of iron in solution between the first and last samples of 9.96 To evaluate the effect of solution potential on the dissolution of enargite catalyzed by pyrite, four different tests were performed. Keeping the En:Py ratio constant at 3, with 60 The results of copper extraction for solution potentials of 460, 470, 480 and 490 The same Huanzala pyrite used in this work was used in a different study ( Therefore, not only the dissolution potential of enargite must be evaluated, but also the potential at which pyrite begins to dissolve under various conditions. The experimental conditions for the study of enargite particle size effect were similar to those described above with a solution potential controlled at 480 The effect of particle size on the oxidation of enargite is presented in Four experiments were conducted to determine the effect of temperature on the rate of copper dissolution from enargite. Other parameters used in these experiments (480 Temperature had a strong effect on the leaching rate. About 35% of the enargite was leached after 45 The objective of this section is to compare the dissolution of arsenic and copper during the leaching process, to determine the extent of arsenic precipitation, and to clarify the oxidation state of dissolved arsenic. Tests were run at 80 Solution samples were analyzed using induction-coupled plasma (ICP). The amounts of copper and arsenic calculated are presented in The stoichiometric ratio of copper and arsenic in solution suggests that the dissolution of enargite occurs without the formation of intermediate sulfides or other compounds, which is in agreement with previous studies conducted under similar conditions ( Or, also: Both reactions generate elemental sulfur that forms at the surface of the unreacted mineral particles as shown in The oxidation state of arsenic in solution is determined by the mechanism of enargite oxidation as given by Eqs. The most abundant compound was found at m/z This result agrees with the work of This study has successfully demonstrated that complete leaching of enargite in acidic ferric sulfate media is possible. Using ground pyrite in solution as a catalyst, virtually complete extraction of copper from enargite was achieved within 24 Temperature had the largest influence on dissolution, followed by enargite particle size. Solution potential had a moderate effect, giving the best results at 460 to 470 A porous layer of elemental sulfur was formed which did not present a barrier for the transport of solutes to the enargite surface. Arsenic in solution followed the same dissolution pattern as copper, with no evidence of precipitation. As(III) was the predominant form of arsenic in solution. This new route of enargite treatment is capable of treating copper-arsenic concentrates in conventional tanks at atmospheric pressure, without the need for roasting, ultrafine grinding, high pressure reactors, corrosive chemical additives or bacteria. The authors gratefully acknowledge the generous financial support of the