Fog collection can alleviate water scarcity in certain arid regions of the World. However, large fog collectors frequently fail under the load of strong wind events. This is mainly due to lack of engineered design and the absence of data on mechanical properties of the meshes used as collecting surface. Indeed, engineering methods permit to design a structure to withstand any desired wind speed. In this study we obtained the mechanical properties of a particular Raschel mesh, the most commonly used material for fog collection, by means of tensile tests. We found that Raschel mesh is very anisotropic, having a stiff and elastic behavior in the knitting, or longitudinal direction, whereas in the transverse direction has an extremely flexible (virtually no stiffness), nonlinear behavior. Using a relatively simple 2-D structural model, we show that the maximum wind pressure a mesh can withstand is inversely proportional to the distance between the sides of the frame that supports the mesh. As a consequence, we recommend installing this mesh with the longitudinal direction aligned with the shortest dimension of the mesh-holding frame, if maximum strength and minimum deformation are desired. The structural model also indicates that the mesh can withstand very strong winds, over 50m/s assuming a steady wind velocity for the typical large fog collectors as presently installed. Possible reasons why the mesh has been observed to break at weaker winds are then discussed.Fog collection can alleviate water scarcity problems in certain arid areas. It has been studied and proved for decades as a feasible alternative source of fresh water in arid areas with the presence of suitable persistent fog ( Since the first studies made by Carlos Espinosa in Chile ( One of the main problems that affects the sustainability of fog collection projects is the maintenance of LFCs that are frequently damaged by strong winds events, the sun (UV radiation) and other environmental factors which affect the structure, mesh and other components ( Recently, The reason why LFCs exhibit such a poor reliability is undoubtedly the lack of a rational (i.e., “engineered”) design process. In other words, most existing LFCs are non-engineered structures. Thus, the implementation of structural engineering principles is then clearly necessary in order to extend the life cycle of LFCs and, consequently, to make them more cost-effective. In this regard, it is interesting to note that, although various geometric layouts have been proposed and implemented, the load path in LFCs is always the same: wind imposes pressures on the mesh, which in turn impose forces on the supporting structure, and these forces are ultimately transferred to the foundation. If the load is known, forces on the mesh and on the supporting structure can be easily calculated through the application of standard structural engineering methods and, once these forces are known, the supporting structure can be easily designed to withstand such forces. However, the assessment of forces on the mesh and on the supporting structures requires knowledge of their mechanical properties. In the case of the supporting structure, these properties are usually known because its members (e.g., beams, columns, cables) have many other structural engineering applications and, hence, have been already characterized, in some cases in detail. The properties of the mesh, on the other hand, are largely unknown: they have not been characterized mainly because typical mesh materials of LFCs do not have structural applications. There are two main design types of LFCs, one type uses rigid frames to hold the mesh and the other uses a flexible frame made with cables. It has been observed that the rigid frame design is more prone to damage by strong winds than the flexible frame one, because the latter bends and adopts a shape that better supports wind forces. The ONG FogQuest has been quite successful in installing flexible frame LFCs all over the world with relatively long useful life. This is the result of a good design and a sound building practice. The objective of this paper is to characterize, qualitatively and quantitatively, the mechanical properties of the Raschel mesh, which is by far the most used mesh material in LFCs ( The Raschel mesh tested in this study corresponds to the standard, black, polyethylene mesh produced in Chile by Marienberg, For characterizing the mechanical properties relevant for the structural design of Raschel mesh in both directions, we performed several tensile tests to selected specimens. All tensile tests were performed at the Laboratory of Metallurgy of the Mechanical and Metallurgical Engineering Department, Pontificia Universidad Catolica de Chile, according to ASTM Standard D4595-11. This standard was developed for geo-textiles, but we could not find a specific standard for Raschel mesh and we believe that this is probably the most appropriate standard for characterizing this material. Following the recommendations of this standard, we made special clamps to hold the specimen on the tensile test machine, as depicted in The main result of the test is the force versus elongation curve, from which strength and stiffness can be assessed. Since the thickness of the mesh is small and difficult to define and measure, due to its large pores, instead of using stress to generalize the results, we used force per unit width, as recommended by ASTM Standard D4595-11. Tensile tests performed along the longitudinal direction produced very different results from the ones performed along the transverse direction.  The force per unit width and elongation are the characteristics that are necessary to calculate the maximum wind that may resist the mesh of a LFC. The relationship between these two variables is shown in The test results described in the former section confirm that the Raschel mesh is indeed very anisotropic. In particular, it has significant strength and stiffness in the longitudinal direction, but has virtually no stiffness (non-negligible only at very large deformations) and a much lesser strength in the transverse direction. These characteristics are very important because they indicate that, when subjected to wind loads, a flat (i.e., bidirectional) Raschel mesh essentially works in a unidirectional manner, i.e., tensile forces act on the mesh only along the longitudinal direction. Since the mesh cannot take bending moments, all the internal forces remain in the plane of the mesh. Therefore, even though the mesh under the effects of the wind takes a three-dimensional shape, the stress analysis is two-dimensional (basic plate theory, see for instance Forces on LFCs subjected to wind loads are then assessed with the help of the 2D model schematically depicted in Since the mesh is a structural membrane, it does not take bending moments and, therefore, the only force it supports at the point of attachment to the rigid frame, Since the frame is assumed as perfectly rigid, the radius Eq. Finally, we need to relate the pressure on the mesh with wind velocity. The procedure to obtain the maximum wind velocity that the mesh of a particular LFC can withstand starts with obtaining the maximum force per unit width and corresponding elongation from tensile tests. With these values, calculate sin With the results presented in Eqs.  However, as mentioned in The first reason is related to practical installation issues and is well known by people with practice in LFC installation. Indeed, as discussed in The second reason is related to wind flow behavior and has not been mentioned previously in the literature. Wind flow has normally large scale turbulence that manifests as wind gusts. The forces induced on LFCs by wind gusts are dynamic with far more detrimental effects on structural elements. Additionally, wind gust speeds are of the order of 1.5 times the average wind speed registered by meteorological stations ( Raschel mesh has a very anisotropic mechanical behavior, being much stronger and stiffer in the longitudinal (knitting) direction. Also stretching in this direction is elastic and elongation is far smaller than in the transverse direction. Based on these findings, it was determined that a flat mesh of a LFC behaves in an essentially unidirectional manner (i.e., tensile forces act only along the longitudinal direction) when subjected to wind loads. A relatively simple 2D model was then developed to assess the maximum wind load that a Raschel mesh can withstand. It was found that a Raschel mesh shall be installed with the longitudinal direction aligned with the shortest dimension of the frame if maximum strength and minimum deformation is desired. It was also found that the Raschel mesh considered in this study should withstand extremely strong winds without damage. Therefore, mesh breakages commonly observed are most likely caused by factors that are known to reduce the strength of the mesh, such as stress concentration, rubbing with other objects, and weak spots produced during erection. The intrinsically dynamic nature of wind loads as a consequence of velocity fluctuation and vortex shedding is, in the long term, likely to induce breakage at wind velocities that are far less than those obtained considering the results of standard lab tests. This phenomenon has not been studied in detail and is certainly recommended for future research. The authors want to acknowledge the grant from