This paper is concerned with the functions of crystallitic carbon, prepared from anthracite coal by demineralization and carbonization, for making Mg-based nanocomposites for hydrogen storage by reactive milling under hydrogen atmosphere. The TEM and XRD analysis show that in the presence of 30wt.% of crystallitic carbon, the Mg easily hydrided into β-MgH2 of particle size 20–60nm and crystal grain size 29.7nm and a small amount of γ-MgH2 after 3h of milling under 1MPa H2. The hydrogen content of the composites is up to 5.81wt.% determined by water displacement method, and its dehydrogenation peak temperature is 344.2°C by DSC analysis. The enthalpy and entropy changes of the hydrogen desorption reaction are 42.7kJ/mol and 80.7J/molK, respectively, calculated by the van’t Hoff equation from the p–C–T data in 300–380°C. With the extension of milling time, more γ-MgH2 yielded, and the endothermic peak of γ-MgH2 separated from that of β-MgH2. The CH dangling bonds in the hydrogenated carbon were determined by FT-IR analysis. The dehydrogenation temperature of the materials decreased with the addition of Co, Ni, Fe and Al.Hydrogen is increasingly considered as an ideal fuel for the future because of its lightweight, zero pollutant emission, high conversion efficiency and potentially abundant production from renewable resources. It is proposed to use hydrogen in power transport vehicles as fuel for proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) or for internal combustion engines. Finding an effective method to store hydrogen is one of the critical steps required for hydrogen energy. Some efforts have been directed towards storing hydrogen in solids such as metal hydrides, complex aluminum hydrides, amides, borohydrides, nanostructure carbons, and metal organic frameworks (MOFs). Magnesium is a promising candidate for hydrogen storage because its theoretical hydrogen capacity is up to 7.6 Wagemans et al. systematically investigated the effect of crystal grain size on the thermodynamic stability of magnesium hydride using ab initio Hartree–Fock and density functional theory calculations Zhang et al. synthesized magnesium nanoparticles around 40 Ball milling has been employed to decrease the particle size of magnesium. However, it is difficult to obtain magnesium with particle size less than 500 The hydriding and dehydriding kinetics of magnesium can be significantly improved by the use of catalysts, such as Ni Besides as fuel, hydrogen is widely used as reactant in the process of hydrogenation, such as hydrocracking, hydrodesulfurization and hydrodenitrogenation. The H In this work, crystallitic carbon, prepared from anthracite coal by demineralization and carbonization, was used as an additive into magnesium to prepare nanocomposite material for hydrogen storage by reactive milling only for 3 The hydrogen used as ball-milling atmosphere has a purity of >99.99 The anthracite coal was demineralized by alkaline melting and acid rinsing treatment to remove most of the mineral matter inherent to the coal, and the ash content was decreased to 0.05 Ball milling to prepare hydrogen storage materials was carried out on a planetary ball-mill (ND7-2 model, Nanda Tianzun Instrument Company, China) with four stainless steel vessels of 500 The morphology observation of the materials was performed on a Hitachi H-800 transmission electron microscope (TEM) operating at 150 By watching the dispersivity of the powders from milling, the effectiveness of crystallitic carbon as milling aid for magnesium can be appreciated. Experiments show that when the crystallitic carbon in the start material is only 10  Magnesium powders have a strong tendency to cold welding during high energy milling, which means they are easy to weld at room temperature and adhere to the surface of milling balls and the inside walls of milling vessels, and as a consequence the milling process might be deteriorated. On the contrary, the crystallitic carbon particles are easy to be milled into nanoparticles because of the low bonding force between crystal grains, and they have not any tendency to cold welding. Therefore, the carbon can firstly play a role of dispersing agent to prevent magnesium powders from cold welding during milling, and dispersive powders can be prepared when the carbon additive is over 30 Image (b) of   After 20 The crystal grain size, represented by the piling height of specific diffraction crystal planes, i.e. the dimension of planes in the perpendicular direction, can be calculated by the Scherrer equation as the following: According to the diffraction peak at 2 The crystal grain size of the β-MgH Dehydrogenation temperature is very important to hydrogen storage materials used for vehicle fuel cells, which affects the practicability of the materials. Too high dehydrogenation temperature means it is difficult to realize its hydrogen releasing. So, suitable dehydrogenation temperature is desired for hydrogen storage materials, e.g. 80–150  With the increase of milling time, a new endothermic peak appears. The lower one corresponds to less stable γ-MgH Moreover, it was found that catalytic metals can significantly lower the dehydrogenation temperature of materials. In a system with the presence of hydrogen, magnesium-based materials usually show a pressure plateau where the pressure of hydrogen in the container maintains almost constant under isothermal condition. Suitable plateau pressure, as long as plateau length and small pressure hysteresis between dehydrogenation and hydrogenation are desired for hydrogen storage materials designed for vehicle fuel cells. The pressure plateau is usually displayed by  In the plateau pressure range of In the temperature range of 300–380 The coefficient of determination According to DSC–TG analysis, the heat absorbed by the material to release each mole of hydrogen can be calculated by the integrated heat of endothermic peak in DSC curve and the amount of hydrogen released in the process. The integrated heat of the material is 36.4 The carbon additive in the mixture with magnesium not only affects the morphology but also the hydrogen content of the materials from milling as shown by curve (a) in In addition, the hydrogen content of the materials is affected by milling time as shown by curve (b) in Moreover, the hydrogen content of the materials is affected by the addition of catalytic metal. The values of the hydrogen content with 10 The hydrogen content determined by water displacement method at 350 Majer et al. reported that the hydrogen stored in graphite may be ascribed to the hydrogen in graphite inter layers and the hydrogen chemisorbed at dangling bonds of edge carbon atoms The method to exactly determine the hydrogen capacity of the carbon in the composite material has not been established by now. However, the contribution of carbon to the hydrogen capacity of the composite material can be estimated according to the carbon content and hydrogen capacity of the composite material. The maximum hydrogen capacity of magnesium is 7.6 Synergetic effect for hydrogen storage might exist between magnesium and carbon because the latter shows a hydrogen capacity less than 0.4 The crystallitic carbon, prepared from anthracite coal by demineralization and carbonization, is an effective milling aid for magnesium with functions of dispersant, lubricant and milling media, and therefore in the presence of 30 The Mg can hydride into β-MgH The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support from