Enzymatic hydrolysis provides an environmentally friendly pathway from cellulosic biomass to sugars that can be fermented to produce ethanol. The hydrolysis step has a marked influence on the overall efficiency of the bioethanol process. Since the cellulosic substrate cannot be completely cleaved to sugars, there always remains a solid residue suspended in the hydrolysate. Solid–liquid separation performed at this stage can improve subsequent membrane filtration (for recycling the enzymes, or concentrating the sugars prior to fermentation, for example). The fermentation process can also be controlled more readily if the cellulosic residue is removed after the hydrolysis. For the present study, shredded cardboard was chosen as the cellulosic raw material. Non-degraded solids were separated from enzymatically produced hydrolysates using a laboratory-scale pressure filter. The influence of process-related variables, such as enzyme dosage, the level of pre-milling, and the initial substrate concentration were investigated by determining the concentrations of glucose and xylose during the hydrolysis. Filtration tests were carried out at three different pressures immediately after each batch of hydrolysis was completed. The results show that some of the chosen variables have an unexpected effect on the filtration characteristics. The degree of conversion of the cellulosic substrate to glucose and xylose was also affected by the investigated process variables.Bioethanol produced from lignocellulosic raw materials has the potential to be one of the most important solutions for reducing the dependence upon fossil fuels in the near future. In spite of numerous technical challenges, industrial-scale production of bioethanol from lignocellulosic biomasses is becoming an option worth consideration. Cellulose is a linear biopolymer consisting of glucose units linked to each other by β-(1-4) linkages ( Enzymatic hydrolysis is an environmentally benign process step that can be used for cleaving the cellulose polymers to glucose, because currently available microorganisms cannot effectively convert cellulose directly to ethanol. The recalcitrance of cellulosic materials to enzymatic hydrolysis is generally regarded as the most significant obstacle to the viable conversion of cellulose to ethanol. A large variety of pretreatment methods, including, for example, steam explosion, ammonia fiber explosion and treatment with pressurized hot water at 150–200 In this experimental study, the solid–liquid separation characteristics of hydrolysates produced by enzymatic hydrolysis from cardboard waste are discussed. It is important to know the filtration behavior of the solid residue that remains after converting a large proportion of the polymeric raw material to monomeric sugars. Significant changes in the properties of the solid take place as the enzymatic hydrolysis proceeds, for example reduction of the fiber dimensions ( The raw material used in the experiments was air dry cellulosic waste consisting mainly of shredded cardboard. Besides cellulose, hemicelluloses and lignin, pieces of plastic, metals, as well as inorganic minerals were found in the raw material. The cellulose content of the raw material was 63 The cellulosic raw material was divided into two classes; (1) original untreated cardboard waste and (2) milled cardboard waste. Milling was carried out by using a specially designed machine owned by the University of Oulu. The maximum size of the particles exiting the machine was 1.5 The total number of hydrolysis batches produced was 14. The experimental variables included (1) enzyme dosage, (2) particle size of the raw material, and (3) initial solid concentration of the suspension. A laboratory scale, Nutsche type, pressure filter was used for studying the influence of the variables on the filterability of the hydrolysates. Because of the filter design, in particular the small diameter of the feed pipe, the maximum solid concentration used in this study was restricted to 10%. The experimental plan is presented in A jacketed glass reactor with a volume of 3 The duration of each hydrolysis was 72 The filtration experiments were conducted using a laboratory scale Nutsche pressure filter. Nitrogen was used to pressurize the filter after filling the filter chamber with the hydrolyzed suspension. The filter was kept at the required temperature with a Lauda RK8 KP thermostat, circulating water through the jacket of the filter. The filter medium, of T1000 type, supplied by Pall Corporation (Bad Kreuznach, Germany), was a disc of cellulose with an effective diameter of 49 Seven samples were collected from the hydrolysis tank during each test run. The concentrations of glucose and xylose in the produced hydrolysates were determined by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC, HP Agilent 1100). The column, a Varian Metacarb 87H, was kept at 60 The yield of glucose in the enzymatic conversion, The conventional theory of constant pressure filtration was applied for the calculations. For calculating the specific cake resistances and cake compressibility indices, the filtration data were modified by plotting the filtration time per volume of filtrate ( Average specific resistances Resistances Resistances of the filter media The cake compressibility index, Calculations related to pressure filtration are described in more detail by The average porosity Different proportions of the original raw material were converted to glucose during the hydrolysis stage. All the variables, including enzyme dosage (ED), particle size of the raw material (PS), and solid concentration (SC) of the suspension, were observed to have an influence on the conversion yield, Glucose concentrations in the liquid phase of the hydrolyzed suspensions, determined after 1, 3, 6, 15, 24, 48, and 72  The concentrations of dissolved solids in the filtrates ranged from 1.9 to 5.3 The particle size of the raw material also had a considerable impact on glucose formation. As shown in The influence of solid concentration of the suspension on the glucose formation during the hydrolysis is presented in Unlike in a typical enzymatic hydrolysis of cellulose, the conversion yield ( Excessively intense mixing is generally known to decrease the conversion yield through partial deactivation of enzymes ( Xylose is the most common pentose sugar derived from the hemicellulose present in most hardwood species ( Significant concentrations of xylose were detected in the hydrolysates. The relative concentrations of xylose in the experiments were fairly similar to those of glucose ( The filtration experiments were carried out using a laboratory scale Nutsche pressure filter at 1, 3.5 and 6 The filterability of the hydrolyzed suspension was markedly better when the enzyme dosage was low, i.e. when a smaller proportion of cellulose had been converted to glucose. This is because a high degree of hydrolysis will shorten the cellulosic fibers ( The results reveal interesting things about premilling of the raw material. The finest fraction (that passed through the 125 Determination of ash content (ISO 1762:2001, 525 The solid content of the hydrolyzed suspension had a marked effect on the filtration rate. While there was a slight difference between the filtration rates for 7.5 and 10% suspensions, the filtration rate for the 5% suspension was much higher. In addition to the higher liquid content of the 5% suspension, the relative quantity of non-converted cellulose in that suspension was largest as well. It is difficult to find a simple explanation for the poor filterability of the 7.5% hydrolysate, but the heterogeneity of the raw material combined with the influences of mixing might be the major reasons. One hydrolysis batch was produced to investigate how filtration temperature affects filterability. The applied filtration temperatures were 10, 20, 30, 40, and 50 The results presented in The average resistances of the filter cakes obtained at filtration pressures of 1, 3.5, and 6  The medium resistances The effect of the initial raw material particle size on the average specific resistance of the filter cake is shown in Compared to the original, non-milled raw material (  There was a large difference between the lowest and highest specific cake resistance: the lowest value, 1.8 The average porosity of the filter cakes, i.e. the volume fraction of pores in the cake, depended on the conversion yield as presented in The conversion yield did not have such a clear correlation with the compressibility index Since each filtration test was carried out twice, it was possible to evaluate the repeatability of the experiments. The repeatability was evaluated based on the average volumetric flow rate of the filtrate during each test. Average flow rate of the parallel tests was calculated and the relative differences (%) from the average were used for repeatability evaluation. Generally, the differences were small, 1–2% from the mean flow rates. The objective of this experimental study was to investigate how the solid–liquid separation of hydrolysates produced by enzymatic hydrolysis from cardboard waste is influenced by the enzyme dosage, premilling of the raw material, solid concentration, and temperature of filtration. The degree of conversion of the cellulosic raw material to simple sugars (glucose and xylose) was influenced by a number of factors. The raw material was observed to be very heterogeneous, which may have caused uncertainty about the accuracy of the results. Enzyme dosage had the biggest impact on the conversion yield, but the economy of the process places limits on the use of enzymes in industrial applications. Quite surprisingly, premilling of the raw material did not increase the conversion yield and did not have a significant effect on the hydrolysis kinetics. Different amounts of sugars were produced from the separated size fractions of the premilled raw material, which implies that the material composition of the fractions was not exactly uniform. Conversion of cellulose to glucose was most efficient at the highest solid concentration of 10%. The typical concentration of xylose in the hydrolysates was approximately 30% of the corresponding glucose concentration. It is apparent that proper pretreatment of the raw material and operation at higher solid concentrations would be required to make the process economically feasible. A low conversion yield, as a result of low enzyme dosage, corresponded with improved filterability of the hydrolysate. A high conversion yield, on the contrary, was the most important factor causing poor filterability. Unlike in mineral engineering applications, the smallest size fraction was, surprisingly, the easiest one to filter. The reason for that may be the composition of the fraction, i.e. a higher ash content and therefore a lower conversion yield and a relatively low compressibility of the cake. Differences in particle shape and composition of the size fractions were not analyzed in this study, but these factors are likely to have a very important role in the filtration process. Filtration rate was higher at lower solid concentration of the suspension, possibly because of lower conversion yield. In industrial applications, however, the solid concentrations would need to be significantly higher than the concentrations used in this study. The average resistance of the filter cake was exceptionally high in case of the 7.5% suspension. Increasing the filtration temperature from 10 to 40 Average specific resistances of the filter cakes were high, 1.2 The results obtained in this study can be applied in pressure filtration operations when the slurry is of a similar type, i.e. processed cellulose, such as paper, cardboard or pulp. Especially the enzyme dosage and the filtration temperature are likely to have similar effects on filtration of other biomass slurries. The results are not directly applicable to hydrolysates containing higher proportions of lignin. Additionally, pretreatment of the raw material has also an influence on the enzymatic conversion and the subsequent filtration.