As new technology is introduced, demand for certain materials will increase and demand for others will diminish. Base metal supply is generally elastic and can be expected to respond to demand. However, most minor metals—or “companion metals”—are coproduced with base metals and therefore have severely limited supply elasticity. If technological or societal change leads to a major demand reduction for a base metal, this could cause significant supply constraints for its companion metals.
                  “Black swan” events are unexpected disruptions with major consequences. In this work, we show that not all companion metals behave the same when faced with a black swan base metal supply disruption, in our case Cu and Zn. We model the large-scale adoption of graphene for both electricity transport and corrosion protection, resulting in 25% and 33% reductions in demand over the 2025–2040 period for Cu and Zn, respectively. We find that companion metals fall into three categories: 1) the nuisance companion, 2) the low-volume companion, and 3) the profitable companion. Cadmium is an example of a nuisance companion, and as of 2014, half of the available Cd was discarded in some form rather than refined into metal. A supply disruption would lead to a reduced Cd oversupply but not to constraints. Germanium and indium are examples of low-volume companions and show a modest supply deficit of 20–50% in 2050 if confronted with a black swan event. Both elements face challenges in scaling up production significantly beyond current coproduction levels with Zn. Silver and molybdenum are profitable companions, and the overall market of these metals would only be moderately impacted by a black swan event (10–20% deficit) because other sources exist. These results indicate policy makers concerned about materials criticality should focus their limited resources on low-volume companion metals.It remains to be seen whether resources supporting the material basis of society are robust enough to carry us through the twenty-first century. Identifying which materials are potentially problematic has been the key enterprise of the critical material community Criticality is assessed on indicators including substitutability, geographical supply concentration, and environmental impacts The most straightforward way to estimate the future magnitude of any variable, including supply and demand, is to build on historical data. However, technology is not static. As new products are introduced or old ones modified (inevitably with new mixtures of materials), demand for certain materials will wax and demand for others will wane. Change can be evolutionary, as with the gradual ongoing replacement of iron alloys with aluminum in transportation, or revolutionary, as with the growth of InSn oxide demand for liquid crystal display (LCD) screens in the 1990s, the recent rise of smartphones, or the possible replacement of crystalline silicon and thin-film solar cells with perovskite solar cells The topic of radical changes in material demand has been explored in various publications. For example, Alonso et al. evaluate how an energy transition toward renewable sources could induce a rapid increase in demand for rare earth elements, on the order of 8.6% annual growth rate over the next two decades However, the supply and demand for many minor metals exhibit a layer of complexity beyond a disruptively increasing demand. These metals are often procured as by-products of base metals, usually in the smelting and refining stages; consequently, producers of minor metals may have limited ability to expand supply in reaction to demand. In many cases, supply of these companion metals is tied to production of the host metals. This work examines companion metals associated with the production of Cu and Zn, which are both primarily produced from sulfide ores. The production process involves the following stages: concentration at the mine site, which separates metals from ores and produces a mineral concentrate (typically 25% Cu and 50% Zn); smelting, which oxidizes sulfur concentrates at high temperatures; and refining, which produces pure metals by removing remaining impurities. Minor metals are geologically associated with base metals in ores, and in many cases are incorporated into the base metal concentrates and into smelter feeds. In the smelters and refineries, these minor metals need to be separated, either into economic by-products, stockpiles for future recovery, or environmentally stable wastes. Disruptions are often difficult or even impossible to predict. Rather, they are “black swan” events—improbable and largely unanticipated events or transitions that have a disproportionately high impact (     We have previously investigated the 2010 rare earth crisis that occurred when China blockaded the export of rare earths after a diplomatic incident with Japan. This supply-fast disruption took roughly 2 years to clear up ( There is scant literature on disruptions in the companion metal supply chain. Tisserant and Pauliuk take on the challenge of modeling companion metal constraints. The potential demand influence of a technological transition cannot be anticipated without distinguishing a metal's principal uses, which allows the construction of more precise “what if?” scenarios. The use of Cu in plumbing is an example. Over time, some of the less rigorous Cu plumbing applications (e.g., cooling water discard) have seen Cu replaced by polyvinylchloride. As polymers continue to improve in strength and high-temperature performance, complete replacement of Cu by polymers in plumbing applications is possible. How would this influence overall Cu demand? Only about 6% of Cu demand would be substituted, which is noticeable but not transformative ( In this section, we first describe possible Cu and Zn disruption scenarios and then the companion metals and their salient parameters. Scenarios and parameters are based on the cited literature and our own research. The Unlike the plumbing example above, we consider the scenario where an alternative conductor (such as graphene) replaces the portion of deployed Cu that is used to conduct electricity. Because many of the Cu applications — 26% electrical, 19% industrial, 13% transportation ( From this perspective, it is important to note that copper deposits are host as well to various widely used companion metals. For example, given economically viable concentrations Mo is separated from Cu porphyry deposits during beneficiation and at sulfide concentrator plants. In the present study, we focus on two companion metals specific to Cu; Mo and Ag. Se and Te are discussed, but not modeled for lack of data. Gold is not modeled because coproduction from Cu represents only a small fraction of overall gold production ( A large fraction of steel is coated with a thin layer of Zn to provide protection against corrosion. This galvanic application accounts for 50% of all Zn use ( Molybdenum is mostly used as an alloying element in steels. Constructional engineering steels account for 35%, stainless steel for 25%, and tools and high-speed steel for 11% of global demand. For these applications, substitutes with adequate performance exist ( Because reliable literature estimates were not available, we collected the coproduction ratios of 15 major sulfide Cu-Mo producers from the annual production reports of mining companies across six countries (Canada, Chile, Mexico, Mongolia, Peru, and the United States), and compared those with global Mo and Cu statistics. We find that on average 25 Silver is used in a variety of applications, as given in the S Copper is primarily produced by two processes: 1) solvent extraction and electrowinning (based on the leaching of oxide ores or secondary sulfide ores), and 2) flotation and smelting (where sulfide ores are beneficiated into concentrates that are subsequently smelted into anode Cu and electro-refined into Cu cathodes). Gold and silver are typically by-products from the flotation and smelting process and are not produced by solvent extraction and electrowinning mines. Seventy-nine percent of total primary Cu production is produced by the flotation process. One feature of both Cu and Zn mines that produce by-product Ag is that the ratio of Ag production to the base metal is highly variable. For example, the KGHM Lubin Cu mine in Poland is the largest Ag mine in the world and produces 2% of world Cu, but a quarter of all Ag that is coproduced from Cu. The Ag coproduct ratio for this mine (2951 The presence of high Ag base metals in mines complicates calculations of the coproduction fraction of Ag from Cu. To model an accurate market response for reducing Cu demand, we assumed KGHM Lubin would not shut down, leading to the modeling parameter that 16% of total Ag will move up and down with Cu production ( As with Mo in copper mines, Ag is separated from Zn bearing minerals through beneficiation in the first processing step after mining, and sold by the mine directly as a Ag-concentrate. Lead-zinc-silver ore produces 68% of total primary Ag production. However, 29% is attributed to Pb-Zn-Ag mines designated as primary Ag mines ( The complex relationship between Zn production and Ag coproduction has implications for how Ag coproduction would react to a reduction in Zn demand. If there was a sharp reduction in Zn price, the high-cost Zn mines with little or no coproduction would likely drop off first (e.g., Nyrstar Tennessee Mines), with negligible impact on Ag production. Polymetallic mines with complex mineralogy and poor-quality Zn concentrates could simply cease production of Zn concentrates and only recover a Pb-Ag concentrate. In this case, Zn would go into the mine tailings. Because the cost curves for the majority of Zn mines are not available, it is difficult to make detailed projections for how Ag coproduction would respond to reducing Zn demand. For the purpose of this study, we conservatively assume that 33% of Ag production from Pb-Zn mines does not respond to our Zn disruption. Furthermore, we consider primary Ag mines to be unaffected by our scenarios. This approach is supported by data in Several “nuisance” elements can be found in the ores of both Cu and Zn. Nuisance elements are minor metals that have detrimental effects on the quality of the finished product or severe negative environmental effects. For example, many Cu ores and some Zn-Ag minerals (e.g., tennantite and enargite) contain elevated levels of arsenic, which cannot be removed during beneficiations. This leads to potential air and water emissions and contamination of refined Cu and Zn. China, the leading country for smelting of base metal concentrates, has implemented arsenic limits on concentrate imports, so mines need to consider arsenic in their testing, process circuits, and blending before shipment. Other nuisance elements are Hg, Bi, Sb, and Cd. In this work, we explore the coproduction of Cd, which is associated with Zn. Cd has some economic value, and therefore relatively good production data availability. Cadmium is a nuisance element because of its toxicity—it associates with Zn-bearing minerals, particularly sphalerite. Cadmium must be dealt with during Zn beneficiation and refinement for environmental compliance reasons. Because of the low demand for Cd, smelters are usually not economically incentivized to produce Cd metal. However, depending on the location and local environmental regulations, it is often cheaper to produce Cd metal than it is to dispose of it in a compliant manner. Practically all Cd is a Zn coproduct. According to the United States Geological Survey (USGS), Zn ores average about 0.03% Cd content Both Ge and In are found at low concentrations in Zn ores, and consequently it is difficult to achieve economically feasible production. Total global Ge production in 2014 was estimated at 165 Indium is mostly consumed for the InSn oxide transparent conductive layer in LCD screens, and 95% of In is sourced from Zn mining ( Selenium and tellurium accumulate in the Cu anode slimes as impurities. Se and Te are only recovered from anode slimes if the by-product revenue from these metals can justify the additional refining costs, but it occurs often enough so that Cu anode slimes account for ~90% of global production for both Se and Te. The Se content in anode slimes can range between 2% and 25% ( Not enough data is available on global Se and Te production to make reasonable modeling parameter assumptions, and Se and Te are therefore not modeled for this paper. However, the USGS estimates that supply adequately services demand and that potential for increased supply exists (personal communication with Thomas Goonan, USGS, November 2016). We will first briefly discuss the scenarios used for this work, then describe the structure of the system dynamics model and how we determined modeling parameters. All assumptions, data and data sources, and the VENSIM files for the system dynamic models are available in the The Yale Center for Industrial Ecology previously published demand, supply, and energy demand implications related to metal production and use over the period 2010–2050 ( The basic metal and material scenarios assume that technological change occurs continuously and does not influence the rate of material use per unit of personal income in a discontinuous manner. For both Cu and Zn, total historic demand is disaggregated based on metal use in different final product sectors, including buildings and infrastructure, transportation, industrial machinery, appliances, electronics, metal goods, and chemicals. The future metal demands for these sectors are estimated using regression analysis of 1980–2010 data, and per capita gross domestic product (a variable that captures changes in both population and per capita income) and time are explanatory variables. Time serves as a proxy for historical time-dependent variables such as policy, substitution, and technological development. As an example, We estimate the primary metals supply using the total demand for the metals in each scenario minus the supply from secondary (i.e., recycled) sources. Secondary production is determined by the historical metal demand, the lifetime of the several metal applications, and the metal recycling rates and efficiencies. Although the amount of the metals supplied by secondary sources is thought to have been increasing over time, little historic information is available to verify this assertion. Elshkaki et al. conservatively estimates the fraction of demand covered by secondary resources for 2008 (a year for which adequate data are available) Expected demand for the minor metals was modeled by averaging the annual production increases over the past decade, as reported by USGS statistics on production. We also assume production equals demand. Very little reliable data on recycling is available for the companion metals. Consequently, we assume relative recycling rates will not change dramatically over the coming decades. To clarify the basic supply trends underlying our models, Companion metal production is then calculated based on three parameters: host metal production, coproduction per ton of host metal including losses along the production chain, and fraction of host metal from which the companion metal is extracted. As an example, To assess whether companion metal supply will be able to keep up with demand, we subtract the calculated supply from the forecasted demand, taking into account that companion metals are also produced from other sources. This allows us to evaluate the effect of the disruption to the base metal on the overall companion metal market. We use the indicator “% of overall market volume,” which was introduced as a resilience indicator in To establish the basis of our results, we will first discuss the primary production of Cu and Zn. As expected, the disruption significantly reduces Cu and Zn output. The higher growth rate of Zn compared to Cu toward the end of the modeled time period is a reflection of future recycling rates that are projected to be higher for Cu than for Zn. It is interesting that metal demand is highest in the equitability world scenario. The demand in the main applications is driven by per capita GDP, which is the highest in the equitability world scenario. Progress toward global equity requires significant metal increases to meet the needs of the global population Our investigation of Cd shows that only half of the Cd content in Zn ores is produced into metal, and the rest is discarded elsewhere along the process chain. For example, at the Mount Isa integrated Pb-Zn-Ag mine and smelter, some Cd ends up in the Pb concentrate and subsequently becomes volatilized during the Pb smelting process and is captured in the baghouse filters. The baghouse dusts are then leached. Cadmium is precipitated in a chemical form that is sufficiently stabilized to be compliant with regulations to be dumped in the tailings dam (  Our undisrupted In scenarios show a slight to moderate In supply deficit that can likely be solved by the supply chain. However, a disruption would result in significant shortages in the 30–50% range that will be significantly be harder to address ( Our Ge models follow a similar pattern to In. Germanium also has a moderate undisrupted supply deficit, widening to 30% in the case of the disrupted security foremost scenario. The difference in disruption between Ge and In can be explained by the fact that Ge can also be sourced from recycling and coal ash. The disruption is smaller relative to the total Ge market. Profitable companion metals are relatively valuable and have high coproduction ratios. As a result, the primary production of both Ag and Mo is relatively diversified and less susceptible to single point failure. Our analysis shows the overall markets for these metals will be only moderately impacted by a black swan event. We find that Mo supply and demand are projected to stay more or less in balance if undisrupted, but a disruption will cause a clear but minor supply deficit of up to 20%. For Ag, our results show that when undisrupted, Cu is able to supply the required amount of Ag. A disruption will lead to a slight supply shortage on the order of −5%. Silver production from Zn shows undisrupted Zn production leads to a Ag supply slightly exceeding demand, at most 15% in the equitability world scenario. Conversely, the disrupted security foremost scenario shows a ~10% supply deficit. It is important to examine the credibility of the assumptions and driving factors in some detail. The fundamental requirement for scenarios is not that they constitute accurate predictions because that cannot be known. Rather, they should be plausible ways that change might occur and provide a structured basis for considering the potential consequences over time. Metal demand is strongly related to population and to per capita income, which are both specified in our foundational scenarios Metal prices play a role in affecting supply and demand in the shorter term. For our modeling work, we carefully separate out noncompanion metal production, and then only examine cases we can reasonably assume the companion metal supply to be price inelastic. In reality, companion metal supply is not entirely price inelastic. Our scenarios should therefore be considered a lower-range for companion metal supply. Our modeling scope assumes that downward transitions base metal supply are exogenous black swan events. With regard to the uncertainty surrounding the data of minor metals, we have extensively reviewed mining literature and annual reports to produce the best available data. We note that mines with coproduction will report Ag and Mo in their financial records. However, since Cd, In, and Ge are not payable at the mine, those concentrations are not consistently measured or reported. Smelters will report on In and Ge if they produce it, but because of internal recycling streams and varying materials sourcing (including secondary sources, which is not necessarily reported on), that information is difficult to lead back to mine coproduction ratios. For secondary (i.e., recycled) resources, the supply hinges on end-of-life recycling rates. We have chosen to use values based on an extrapolation ( Many minor metals are coproduced in the processing chains of base metals and are known as companion metals. We analyze how the supply of companion metals reacts to a black swan event, a technological breakthrough that drastically reduces demand of a base metal. We find severe supply and demand imbalances for some of companion metals but not for others. Policy makers need a way to determine which companion metals to prioritize given their limited resources (e.g., research funding, legislative proposal push), and what type of policy is most likely to be effective. This work elucidates parameters to help determine if companion metal production will be hampered by disruptions in the production of the host metal. Although this work focuses on companions of Cu and Zn as case studies, the policy implications can be generalized to all companion-base metal relationships. We find that companion metals can be grouped into three categories: 1) nuisance companions, 2) low volume companions, and 3) profitable companions. An overview of the salient parameters can be found in Nuisance companions (elements that have detrimental effects on the quality of the finished product, or severe negative environmental effects) are often produced into metal because this is more economical than other forms of environmental management. Because of their negligible economic value, however, production of nuisance elements is often not reported, so there is limited transparency on their fate. In this work, we focused on the coproduction of Cd (which is associated with Zn), as a typical example of nuisance companion metal production. Cd has some economic value, and therefore adequate production data availability. We estimate the production potential of Cd from Zn to be in the range of 3.3–10 The ore concentration of low volume companions is so low (usually in the range of several hundreds of parts per million), that there is effectively no price signal for a mine to change production in response to increasing price. Supply of low volume companions is highly inelastic with respect to price changes and consequently extremely sensitive to host metal supply disruptions. As a result, low volume companion recovery is almost entirely dictated by the smelter, whose significant effort is required to attain concentrations that can be viably produced. For example, Ge is recovered in the gas cleaning stream of Zn smelters, and only rarely are concentrations achieved that make recovery possible, which means that only 3% of the Ge in Zn ores is commercially recovered. In the case of In, only fully integrated Zn smelting and refining chains will have the overall volume and technology necessary to achieve the internal recycling streams that are necessary for economically recoverable In concentrations. 35% of In contained in Zn is recovered ( Although low volume companion metals face challenges in scaling up production significantly beyond current coproduction levels, this does not mean there is no elasticity. Vertical integration across mines, concentrators, and smelters favors the correct placement of high minor metal concentrates into smelters that can recover these metals. For example, historically, Se was regarded as a nuisance element in Cu production. This lead to smelters penalizing Se, which incentivized Cu concentrators to optimize their production processes to reduce Se content ( Profitable companion metals have high coproduction ratios and are relatively valuable. Their production constitutes a significant proportion of the total mine revenue. While the low volume companions are paid for at the smelter, the profitable companions are paid for at the mine site. Price changes immediately affect mines, and incentivize them to change their plans and processes in response to supply and demand fluctuations. It is even possible that the status of primary metal and companion metal switches according to economic circumstances. For example, in several mines the Ag coproduction fraction is high enough they can switch from being primarily Zn driven mines to becoming Pb-Ag mines. For Mo, there are several currently mothballed primary Mo mines that, while having a higher cost-base than Cu-Mo mines, could swing into production if Mo prices increased enough to restore profitability. Because of this, profitable companions are not significantly restricted in their supply elasticity. Furthermore, we found that while the disruption affected Mo and Ag supplies, its effect was dampened by the availability of supply that was not tied to the disruption of the host metal. However, while the dynamics in general seem to allow for medium-term market balancing, short term effects could still be severe. Of the three categories, we find that low volume companions will experience the most significant long-term disruptions as a result of black swan events. Because of the difficulties of increasing supply elasticity—which is inherent to the low profitability of mining these elements—policies that may help are ones that can provide broader benefits at the demand-side such as research into substitutes to provide increased demand elasticity. Stockpiling is appropriate but will most likely only help meet immediate demand during the beginning of the disruption. Instead of disposing residues or waste products containing minor metals in tailing dams, where recovery is nearly impossible, it may be particularly advantageous for smelters to collect these wastes during periods of low prices so they may be easily reprocessed when prices rise. Policy makers should support this effort. Profitable companions have enough supply elasticity that a black swan disruption of one source can be eventually compensated from other sources. However, there could be significant short-term supply disruption because of the time lags involved in opening alternative primary production sites. As seen in the example of the 2010 rare earth element crisis, when a ~20% supply drop caused an order of magnitude price spike, demand for minor metals can be highly inelastic ( We thank Chuanbin Zhou for his assistance with the graphics. This project was funded by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 