The dolomite coastal aquifer of Balanegra (SE Spain) is the only source of irrigation water in an area of flourishing intensive agriculture. This scenario has consequently led to a severe exploitation of the water resources. This aquifer extends from the edges of the Sierra de Gádor to the sea, deepening progressively under the thick Neogene sedimentary sequence that confines it. Based on the content of major ions, the groundwater was classified into four groups (G1 to G4). G1 samples were characterized by their high content of dominating ions HCO3
                     − and Mg2+. Samples classified as G2 showed a similar composition, but with a higher SO4
                     2
                     − ion content. As for samples corresponding to groups G3 and G4, they were characterized by their chloride content. However, Na+ is the major cation in G3 and Mg2+ in G4.
                  Based on the study of ionic relationships, ionic deltas and mineral saturation indices, it was possible to elucidate the main processes that condition the chemical composition of each of these groups of samples. The most important among said processes is the dissolution of dolomite or dolomitic limestone, the primary component of the aquifer rock. Compositional changes are due to SO4
                     2
                     − concentration resulting from gypsum dissolution (G2). In G3, salinity is the result of dissolution of salts, or contamination through saline waters of the upper detrital aquifer. Seawater intrusion, a consequence of the overexploitation of the aquifer, increases the salinity in the G4 samples. In this intrusion process, waters of marine origin rich in Mg, interact with the carbonated rock, favouring a cation exchange in which Mg is fixed in dolomite or dolomitic limestone and Ca ion is released. This process is supported by the ionic delta values of these two cations. The marine intrusion in the area is facilitated through groundwater overexploitation, and also by the structuring of the aquifer. Marine intrusion exists where tectonics has allowed interconnection between the carbonate rock and the sea. In other areas on this coast, marine intrusion has not been possible because of the presence of impermeable Neogene materials that prevent this interconnection.One of the major threats to coastal aquifers is the aquifer salinization due to seawater intrusion, yet it also constitutes an early warning sign of such an event at a specific point in time and space, which can prove invaluable to water authorities around the world ( Freshwater extraction of coastal aquifers that have a hydraulic connection with seawater leads to the salinization of these water sources by advancing the saline wedge towards the continent and through “up-coning” generated under the extraction wells ( Knowing the origin of groundwater salinity is essential for the proper management of aquifers ( This paper discusses the geochemical processes that give rise to a wide range of hydrochemical facies in a coastal carbonate aquifer, composed primarily of dolomite rocks. The interaction between carbonate minerals and groundwater in carbonate aquifers has a strong influence on groundwater chemistry and the dissolution/precipitation reactions may be defined from variations in the groundwater chemical composition. By interpreting geochemical data from groundwater samples, this study will determine the possible origin(s) of the saline water. The Campo de Dalías coastal plain is situated in the extreme south-east of Spain, covering an area of about 330 km The aquifers of the Campo de Dalías are grouped into three hydrogeological units ( A sampling survey was carried out to monitor water quality and assess the main physico-chemical processes in the Balanegra aquifer. A total of 45 groundwater samples were taken from wells distributed in the study area ( Samples were taken in duplicate and filtered with a 0.45 μm Millipore filter, collected into low density polyethylene bottles and stored at 4 °C. For cation analysis, 1 ml of ultra-pure nitric acid was added to prevent precipitation or absorption ( Direct modeling is an important tool in the interpretation of the water-rock interaction processes. The mineral saturation indices (SI) indicate the degree of saturation in a particular mineral phase and based on this SI value, the trend of precipitation or dilution of the mineral phases can be deduced. For this reason, the PHREEQC code, version 3 ( Ionic deltas (∆) were obtained for all the major ions based on the theoretical percentage of seawater, deduced from the concentration of the chloride ion. The concentration of an ion Y, by conservative mixing of seawater and freshwater is: The value of the ∆ ion is the difference between the measured concentration in the sample analysed and the theoretical value obtained deduced from ideal mixing between seawater and freshwater ( In this way, ∆Y is calculated as: ∆Y = [Y] The analytical results obtained are summarized in The percentage of seawater in the samples was calculated from the chloride ion, according to the expression: Analytical data were plotted on an expanded Durov diagram, where the cations and anions triangulate fields are separated along the 25% axes so that the main field is conveniently divided ( In order to establish and identify all the processes that are active in the aquifer, different ionic ratios were calculated ( Given that dolomites and dolomitic limestones constitute the main rock in the Balanegra aquifer, the relationship between Cl and (Ca + Mg)-SO The ionic delta values were calculated and are presented in The cause of this deficit in the magnesium ion in most saline samples (group G4) would be linked to an ion exchange process between Ca and Mg within the crystalline structure of the dolomite or magnesian limestone that composes the aquifer matrix. This cation exchange would be as a result of marine intrusion caused by pumping. The mixing of groundwater with a percentage of seawater increases the Mg concentration, favouring conditions for the latter to be fixed in the crystalline structure of the carbonates, by exchanging the Ca ion. The saturation indices of the main mineral phases that can influence the chemical composition of the samples were calculated. These phases are dolomite and calcite, the main components in the aquifer matrix, along with gypsum and halite. Most groundwater in the Balanegra aquifer appeared to be in equilibrium or supersaturated with respect to calcite and dolomite, as the SIs with respect to these minerals were close to zero or positive ( The saturation index in dolomite was positive in most of the samples, displaying values of up to 1.4. It was only negative in the G1 samples that were less mineralized, which is similar to what was observed for SI in calcite. Some of the G2 samples displayed the highest SI values in these carbonates. The SI in gypsum ranged between −2.7 and −1, meaning this phase would be susceptible to dissolution if it were located in an aquifer matrix. The distribution of the samples followed a curve along which the most saline samples are those SI that are less negative. Similar results were found for the SI in halite, albeit the curve fit was better ( To elucidate the main processes that are active in this aquifer, the field data were compared in a model to the experimental results using the PHREEQC code. The steady-state is an assumption used in modeling of the chemical evolution in the groundwater system. More sampling campaigns should be necessary to identify temporal fluctuations that the aquifer can likely to experience. Based on the percentages of seawater and the ion deltas calculated ( Additionally, the SI values were modeled for the four most important mineral phases, i.e. calcite, dolomite, gypsum and halite ( Simulations were also conducted for the SIs that would be obtained in the samples if there had only been one freshwater-seawater mixing process. Only in the case of the SI for halite was a good fit observed. The lack of a fit for the remaining mineral phases, with the curve representing the freshwater-seawater mixture, indicates that other geochemical processes must have been at work. A series of interpretations of the key hydrochemical processes at work in the dolomite coastal aquifer of Balanegra can be made based on analyses of the main physico-chemical components, the results of the ionic deltas and the mineral saturation indices. The dissolution of the dolomite rock was the main mineralization process of the groundwater, especially in the G1 samples. Consequently, the recharge water from rainfall gradually increased its Ca and Mg content. The concentrations in these two cations increased in parallel in this group. Regarding the samples corresponding to G2, there was a slightly greater proportion of Mg than Ca ( G3 samples were characterized by having a higher salinity than G2. The wells where these samples were taken were relatively deep. They pass through an upper detrital aquifer, highly contaminated by the agricultural activity ( By plotting the aquifer points where the samples were taken on a map, and indicating the group to which they belong ( This distribution of the G3 and G4 samples is controlled by the general structure of the aquifer. The dolomite rocks extend from the edge of the Sierra de Gádor, progressively deepening below the thick Neogene sedimentary sequence that confines the carbonates. They follow a fold geometry that runs from synform type to antiform, forming the carbonated rocks at the far southern end of the aquifer ( As a result, Ca is added while Mg is removed from groundwater. This rock-water interaction process intensifies the impact of cation exchange (Ca surplus vs. Mg deficit) along the flow path of the dolomitic limestone. The Mg deficit induces Mg desorption and causes a lower fraction of exchangeable Mg in the salinized zone compared to the freshwater zone ( The cation exchange processes linked to marine intrusion is usually dominated by Na ( Over the past several decades, the carbonated aquifer of Balanegra has been experiencing salinization in the central and coastal sectors as a result of intense groundwater abstraction. Of the four groups of samples that were analysed, those corresponding to groups G3 and G4 were affected by salinization. However, the causes of the salinization in G3 and G4 differ, as revealed by the chemical analysis of their waters. The main cause of salinization in G3 was the salinization from the upper detrital aquifer through the wells themselves. The upper aquifer is currently salinized as a result of irrigation return-flow, as well as the presence of salts in the detrital formations. As for G4, there are clear signs indicating that it was salinized exclusively through seawater intrusion. The hydrochemical processes that take place in the aquifer are varied and do not act in isolation; instead, they act at the same time and with different intensity, which is more evident in areas of higher salinity. The Ca/Mg cation exchange in dolomites and magnesic limestone of coastal carbonated aquifers would be one of the hydrochemical processes most directly linked to these seawater intrusion processes. The ionic deltas of Ca and Mg in coastal carbonated aquifers allow us to recognize whether the salinity of the samples is the result of the seawater intrusion process, in which case positive ∆Ca values and negative ∆Mg values would be expected. The intensive exploitation of the groundwater has led to a generalized drop in water levels and a concomitant deterioration of water quality observed in samples G-3 and G-4. Consequently, the volume of usable groundwater is reduced, showing the need of a better management of this aquifer to ensure its future sustainability. Angela Vallejos: Writing - Review & Editing Linda Daniele: Formal Analysis Fernando Sola: Conceptualization, Methodology Luís Molina: Investigation Antonio Pulido-Bosch: Project administration The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work formed part of the general research activities promoted by the CEI-MAR Campus of International Excellence and it was supported by