Fundamental results obtained from research on the properties of the edge surfaces of kaolinite particles (∼500nm) are reported. Of particular significance was the development of the experimental protocol. Well-ordered kaolinite edge surfaces were prepared as an epoxy resin sandwich structure having layered kaolinite particles in the center of the epoxy resin sandwich. Images of the sectioned kaolinite edge surfaces were examined by atomic force microscopy (AFM), and the average thickness of kaolinite particles in this study was determined to be 38.3nm±11.7nm. Furthermore, the surface charge of the kaolinite edge surfaces was evaluated with a super sharp Si tip. The point of zero charge (PZC) of the kaolinite edge surface was determined to be below pH 4, in contrast to the traditional view that the edge surfaces of kaolinite particles may carry a positive charge at pH 4. This lower PZC of the kaolinite edge surface was attributed to the lack of isomorphous substitution in the silica tetrahedral layer when compared to the PZC for the muscovite edge surface. Our results are consistent with the particle aggregation and flotation behavior of kaolinite, and should provide the basis for improved flotation strategies leading to the efficient recovery and utilization of mineral and energy resources.Clay minerals are among the most important and useful industrial minerals because they have many applications. For example, they are used in paper, cosmetic products, rubber, and polymer composites Kaolinite [Al Very limited research on the characterization of kaolinite edge surfaces has been reported in the literature. Van Olphen Atomic force microscopy has been widely applied in imaging and measuring the surface forces between the sharp tip of a cantilever and selected surfaces of interest In our study, oriented kaolinite particles (∼500 A clean kaolinite sample was obtained from the St. Austell area in Cornwall, UK. Characteristic data for this sample and its preparation can be found in the literature A 6% kaolinite suspension was prepared and the pH was adjusted to about 9 using the KOH solution. Rapid magnetic stirring for 1 A picoforce AFM with Nanoscope V controller (Veeco Instruments Inc., Santa Barbara, CA) was used with a PF-type scanner designed for picoforce measurements. Sharp triangular silicon tips on a silicon nitride cantilever (SNL-10, Bruker AFM Probes, CA) with spring constants varying from 0.25 The force measurements were performed in 5 Considering the previous estimation on the thickness of kaolinite particles, reported to be about 11.2 The geometry of the silicon AFM tip can be approximated as being conical in shape with a spherical cap at its apex. The geometry of the system and the parameters used for analysis are shown in The DLVO theoretical model for the conical tip-flat substrate system is derived and discussed in the literature The total DLVO force: The surface potential SEM images were taken after the kaolinite film was spread on the resin surface, as shown in Before examination of kaolinite edge surfaces, it is important to first determine the surface charge and surface potential of the AFM tip. The surface potential values of muscovite have been widely reported by several techniques Typical force curves between the AFM tip and kaolinite edge surfaces are shown in As previously mentioned, very limited research on the characteristics of kaolinite edge surfaces has been reported. Gupta et al. Yan et al. The Si–OH is expected to be unreactive at the edge surface Furthermore, our surface charge results for the kaolinite edge surfaces can now explain the flotation behavior of kaolinite. As reported in the literature With a new experimental protocol, well-oriented kaolinite particles (∼500–700 The kaolinite edge surfaces were imaged by AFM and identified according their surface morphology. The thickness of kaolinite edge faces was evaluated and found to be 38.3 Research results successfully demonstrate a method to prepare kaolinite edge surfaces from 500 The financial support from the