Grinding aids have been researched and used for decades to reduce energy consumption in the process of cement production. In this work, the effects of new alkanolamines, such as N,N-bis(2-hydroxyethyl)isopropanolamine (DEIPA), N,N-bis(2-hydroxypropyl)-2-aminoethanol (EDIPA) and N,N,N′,N′-tetrakis(2-hydroxyethyl)ethylenediamine (THEED), on the grinding, flowability and physical properties of Portland cement were investigated. The results indicated that DEIPA and EDIPA could significantly decrease the sieve residues (45μm), and improve the flowability of the cement powder. They could decrease the compressibility and the magnitude of the pressure drop of the cement at a definite normal stress, thereby preventing cement particles from agglomerating. Notably, DEIPA and EDIPA increased both the early (3-day) and late (28-day) compressive strengths. DEIPA can be used as an accelerator to shorten the setting time. THEED just provides a greater contribution to the late compressive strength.Since 1824, cement has been one of the most important, irreplaceable and traditional building materials. The world cement production reached 4.18 Increasing amounts of chemical additives have been used in the process of cement grinding The primary objective of this work is to investigate the effects of new alkanolamines on the grinding efficiency, flowability, phase structure, and physical and mechanical properties of Portland cement. The effects of DEIPA, EDIPA and THEED on the grinding efficiency were examined in terms of sieve residues (45 The clinker and gypsum used in this work were obtained from a Chinese cement company. The chemical and mineralogical compositions of the clinker are shown in Mixtures of clinker, gypsum and different amounts of the alkanolamines were ground using a laboratory batch ball mill with dimensions of 500 To investigate the effect of alkanolamines on the fineness of the cement, the sieve residue was measured using a negative pressure sieve analyzer with a sieve size of 45 The specific surface area of the cement was measured using the Blaine method in accordance with the Chinese standard GB/T8074-2008. The particle size distribution was measured by laser diffractometry in a Microtrac S3500SI. The angle of repose of the powder was measured using the injection method in FT-104B according to the Chinese standard GB11986–89. Two-hundred grams of cement was weighed and then dropped onto the experimental desk through a funnel to form a cone. The radius (R) and height (H) of the cone were measured. Finally, the angle of repose (α) was calculated according to Eq. BFE, SE, density and the value of the pressure drop of air through the ground powder were measured at a definite normal stress using a multifunctional powder tester in FT-4 (Freeman Technology). The compressibility was calculated according to Eq. The phase composition was investigated using a Rigaku SmartLab 3000A diffractometer with Cu K Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) was also used to analyze the phase compositions by studying the molecular vibrations for cement. FT-IR spectra were recorded on a Thermo Scientific Nicolet IS5 spectrometer over the range of 400 to 4000 The setting times and normal consistency of the cement paste were determined in accordance with the Chinese standard GB/T1346 using a Vicat apparatus. Cement paste was prepared from cement and water. The ratio of water to cement was 0.5. The compressive and flexural strengths of mortars were measured according to the Chinese standard GB/T17671-1999. Mortars were prepared with Chinese standard sand, cement and water. A cement powder/sand/water weight ratio of 1:3.0:0.5 was employed. The sieve residues (45 The specific surface area was also used to characterize the fineness of cement. The specific surface areas are shown in In the initial stage of grinding, particles are shattered and new cracks, active sites and electrostatic charges occur on the fractured surface under the mechanical force, which leads to the new cracks closure and trends toward particle aggregation. In the middle and later stages, particles are kept fine with reunion of fine particles due to electrostatic charges. DEIPA and EDIPA are trialkanolamines with their structures similar to that of TEA The particle size distribution curves for cements without and with 0.015% alkanolamines ground for 25 The angle of repose is primarily used to characterize the flowability of powders. A powder with a smaller angle of repose has greater flowability. BFE is required to move pretreated and stable powder with a fixed flow mode and flow rate, and it is also an important parameter for characterizing changes in flowability. A powder with a lower BFE has greater flowability for pneumatic conveying, loading and packing of cement powder. New alkanolamines, such as DEIPA and EDIPA, result in a significant decrease in BFE, whereas THEED shows a slight effect (shown in SE is the shear flow of a unit mass of powder that is required to move a pretreated sample with a slight shear and lift mode. SE is primarily used to characterize the flowability of a powder in a loose heap, such as rubbing or mechanical interlocking between the particles under low stress. As shown in To achieve the flow of powder, the gravitational force on the powder particles must be larger than the resistance between the particles, such as frictional force, adhesion force and electrostatic force Compressibility is the ability of plastic deformation of powder caused by external pressure. It is affected by the chemical composition, particle shape and structure, size and distribution, and bulk density of powder. In addition, compressibility is also related to the van der Waals forces and electrostatic attraction force between the particles The air permeability of a powder reflects the pore sizes and distribution among the particles. A smaller pore size results in a higher pressure reduction due to pore resistance and thus a worse air permeability.  FT-IR spectroscopy is one of the most useful techniques for characterizing molecular structures. FT-IR is typically used to monitor the hydration of cement. The fineness of cement is known to be a critical parameter for its properties TEA significantly affects the compressive strength of the cement paste at 3 As with TEA, the new alkanolamines, such as DEIPA, EDIPA and THEED, are highly effective in the grinding of Portland cement, decreasing the sieve residues (45 Compared to the blank cement, the alkanolamines, except for THEED, significantly reduce the angle of repose of the ground cement. When the dosages of these alkanolamines are 0.015% by weight of the blank cement, they decrease the angle of repose in the order DEIPA The mineral compositions of the cements do not change during grinding. The XRD and FT-IR results show that alkanolamines accelerate the amorphization of gypsum, being added at the same low dosages. The amounts of water required for a normal consistency are slightly greater for the cements containing 0.015% alkanolamines. In addition, the initial and final setting times are decreased. DEIPA decreases the initial and final setting times by 20 and 25 The authors are grateful for the financial support of the