A study was designed to examine the outcomes of patients with closed comminuted subtrochanteric femoral fractures fixed with a dynamic condylar screw (DCS) and using biological (indirect) reduction techniques at a tertiary referral centre.
                  Thirty-one consecutive patients with a mean age of 32.6 years, who sustained subtrochanteric femoral fractures, were treated with this method. Twenty-seven cases (87.2%) sustained these fractures either from traffic crashes or falls from height and the remaining four had a simple fall. Average follow-up was 3 years (range 14–65 months).
                  Patients were assessed clinically and radiographically with regards to fracture classification, operating time, blood loss, time of union, malunion and other complications. Union was achieved in all cases (100%), with full-weight bearing after an average of 4.9 months. The average operating time was 2h and blood loss averaged 430ml. There was only one case of superficial infection, which settled with local debridement and antibiotics. Malunion was seen in 2 cases out of 31 (6.4%) without the need for further surgery.
                  In conclusion, use of biological (indirect) reduction techniques instead of anatomic, open reduction has proven to be successful, especially in comminuted subtrochanteric fractures. The early appearance of callus avoids the need for primary cancellous bone grafting, emphasising the importance of preserving biology of the fracture fragments.In the last two decades, it became obvious in fracture healing that mechanics provided support and proper biomechanical conditions played an essential role, but biology was also responsible for healing and therefore determined the outcome Comminution in subtrochanteric fractures renders anatomic reconstruction difficult, consumes operative time, produces blood loss and contributes to avascularity of the fracture fragments. Comparisons between conventional technique and indirect reduction techniques, in the literature, reveal higher incidences of delayed/non-union (up to 16.6%) Indirect reduction techniques allow correct axial alignment (in The dynamic condylar screw (DCS) was introduced as an alternative to the condylar blade plate (CBP) with the screw replacing the blade portion of the plate. The introduction of the DCS Indirect reduction techniques with the CBP are reported Also, the antero-posterior (AP) diameter of the femur neck is narrow in Indian bones compared to the width of the CBP (Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) Report), therefore there are increased chances of cut-out in the AP plane if a CBP is used. This technique was studied to evaluate its efficacy with respect to the rate of union, operative time, blood loss, infection and morbidity in subtrochanteric fractures. Thirty-one consecutive patients with subtrochanteric fractures were treated with a DCS and biological reduction methods between October 1995 and February 1999. Only patients with comminuted fractures and those that presented within 4 weeks of the injury were included in the study. Exclusion criteria were open fractures and patients who were not likely to comply with non-weight bearing post-operatively, e.g. psychiatric illness. The fractures were classified as per the AO system  Reduction using axial traction on a fracture table was used in 24 cases During reduction and fixation, importance was given to restoration of limb length, mechanical and rotational alignment. Correct alignment and rotation was checked intraoperatively as per methods described by Krettek et al. The following two methods of plate introduction were used during this procedure. Twenty-four (80%) patients were treated with this technique. Two separate incisions were made above and below the fracture site. The plate was slid below the soft tissue extraperiosteally from the trochanteric incision to the lower one without disturbing the fracture site, keeping in mind the neurovascular bundle. The plate was inserted keeping the barrel towards the surgeon and subsequently rotated through 180° to engage the previously inserted DCS. A slotted screwdriver is engaged into the barrel of the plate to facilitate this rotation. After rotation, the barrel faces away from the operating surgeon and is then gently slid over the previously inserted condylar screw by harmoniously matching the slot of the condylar screw with the barrel of the plate. The plate is fixed to the distal femoral shaft through the distal incision and secured by a plate holding clamp. The size of the plate is such that at least three to four holes remain distal to the fracture site for fixation after an indirect reduction. Proximally, the second screw (4.5 cortical) was placed obliquely to additionally engage the head. The third screw (4.5 cortical) was inserted to engage the lesser trochanter (whenever intact), while attempting to lag it when it was not intact. These three proximal screws provide solid three dimensional stability to the proximal construct. Seven cases were treated by this method. A full-length incision was made on the skin and subcutaneous tissue, but the vastus lateralis and periosteum was only detached proximally and distally as in the sliding plate technique. The major fragments were fixed with lag screws as necessary. The smaller comminuted fragments were neutralised. This technique was used in cases where smooth gliding and/or rotation of the plate through 180° was difficult due to obesity and/or slightly old fractures. All patients were operated within 1 week of injury except two, who came late, i.e. 4 weeks post-injury. All the patients received perioperative antibiotic prophylaxis. The post-operative regimen included passive hip and knee flexion and static exercises and partial weight bearing beginning with 15–20 Thirty-one patients with subtrochanteric fractures were treated with the dynamic condylar screw using biological principles between October 1995 and February 1999. There were 28 males and 3 female patients. The mean age of the patients was 32.6 years (range 14–45 years). Maximum number of patients were in the 20–40 years age group. Twenty-seven (87.2%) patients sustained high-energy injury due to road traffic crashes or a fall from height and four (12.8%) patients had a simple fall. Fractures were classified according to AO classification Fifteen patients sustained C1 type fractures while 10 had a B1 type fracture. Two patients sustained C2 type fractures while there were one patient each with AO types A1, A3, B2 and C3. Average operating time was 2 Acceptable alignment (varus valgus angulation up to 10° and rotation up to 15°) Data was statistically analysed using SPSS/PC (Version 6) and EPINFO Statistical packages. We compared our results with those in the literature ( Perren In biological plating, reduction is achieved by indirect methods Conventional lateral plate osteosynthesis placed the femoral perforating arteries and nutrient artery of the femur at risk Siebenrock et al. The biological plating technique does not interfere with the medullary blood supply as occurs in reamed intramedullary interlock nailing. Moreover, in plating neither the patient nor the surgeon is exposed to significant radiation as in interlock nailing. Intramedullary devices are difficult to use in fractures with trochanteric extension and adjunct reduction techniques are often required to achieve fracture reductions and prevent varus malunions With the use of a gamma nail in predominantly unstable subtrochanteric fractures, Vanderschot et al. Siebenrock et al. reported lower complication rates using condylar blade plates without direct reduction of the medial fragments as compared to other devices Nungu et al. The dynamic condylar screw and plate provides strong fixation in the cancellous bone of the neck and the head with considerable rotational stability. Additional screw fixation of the proximal fragments in the head and the calcar enhances the stability of the construct. After indirect reconstruction of the medial cortex the dynamic condylar screw and plate acts as a tension band device on the lateral side Using the dynamic condylar screw and plate acceptable alignment can be reliably achieved. There were only two patients (6.4%) with malunion, which, did not lead to clinical symptoms and did not require further intervention. One had varus and procurvatum of 20°. Another had 15° varus and 10° of procurvatum. In both patients intraoperative alignment was not near anatomical, but was accepted as surgery was delayed—one was a late presentation at 4 weeks and the other because of poor general condition. Near anatomical alignment could not be achieved without hampering the blood supply. These malunions were functionally acceptable and neither required correction nor any further procedures. The result of the current report is encouraging with no failure. The results are especially remarkable since the majority of patients had sustained high-energy trauma where fragment devitalisation is a crucial factor. Stripping of the soft tissue of the lateral cortex is kept to the minimum in indirect reduction. The vitality of the medial fragments is not further compromised since they are not exposed. This leads to abundant and rapid callus formation especially in multifragmentary injuries as seen in The reported operation time is shorter for intramedullary devices (average 1.5 With biological fixation techniques the operation time is shorter and the blood loss is lower than conventional plating. Also infection is minimal, union is faster without any need for bone grafting (our series) and has minimal complication as compared to direct anatomical reduction in cases of subtrochanteric fractures In our hands biological (indirect) reduction technique and the use of the DCS for fixation has proven to be safe and successful, in comminuted subtrochanteric fractures. Furthermore, in developing countries, it is less expensive than the locked nailing technique and has a shorter operative time, less blood loss and a lower rate of infection than conventional plating technique. The appearance of callus as early as 6 weeks post-operatively without the need for primary cancellous bone grafting shows the importance of preserving biology rather than attempting an open reduction of fracture fragments. We thank the Dean, Dr. N. Kshirsagar and the Head of the Department of Orthopaedics, Dr. V.J. Laheri of King Edward VII Memorial Hospital, Mumbai 400012, Maharashtra, India for granting us permission to use the hospital data.