Single particles as well as assemblies of particles of α-lactose monohydrate have been subjected to compressive loads at different temperatures with a view to investigate the effect of temperature on the crushing behaviour. The results show a significant decrease in the extent of breakage of both single and bulk particles when the temperature is decreased, presumably due to an increase in fracture toughness. The energy utilisation in the bulk compression, expressed in terms of specific surface area created per unit of input energy has also been quantified. It is found to be relatively constant for different levels of input energy, but surprisingly it decreases with a decrease in temperature.The study of the breakage behaviour of pharmaceutical particles is important in many processes where particle size and mechanical properties may influence the process. Tableting and dissolution are two common processes in pharmaceutical industries in which particle size and mechanical characteristics affect the process as well as product. In a large number of applications, milling is carried out to obtain a desirable particle size distribution. However, the milling operations are strongly influenced by the material mechanical properties and a relationship between them needs to be established. Furthermore, some pharmaceutical solids are relatively ductile for which cryogenic milling could be an option. Empirical approaches for establishing the optimum milling operations require a significant amount of material, which may not be available at the early stages of drug development. The focus of this paper is therefore to investigate the effect of temperature on the single particle and bulk crushing of pharmaceutical powders. Crystals of α-lactose monohydrate in the size range 500–600 μm have been chosen as a model material. The single particle crushing strength has been evaluated by compression between two platens, commonly termed quasi-static side crushing strength (SCS). The bulk breakage characterisation is carried out by quasi-static bulk crushing in a cylinder. For bulk crushing, the energy utilisation is evaluated at different temperatures. In addition, the variation of the bulk crushing results with temperature are compared with the predictions by distinct element method (DEM), which have been carried out and separately reported by Hassanpour et al. The side crushing strength test method is according to the procedure described by ASTM α-Lactose monohydrate crystals have a tomahawk shape with three significant sides as shown in The sample obtained by sieving from the commercial sample of α-lactose, Pharmatose 50M, supplied by DMV, the Netherlands, has been subjected to the SCS tests. The test results for each direction are presented in The crushing load distribution has also been plotted in To investigate the crushing load of α-lactose particles in response to temperature variations, a series of the tests were done at −20 °C. The loading rate was 0.15 mm/min. In order to prevent water condensation on the samples during the tests and to reduce temperature changes, the specimen was kept in a cup during the test. The cup and the piston were isolated before the test with a cover surrounded by silica gel. The isolated cup was kept for one day with silica gel inside it before cooling down. The samples were then kept for one day at −20 °C (in a freezer) to reach to the desirable temperature. The SCS tests have been done along the side 1 of the particles. The results show a significant increase in the average single particle crushing load by a factor of 1.83 The SCS test on the individual particles usually gives a wide variation of strength. Therefore, a large number of particles should be subjected to the test to achieve a reasonable statistical reliability. In the bulk crushing test (BC), a bed of α-lactose monohydrate particles is quasi-statically compressed in a cylinder with a piston using a mechanical testing machine. After unloading, the material is carefully removed from the cup and analysed in order to measure the amount of fines and broken particles. The wall of the cup used for the BC test is made of PTFE in order to reduce the friction between wall and particles. The internal diameter of the cup is 40 mm and bottom platen is made of stainless-steel. To investigate the bulk behaviour of α-lactose particles in response to temperature variations, three series of the tests were done at 20, 2 and −20 °C. The loading rate and bed height used for these tests were 0.15 mm/min and 6 mm, respectively, in accordance with Schönert's suggestion In In the bulk crushing test, expended energy can be easily obtained by integrating the area under the load–displacement curve. In The specific expended energy for the bulk crushing of α-lactose monohydrate particles is plotted against applied pressure in It has been shown by Stehr and Schwedes As shown in This relationship can also be shown in terms of energy utilisation, i.e. the new surface area formed by crushing per unit of expended energy as shown in From The tensile strength of the pharmaceutical compacted tablets including lactose and paracetamol at different temperatures has been measured by Britten and Pilpel Kwan et al. Another reason can be related to the nature of the tests. In the quasi-static side crushing test, the particle is loaded until its breakage is detected, but in single particle impact test, the particle is impacted to the target with a certain velocity. As the mechanical properties of the particle such as yield stress vary with the temperature, the elasto-plastic contact time may vary with the temperature. Therefore, the applied impact force to the particle cannot be the same for different temperatures. In the model of Ghadiri and Zhang From this model, it may be concluded that an increase in the fracture toughness may not necessarily affect the breakage propensity, because the impact force can also increase with lowering the temperature. However, in the quasi-static single particle crushing test for a given breakage propensity, if the fracture toughness increases with a decease in temperature, the applied load has to be increased. This can suggest that the fracture toughness of α-lactose monohydrate may increase with lowering the temperature. This idea can be checked with the bulk crushing energy utilization results. In the Rittinger's As it can be expected from the results of SCS tests, lowering the temperature should decrease the bulk crushing extent of the particles. This behaviour has been confirmed by obtaining a lower extent of breakage at the sub-ambient temperatures in the BC tests. The variation of the bulk crushing with the single particle crushing could be analysed with the distinct element method. In this model, a number of particles are generated in an assembly and will be compressed to a specified pressure level. The contact force evolution, which is based on Newton's laws of motion and Hertz's analysis is monitored as the applied load is increased and the condition for fracture is simulated based on the crushing load (SCS test) of individual particles (Hassanpour et al. The extent of breakage of small crystals of α-lactose supplied by DMV (the Netherlands) has been investigated by quasi-static single particle and bulk crushing test in response to temperature variations. The results indicate that under sub-ambient conditions the extent of breakage of both single particles and bulk material decrease due to an increase in fracture toughness. The energy utilization of the bulk crushing at different temperatures shows that specific surface area per unit expended energy decreases as temperature decreases. The comparison of simulation results using DEM with the experimental bulk crushing results show a reasonable relation between SCS test and BC test results for all the temperatures tested. expended energy (J/kg) impact force (N) particle hardness (Pa) constant of Rittinger's law (m fracture toughness (Pa m particle size (m) fracture load (N) particle radius (m) new specific surface area of the particles (m peak contact time (t) impact velocity (m/s) breakage propensity density of particle (kg/m internal indirect tensile stress (Pa) This work is part of an ongoing work supported by Pfizer Global Research and Development, for which the authors are grateful.