Preliminary leaching tests on a sample of limonitic laterite at 220°C, gave satisfactory recoveries of nickel. It was noted that a significant proportion of the iron remained in solution (about 11g/l) due to its presence as divalent iron. This was equivalent to about 55kg per ton of ore or 14% of the iron. The use of oxygen in the leach was investigated as a means of precipitating this iron as hematite and a few tests with oxygen were performed. Reaction with manganese dioxide was used subsequently, as a means of quantifying oxygen consumption and the ferrous content of the ore. A series of tests at various acid additions was used to test the benefit of oxidizing conditions. The concentration of iron in solution was reduced to about 1g/l when oxidizing conditions were used, resulting in a calculated saving in acid consumption of about 88kg/t. The data confirmed that the saving in acid consumption was of this order. The oxygen consumption of the ore, based on conversion of manganese dioxide, was very variable, with an average value of about 15kg/t. This is about twice the calculated value (of 7kg/t) based on reduction of iron in solution. This could imply that a similar proportion of ferrous iron was present in the residue.
                  The use of a high temperature (270–280°C), for precipitation of ferrous compounds, may not necessarily reduce acid consumption, if these compounds contain sulphate or if they re-dissolve on cooling, as filtration at high pressure and temperature is required. The use of oxygen in the leach offers the potential of reducing acid consumption and eliminating unstable precipitates associated with ferrous compounds.About 60% of current worldwide production of nickel is derived from sulphide ores, but about 70% of the nickel reserves are present in laterite deposits ( Laterites are iron-rich layers in soils derived from prolonged mechanical and chemical weathering of ultramafic (ultra-basic) rocks, in a tropical climate. Some laterites are classified as bauxites, in view of their gibbsite content, but this paper will be focussed on laterites with a significant concentration of nickel (and associated cobalt). The mechanisms by which the iron and other metals are mobilised and concentrated in lateritic layers is the subject of on-going debate. It should be noted that ultra-basic rocks contain alkaline species and these rocks react with water to produce an alkaline pH. However, the presence of oxygen and carbon dioxide in rainwater over a prolonged period, makes the picture complicated. The form of the precipitate in a typical nickel laterite changes with depth and the zones are usually classified, from top to bottom, as follows: ferricrete, limonite, nontronite, saprolite and altered peridotite ( The iron content of laterites can be utilised if the ore is smelted directly to form an iron/nickel alloy. However, the fine particle size, the high proportion of slag forming elements and the cost of drying (in a tropical climate) make this option unattractive in most cases. High pressure acid leaching (HPAL), on the other hand, fits in well with a fine, moist feed and it is considered to the best option in many cases for selective dissolution of nickel and cobalt, as the iron is re-precipitated as hematite. The existing users of the HPAL process use a pulp containing 25–35% solids, a residence time of 30–90 The use of temperatures in the range 250–280 In view of the remote location of many of the laterite deposits, transport of sulphur, rather sulphuric acid, may be considered. The sulphur could be converted to sulphuric acid locally (by reaction with air) and some of the exothermic heat could be used to pre-heat the leach pulp by heat exchange. An alternative approach is to add the sulphur to the pulp and to inject locally generated oxygen into the leach vessels, to provide in situ heating, in combination with the generation of sulphuric acid. A further option would be to use oxygen and a low grade (high sulphur) nickel sulphide concentrate as a source of sulphur, thereby providing a synergistic means of recovering the nickel in the concentrate. Injection of oxygen into the leach provides a means of converting ferrous compounds into hematite, thereby reducing the amount of sulphate-containing precipitate, the associated acid consumption and environmental problems associated with unstable precipitates. It should be noted that oxidation of ferrous sulphate is used to co-precipitate other metals. It is also possible that the rate of dissolution of the nickel-containing minerals may be improved by oxidising conditions. This paper describes a preliminary investigation of the effect oxidising conditions on pressure leaching of limonite. Recent published laboratory test work on the HPAL process has been done in batch autoclaves at 230 to 270 A sample of lateritic ore was provided by Anglo American PLC, which was described as a typical limonite, high in iron and low in magnesium, with a moderate acid consumption. The metal content was given as approximately: 0.4% Ni, 0.05% Co, 40% Fe, 0.3% Mg and 0.8% Al. A Parr autoclave (2 The limonite sample, which contained lumps of aggregated material, was crushed to pass a 600 Preliminary tests over a range of acid additions showed that nickel extraction increased with increasing acid addition, up to a maximum of about 90%, based on the head grade of 0.4% Ni. The residue was not analysed. The pH of the solution, (after cooling) decreased marginally with increasing acid addition, as shown in Given the pH values shown in The use of manganese dioxide to oxidise ferrous iron to the ferric state is well known to extractive metallurgists for uranium leaching. It has also been used as a wet analytical method for determination of ferrous iron in solution. Manganese dioxide will only dissolve in acid solution by reduction to Mn The non-oxidative leaching tests showed that the ore contained about 0.2% soluble manganese (0.4   The reaction time was reduced to half an hour in two experiments (in  Initial leaching tests at 220 The consumption of oxidant was measured by adding manganese dioxide and this method proved to be both simple and effective. The equivalent consumption of oxygen varied significantly, (between 8 and 20 Literature on high pressure acid leaching of nickel laterites has not highlighted the presence of ferrous compounds and how they are precipitated. Injection of oxygen is an effective way of converting divalent iron and manganese ions into stable oxides. Tests at 270–280 Oxygen consumption was shown to be independent of acid consumption in tests at 220 The ore (limonite) had a low concentration of magnesium (0.3%) and no magnesium was found in solution. The use of oxygen is not expected to have any effect on precipitation of magnesium during pressure leaching of saprolite, but improved co-precipitation with iron may occur.