The cementation of copper onto zinc in acidic sulfate solutions in the presence of nettle (Urtica Dioica L.) extract was studied using atomic absorption spectroscopy, scanning electron microscopy, EDX and voltammetry techniques. The extract obtained by refluxed technique in water, was shown to be a good inhibitor against hydrogen evolution. This hydrogen is the major cause of the overconsumption of the substrate during cementation in acidic media and limits the efficiency of the cementation reaction. The rate of cementation is improved by the increase of inhibitor concentration in the solution until an optimal value of 1.5gL−1. The rate of the cementation reaction was also found to increase with increasing temperature until 37°C. This effect is more significant when the inhibitor is present in the solution. This improvement is due to the inhibition of the hydrogen evolution by adding nettle extract in the solution. The electrode potential E(t) changes during cementation, with and without nettle extract, are followed and some conclusions were drawn for the copper deposit adherence onto the substrate and its morphology.Cementation is an electrochemical process in which noble metal ions in the solution are reduced by simultaneous oxidation of a less noble metal, the latter being both the substrate on which the deposit is formed and the sacrificial electrode. The metal deposit films obtained have a decorative appearance and are widely used as a standard contacting material for corrosion protection and for soldering and welding in the production of electric contacts and interconnections ( Cementation process is one of the most effective and economical techniques used in electrowinning of metals to purify the zinc sulfate solutions used in hydrometallurgical zinc production. The purity criteria necessitate the elimination of the metal impurities more electropositive than zinc (the nobler ones) which codeposit on the cathode and lead to the redissolution of the zinc deposits ( The morphology and the adhesion of cemented deposit can affect significantly the kinetics of the process. For this reason, the investigation of the morphology of the deposit formed during cementation reaction seems to be very important ( As the side reaction of hydrogen evolution is undesirable in the cementation process, the present work is concerned with the study of the cementation of copper onto zinc metal in the presence of nettle plant extract ( Thus, this nettle extract (which is a mixture of different compounds) can act as an inhibitor of hydrogen evolution which leads to minimize the excess consumption of zinc in the cementation reaction and to avoid the cement detachment; in consequence, the presence of this inhibitor may change the electrochemical conditions on the surface of the zinc metal and thereby the cementation rate of copper. Without any additives in the zinc sulfate solutions, the copper deposit onto zinc obtained by cementation is generally dendritic with high porosity ( To our knowledge there is no publication in the literature concerning the cementation of copper under these well defined conditions. To control the hydrodynamic conditions, the cementation of Cu The cementation and electrochemical experiments were carried out in a classical three electrodes cell with a platinum counter electrode, a rotating zinc as working electrode and a saturated sulfate electrode (SSE) as reference. This SSE electrode was chosen to avoid the contamination of the solution. The time dependence of the Cu Cyclic voltammetry experiments were run using a Tacussel PGP201potentiostat/galvanostat coupled with an HP microcomputer under “Voltamaster software”. The proton reduction and the zinc oxidation, with and without nettle extract were conducted in Na Nettle ( During the cementation process of copper onto zinc, the following reaction (Zn The proton electrochemical reduction process was studied using the linear potential scan voltammetry technique in a stationary regime with a potential scan rate of 1  Anodic potentiodynamic polarization curves for zinc in solution containing different concentrations of plant extract (ranging from 0.6 to 3 The variation of log (C°/C) with cementation time for different contents of the nettle extract in the solution is shown in The values of the cementation rate constant k, calculated from the slopes of the curves in These results indicate clearly that the cementation of copper can be conducted when nettle extract is present in solution. As we have mentioned above ( The effective inhibition of the proton reduction in the presence of nettle extract increases the cementation rate. This possible hypothesis of the enhancement of the cementation kinetics when the hydrogen evolution is avoided is that when bubbles of hydrogen are eliminated from the zinc substrate, the copper deposit which enlarges the cathodic area for copper reduction does not fall (see The corresponding electrode potential When the cementation reaction duration is longer than 1 The examination of the electrode (zinc substrate) by SEM, before cementation and after 60 This phenomenon leads to a decrease in the adhesion of the cement deposit on the metal; in consequence the cathodic surface area decreases and the rate of reaction decreases too. In the presence of the inhibitor, (for instance with 0.6 The EDX analysis of the electrode surface after 60 It has been found in many studies reported previously ( It can be seen from these results that the cementation rate increased greatly with the increase of temperature from 20 to 37 No discontinuity was observed in the The rate of cementation of copper onto zinc in acidic sulfate solutions is increased by addition of nettle extract. Without adding the inhibitor, copper deposition onto zinc was dendritic with high porosity. Numerous holes have been created by the corrosion of the zinc electrode as a result of the intensive hydrogen evolution. The holes created by the hydrogen evolution in the deposit diminish as the content of the inhibitor in the solution increases until the optimal value of 1.5 The authors thank Professor Zerroual L., from University of Setif (Algeria) for his help in the revision of the manuscript language.