A geo-material failure process analysis (F-RFPA2D), considering the coupling of stress distribution, fluid flow, and element damage evolution, is used to investigate the mechanisms of crack initiation and propagation around a 2-D cylindrical cavity in heterogeneous stiff soils during hydraulic fracturing. A large number of numerical analysis on hydraulic fracturing in stiff soil with pre-existing injection cavity have been carried out to study the mechanism of hydraulic fracturing in stiff soil. In addition, the characteristic of acoustic emission (AE) due to hydraulic fractures are studied by numerical simulations. The results provide a better understanding of the crack initiation and propagation mechanisms during hydrofracturing. The simulation software package can be a powerful tool for study of soil behavior during hydraulic fractures.Hydraulic fracturing is a common technique used in petroleum engineering, mining engineering and grouting engineering for many years. Hydraulic fractures are created in the vicinity of a borehole when fluid is injected at a pressure that exceeded some critical value. Hydraulic fractures created during permeation or compaction grouting can affect the distribution of grout and markedly reduce the ability of grout to seal or increase strength Much attention have been paid to the mechanism of hydraulic fracturing in soil, which had also been gradually recognized in connection with pressure grouting In a saturated cohesive soil, it is very useful to determine the influence zone around cavity and the generation and the dissipation of pore water pressure during and after cavity expansion. The usual procedure for analytical analysis (cavity expansion theory) is described as follows: in In this paper, a numerical model that can consider the coupling effect of seepage, damage and stress field is introduced. Two-dimensional numerical simulations of the behavior of cylindrical cavity in the center of a saturated stiff soil subjected to different initial in situ stresses and an increasing injection pressure are performed to examine the initiation of tensile cracks and/or shear cracks and their subsequent propagation. The characteristics of acoustic emission (AE) due to hydraulic fractures are simulated. Moreover, the influence of heterogeneity of stiff soil on hydraulic fractures is studied by numerical tests. Traditionally, crack initiation in geo-materials is considered to be either a tensile failure or shear failure in the material. Some researchers On the basis of cylindrical cavity expansion analyses, Soga et al. Soil is assumed to be an elastic material in the derivation of Eqs. Before the circumferential effective stress diminished for soils of no tensile strength or reaches the tensile strength for cemented soils, shear failure can occur in soil when the stress conditions satisfied the Mohr–Coulomb shear failure criterion as shown in The model, developed by Tang et al. In addition, both tensile and shear failures are considered in the analysis. An element is considered to have failed in the tension mode when its minor principal stress exceeds the tensile strength of the element (Eq. For an individual element, when the stress of the element satisfied the certain strength criterion, the element begins to damage. Karihaloo and Fu It is well known that the acoustic emission (AE) can emit due to the micro-fractures or voids occurring frequently inside the soil when the soil is subjected to the internal hydraulic fracture and the surrounding loading. Accordingly, the damage degree of soil can be expressed by the AE number and amplitude, which is related with the micro-hydraulic hydraulic fracture evolution inside the stiff soil. In this paper, it is supposed that every fractured element could produce a certain amount of AE when it failed In this paper, the results of three sets of simulations are reported. The first set of simulations is performed to simulate the behavior of stiff clay in the vicinity of an expanding cavity due to the internal hydraulic pressure. The purpose is to develop a better understanding of the crack initiation and propagation mechanisms. In the second set of simulations, the effect of different In all of the sets of simulations, the domain is discretized into many small square elements. Coupled seepage and stress analyses are performed. Injection pressure is applied in a quasi-static manner. At each loading increment, the seepage and stress equations of the elements are solved and the coupling analysis is performed. The stress conditions of each element are then examined for failure before the next load increment. Input parameters for these simulations are tabulated in  The entire process of hydraulic fracturing can be divided into four major stages according to the evolution of stress field. (1) Stress concentration stage. During the initial increase of the injection pressure, the stresses increase in the soil with the cavity expanding. There are no new cracks initiated around the borehole (see In addition, when the injection pressure increased 60 As mentioned in Section Mode I corresponds to the case of tensional cracking considered up to this point. In fact, it was the most useful mode to study, as experimental evidence Some researchers In addition, some researchers  Another factor to affect the hydraulic fractures initiation and propagation is the injection rate (increment of injection pressure/time). Much stiff clay forming part of slopes and the core section of earth dams exist in the fissured state. These fissures or cracks in the clay can produce stress concentrations that can force the clay beyond its peak strength, producing as a result the non-uniform mobilization of strength, and thus causing the progressive failure of the clay. In this section, soil samples with different homogeneity index were modeled to study the influence of heterogeneity on the hydraulic fractures.   A geo-material Failure Process Analysis developed for heterogeneous stiff geo-materials coupling stress, seepage and element damage evolution are introduced to investigate the behavior of the crack initiation and propagation in stiff clay during injection. Numerical results illustrated that the entire process of hydraulic fracturing can be divided into four major stages: (1) stress concentration stage, (2) induced fracture initiation stage, (3) fracture stable propagation stage and (4) fracture closing stage. The concept of process zone is introduced to explain the mechanism of hydraulic fractures propagation is in fact a combination of the tensile and shear failure modes. Numerical results reproduced the acoustic emission (AE) characteristic in spatial and time evolution in soils due to the internal hydraulic fracture and the surrounding loading. The numerical results indicate The propagation of fractures is dominated by The numerical results indicate the heterogeneity of soil is sensitive to influence the stress field modification when hydraulic fractures initiate, and then influenced the propagation of fractures. The higher the value of the homogeneity index, the higher the strength of the specimen. The curves of stress-strain become even linear and the strength loss is also sharper for the more homogeneous specimens. The work described in this paper was partially supported by the National Science Foundation under Grants (CMMI-0408390, CMMI-0644552, 50674025 and 10872046), by the American Chemical Society Petroleum Research Foundation under Grant PRF-44468-G9, by the National Natural Science Foundation of China, by 973 Program of Ministry of Science and Technology of China, by the Australian Research Council under Grant DP0881238, by the Fok Ying Tung Education Foundation, and by the Changjiang Scholarship of Ministry of Education of China, to which the authors are very grateful.