We present a technique of femoral impaction grafting used for the treatment of periprosthetic femur fractures with severe bone loss after total hip arthroplasty. Seven patients with femoral fractures with compromise of the femoral isthmus were treated with femoral component revision using the impaction grafting bone technique. The average age was 64 years (range, 44-72 years), and 2 patients required mesh augmentation at the time of surgery. The average follow-up for this group of patients was 56 months (range, 39-92 months). Radiographic evaluation revealed healed fractures in all patients and no evidence of implant loosening at a mean of 56 months (range, 39-92 months). There were no cases of infections or dislocations in this series. Impaction grafting technique can be useful in the treatment of periprosthetic femur fractures when bone loss and canal geometry preclude the use of fully coated femoral components.Periprosthetic femur fractures after total hip arthroplasty (THA) can cause severe pain and disability to the patient and present significant challenges to the treating surgeon Between 1996 and 2000, 7 patients underwent femoral component revision after a periprosthetic femur fracture using a long-stem cemented femoral component using impaction grafting. There were 6 women and 1 man with an average age of 64 years (range, 44-87 years). One patient sustained a fracture after prior revision THA, and 2 patients had prior failed attempts at open reduction and internal fixation of their periprosthetic fractures. The femoral factures were of the Vancouver B2 and B3 variants All patients underwent femoral component revision with impaction grafting and a long-stem cemented femoral implant (Spectron 195-mm or 225-mm stem; Smith and Nephew, Memphis, TN) that bypassed the most distal aspect of the fracture by at least 2 cortical diameters. Two patients underwent concurrent acetabular revision at the time of surgery. Two patients required the use of a mesh to contain the bone graft, whereas a patient required the use of a strut allograft for augmentation of her proximal femur. No structural allografts were used to augment the fracture sites. Postoperatively, all patients were allowed to partial weight bearing on their operative extremity, and aspirin was used for deep venous thrombosis prophylaxis. The clinical outcome was evaluated using the Harris hip score, and serial radiographs were evaluated by a surgeon who did not perform the revision hip arthroplasties (GCL) for evidence of fracture healing and implant loosening or subsidence. The position of the femoral component was evaluated at various intervals with relation to greater trochanter, lesser trochanter, and the ischium, and the presence and location of radiolucent lines were also recorded. An implant was defined as stable if there was an absence of radiolucent lines around the femoral stem or progressive implant migration or subsidence on serial radiographs Despite the acute presentation of these patients, preoperative planning is paramount. First, preoperative templating is done to estimate the appropriate size and length of the femoral component necessary to bypass the distal aspect of the fracture by at least 2 cortical diameters and to allow the surgeon to preview the desired position of the new femoral component. In most cases, a stem of at least 200 mm measured from the medial calcar will be necessary. Second, ample allograft bone should be available. We recommend a minimum of 270 mL of corticocancellous allograft chips of the size and shape described by Sloof et al The hip is approached through a standard posterolateral approach. The lateral exposure of the femoral shaft is carried out with care to minimize periosteal stripping and preserve extraosseous blood supply. Distally, the vastus lateralis is elevated off the intermuscular septum, and the perforators from the profunda femoris are identified and ligated. Before dislocation of the hip, control of the proximal fragment is accomplished using a large bone clamp. This allows for internal rotation of the proximal femur to allow release of the external rotators and posterior capsule, thereby allowing dislocation of the hip. After removal of the loose femoral component and existing cement, the fracture is reduced and provisionally fixed. For oblique or spiral fractures, we prefer using stainless steel cerclage wires. For fractures with transverse components, we recommend the addition of circumferential wire mesh in addition to the cerclage cables. Comminution at the fracture site, osteolysis, poor bone quality, and limited surface to “key-in” fracture fragments make provisional fixation with cerclage wires ineffective and inadequate. Conversely, the provisional reduction using a wire and mesh construct is usually enough to provide stability to the femur to allow maneuvering of the leg to complete the reconstruction. In general, the wire mesh should span at least 2 cortical diameters above and below the fracture site. The circumferential wire mesh provides the advantage of containment of corticocancellous allograft and cement because comminution is commonly seen in these fractures. Femoral preparation and impaction begins with the removal of the intramedullary membrane using canal scrapers and standard reamers. The appropriate length and diameter of the femoral component is determined through templating and confirmed intraoperatively with an x-ray after trial reduction. The goal is to bypass the fracture site with the stem by at least 2 cortical diameters. Next, a cannulated cement restrictor (Smith and Nephew) is placed 2 cm distal to the anticipated tip of the femoral component. Using a large bone tamp, allograft bone is impacted against the cement restrictor to prepare the distal mantle for the prosthesis. Cannulated long, smooth, tapered reamers (Smith and Nephew) are used to circumferentially pack corticocancellous allograft chips in areas of bone loss and comminution throughout the length of the femoral shaft while maintaining a centralized canal. Broaching then proceeds with cannulated smooth femoral broaches (Smith and Nephew) to accomplish the circumferential packing of the bone chips proximally. Tight proximal bone packing is completed using small trapezoidal bone impactors to optimize the rotational and axial stability of the final impaction. After satisfactory reconstitution of the proximal and distal femoral bone stock and a trial reduction, the final component is cemented into place using modern cement technique. Between 1996 and 2000, 7 patients with periprosthetic femur fractures underwent femoral component revision with impaction grafting and cemented long-stem femoral component. The mean follow-up was 56 months (range, 27-90). No patient died or was lost before 2 years of follow-up, and 3 patients were followed for a minimum of 5 years. The patients' clinical outcome was evaluated using the Harris hip score. The average Harris hip score in this group was 73.8 points (range, 39-92 points). Six of the 7 patients were rated as having good or excellent result. Five patients had no pain, one had mild pain, and one patient complained of severe hip pain at their last evaluation. Four patients did not require the use of any gait aides, 2 used a cane only for long walks, and one used a cane at all times. Overall, 6 of 7 patients were satisfied with their overall outcome. At final follow-up, no patients required revision of their femoral component due to infection, loosening, or subsidence. One patient sustained 2 dislocations shortly after surgery (1 and 2 months) and was treated successfully with closed reduction and immobilization with no recurrences. One patient developed asymptomatic heterotopic ossification surrounding the hip but did not require reoperation. Finally, one patient underwent open reduction and internal fixation of an avulsion of the greater trochanter at 80 months after the initial surgery. Radiographic analysis of these patients averaged 56 months (range, 27-90 months). At the last radiographic evaluation, all 7 patients had shown complete fracture healing with good incorporation of the corticocancellous graft. When comparing final implant position on serial anteroposterior and lateral views of the hip, there was no evidence of implant loosening. The average implant subsidence at 12 weeks measured 3.8 mm compared with immediate postoperative films. At last follow-up, the mean distance of implant subsidence measured 4.3 mm. No implant had circumferential radiolucencies. Radiolucent lines were present in Gruen zone 1 in 3 hips (46%). All implants were determined to be stable with no gross change in position. Treatment of periprosthetic femur fractures after THA has historically yielded variable results. Options for reconstruction include open reduction and plate fixation or cemented or cementless femoral component revision Mont and Maar However, there is a subset of periprosthetic femur fractures associated with loose femoral components where the fracture pattern, comminution, and bone loss extend below the level of the femoral isthmus and preclude adequate fixation with traditional fully porous-coated cementless femoral components. In these cases, the options include cementless fixation using a modular fluted femoral stem or long-stem cemented fixation coupled with impaction bone grafting. Impaction grafting was originally introduced as a means to restore acetabular and femoral deficits during revision THA Our results compare favorably with previously published reports of patients undergoing treatment of periprosthetic femur fractures after THA. In this series, union was achieved in 100% of the patients, and there was no evidence of implant loosening or subsidence at last follow-up. Clinically, all patients showed significant improvements in pain and function, and 6 of 7 patients were rated as having good to excellent results. One patient was rated as having a poor result after revision THA and fracture fixation because of persistent pain in the groin and thigh. Radiographs revealed a healed fracture and a stable femoral implant. Further evaluation of this patient revealed that she had spinal stenosis, but she elected conservative treatment of her spine. She did not require further intervention for her hip. Another patient presented for evaluation with an avulsion of the greater trochanter 80 months after initial surgery and underwent open reduction and internal fixation. At the time of surgery, the femur showed incorporation of the corticocancellous allograft and a stable femoral component. Even though the average femoral stem had subsided 4.3 mm (range, 1-5 mm) at last follow-up, all femoral components were judged to be stable. Because of the femoral stem geometry (tapered) and texture (smooth, polished), a small degree of implant subsidence is to be expected. Other studies on the outcomes of the use of the impaction bone graft technique have also reported femoral component subsidence without loosening. Sierra et al Impaction grafting and cemented stem fixation should not be used for all cases of femoral periprosthetic fractures. The circumstances in which this particular technique should be considered include fractures with patterns and significant comminution at or below the level of the femoral isthmus that can prevent traditional long cementless porous-coated femoral components from achieving axial and rotational stability Although we recognize that there are several limitations to this study including the small sample size and lack of a control group, we believe that this approach has the potential to address the problems of bone loss, fracture healing, initial implant stability, and long-term prosthetic fixation, which are often present in the management of these very difficult fractures. Our results show that impaction grafting combined with cemented long-stem revision for treatment of Vancouver B2 and B3 periprosthetic femur fractures is a viable technique for achieving reliable fracture healing and satisfactory clinical results.