Recent studies suggest that low-cost coal preparation technologies can play an important role in reducing the emissions of air toxics at electric utilities. To evaluate this approach, a detailed study was conducted at Virginia Tech to quantify the capabilities of a variety of conventional and advanced precombustion cleaning processes for removing hazardous air pollutant precursors (HAPPs). Characterization data obtained from this study indicate that most HAPPs associate with mineral impurities commonly found in run-of-mine coals. Some elements (e.g., mercury) were found to associate with pyritic sulfur, while others (e.g., manganese) were more closely associated with ash-bearing minerals. Furthermore, pilot-scale tests conducted as part of this work demonstrated that conventional cleaning processes could achieve HAPPs rejections of 50–80%. The use of advanced processes further improved these rejections, particularly for HAPPs associated with pyrite. The data also showed that trace element rejections could be improved by pulverizing the feed coal to liberate mineral matter. However, mathematical simulations indicated that these apparent gains are often not realized in industrial operations due to the lower separation efficiencies of the finer coal cleaning circuits.In response to growing environmental concerns reflected in the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendment, the United States Department of Energy (DOE) sponsored several research and development projects beginning in late 1995 as part of an initiative entitled Previous studies have suggested that HAPPs generally occur as trace elements in the mineral matter of run-of-mine coals As part of the DOE initiative, a research program was undertaken at Virginia Tech to further evaluate the capabilities of coal preparation technologies for HAPPs control. Specific objectives of this investigation were: to conduct detailed characterization studies that quantify the types and amounts of trace elements present within the various components of coal, to perform bench-scale separation tests that demonstrate the capabilities of various conventional and advanced cleaning processes for rejecting trace elements from run-of-mine coals, and to formulate appropriate control strategies capable of minimizing the downstream impacts of trace elements rejected with the coal waste streams. In order meet the project objectives, three US coal samples were selected and subjected to a variety of laboratory and bench-scale test programs. The first series of tests involved Characterization tests were conducted to determine the ultimate level of trace element reduction attainable by physical cleaning methods. Several size fractions from three different run-of-mine coals (i.e., Pittsburgh No. 8, Illinois No. 6 and Coalburg seam) were subjected to float–sink testing and flotation release analysis. Float–sink tests were conducted on three size fractions (50×10 mm, 10×0.6 mm, 0.6×0.15 mm) of each coal sample. These three fractions were chosen to cover the range of sizes normally treated by industrial coal cleaning processes, i.e., dense media cyclones and water-based concentrators. Each size fraction was separated in a laboratory vessel to generate specific gravity classes between 1.3 and 1.9 SG. In addition, flotation release analyses were performed on two fine size fractions (0.15×0.05 mm and −0.05 mm) using the procedure advocated by Dell  A preliminary analysis of the characterization data indicated that most of the trace elements examined in this study were strongly associated with the mineral impurities in the run-of-mine coals. For example, Regression analyses were used to establish statistical correlations between trace elements concentrations and the occurrence of different coal components. The results of the regression analyses are summarized in Several poor fits ( Normalized multiple linear regression coefficients were determined for each coal to correct for large differences in the relative magnitudes of ash, pyritic sulfur or OM contents in each regression equation. The normalized regression coefficients for each element are plotted in The conclusions derived from the data provided in The results of the SEM characterization studies are summarized in After completing the characterization work, the Pittsburgh No. 8 seam coal was subjected to a variety of bench-scale tests using traditional dense medium and froth flotation processes. The performance data from these tests are summarized in Trace element rejections for the total plant varied from a low of 46.7% for mercury to a high of 80.0% for lead. Arsenic, cadmium and mercury tended to be rejected at approximately the same level as pyritic sulfur (≈50%). These findings were consistent with the characterization data that showed a strong correlation between these elements and pyritic sulfur. On the other hand, the elements of chromium, cobalt, lead and manganese were rejected at levels approximately equal to that of the plant rejection of ash (≈70%). This correlation was expected since these elements were shown in the characterization studies to have a strong association with ash-bearing minerals. However, nickel was rejected at slightly higher levels than expected (i.e., the SEM data indicated that these elements should be associated more closely with pyrite). The higher rejection of this element may be attributed to (i) the relatively high rejections of carbonate minerals which contain this element and (ii) variations in the mineralogical association of this element over different particle size classes. It should also be noted that promising results were obtained through the use of fine coal processing circuits that combined multiple separation processes in series. For example, Clean coal samples from the bench-scale tests were treated with chelating agents to further enhance the removal of trace elements by increasing their effective solubility range. Chelating agents are routinely used in the minerals processing industry to improve leaching operations. Several different reagents were evaluated in this work including ethylenediaminetetraacetate (EDTA), nitrilotriacetate (NTA) and diethyltriamine (DETA). These reagents are biodegradable and are well-known complexing agents for a variety of metallic elements. The chelate extractions were performed on clean coal products obtained under optimum separation efficiency for each of the physical cleaning processes examined in the bench-scale test work.  The removal of HAPPs by coal preparation has the unfortunate side effect of increasing the concentration of potentially toxic elements in the coal refuse impoundment. This approach is obviously preferred over postcombustion disposal due to the smaller surface area and lower reactivity of coal refuse compared to that of the ash disposed at coal-fired power stations. However, control strategies must be formulated to ensure that toxic elements are not released from the refuse impoundment at the preparation plant site. Therefore, a low-cost bioremediation technique involving microbial mats was tested using samples of refuse material from the bench-scale work. This technique, which was developed and patented by researchers at Clark Atlanta University  In order to maximize the utility of the database compiled during this study, a flowsheet simulator was developed to evaluate the technical performance of a variety of circuit designs and processing strategies for trace element rejection. A typical set of simulation runs is shown in  ⋅ A detailed study was undertaken to evaluate the capabilities of coal preparation technologies for the precombustion removal of hazardous air pollutant precursors (HAPPs) from run-of-mine coals. The study included the washability characterization of three different coal samples and pilot-scale evaluations of a variety of conventional and advanced coal cleaning processes. ⋅ Characterization data indicate that HAPPs tend to be concentrated in the mineral matter impurities of coal. The data also show that the HAPPs of greatest environmental concern (e.g., mercury) are strongly associated with the mineral pyrite. Therefore, coal preparation facilities need to place a greater emphasis on pyrite removal to further improve the rejection of these elements. ⋅ Test data obtained from the pilot-scale testing of traditional dense medium and froth flotation processes showed that substantial reductions in trace element content could be achieved via coal preparation. Trace element rejections for the total plant varied from a low of 46.7% for mercury to a high of 80.0% for lead. These levels of performance were achieved while maintaining a combustible recovery in excess of 90%. ⋅ The pilot-scale test work indicated that elements such as arsenic, cadmium and mercury were rejected at approximately the same level as pyritic sulfur (≈50%), while elements such as chromium, cobalt, lead and manganese were rejected at levels approximately equal to that achieved for ash (≈70%). The rejections of lead and nickel were higher than expected in light of the characterization data showing that these elements tend to associate more intimately with pyrite than other ash-forming minerals. ⋅ Float–sink data indicate that trace element rejections can be theoretically improved by reducing the coal topsize to liberate mineral matter. Unfortunately, plant simulation studies indicate that the apparent gains indicated by the float–sink data are significantly diminished (or eliminated) when the lower process efficiencies of the fine coal circuitry are considered. ⋅ Analyses conducted to date suggest that trace element rejections can be improved by replacing low-efficiency, conventional, fine coal cleaning processes with advanced, multistage coal cleaning processes. These strategies would also provide coal companies with a financial incentive to implement these technologies as a result of potential improvements in clean coal yield. ⋅ Bioremediation tests conducted using waste water streams from coal refuse run-off indicate that microbial mats are a promising method for controlling the release of trace elements that may be introduced at greater levels into coal refuse impoundments. This technology was capable of reducing trace element concentrations by 65–90% for the coal refuse evaluated in this study. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of the Federal Energy Technology Center of the US Department of Energy (Contract DE-AC22-95PC95154) which made this work possible. Contributions by Southern Illinois University at Carbondale, Clark Atlanta University, Electric Power Research Institute and CONSOL are also gratefully acknowledged.