The optical and functional properties of powder coatings depend on the particle size distribution of the powder. The production steps for powder paint are mixing and extrusion of the raw material, cooling, pre-crushing and grinding. Depending on the requirements, the ground material is either collected in a cyclone or an inline classifier. In order to be able to produce different product qualities, the classifier should allow to vary the size distribution easily in a wide range. In that context, the second generation of a newly developed inline classifier as well as typical results applying the actual grinding and classifying technology will be presented. Finally, it will be shown to what extent the size distribution of the powder paint effects the application process and the quality of the coating.The particle size distribution of disperse materials has in many cases a fundamental impact on properties like for instance flowability, bulk density and chemical reactivity. A typical example is powder coatings where the quality and the optical properties of the coating depend on the particle size distribution of the powder. In addition to a well-defined top size, the amount of fines is of fundamental importance as this affects the applicability of the powder. During the last years, powder paint is penetrating into new applications that require a sophisticated coating technology and a well-defined size distribution in order to achieve high quality coatings. One of these challenging technologies is the coating of cars, for example, where highest standards have to be met. One general trend to be observed is towards finer particles as this makes it possible to reduce layer thickness and also leads to lower curing temperatures. One problem in this context is that with decreasing top size the amount of fines in the range below 10 μm increases. This fact can lead to several problems during application due to poorer fluidisation behaviour, low deposition efficiency on the substrate and clogging of the spray gun. The top size can easily be adjusted by the operational parameters of the mill like flow rate or classifier speed. Although the amount of fines (below 10 μm) can be influenced by various measures in a certain range, too, it is not possible to reduce it arbitrarily. This fact has been confirmed by single impact grinding tests which showed that the actual grinding technology is very close to the physical limits. This makes it inevitable to have an additional classifier downstream of the mill, if the amount of fines in the ground material is higher than acceptable. This preferably is realized by inline classification to keep the grinding system as simple as possible. In order to be able to produce different product qualities the classifier should allow to vary the size distribution easily in a wide range. It will be described how the size distribution can be adjusted during grinding and classification according to requirements of the customers. In addition to that, it will be described how powder properties influence the application process and the quality of the coating. Powder coatings are produced in a completely dry way under ecologically favourable conditions avoiding VOC emissions. Compared to wet paint technology, the production process is more simple and allows a higher degree of automation. In the first step of the production process, resins, pigments, curing agents and catalysts are blended in an intensive mixer and a melt extruder. The extrudate is cooled, pre-crushed and then ground on Air Classifier Mills (ACM). The ground product is recovered in a cyclone if no classification is required. In the case that the amount of fines has to be reduced, an inline classifier is installed between the mill and the cyclone, see Depending on the application of the powder coating, the top size of the powder has to be adjusted. Typically, the upper size defined as It also can be seen that with decreasing top size the amount of fines below 10 μm increases. The experience of mill manufacturers, as well as powder paint producers, shows that the amount of fines cannot be reduced arbitrarily. Although an optimisation of the mill is possible in a certain range by changing the mill geometry, see In order to evaluate which amount of fines can be achieved under ideal conditions and to determine the potential for optimising the milling process, single impact grinding tests have been made. This method was introduced by The key idea of that method is to stress the particles in a well-defined way by an impact under an ideal angle of 90°. The grinder is operated under vacuum so that impact velocity can be calculated exactly from the speed of the grinding disk. The tests are conducted at very low concentrations so that particle–particle interactions can be neglected. For the experiments made at the Institut für Aufbereitung und Veredelung at University of Clausthal-Zellerfeld, Germany, a standard epoxy–polyester coating was used. In order to get a well-defined top size, the raw material was stressed, the fines below 100 μm were removed by sieving and the coarse fraction was stressed once again. This procedure has been repeated until the desired top size of the product was reached. Although the size distribution obtained by single impact grinding tests is steeper in the middle size range, the amount below 10 μm is nearly identical in both cases. Even under the ideal conditions of the single impact grinding test device, it is not possible to reduce the amount of fines significantly. Obviously, the grinding process in air classifier mills is very close to the optimum under the aspect of production of fines. These results explain why all attempts for a further reduction of fines failed in the past. Due to that, it is inevitable to have an additional classification step if the ground material produced by the mill has too many fines in the range below 10 μm. The most simple but also most inefficient way to remove fines is using a cyclone with a leaking rotary airlock so that re-entrainment of collected particles will occur. As this effect concerns mainly the smaller particles, the amount of fines in the product will be reduced. The big disadvantage of this approach is that cut size cannot be adjusted accurately and sharpness of cut is very low. In order to improve efficiency, the first development step was it to use cyclone classifiers where the vortex finder of the cyclone is replaced by a classifier wheel as it is shown in The basics of the classification principle can be seen in In practice, such an ideal cut cannot be realized due to several reasons. Especially at higher material loadings particles are precipitated in the inlet area nearly independent from size. This effect negatively influences the sharpness of cut as particles smaller than required are found in the product. In order to improve the performance, a secondary air inlet at the bottom of the classifier allows the controlled re-entrainment of the collected material. By this measure, the particles are transported to the classifier wheel where a classification takes place according to the principle shown in The next developing step in order to meet the increasing demand for classified powder with a narrow size distribution was the introduction of the MikroClassifier CC which is shown in  Another advantage of the MikroClassifier is that the amount of fines can be varied by changing the speed of the classifier wheel respectively the flow rate of the secondary air. If requested, the The material circuit during the application of the powder paint is shown in In spite of the charging process especially the smaller particles are not completely deposited on the substrate. This so-called overspray is removed from the spray cabin with the exhaust airflow and collected in a bag filter. The selectivity of the deposition process results in an average particle size of the overspray that is smaller than the original product. As this recycled material is mixed with fresh powder and applied again, the average particle size of the sprayed powder gets finer, the deposition rate decreases and the quality of the coating deteriorates. In cooperation with the Fraunhofer Institute for production technology and automatization, it has been investigated how the amount of fines in the fresh material changes the deposition rate during application (  A defined powder coating quantity was sprayed on a substrate and the overspray was collected separately in a bag filter. For the next cycle, fresh powder was mixed with the overspray according to the deposition efficiency. This material was sprayed again and the whole procedure was repeated several times. At each step, size distribution of the material as well as efficiency of application was measured. Due to the effects explained above, the average particle sizes as well as the deposition efficiencies are decreasing with the number of circuits. When comparing the two figures, it becomes obvious that the coating parameters when using the classified product change slower with time which means that the coating process runs more stable. Application efficiency is significantly higher in this case leading to a lower recirculation rate of the powder. In order to measure coating quality, the surface of coated substrates was analysed with a surface analyser. The results of these tests are shown in The use of inline classifiers allows production of powder coatings with a considerably enhanced applicability. With the MikroClassifier, the powder coating manufacturer has a classifier available which meets the market needs of an increasingly finer coating powder. Through the optimised selectivity, compared to the current state of the art technology, the yield can be considerably increased. By closely monitored coating trials, it has been proven that the application of classified product has many advantages with regard to application efficiency, circulation stability and coating quality. drag coefficient centrifugal force drag force cumulative mass distribution flow parameter radius of cut size Reynolds' number grade efficiency radial velocity circumferential velocity particle size cut size solids loading atmospheric density solids density angular velocity dynamic viscosity