Bacterial populations and pathways involved in acetate and propionate consumption were studied in anoxic brackish sediment from the Grosser Jasmunder Bodden, German Baltic Sea. Uptake of acetate and propionate from the porewater was studied using stable carbon isotope-labeled compounds. Labeled acetate was not produced as an intermediate during propionate uptake experiments, and propionate consumption was not affected by the addition of acetate. In parallel, incorporation of labeled acetate and propionate into phospholipid-derived fatty acids (PLFA) was studied to indicate bacterial populations involved in the consumption of these substrates. The 13C-acetate label was mainly recovered in even-numbered PLFA (16:1ω7c, 16:0 and 18:1ω7c). In contrast, primarily odd-numbered PLFA (a15:0, 15:0, 17:1ω6 and 17:0) and the even-numbered i16:0 were labeled after incubation with 13C-propionate. Although single PLFA labeled with propionate are commonly found in sulfate reducers, the complete PLFA-labeling pattern does not resemble any of the know strains. However, the acetate-labeling pattern is similar to Desulfotomaculum acetoxidans and Desulfofrigus spp., two acetate-consuming, sulfate reducers. In conclusion, our data suggest that acetate and propionate were predominantly consumed by different, specialized groups of sulfate-reducing bacteria.Natural microbial communities are generally highly diverse and are involved in a variety of biogeochemical processes. Information that directly links structural and functional data on the bacterial communities is, however, limited and therefore urgently needed Under conditions where sulfate reduction is the dominant process, acetate is most likely directly consumed by sulfate-reducing bacteria like To differentiate between these different pathways of acetate and propionate degradation, we studied the turnover of stable carbon isotope-labeled acetate and propionate, and the accumulation of intermediates in anoxic brackish sediments. In addition, the incorporation of Sediment samples were taken from the Grosser Jasmunder Bodden, an eutrophic, brackish lagoon (salinity 8‰, water depth 8 m) on the Island of Rügen, German Baltic Sea, using a shipboard multi-corer on 9 May 1995 Sediment from 1–3-cm depth horizon collected from three replicate cores and anaerobic sediment slurries were prepared as described by de Graaf et al. Small sub-cores (diameter 2.4 cm) were taken from larger multi-corer cores and injected at 0.5-cm intervals with Lipids were extracted from 3 g wet weight of sediment with a modified Bligh and Dyer extraction using 50-ml screw-cap centrifuge tubes The isotopic composition of individual FAME was determined by using a Varian 3400 gas chromatograph equipped with a Varian SPI injector, which was coupled via a Type II combustion interface to a Finnigan Delta S isotope ratio mass spectrometer. An apolar analytical column (Hewlett-Packard Ultra-2, 50 m×0.32 mm×0.17 μm) was used with helium as carrier gas that was kept at 80°C for 1 min and then temperature programmed from 80 to 130°C at 40°C min Acetate and propionate were readily consumed at similar rates within 40 to 60 min in anaerobic sediment incubations ( Before label addition and after all label had been consumed, background porewater concentrations of unlabeled acetate varied between 3 and 10 μM as determined by GC-FID, and between 0 and 4 μM for unlabeled propionate. Unlabeled acetate (5 to 15 μM, calculated as the total acetate concentration minus the sum of the labeled acetate forms) could always be detected during the experiments. Similar results were obtained for sediment sampled from the same site in October 1994 (in situ temperature 10°C, data not shown). Both acetate and propionate uptake was, however, slower and label was completely removed from the porewater between 150 and 200 min (compare Concentrations of PLFA were very similar for all sediment incubations and only averages with standard deviations are shown in Labeling patterns of PLFA were very different between sediments incubated with In our propionate incubations with anoxic sediment, no transient accumulation of labeled acetate could be detected, which suggests that propionate was directly degraded without acetate as an intermediate. In addition, propionate and acetate uptake were independent, suggesting that different uptake systems were involved. It could be argued that we might have missed the accumulation of intermediate acetate as uptake of labeled acetate and propionate showed similar rates. This is, however, unlikely as this labeled intermediate acetate would have been diluted into the porewater pool of unlabeled acetate, where it would have been detected. Although uptake of propionate has been studied before The labeling pattern with propionate ( We used propionate labeled at the methyl end (C3) as uniformly labeled propionate was not available to us at the time of the measurements. It is, however, not likely that this would have affected the results of both the consumption and incorporation studies. Most bacteria studied degrade propionate incompletely to acetate using a randomizing pathway, which results in a mixed labeling of both carbon atoms in the produced acetate The PLFA labeling pattern with As shown before Our results suggest that two distinct and specialized populations or groups of bacteria were involved in the consumption of acetate and propionate in anoxic sediment. A study by Roslev et al. R. Pel and C.A. Hordijk are thanked for the use of the GC-IRMS facility at the NIOO/CL in Nieuwersluis, the Netherlands and A.M.J. Stams for carefully reading the manuscript. This work was supported by the EC Environment Programme project EV5V-CT92-0065. Publication 2712 of the Netherlands Institute of Ecology, Centre for Estuarine and Coastal Ecology.