This paper provides a first assessment of the use of mechanical activation to enhance the availability (i.e., leachability) of potassium from K-feldspar containing materials for soil improvement and agricultural purposes. A planetary mono mill was used to achieve high intensive dry grinding of both a K-feldspar concentrate and a nepheline syenite concentrate that served as a reference material. The K-feldspar concentrate was also milled in a pilot-scale HiCOM 15 nutating mill. The mill products were characterised with respect to their size distributions, specific surface areas and their relative degree of structural disordering as calculated from X-ray diffraction analysis. The enhanced solubility of the products in terms of potassium was determined directly through a three-step cascade leaching test. The results show that high intensive dry grinding could be used to increase the release of potassium from K-feldspar containing materials by more than an order of magnitude. When subjected to planetary milling, less than 10min of milling was required to make the K-feldspar mineral more reactive than the intrinsically more soluble nepheline. The enhanced reactivity of the mill products is predominantly a function of their specific surface areas, but a significant part of the observed increase in reactivity must be attributed to structural disordering. The use of water as a grinding aid makes it possible to produce very reactive structurally disordered products with high specific surface areas.Several investigators have studied the potential use of rock flour and mineral waste materials as a source of potassium for agricultural purposes ( The release of potassium from potassium-rich silicates is a surface reaction. Mechanical activation of these minerals through intensive grinding could produce more reactive surfaces and result in a higher rate of release, but could require a considerable amount of energy ( The main purpose of this study is to determine the effect of mechanical activation on the availability (i.e., leachability) of potassium in K-feldspar, using nepheline syenite as a reference material. Consequently, the experimental setup was designed to evaluate the difference between the original mineral concentrates and the corresponding activated products. Although the bulk of the experiments were conducted in lab-scale by use of a planetary mill, pilot-scale milling with a HiCOM nutating mill was also performed in order to provide a first assessment of the energy requirement of the proposed concept. All the activated materials were produced through dry milling in order to maximise the effect of mechanical activation. Dry milling would also simplify the future implementation of the concept and contribute to lower production and handling costs. Following milling, the activated products were subjected to a simple leaching test in which both distilled water and a 0.01 Two different potassium rich concentrates were used in this study; a K-feldspar concentrate (K600) and a nepheline syenite concentrate (Altafloat 500). Both the concentrates were supplied by the Norwegian mining company North Cape Minerals AS and were used as received without any further treatment. The concentrates consisted of classified material finer than 500–600 The overall chemical composition of the original concentrates with respect to major elements was determined using the X-ray fluorescence (XRF) technique using a Philips PW 1480 X-ray spectrometer. The original concentrates were also subjected to an X-ray powder diffraction analysis (XRD), using a Philips PW1710 diffractometer with a PW 1830 generator, scanning from 2° to 60° with monochromatised CuK Mechanical activation of the original K-feldspar and nepheline syenite concentrates was achieved using a Fritsch Pulverisette 6 planetary mono mill (batch mill) by dry milling of 20.0 The milling or activation time spanned from 2 After milling the activated products were carefully retrieved using a brush and a spatula. Great care was taken to minimise the risk of cross contamination between batches. Between each batch milling operation the mill chamber and grinding balls were rinsed by milling 40 After the first results had been obtained, two additional K-feldspar batches were run. These two batches were produced according to the procedure outlined above, but with 1.00 The materials produced by milling using the planetary mill (PM) are referred to as PM-activated K-feldspar and PM-activated nepheline syenite. A list of the different batches produced is given in Mechanical activation of the original K-feldspar concentrate was also achieved using a HiCOM 15 nutating batch mill by dry milling of 1000 The materials produced by milling in the HiCOM mill (HC) are referred to as HC-activated K-feldspar. The milling or activation time spanned from 5 Size distributions of the activated products were obtained from Fraunhofer diffraction analysis using a Coulter LS 230 Particle Size Analyser, whereas specific surface area was determined using the N Selected samples of both the original and activated K-feldspar were also subjected to an XRD analysis in order to evaluate the extent of structural disordering. The XRD analyses were performed using the instrument, procedures and settings previously outlined. The relative degree of structural disorder was expressed by calculating the following ratio ( In order to check whether the specific surface areas of the dry activated products were representative for the real specific surface areas in aqueous suspensions, 4.00 The leaching experiment was performed as a batch cascade test in which the solid material was subjected to three successive leaching steps. The test was conducted using a number of 125 Following the first leaching step, each suspension was centrifuged at approximately 1200 The pH of the supernatants from each individual leaching step was determined immediately after centrifugation using a Metrohm 713 pH meter and a Aquatrode Plus combined glass electrode before the solutions were sampled by extracting and filtering a volume of 10 Finally, the filtrates were analysed using atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS) and a GBC Avanta Σ flame atomic absorption spectrometer. Each determination was obtained by taking the average of three replicate measurements. The pH meter was calibrated prior to each series of measurements, and great care was taken to minimise the risk of contamination throughout the study. The leaching test was performed on selected PM-activated products which were chosen in order to study the effect of both specific surface area and structural disordering. The highest values of these two parameters were found after milling times of 10 The results from characterisation of the activated products are summarised in As is apparent when viewing The addition of water as a grinding aid resulted in higher specific surface areas of the final products, probably by lubricating the system and delaying agglomeration. It is interesting to note that this also affects the relative degree of disordering as described by the calculated The specific surface areas of the HC-activated products are generally lower than those of the PM-activated materials, although the F10–15 batch is comparable to the F3 and F5. Compared to the planetary mill, the HiCOM mill is also less efficient with respect to mechanical activation. When studied as a function of milling time, the As shown in The total energy consumption of HiCOM milling is shown in Due to the lower stability of the reduced charge, the power values found for the batches produced with only 1000 In order to span the range of specific grinding energy as well as specific surface area, batches F6-15, F7-19 and F10-15 were selected for the leaching experiment. The specific grinding energy of these batches varied from approximately 300 to 750 The results from the three-step leaching test were evaluated by calculating the cumulative relative release of potassium, i.e., the ratio between the amount released to the aqueous phase and the total amount initially present in the solid product. Hence, the cumulative relative release of potassium was defined as follows: The results from the leaching test that are shown in The most notable result from the leaching test is the cumulative release values for the F13 material which reached no less than 58%. This material was produced by adding 1.00 The leachability of the materials depends on three main parameters; the specific surface area, the degree of structural disordering and the acidity of the leachant. The relative importance of these three factors depends on the mineralogy of the material, as can be seen when comparing the difference between the cumulative release in 0.01 When comparing the specific surface areas with the corresponding cumulative relative release values, it becomes clear that surface area is the main factor controlling the availability of potassium when the materials are exposed to a given leachant. This explains why the materials that have been milled for 60 As expected, the cumulative release values of the HiCOM products are lower than those of the PM-activated materials. However, the release of potassium obtained for the F10–15 product is comparable to the results from the F3 material. Considering the values of their surface areas, this is not surprising. The relative importance of specific surface area and structural disordering found for the PM-activated materials appears to be valid for the HiCOM products as well. The results obtained by high intensive ultrafine grinding of the K-feldspar concentrate are promising, but they also show that further research is required in order to find the optimal milling solution. As demonstrated by this study, enhanced reactivity can be obtained both by increasing the specific surface area and by increasing the level of structural disorder. The products from the HiCOM mill were characterised by relatively low specific surface areas which directly limited the release rates. Based on the results obtained with the planetary mill, further experiments with the HiCOM mill will be conducted in which the use of water as a grinding aid will be explored. The full potential of the HiCOM mill remains to be discovered. However, as the specific surface area appears to be the single most important variable controlling the reactivity of the mill products, other milling solutions should also be considered. Attrittors are generally chosen when surface area is the primary aim and could therefore represent an interesting alternative, although such mills are likely to be less efficient at producing a highly disordered product. Wet milling would represent a further step in this direction and should not be ruled out. The following conclusions were drawn from the experimental study in which materials produced by high intensive ultrafine dry grinding of nepheline syenite and K-feldspar concentrates were characterised and subjected to a leaching test: Intensive grinding could be used to increase the availability (i.e., leachability) of potassium in K-feldspar containing materials by more than an order of magnitude. Less than 10 The rate of potassium release from the milled products is predominantly a function of their specific surface areas, but a significant part of the observed increase in reactivity must be attributed to the structural disordering caused by mechanical activation. Addition of small amounts of water as a grinding aid resulted in products with considerably higher specific surface areas, but the presence of water also delayed the effect of mechanical activation. However, using water as a grinding aid makes it possible to produce very reactive products characterised by both high specific surface areas and substantial structural disordering. The results obtained by high intensive ultrafine grinding of the K-feldspar concentrate are promising, but they also show that further research is required in order to find the optimal milling solution.