This study aimed to develop radio frequency (RF) pilot-scale protocols for tempering beef meat blends (4kg blocks) to achieve average temperatures between −2 and −5°C. Post-tempering temperature distribution in these blocks was compared to products tempered by conventional methods. The optimum RF power–time combination for tempering lean and 50:50 lean:fat mixtures to the target range was 500W for 11min which produced respective means of −3.6°C (s.d. 1.1) and −3.4°C (s.d. 1.5). In contrast, 400W for 11min was optimum for fat (mean −4.9°C, s.d. 2.1). This study shows the principal advantages of RF over conventional tempering as an approximate 30 fold tempering time reduction and a greater uniformity of end point temperature distribution under the conditions employed. Furthermore, power consumption was reduced approximately ninefold with RF compared to conventional tempering. More uniform temperature distribution was achieved in samples that were comminuted to a greater extent.Novel technologies that reduce process time and maintain or improve product quality are of considerable interest to the food industry. One problematical area which is of particular relevance to the meat industry is the excessively long time required in conventional heating to bring bulk frozen meat to temperatures at which it can be processed. To defrost meat it may be thawed (temperature of the coldest spot just above product freezing point) or tempered (temperature of the hottest spot just below product freezing point). Of these two unit operations, tempering is the more commonly used particularly for products which subsequently require further size reduction (e.g., grinding, bowl chopping). There are many reasons for this including the fact that it is faster than thawing, yet yields a product that is more amenable to subsequent processing than deep frozen meat (i.e., −18 to −20 Many methods can be used to temper and thaw products including placing the product in contact with air or water at controlled temperatures. Air tempering is the most commonly used. In air tempering, the air in contact with the product transfers heat to the outer surface of the product. This heat then transfers to the interior of the product by conduction which is a relatively slow method of heat transfer. Industry is always interested in faster and more compact systems while yet maintaining the high quality demanded by consumers. In response to this demand, methods such as vacuum heat ( Relatively few studies have been published on the dielectric heating of frozen foods. In Because of the paucity of information of RF tempering of meat a key objective of the present study was to develop a satisfactory protocol for RF tempering blocks of meat to a temperature ranging between −5 and −2 Lean beef (95% visual lean) and beef fat was procured from a local supplier (Kepak, Clonee, Co. Meath, Ireland). The lean and fat were ground through a plate with 10 Thirty boxes (20 The RF oven used was a custom built 50 Conventional air tempering was performed on a laboratory scale (400 MW tempering was carried out using an Amana Commercial MW (Model No. RS591SS, Amana Refrigeration Inc., PO Box 8901, IA 52204-0001, USA) at a frequency of 2450 A thermocouple jig technique was used to measure temperature from 25 locations within the sample following tempering. However, due to the solid nature of the frozen meat, it was necessary to drill holes at precise locations within samples prior to tempering to ensure repeatable insertion of thermocouples. A fibreboard template was prepared as illustrated in Endpoint temperature for each of the treatments was evaluated for all blends tempered by inserting a purpose built thermocouple jig into the product immediately post-tempering. The jig was assembled from five wooden skewers (diameter 3.5 The jig was inserted for 2 An IRISYS, Universal Thermal Imager (Type: IRI 1011, Infrared Integrated Systems, Towcester Mill, Towcester, Northants NN12 6AD, UK) was used to capture surface temperature profiles of the meat thereby facilitating the location of the hot and cold spots on the surface. A power meter (LEM Heme Analyst Model No. 2050, LEM UK Ltd., Geneva court, Lancashire WN8 9QX, UK), was used to measure the power consumption in kilowatt-hour (kW Moisture, protein, fat and ash content were determined for the three types of meat (lean, fat and 50:50 mixture), using AOAC (1995) method numbers 950.46, 928.08, 991.36 and 920.153, respectively. All samples were analysed in triplicate. When meat was finely comminuted before tempering the temperature distribution was more uniform compared to minced or whole meat. As shown in Preliminary experiments showed the block sizes 20  In As anticipated, the power level was an important factor in RF tempering, i.e., for a given treatment time the higher the power the higher end point temperature (EPT) attained. For example, at a specific point within lean, the temperature was −8.3, −6.7 and −5.7 In the current study it was observed that at lower or higher power–time settings then the optimized ones already discussed (Section Meat composition also had an influence on temperature distribution. In the current study the three beef formulations (lean, beef fat and 50:50 mixture) differed significantly (  Lean, 50:50 mixture and fat were tempered in 5 An effect of composition on temperature distribution was observed for conventionally tempered meat, with higher fat content producing wider Δ    At the scale employed in the current study, conventional tempering required 1.7 It must be noted that the RF oven used in this study was made out of three components: (a) the RF generator, (b) an impedance matching box and (c) a matching box controller. The total power drawn was 0.2 RF tempering protocols were developed for defrosting comminuted beef meat blends, to an average temperature in the range −2 to −5 The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support of the Non-Commissioned Food Institutional Research Measure (FIRM), directed by the Irish Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.