The particle size of rutile concentrate in China is too fine to meet the requirement of chlorination process. It needs to be granulated into micelle with the diameter about 100μm before chlorination. The fluidized bed granulation method was used to prepare micelle, and the influence factors on granulation were studied. The results show that the relative high concentration and the increase of spray time are favorable to particle growth. To obtain good granulation performance, the proper concentration of binder solution, filling ratio and spray time were 0.8%, 1.8% and 60min respectively while using carboxymethyl cellulose sodium (CMC) as the binder. The mean diameter of the final product is approximately 103μm with uniform particle size distribution, and the particle sphericity is improved. The granulating mechanism of micelle shows that agglomeration and layering growth coexist during the granulation process. The particle growth is controlled by agglomeration growth at the early stages of granulation, and coating is the main growth manner at the end of granulation.Titanium is considered as a new engineering material, and also regarded as only second to steel and aluminum in the so-called “third metal”, “space metal” and “marine metal”, widely used in industry Presently, the proven reserve of rutile ore in China is about 1.53 As the natural rutile concentrate is characterized by high level of titanium, low levels of calcium and magnesium, fluidized bed chlorination has become the main process for rutile smelting throughout the world There are two typical kinds of conventional methods for ores pelletizing: disc balling and drum balling. But they are unsuitable for the production of micelles with 100 A typical kind of rutile concentrate was used as the raw material, which was provided by a mineral processing plant in Hainan province, China. The main chemical components of rutile were detected by X-ray fluorescence, and the results are shown in The particle size distribution of raw material was measured by Malvern Particle Size Analyzer (Mastersizer 2000), and is described in Carboxymethyl cellulose sodium (CMC, Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd., CP) was used as the binder for all the trials. At 25 The experimental investigations were performed in a granulator, which was a modified The bottom of the chamber is the air distributor which is a stainless steel perforated plate with a porosity of 12% and hole diameter of 30 According to the research of Gupta et al. A sample table which pastes double-sided carbon conductive adhesive was applied, and the particles were dispersed on the adhesive. Then, it was tested by scanning electron microscopy for getting the morphology images. The Leica QWin image analyzer (Germany) in monochrome mode was used to analyze the SEM images of particles. The particles can be discriminated from the background, and the boundary of each particle also can be found by adjusting the gray level threshold. Meanwhile, the equivalent diameter, projection area and perimeter were measured. Hence, the growth index and sphericity value can be evaluated by Eq. In order to investigate the difference in specific surface area of particles before and after granulation, isothermal nitrogen gas adsorption-desorption measurements were carried out at liquid nitrogen temperature of 77.3 The fluidized bed granulation was conducted with CMC as binder, inlet air temperature of 65 The particle morphology of raw material and the products in Scheme-1–Scheme-4 was investigated by scanning electron microscopy shown in The particle size distributions of product in four different kinds of schemes mentioned before were depicted in  It also can be obtained from The effect of spray time was investigated under Scheme-3. The spray pressure and velocity were maintained at constant. Sectional sampling was conducted at different phases during the granulation process and the corresponding times were 20 As shown in The finished product with particle size in the 70–125 In terms of the particles of rutile concentrate and final product of Scheme-3, the particle sizes are all in the range of 70–125 According to IUPAC, the pores are attributed in different classes according to their size, the pore size less than 2 The mechanism of particle growth can be detected via the measurement of the carbon content of the sample of sectional sampling of Scheme-3, which reflects the adsorption rate and distribution of binder. According to other researchers' results, particle growth in the fluidized bed is controlled by two mechanisms: “agglomeration” and “layering”  The effects of filling ratio, concentration of binder solution, and spray time on fluidized bed granulation of rutile concentrate are studied. The concentration of binder solution and the spray time have significant impact on the granulation effect. The higher concentration and the increase of spray time are favorable to the agglomeration of particles, and the particle size distribution of the final product is more uniform. The rutile concentrate fine (the mean particle size is 17 At the early stages of granulation, the micelles grow up through the agglomeration mechanism. Then, the particle growth is governed by layering at the end of agglomeration. Agglomeration and layering mechanism coexist for the growth during the granulation process. The research is financially supported by the