A new process for the separation of Zr(IV) and Hf(IV) from sulfuric acid solution by selective extraction and stripping was proposed. Firstly, Hf(IV) was preferentially extracted by di-2-ethylhexylphosphoric acid (D2EHPA) from moderate sulfuric acid solutions. From the loaded D2EHA, co-extracted Zr(IV) was selectively stripped by strong sulfuric acid solution with a separation factor of 10, leaving only Hf(IV) in the stripped D2EHPA. Hafnium(IV) was then completely stripped by oxalic acid solution and thus D2EHPA was regenerated. The McCabe–Thiele plots for the extraction and stripping isotherms were constructed and the results were verified by the simulated cross-current extraction and stripping experiments. Zirconium(IV) solutions of high purity were obtained in the extraction raffinate and sulfuric acid stripping solution, while Hf(IV) was present in the oxalic acid stripping solution.Hafnium usually accompanies zirconium in natural sources to the extent of 1.5–2%, and has a high neutron capture cross-section of 120 In aqueous solutions, zirconium(IV) and hafnium(IV) have high coordination numbers, exhibit hydrolysis, and as a consequence exist as metal ion-complexes. The tendency of the anions to form complexes with zirconium(IV) and hafnium(IV) decreases in the following order: OH According to our previous research ( In this present work, we developed a process for the efficient separation of zirconium(IV) and hafnium(IV) from sulfuric acid solutions of moderate concentrations (0.05–1 The extractant D2EHPA was purchased from Cytec Canada Inc. It was used without any further purification. Kerosene (Daejung Chemicals and Metals Co., Ltd., Korea, 95%, Aromatic content < The mixed feed solutions of Zr(IV) and Hf(IV) with various compositions were prepared by dissolving the necessary amount of Zr(SO The general extraction and stripping experiments were carried out by contacting equal volumes (20 The number of extraction and stripping stages in a continuous operation was determined by constructing a McCabe–Thiele diagram. The equilibrium isotherms were determined using shakeout tests with aqueous and organic solutions at different phase volume ratios and mass balance after equilibration. The cross-current simulation experiments for the selective extraction and stripping were carried out to verify the results obtained from McCabe–Thiele diagrams. During the cross-current simulation of the extraction of Hf(IV) with D2EHPA, the feed solution containing 10 The extraction percentage (Ex%) and stripping percentage (Strip%) of metal ions were obtained from the following equations: The symbols M In order to improve the efficiency in the stripping step, the initial experiments were performed from moderate concentrations of sulfuric acid for the selective extraction of Hf(IV) over Zr(IV) by D2EHPA. In these experiments, the concentration of Zr(IV) and Hf(IV) in the synthetic solutions was kept at 10 where (HA) When the sulfuric acid concentration was lower than 0.5 In terms of differences in the extraction percentage between Zr(IV) and Hf(IV), sulfuric acid concentration of 0.5 and 1  This data indicates that separation of Zr(IV) and Hf(IV) from moderate sulfuric acid solutions is still possible, although the separation factor value is lower than that obtained at 4  McCabe–Thiele plot of hafnium(IV) extraction isotherm was constructed to estimate the number of required stages and flow rate of the two phases to achieve the maximum extraction of hafnium(IV). These experiments were performed using 0.05 Stripping of metal ions from the loaded cationic extractants is generally performed using strong acid solutions (Eq. The loaded D2EHPA obtained by extraction from 0.5 The stripped Zr(IV) has a strong tendency to form complexes with sulfate ion as shown in Eq. Although quantitative stripping was not observed in our experimental program, it is possible to strip Zr(IV) completely from loaded D2EHPA by increasing the number of stripping stage in the cross-current stripping experiments described in In order to construct the McCabe–Thiele diagram for the stripping of Zr(IV) from the loaded D2EHPA, stripping isotherm was obtained by varying the volume ratio of organic to aqueous phase from 1/9 to 5/1. The loaded D2EHPA was prepared by extraction of Zr(IV) and Hf(IV) from 0.5 A process flowsheet for the separation of Zr(IV) and Hf(IV) developed in this study is represented in Pure Zr(IV) and Hf(IV) solution could be obtained in two respective stripping procedures. From Zr(IV) stripping solution, pure H In this study, the results obtained from McCabe–Thiele plots were compared to those obtained by batch simulation experiments for the extraction and stripping. The starting feed solution contained 9.8 The batch simulation experiments on the cross-current operation were employed in this work for convenience and to check the validity of the prediction. The loaded D2EHPA employed for the cross-current stripping simulation was obtained by extraction from 0.5 In comparison with other processes developed for the separation of Zr(IV) and Hf(IV) from acidic solutions, the advantages of the current process are: (1) a process in which minor component Hf(IV) could be selectively extracted over the major component Zr(IV); (2) Zr(IV) and Hf(IV) in the loaded D2EHPA could be separately stripped in two steps. Continuous experiments with real leach solution by operating a mixer–settler are still necessary in further studies. The Hf(IV) ions were preferentially extracted over Zr(IV) by D2EHPA from a sulfuric acid solution of moderate concentration of 0.5 A process flow sheet is proposed for the selective extraction of Hf(IV) over Zr(IV) from sulfuric acid solutions by using D2EHPA. In this process, two stripping steps were required to selective stripping of Zr(IV) and Hf(IV) into sulfate and oxalate stripping solutions, respectively. Moreover, this process was verified by the batch simulation experiments of the cross-current extraction and stripping to produce Zr(IV) and Hf(IV) solutions with high purity. This work was financially supported by a grant from the fundamental