In this research, the effect of bubble size distribution on the performance of column flotation of fine particles of apatite was investigated. The Brazilian apatite ore sample used in this study was low grade (18.38% P2O5 content) with a Sauter mean diameter of 13.95μm. Bubbles were measured in a system consisting of a high-speed digital camera and software for image analysis. In addition, probes were used for shooting bubbles. The effect of the presence of mineral particles on the bubble size distribution was also investigated comparing the bubble size in air-water and air-water-ore systems. The presence of ore particles adhered to the bubble surface, prevented bubble coalescence, consequently reducing the bubble size, compared to the air-water system. The flotation tests were performed for different bubble size distributions: small bubbles (d32
                     <300μm), medium-sized bubbles (300<d32
                     <1000μm) and large bubbles (d32
                     >1000μm). The best bubble size range for flotation of fines particles of apatite was identified and the images from probes helped us to correlate the performance results (P2O5 content and recovery) with the flotation mechanisms. The highest P2O5 content was obtained when the flotation of fine apatite was performed with small bubbles (d32
                     <300μm), however, the P2O5 recovery was very low (40%) at this condition. The highest P2O5 recovery was obtained in flotation using larger bubbles (d32
                     >1000μm) but with low P2O5 content. The best flotation performance, simultaneously considering both responses (P2O5 content and recovery), was obtained with medium-sized bubbles.Phosphate rock is a vital non-renewable resource and is the only economically feasible source of phosphorus for phosphatic fertilizers and chemicals [ Froth flotation is commonly used to separate particles of different surface properties and is widely utilized to concentrate minerals from ore [ Column flotation has been successfully used in apatite concentration due to its better performance than conventional cells, producing froth with better flow characteristics. The gangue entrainment in the froth is decreased and the bubble residence time in the pulp increased, resulting in a better selectivity [ Flotation is based on the ability of some solids to remain attached to the bubble surface. Thus, the bubble-particle interaction constitutes a key step in the flotation process and is responsible for controlling the efficiency and selectivity [ The difficulty in flotation of fine particles is due to the low probability of bubble-particle collisions, which decreases the attachment probability and hence decreases the flotation efficiency [ Several alternatives have been studied to increase the bubble-particle collision efficiency of the fine particles, including modified floc-flotation [ The probability of bubble-particle collisions decrease with decreasing particle size and increasing bubble size, suggesting that decreasing bubble size can increase the flotation rate and the bubble-particle collision efficiency of fine particles [ The bubble size control can be made by adjusting the operating conditions of the aeration system (pore size, impeller speed, airflow rate) and the addition of frothers [ Some works in literature report the influence of the presence of solid particles (three-phase system) on bubble size in a bubble column [ Several techniques to determine the bubble size in systems with or without particles have been used, such as photographic techniques, electrosensitivity measurements, dynamic bubble removal techniques, isokinetic sampling probe, conductivity probes, acoustic techniques, particle image velocimetry (PIV), laser doppler anemometry, and optical fiber probe [ Considering the difficulty in floating fine particles and the relation of flotation performance with bubble size, this research aimed to study the influence of bubble size distribution on the flotation performance of fine apatite from a Brazilian phosphate ore. The low-grade apatite ore sample used in this work was taken from Barreiro complex (Araxa, Brazil) owned and operated by Mosaic Fertilizer. The sample came from the flotation circuit for fines [ The chemical composition of the sample was determined by X-ray fluorescence spectrometry in a pre-calibrated equipment (S8 Tiger, Bruker). The particle size distribution was determined by laser diffraction technique using a Malvern particle size analyzer. The mineralogical determination of the feed sample was performed by coupling X-ray diffraction (XRD) data with scanning electron microscopy and energy dispersive spectrometry (SEM/EDS) observations. The XRD analysis was performed, using a semiautomatic Rigaku Geigerflex diffractometer. Microstructural studies were also performed using SEM/EDS. These analyses were performed with a SEM JEOL JSM-5410 microscope and an EDS Noran TN-M3055 spectrometer. The reagents used in the ore-conditioning step were fatty acid soap from rough rice oil as the collector and gelatinized cornstarch as the gangue depressant. Both collector and depressant were diluted in water to a concentration of 2.5% and 3%, respectively. The pH was adjusted using a 10% NaOH solution. These reagents (collector and depressant) were selected according to previous studies on flotation of igneous phosphate ores [ The flotation tests were performed in an acrylic column, divided into three sections: a 4-cm-diameter, 150-cm-long cylindrical section; a 9.5-cm-tall frusto-conical section; and a third cylindrical section 12-cm long with a 10 The bubble sizes were measured in two systems: air-water and air-water-ore, in which, we used a high-speed digital camera and a software for image analysis. In addition, we used PVM probes for shooting bubbles. These procedures are described in more detail in our previous work [ To measure the bubble size distribution (BSD), image sets were recorded with a high-speed (1000 frames per second) digital camera, model Fastec IL5 (Fastec Imaging The effect of bubble size on the flotation performance was investigated. Thus, the experiments were performed with different bubble size ranges. In addition to the variation of airflow rate, a frother was also used (Genagen® from Clariant) to control the BSD. The frother concentration was 15 The chemical composition of the flotation feed samples obtained by X-ray fluorescence spectrometry was 18.38% P The particle size distribution (PSD) of the feed sample obtained by laser diffraction technique was fitted to the main statistical models for estimating PSD. The Rosin-Rammler-Bennett (RRB) model (Eq. Where: d The results of the mineralogical analysis are presented in In this work, the BSD was measured in two systems: air-water and air-water-ore. In order to minimize the measurement error related to the overlapping bubbles, we used sequential images to identify the movement of the bubbles, differentiating one bubble from another. To confirm the results, replicates of measures were also performed. In this work, we classify the bubble size in three ranges [ The smaller bubbles for the column operating with ore is also shown in     Some works of literature have shown that not only the collision probability but also the attachment probability can be improved when small bubbles are used in the flotation of fine particles [ The low P   Some works in literature [ The airflow rate has a significant effect on the recovery of the floated mineral. It is directly associated with surface velocity, hold up and the bubbles diameter. Within the stability limits of the column, the recovery of the floated mineral is usually increasing with the increase of the airflow rate until reaching its maximum value. This recovery gain is due to the increase in the number and the total surface area of bubbles introduced into the column. However, a significant increase in airflow rate may hamper the flotation process due to turbulence or foaming in the recovery zone [  Considering the requirements of the phosphate industry, we can observe in  In this paper, the effect of bubble size distribution (BSD) on column flotation of fine particles of apatite was investigated. We used a high-speed digital camera and a software for image analysis to measure the BSD. In addition, we used PVM probes for shooting bubbles. The effect of apatite particles on BSD was also investigated by comparing the bubble size in air-water and air-water-ore systems. The presence of ore particles adhered to the bubble surface, prevented bubble coalescence, consequently reducing the bubble size, compared to the air-water system. The highest P The highest P The size range that led to the best flotation performance, simultaneously considering both responses (P  Bubble size distribution Frother concentration Bubble diameter Particle diameter Sauter mean diameter Focused Beam Reflectance Measurement. Superficial gas velocity Particle Vision and Measurement Air flow rate Frother flow rate Cumulative fraction P Recovery The authors would like to thank the