During the last years, combined cooling, heating, and power (CCHP) systems have drawn a lot of attention thanks to their low greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, high efficiency and cost benefits. Considering the increasing interest on sustainability assessment of novel energy generation technologies, in this paper a life cycle assessment of an innovative small-scale solar Organic Rankine Cycle (ORC) trigeneration plant is performed.
                  The plant under investigation is composed of a 50 m2 Compound Parabolic Collectors (CPC) solar field, a 3 m3 diathermic oil storage tank, a 3.5 kWe ORC plant and a 17 kWc absorption chiller. After the set-up of the inventory data of the different subsystems, a sensitivity analysis of the environmental and energy performance of the plant has been conducted by varying: (i) the system adjustment parameters; (ii) the size of the solar field and the consequent solar multiple index of the plant; and (iii) the organic working fluid of the ORC unit. Results of the analysis confirmed that the Life cycle assessment (LCA) is of paramount importance for the appropriate selections of component specifications and operating conditions of the integrated system. In particular, the investigation has revealed that the variation of the adjustment parameters brings to slight modifications of the energy performance and has a limited impact on the environmental output whilst the proper selection of the working fluid and the size of the solar field can result in an appreciable environmental optimization of the whole plant.area of the collector [m first order efficiency coefficient [W/m second order efficiency coefficient [W/m i-th configuration Combined Heating and Power Combined Cooling, Heating and Power Coefficient Of Performance Compound Parabolic Collector Concentrated Solar Power Energy Pay Back Time Evacuated Tube Collector direct radiation on collector plane [W/m diffuse radiation on collector plane [W/m Global Warming Potential operating hours of the absorption chiller [h] operating hours of the ORC unit [h] hot sanitary water High Temperature storage Tank Incident Angle Modifier Levelized Cost Of Energy Linear Fresnel Reflector Low Temperature storage Tank Incident Angle Modifier for direct radiation Incident Angle Modifier for diffuse radiation mass flow rate of the cooling water [kg/s] mass flow rate of the organic fluid [kg/s] electrical power [kWe] cooling power [kWc] thermal power [kWt] cooling power output from the absorption chiller [kW inlet thermal power to the absorption chiller [kW electrical power produced by the ORC unit [kW outlet thermal power from the ORC unit [kW inlet thermal power to the ORC unit [kW inlet power to the solar field [kW] outlet thermal power from the solar field [kW Parabolic Trough Collector heat losses at the receiver [kW Solar Multiple Thermal Energy Storage ambient air temperature [°C] average temperature [°C] inlet temperature of the cooling water at the condenser [°C] mean temperature of the fluid in the collector [°C] outlet temperature of the cooling water at the condenser [°C] lower bound temperature set-point of the TES [°C] upper bound temperature set-point of the TES [°C] average temperature of the TES [°C] actual specific enthalpy difference across the expander [kJ/(kg K)] actual specific enthalpy difference across the pump [kJ/(kg K)] hot period working temperature range of HTT-ORC inlet [°C] cold period working temperature range of HTT-ORC inlet [°C] mid seasons working temperature range of HTT-ORC inlet [°C] electric kW thermal kW cooling kW solar elevation angle absorptance coefficient emittance coefficient electrical efficiency ORC unit electrical efficiency CCHP global efficiency mechanical efficiency maximum optical efficiency ORC unit electrical efficiency ORC unit thermal efficiency overall conversion efficiency of the solar field Among the key instruments to curb CO2 emissions and guarantee a sustainable development, the use of locally available renewable sources and multi-purpose energy systems has a great potential. In particular, use of solar energy in decentralized energy systems is foreseen to play a prominent role in mitigating the global warming scenario of the present century The growing interest towards solar power generation technologies and, in particular, to solar CHP and CCHP ORC systems makes of paramount importance the thorough analysis of the environmental impact of such systems. In general, the environmental sustainability of a CHP system is assessed by comparatively defining its overall environmental performance and potential benefits respect to traditional technologies and separate thermal and electrical energy production. Some of the authors With reference to the concentrating solar systems, Lamnatou et al. Lechon et al. In A further LCA of a 50 MW CSP power plant based on PTCs and a two-tank configuration has been developed by Heath et al. Piemonte et al. While there are several works in literature regarding the life cycle analysis of ORC power, CHP and CCHP systems, and large size CSP power plants, to the best of the authors’ knowledge no many articles referred to small scale CSP systems coupled with ORC units for cogeneration applications and, especially, no articles at all referred to such systems for trigeneration purposes by means of absorption chillers. Hence, the aim of this study is to identify the environmental hotspots of a small-scale solar CCHP system, previously simulated and analyzed by some of the authors Thus, the paper is organized as follows: after the introduction, materials and methods are presented in As mentioned above, the object of the present environmental analysis is an experimental trigenerative solar-powered system designed and built by some of the authors As regards the solar field, it consists of twelve solar collectors, ten SKY PRO 22 and two SKY PRO 20 The overall system has been modelled in TRNSYS With regard to the energy production, the collected thermal energy from the CPC solar field is calculated as in Eq. As regards the ORC unit the electrical and thermal power output can be expressed as in Eqs. With respect to Eq. In Eq. Eventually, the cooling power generated by the absorption chiller is evaluated as follows: Further details on the model can be found in Once the energy performance of the system is assessed, such is used within the LCA model here developed. Similarly to the previous work of some of the authors LCA as a holistic approach for comprehensive environmental evaluation of the energy system, is implemented in this study following ISO standards (ISO14040:2006, ISO14044: 2006) For what concerns the goal of the present study, it is twofold: (i) to identify and quantify the environmental profile of the innovative trigeneration system conceived for residential applications and (ii) to evaluate the impact of varying design and operating parameters on its environmental and energy performance. Hence, the final aim of this analysis is to provide worthwhile insights into the merits and demerits of similar distributed energy systems and to serve as a useful analytical and decision support tool to design and construct a small-scale trigenerative ORC at residential level. The main audience of the study are policymakers who looking at environmental standards for promoting and achieving a sustainable development. The system is assessed following a cradle to gate approach and considering 1 kWh of equivalent primary energy (1 kWh Based on the system boundaries, the life cycle inventory data are collected for the three main subsystems, namely the solar collectors, the ORC system and the absorption chiller. The inventory data of the solar plant components are provided by Kloben company However, due to the lack of some data in the software database the diathermic oil used in the real application, namely Therminol 62 For what concerns the 3.5 kW According to the information provided by Yazaki company, the outer structure of the main components of the absorption chiller, namely the evaporator, the condenser, the absorber and the generator, are made of stainless-steel whilst copper is used for the heat transfer tubes. The weight of these materials is calculated based on the assumptions adopted in According to the absorption chiller requirements, the desired lithium bromide solution accounts to 31 kg as quoted by Yazaki company Eventually, independently from the subsystem the extraction phase of the raw materials used for their construction as well as the processing phase of fuels and electricity consumed have been obtained from the Ecoinvent database in SimaPro software In order to evaluate the impacts of varying design and operating parameters on the environmental and energy profile of the trigeneration system, a sensitivity analysis has been developed based on three thematic scenarios consisting of seven different configurations totally. In particular, the first scenario aims at evaluating the effects of the variation of some system adjustment parameters, the second one aims at assessing the effects of three different solar field sizes which determine the solar factor of the system and the third scenario evaluates the effects of employment of three different working fluids in the ORC subsystem. Each scenario comprises three configurations while configuration 1, as base case, is included in all the considered scenarios. With respect to Scenario 1, the variation of the working temperature range of the HTT is considered as driver. The performances of the system, indeed, are significantly affected by the temperature at the HTT and the system operation requires to fix a certain temperature range. When the temperature at the HTT storage tank reaches the upper bound, the ORC switches on. When it goes down the lower value of the range, the ORC is switched off. Hence, in Scenario 1 the working temperature ranges have been varied similarly to the previous work by Cioccolanti et al. As regards Scenario 2, the size of the solar plant is considered as driver. The solar multiple (SM), which corresponds to the ratio between the area of the solar field considered in the project and the area of the solar field corresponding to the power feed of the ORC unit at its nominal operating conditions, has been varied in the range 1.42–2.85. Eventually, in Scenario 3, the impact of two other different low-GWP working fluids, namely Neopentane and R245ca, has been assessed and compared to that of R245fa as in the base configuration C1. As reported in In order to compare the environmental performance of the different configurations, the energy outputs are presented by the equivalent primary energy productions Details of the alternative investigated options for the different scenarios are summarized in In this study, the environmental and energy performances of the configurations under investigation are evaluated according to different indicators using IMPACT 2002 + model Twelve relevant midpoint indicators from IMPACT 2002 + model are identified for assessing the impact. On the contrary, the impact of non-renewable energy use, mineral extraction and global warming are excluded since they are taken into account by means of cumulative energy demand and IPCC methods. In addition, four endpoint indicators have been included for comparing the different configurations: (i) human health; (ii) ecosystem quality; (iii) climate change; and (iv) resources The characterization is a mandatory step in environmental impact assessment. In this phase, using characterization factors, the set of inventory flows are quantitatively transformed to impact category indicators relevant to resources, ecosystems, and human health. The categorized impact results associated with 1 kWh of primary energy production from the trigeneration system under configuration 1 (C1) are reported in As clearly shown in Instead, the production phase of the aluminum used in the solar CPC plant is the main responsible for non-carcinogens (85%) and carcinogens agents (64%) emissions which have dangerous effects on the human health. Since almost the entire amount of aluminum is used for the construction of the evacuated tubes solar collectors, it is evident that also this solar technology has a great impact on many environmental indicators. On the contrary, copper used in ORC plant components contributes to about 40% of the terrestrial ecotoxicity and the aquatic eutrophication. This is because the production of copper releases massive hazardous substances to air and soil, including aluminum, copper, and nickle, which affect the soil organisms The primary energy consumption and the carbon footprint are appealing impact categories in LCA studies of renewable technologies. Therefore, the contribution of the different materials to the carbon footprint and the non-renewable primary energy consumption has been assessed as reported in As regards the CO Due to the great impact of some components of the plant on the overall environmental impact different scenarios have been investigated by varying some operating and design parameters. In case of Scenario 1, the working temperature ranges of the HTT have been varied and the damage in terms of endpoint results has been illustrated in With reference to In Scenario 2, instead, the size of the solar field has been varied due to the significant impact of the solar technology on the environmental indicators as previously shown. In particular, In addition, the results of both scenarios demonstrate that the system under investigation primarily affects the human health rather than the other damage categories. This is mainly due to the fact that in IMPACT 2002+ Eventually, because of the fundamental role of the organic working fluid on the energy and environmental performance of the ORC system, in Scenario 3 the impact of two other different working fluids has been assessed. More precisely, Neopentane and R245ca have been considered additionally to R245fa since they represent the best compromise between good energy performance in case of low-temperature ORC systems and very low environmental impact in terms of GWP. Despite the lower GWP of Neopentane and R245ca compared to R245fa, the analysis proved that the latter has the lower impact on the considered damage categories, as reported in Eventually, the environmental performance of the integrated systems has been evaluated also with respect to the sustainability indicators previously mentioned. With respect to the CO The environmental impacts of a small-size solar ORC trigenerative system for residential applications have been assessed through a life cycle assessment and a sustainability analysis of the overall system. To the best of the authors’ knowledge the application of a similar LCA analysis to small-scale CCHP solar-powered ORC plants has never been addressed in literature so far. Therefore, the present work, provides some useful insights to drive the design and construction choices of such energy systems considering both the energy and environmental point of views. In particular, a sensitivity analysis of the system by varying some selected operating and design parameters has been performed and the following main findings have been obtained: the variation of the working temperature ranges of the HTT has an appreciable effect on the energy performance but a very low incidence on the sustainability indicators; despite the higher GWP, the use of R245fa allows to achieve better environmental benefits compared to R245ca (140 µPt/kWh for the considered trigeneration plant the use of R245fa and Neopentane is almost similar from the environmental point of view; the SM is the most effective parameter. Doubling the area of the solar field (from 50 m an increase of the solar field from 50 m In conclusion, a higher solar multiple makes the solar trigeneration system much more effective respect to the most important purposes of such a technology: a major energy efficiency and a lower environmental impact. Hence, a proper solar field area with respect to the ORC unit nominal capacity is the most affecting parameters on the energy and environmental performance of the system and needs to be carefully selected during the design of similar CCHP systems. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The research was partially supported by We wish to thank also the company Enertecna for the prosecution of R&D activity of research project STS – Solar Trigeneration System from which started this activity regarding optimization of solar CCHP.