A phase mixture model is proposed to describe the deformation behaviour of a nanocrystalline metallic material. The deformation behaviour of the crystallite phase is described by constitutive equations based on dislocation density evolution and includes a contribution from diffusion controlled plastic flow. The dislocation glide contribution to the plastic strain rate is considered to vanish below a certain critical grain size. The grain boundary material, which is treated as a separate phase, is considered to deform by a diffusional mechanism, resulting in a viscous Newtonian behaviour. The strain in both phases is assumed to be the same and equal to the imposed macroscopic strain. The stress is calculated using a simple rule of mixtures. The grain size dependence of the stress–strain curves obtained is shown to be in reasonable agreement with experiments, as are the predicted strain rate effects. In particular, observed deviations from the Hall–Petch behaviour are described by the model correctly. The effect of grain size distribution is also considered.The last decade has seen a significant interest in nanocrystalline (NC) materials There is currently a great need for modelling techniques with a good descriptive and predictive capability. A phase mixture model has been successfully used for the explanation of the mechanical properties of NC including nanocomposites, such as grain size dependence of hardness and yield stress For developing a phase-mixture model, it is necessary to devise constitutive equations for the crystalline phase, which can account for the microstructural characteristics, such as the dislocation density, and notably, the grain size. In addition to the dislocation glide mechanism of crystallite plasticity (which may break down with decreasing grain size), diffusion creep should be included. A separate model for the grain boundary phase is required. Various models were proposed for each constituent of the phase mixture model. For example, coarse-grain-like or perfect plasticity behaviour of the crystallite and amorphous or diffusion creep behaviour of the boundary phase were considered In this paper, we present a phase mixture model based on the volume fractions of the crystallite phase and the grain boundary phase and an improved constitutive description of both phases. The model is used to account for the ‘anomalous’ behaviour of nanocrystalline materials. The grain size and the strain rate dependence of the mechanical properties is presented. A particular aspect of modelling considered is the effect of the grain size distribution.  In order to describe the constitutive behaviour of a crystallite in materials with the grain size ranging from a conventional coarse scale down to the nanometer scale, all possible deformation mechanisms should be considered. Three deformation mechanisms will be considered to contribute to the deformation behaviour of a crystallite. They are: (i) the dislocation glide mechanism, which is incorporated in the unified constitutive model The plastic strain rate of a crystallite associated with the lattice diffusion mechanism (Nabarro–Herring creep) The notion of dislocation plasticity will break down below a certain value of Since the atoms in a general grain boundary are arranged relatively loosely, the deformation mechanism in the boundary phase can be associated with diffusional mass transport along the boundaries. The diffusion flow mechanism will be assumed to operate up to the grain size corresponding to the maximum possible strength of the boundary phase. The yield strength of the amorphous state is taken to be equal to this limiting strength In In this viscous Newtonian flow law, a generalised viscosity determined by the grain size and the grain boundary self-diffusion coefficient The strength of the boundary phase, which is quadratic in It is interesting to note that in the model presented, the same grain boundaries are regarded as ‘channels’ for material flow of two separate phases: the boundary phase itself and the crystallite deforming by the Coble mechanism. This dual role of grain boundaries distinguishes the present model from others, particularly from that due to Chokshi et al. The phase mixture model described above was applied to polycrystalline Cu. The computation results were compared with the experimental data available in the literature. The stress in the grain boundary phase was obtained from In the expressions (3) and (4) for the plastic strain rate in the crystallite associated with the lattice and the grain boundary diffusion, the parameter values from The stress in the crystallite was calculated as a function of the imposed strain rate The calculated yield strength represented by the stress at 0.2% offset strain is shown as a function of the grain size in the Hall–Petch (H–P) plot, Deviations from the H–P relation in NC Cu can be seen on The effect of the grain size on the deformation behaviour of nanocrystalline materials was studied using a phase mixture model in which a material is considered to be a ‘composite’ of the crystalline and the intercrystalline grain boundary phases. The deformation of the crystallite was represented by a superposition of diffusional flow and dislocation glide. The dislocation density evolution was treated by means of an established model One of the authors (Yuri Estrin) would like to acknowledge the hospitality of the Institute of Metal Physics and Nuclear Solid State Physics, TU Braunschweig, during his stay there as an Alexander von Humboldt Awardee. This work was supported by grant number: 2000-1-30100-007-3 from the Basic Research Program of the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation.