Biomass is important in energy conversion processes due to their favourable status with respect to greenhouse gas emissions. However, biomass particles have unusual properties which make them difficult to fluidize and handle. This paper reviews recent research on the hydrodynamics and mixing of biomass particles in fluidized beds. Whereas there has been considerable effort to develop new biomass gasification, combustion, pyrolysis and bio-conversion processes, relatively few authors have characterized the relevant flow characteristics of biomass particles in fluidized beds or investigated measures that could assist in resolving flow issues. The limited work that has been reported on biomass fluidization primarily treats means of achieving fluidization, mixing and segregation. Most of the work has been in low-velocity fluidized beds, although circulating fluidized beds are also important. Further research is needed to provide general understanding of interactions among heterogeneous particles and guidance on conditions that can lead to viable and sustainable processes.The term biomass refers primarily to organic material originating from plants (including trees and agricultural crops). Biomass is of great potential importance worldwide with respect to energy conversion processes, given its renewable non-greenhouse-gas-producing status and the possibility of productively utilizing waste materials, e.g. forest and agricultural wastes. It is presently estimated to contribute Utilization of biomass requires various steps: harvesting, transportation, drying, cutting or comminution, sorting or screening, feeding into processing vessels, processing and separation. Most of these operations require that the biomass material be subjected to two- or three-phase flow, usually in air or in water. The biomass particles or pieces are commonly non-standard—large in size, extreme in shape (e.g. long and thin as with stems or fibres), wet and pliable—relative to normal particulate matter handled in chemical, mineral and pharmaceutical operations. These differences are often critical, making it difficult, or even impossible, to handle, feed or process biomass particles. Hence their multiphase flow characteristics are of special interest. Understanding and managing multiphase flows are critical to successful new energy-related processes for biomass, and to improve existing biomass processes. However, most fundamental work on particulate processes has focused on dry spherical particles of narrow size distributions, with limited extension to other regular shapes. When coupled with the complexity of characterizing the properties and behaviour of non-standard materials, general methods of handling irregular particles are not very reliable. Biomass particles are commonly so extreme in nature that their flow characteristics are not readily predictable. In this paper we review previous multiphase research related to the hydrodynamics and mixing of biomass particles in fluidized beds. The paper is drawn from more extensive reviews of multiphase flow aspects of biomass sponsored by the interdepartmental Program of Energy Research and Development (PERD) of Natural Resources Canada ( Fluidized beds have been applied widely in processes involving gasification, pyrolysis and combustion of a wide range of particulate materials including biomass. Advantages of fluidization include high heat transfer, uniform and controllable temperatures, favourable gas–solid contacting and the ability to handle a wide variation in particulate properties. Both low-velocity bubbling fluidized beds and high-velocity circulating fluidized beds (CFB) have been utilized in these processes (e.g. see When a particle falls freely under gravity in a stagnant gas or liquid, it accelerates until it reaches its terminal settling velocity, Procedures for estimating the drag and terminal settling velocities for bodies of regular shapes (spheres, cylinders, discs, spheroids) were covered by As noted above, drag and settling may also be influenced by other factors. The effects of free-stream turbulence and roughness were summarized by Biomass particles are difficult to fluidize due to their peculiar shapes, sizes and densities. As a result, conventional correlations for the minimum fluidization velocity,      (a) for rounded particles (sphericity (b) for angular particles (     Clarke et al. reported that existing correlations were unable to predict The authors suggested that more research is needed to understand why binary mixtures can improve the fluidization quality. The nature of the interaction between the two types of particles remains unclear. It seems plausible that the wet sawdust and glass spheres no longer behave as discrete particles due to interparticle capillary forces. Fibre suspensions are important raw materials in paper mills, textile mills and processing of fibre composite materials. Fibre suspensions tend to lose their ability to flow when their consistency (i.e. volume fraction) exceeds A novel biomass gasification process was proposed by The optimal fluidization regime for low-velocity fluidization was expected to be a bubbling fluidized bed rather than a particulate (i.e. homogeneous) fluidized bed The minimum fluidization velocity was of the order of several mm/s, increasing with temperature up to The terminal settling velocity was in the range of several cm/s, showing the same trends as the minimum fluidization velocity. A bubbling fluidized bed reactor could provide the residence time typically required for the supercritical water gasification process, whereas a circulating fluidized bed reactor would require a special design to achieve a sufficiently long residence time.   Knowledge of the residence time of different biomass particles under various operating conditions is necessary to model and understand the kinetics and heat transfer of pyrolysis processes. However, information is scarce.     Some papers have also been intended to provide information relevant to biomass conversion processes based on experience with more conventional particles. For example, A rotating cone reactor was developed by   Some work has been done also on non-biomass particles in circulating fluidized beds in an effort to provide information related to biomass. A novel multistage fluidized bed reactor was tested ( The reactor showed no start-up problems. If enough solid material was present, steady-state was reached a few seconds after initiating gas flows to the riser and sealing fluidized bed. In addition to the total inventory of inert solids (sand) in the system, the gas velocities through the riser and the seal fluidized bed were the most important operating variables; they controlled the solids flux, solids hold-up, heat transfer in each segment and extent of mixing. Back-mixing of gas and solids between the segments was negligible, as demonstrated by gas-tracer experiments (with Gas-phase RTD measurements showed that: (i) there was no tendency to form a long tail; (ii) the mean gas residence time calculated from the measured RTD curves agreed well with the actual residence time of the riser; and (iii) the overall gas-phase hydrodynamics could be described by a CSTR cascade model, in which the number of CSTRs was almost the same as the actual number of segments in the riser.  Fluidized bed biomass combustion and gasification have found industrial application. However, little work has been done to understand the fluidization mechanics of biomass itself, or of mixtures of biomass and inert particles. It generally appears to be assumed that the design and operation of equipment involving biomass materials can be based on conventional fluidization knowledge and methodologies. However, the properties of biomass particles are sufficiently unique that the importance of the fluidization behaviour of biomass particles is under-estimated. In particular, there is very little knowledge of how fluidized bed hydrodynamics and related properties are affected by such characteristics as extreme particle sizes and shapes, moisture content and compressibility. Since the hydrodynamics are critical to successful design and operation of fluidized bed processes, it is important to undertake research directed at improving the characterization and modelling of biomass fluidization hydrodynamics. The limited work that has been reported on biomass fluidization mainly treats the minimum fluidization velocity, ways of achieving fluidization, mixing and segregation, and residence time distributions. Most work has been for low-velocity fluidized beds, although circulating fluidized beds are also of practical importance. In some of the work, biomass particles were the only particles present, while in others the biomass particles were mixed with inert particles, most often sand. In addition, some published reports describe work where only inert particles were employed for cold model tests, even though the work was intended to provide information with respect to biomass operations. In view of the previous work summarized in this paper, it is clear that research is needed in the following areas related to fluidization of biomass particles: To test fluidization hydrodynamic characteristics for wide ranges of biomass particles, and compare the results with those for more conventional particles. To understand the influence of key particle properties (e.g. particle size distribution) and the presence of particles of extreme shapes (e.g. long thin stalks or flat chips), so that biomass particles can be tailored to provide improved performance. To evaluate fluidization quality and optimize gas–solid flow. Among the topics requiring attention are mixing of binary (biomass and inert) particles, radial and axial species concentration profiles, and solids residence time distributions. To provide criteria for the specification of optimum inert particles when these are needed to fluidize biomass particles. To study the effect of temperature on the motion of biomass particles in fluidized beds. To develop novel and effective configurations to optimize the conditions for biomass particles, with favourable gas–solid mixing and contact efficiencies. To develop multiphase flow models, combining elements from experimental findings, conventional models, and more advanced techniques like CFD, to guide design and operation of biomass processes. Biomass has great potential for sustainable energy conversion processes. Many of the biomass processes under development require the use of fluidized beds. Although considerable progress has been made in utilizing biomass in bubbling bed and circulating fluidized bed reactors, characterization of the multiphase flow aspects is weak, leading to trial and error ad hoc solutions. Flow is complex given the heterogeneous nature of the particles, turbulence of the fluidizing fluid, complex geometries, simultaneous heat and mass transfer, and rapid gas release during devolatilization. Many of the applications involve biomass particles co-fluidized with much denser and more regular particles such as sand. Interaction and mixing of the species then become major issues. Most reported work has been empirical and directed to a single binary, seeking operating conditions that allow fluidized bed reactors to function. There has been little work of a comprehensive or fundamental nature which could provide more general rules or delineate principles helpful in resolving multiphase flow issues. Further research is needed to provide a general understanding of interactions among heterogeneous particles and guidance on conditions most likely to lead to viable and sustainable processes. In addition, there has been relatively little use of sophisticated experimental techniques like capacitance and X-ray tomography, and MRI. Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) has also had little or no impact in this area, understandable in view of the serious modelling and validation challenges offered by such complex heterogeneous materials.  The authors are grateful for financial support from the interdepartmental Program of Energy Research and Development (PERD) of Natural Resources Canada, and the support of Dr. M. Sayed of the Canadian Hydraulics Centre of the National Research Council of Canada.