The utilisation of microalgal biomass as feedstock for bioethanol production has been very promising owing to the large amounts of carbohydrates embedded in the physiology of the microalgal cell. This is coupled with the potential of microalgae to achieve targets required for high growth rate bioethanol production, climate change mitigation and economic growth. The high content of complex carbohydrates entrapped in the cell wall of the microalgae makes it essential to incorporate a pre-treatment stage to release and convert these complex carbohydrates into simple sugars prior to the fermentation process. Hence, this study explores the influence of acid exposure as a microalgal pre-treatment strategy for bioethanol production. Different parameters were investigated: acid concentration, temperature, microalgae loading and pre-treatment time. A central composite design technique was employed to optimize the acid pre-treatment conditions. Results showed that the highest bioethanol concentration obtained was 7.20g/L and this was achieved when the pre-treatment step was performed with 15g/L of microalgae at 140°C using 1% (v/v) of sulphuric acid for 30min. In terms of ethanol yield, ∼52wt% (g ethanol/g microalgae) maximum was obtained using 10g/L of microalgae and 3% (v/v) of sulphuric acid under 160°C for 15min. The statistical analysis revealed amongst the parameters investigated that temperature is the most critical factor during acid pre-treatment of microalgae for bioethanol production.Research into the development of renewable and sustainable fuels has been a major endeavour owing to the shortage of petrochemical fuel resources and climate change. Bioethanol has been proposed as a viable alternative to fossil fuels. Biomass for bioethanol production has emerged from different sources such as sugar cane, sorghum, and corn The production of bioethanol involves an extensive process and varies depending on the type of biomass. The process mainly encompasses the upstream and downstream operations which involve pre-treatment of the biomass, saccharification, fermentation and product recovery. The biomass pre-treatment is a crucial process because it is essential for the fermentable sugars to be released and made available for the fermentation process. However, since the pre-treatment process contributes significantly to the cost of production of bioethanol, the most economical pre-treatment protocol must be selected in order to make bioethanol more economically attractive. An efficient biomass pre-treatment procedure must be energy efficient, cost effective, simple to apply and must not degrade the fermentable sugars In the case of microalgal biomass, it is known that the complex carbohydrates are entrapped in the microalgae cell wall Therefore, this study investigates the effects of process variables such as time, temperature, microalgae loading and acid concentration on microalgal acid pre-treatment for bioethanol production. Central composite design (CCD) technique is employed for process optimisation. The microalgal culture used in this study is the same as that reported in our previous work, Harun et al. The harvested culture was centrifuged at 4500 Studies on acid pre-treatment of microalgae was conducted by investigating different parameters; acid concentration (1–10%, v/v), pre-treatment time (5–60  All pre-treatments were done in the oven (Model 400, Memmert, Germany). Microscopic analysis of microalgal cells before and after pre-treatment was performed using a fluorescence microscope (Model Olympus BX51TF, Grale Scientific, Australia). Concentration of bioethanol produced after fermentation was analysed using gas chromatography (GC) (Model 7890A, Agilent, CA). The GC consists of an auto sampler, flame ion detector (FID) and HP-FFAP column, 50 Yeast growth was monitored by periodically measuring the optical density of the culture at 620 Microalgae composition was analysed by high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) equipped with a 250 Reducing sugar concentration was analysed using the phenol–sulphuric acid method The central composite design was employed in order to optimize process parameters for microalgal acid pre-treatment for bioethanol production. The parameters optimized in this study are acid concentration, pre-treatment time, microalgae loading and temperature. The results from the experimental work were statistically analysed using the Statistica software (Statsoft, v.5.0). The effect of each parameter was identified in order to understand how the response of a combination of parameters could result in the highest bioethanol yield.  Microalgae consist of different types of carbohydrate which are mostly stored in the cell wall Effect of acid pre-treatment of microalgae on bioethanol production was investigated under varying conditions of reaction time, temperature, microalgae loading and acid concentration as summarized in The trend in The duration of the acid pre-treatment process and its influence on bioethanol production was also studied in this work. Microalgae cells were pre-treated for varying durations from 5 The effect of microalgae loading on the acid pre-treatment process was also studied. The amounts of microalgae loaded for this study are shown in Another parameter examined in this study was the acid concentration. This study was performed by varying the acid concentration from 1% to 10% (v/v) during the pre-treatment process. The smallest amount of acid employed in this study, 1% (v/v) produced the highest bioethanol concentration. Del campo et al. The growth of yeast and consumption of released sugar were monitored during the fermentation process in order to understand their relationship on bioethanol production. The results are shown in The produced bioethanol from acid pre-treatment of microalgae was compared with that of our previous work; where microalgae cells were pre-treated by supercritical CO The results from the central composite design were examined using statistical analysis in order to identify the significant parameters that affect bioethanol production from microalgae. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed using Statistica (Statsoft v.5.0) and the results are shown in In order to increase bioethanol production from microalgae, acid exposure was used in this study as a pre-treatment method to release and convert the carbohydrates that are entrapped in the microalgae cell wall into simple sugars prior to the fermentation process. Aside improving bioethanol production titres, acid pre-treatment provides advantages such as cost effectiveness and low energy consumption compared to other pre-treatment methods. Results showed the highest bioethanol concentration as 7.20 This work has been supported by the Department of Chemical Engineering, Monash University, Australia and the Ministry of Higher Education, Malaysia.