The pumping ability and placement performance of fresh cemented paste backfill (CPB) in underground mined cavities depend on its rheological properties. Hence, it is crucial to understand the rheology of fresh CPB slurry, which is related to CPB mixture design and the temperature underground. This paper presented an experimental study investigating the effects of binder type, content, water chemical properties and content, and temperature, on the rheological properties of CPB material prepared using the tailings of a copper mine in South Australia. Portland cement (PC), a newly released commercially manufactured cement called Minecem (MC) and fly ash (FA) were used as the binders added to the mine tailing materials. Various amounts of two different water types were added to the mixtures in the preparation of backfill material slurry. Six different temperatures ranging from 5 to 60 °C were to investigate the effect of temperature on CPB rheology. Overall, the increasing water content and decreasing temperature lead to lower yield stress. Based on the results obtained from the rheological properties of CPB slurry, it was found that at room temperature (25 °C), with regards to the unconfined compressive strength (UCS) performance, the replacement of 4% PC mixed CPB (28 days UCS 425 kPa) to 3% MC mixed CPB (28 days UCS 519 kPa), reduced the slurry yield stress from 210.7 to 178.5 Pa. The results also showed that the chemical composition of water affects the yield stress of CPB slurry and that MC mitigates the negative effect of mine-processed water (MW) and thus lead to improve the rheological properties of the slurry. However, the results suggested that the rheological properties of a mixture using MC is very sensitive to the water volume and temperature change. Therefore, using MC in backfill requires better quality control in slump mixing.Mine tailings, deposited after minerals been extracted, are the largest source of waste in mine processing. Approximately 14 billion tons of tailings were produced globally by the mining industry in 2010 On the other hand, after the mix of CPB slurry, fresh CPB is transported to underground voids by gravity or is pumped through pipelines and boreholes. Thus, CPB slurry should be thickened to obtain a non-settling character for facile pumping into mined cavities resulted from underground mine operations Several studies have been conducted in past years to understand CPB’s rheological behaviour better, and it is affecting factors. These studies show that the rheological behaviour is affected by external (e.g. temperature and time) and internal (e.g. cement content, the addition of slag, fly ash or superplasticizers, water type and content) factors. Although the effects of these variables have been widely documented in the literature, the reported results are not consistent as the physical, chemical and mineralogical properties of the tailings varies from mine to mine In this study, the rheological properties of CPB slurry are studied with different concentrations of a newly developed slag-blended cement called Minecem (MC), Portland cement (PC) and fly ash (FA), the pozzolan additive, under various water and temperature condition using the tailings material from a South Australian copper-gold underground mine. MC was chosen for this study as it increases the mechanical properties of CPB compare to PC; however, the effect of MC on the rheological properties of CPB has not been reported previously The materials used in this study include tailings, two types of binders (Minecem and Portland cement), fly ash (as an additive to reduce the amount of binder), and both fresh and mine-processed water. The processed tailings used to study the rheological properties of the paste backfill were sourced from a copper-gold underground mine in South Australia. The tailings sample had an initial water content of about 40%; it was then thoroughly dried in an oven to accurately control binder and water content. The tailings’ particle size distribution was determined with an electric sieve shaker and a sedimentation test. The results of the particle size distribution are shown in  Two binders were used as the major binder. They included a Portland cement (PC), and a newly released commercially manufactured cementitious agent for backfill purposes, referred to as Minecem (MC). MC is a slag-blended cement specifically developed for underground mine backfilling applications. The chemical composition of MC, as supplied by the manufacturer, consists of ground-granulated blast-furnace slag (50%), Portland cement clinker (20%), cement kiln dust (<15%), natural gypsum (5%–7%), limestone (<7%), and other mineral additives ( The type and quality of water used for making CPB can have an impact on the yield stress of backfill In this study, the original CPB mixture as recommended by the manufacturer in the mine included 4% Portland cement (PC) and 23% water. The PC then was replaced by 3% MC, as MC demonstrated better strength performance The binder or binder + additive (MC or PC + FA) and water contents were, respectively, defined as: The mine aimed to reduce the amount of binder and replace it with fly ash, which is a waste material. Therefore, this study investigated the rheological properties of CPB containing 3% or less MC and 4% or less PC with different amounts of FA. CPB with 3% MC, 23% water that was prepared at a room temperature of 25 °C was considered as the benchmark samples. The intention was to investigate the effects of different binder contents, water contents and temperature values. Each time one of these parameters was changed, where the other parameters remained constant. The tailings and binder (or binder + additive) were mixed in the dry form under the adopted contents summarised in Rheometer vane testing allows for the measurement of the rheological properties of different materials. The MCR 102 Rheometer was used in this study. The MCR rheometers are based on a concept in which the low friction-bearing (vane) resides at the cutting edge of the sample. Any type of rheological tests in rotational mode is possible with the MCR rheometers. The modularity of MCR rheometer allows for the integration of a wide range of temperature devices and application-specific accessories The vane method requires the rotation of a vane, consisting of four perpendicular blades, immersed in the suspension under investigation. The vane’s geometry aims to minimise slippage between the sample and the instrument fixture. A schematic diagram of the vane-shear apparatus is shown in In order to produce consistent and repeatable results, two types of tests were conducted using the rheometer: a constant shear rate (CSR) test and a flow curve (FC) test. Before testing, the freshly mixed paste was well mixed, using a 12 mm vane rotator at a rotation speed of 100 rotation per minute (r/min) for 20 s, to break the particle agglomerates in the suspension. Following a 5 s pause, two separate tests were carried out following CSR and FC methods. For the CSR test, the vane-and-cup test was used to measure the yield stress of the material directly, using a constant, low rotation speed, which was 0.1 r/min. In this constant shear rate mode, the vane suddenly starts rotating at a constant speed. With the vane’s slow rotation, shear stress vs. time and viscosity vs. time curves were recorded over 200 s. In the CSR test, as the rotation speed of the vane was low (i.e. 0.1 r/min), the mixed paste was considered to be in a steady-state. The peak value of the shear stress vs. time curve was ultimately presenting the yield stress and the viscosity at a static state For the FC tests, the 12 mm vane rotates at different rotation speeds, which was increased in a stepwise manner from 5 rotation per second (rps or strain rate at five s The Bingham model is one of the most common models used for cementitious materials An example of the shear stress and viscosity vs. shear rate curve is given in Cementitious materials’ yield stress forms from both the microstructure of the particle-to-particle network through colloidal interaction, or direct contact, and cement hydration bonding (calcium-silicate-hydrate or C-S-H and portlandite or C-H). The result of the CSR method measured static yield stress corresponds to a state before the structure is broken down, which is the stress necessary to initiate flow. Meanwhile, the FC result represents the dynamic yield stress represents the minimum stress needed to sustain or terminate the flow of the material Overall, the results of the CSR method and the FC method have a similar trend for the two values (yield stress and viscosity). Dynamic yield stress is representing the minimum stress needed to sustain or terminate the flow of the material, which is usually adopted to investigate the pumping energy requirement for CPB slurry The effects of various parameters on the rheological properties of fresh CPB, including the binder type and content, water type and content, and initial temperature are discussed below.  The results presented in In the presence of PC and water in CPB, a series of short/immediate- and long-term chemical reactions initiated in the tailings-binder medium, hence amending the tailings fabric into a unitary mass of enhanced mechanical performance. Long-term chemical reactions consist of pozzolanic reactions, which are strongly time-dependent and less effective on the early age CPB workability. The short-term chemical reactions include cation exchange and flocculation-agglomeration, short-term reactions lead to a notable increase in soil plasticity, workability, and early age strength and swell-consolidation capacity FA often contains a low content of cementitious material; and FA is dominated by large fractions of silicate and, particularly, aluminate. As such, the addition of FA, alongside cementitious binder as its activator, induces the development of pozzolanic reactions (or cementation products) in the matrix. A short-term chemical reaction could not be found in FA-tailing mixtures MC is a slag-blended cement that mainly consists of ground-granulated blast-furnace slag (50%), Portland cement clinker (20%). Comparing to PC, it has a larger average particle size and less short-term cementitious material. As a result, the yield stress of cemented paste backfill prepared with Minecem (MC-CPB) mixed with 23% or more water is lower than the stress of PC-CPB and the yield stress of MC-CPB mixed with 18% or less water is higher than the yield stress of PC-CPB. One of the aims of this study was to compare the rheological behaviour of PC-CPB and MC-CPB. However, the unconfined compressive strength (UCS) after 28 days’ curing, using PC-CPB with 3% and 4% binder usage are 363.5 and 425 kPa respectively. MC-CPB with 3% binder results in 519 kPa UCS after 28-days’ curing  As explained previously, the 3% MC-CPB has a slightly higher 28 days’ curing UCS than does 4% PC-CPB. While comparing the yield stress of 3% MC-CPB and 4% PC-CPB, the 3% MC-CPB had much lower yield stress than 4% PC-CPB. Therefore, the results show that for the same stope strength requirement, the use of MC mitigates both the binder dosage and the energy required to ensure adequate pipeline transport of CPB. This study investigated a comparison of the yield stress of the CPB samples, made using two types of water: tap water or fresh water (FW) and mine-processed water (MW). Mahlaba et al. concluded that the use of a more salty brine would result in a less workable paste using a given binder content The CPB samples with mine-processed water in this study generated higher yield stress values. It can be seen in Every underground mine is unique with regards to its temperature conditions. The temperature in the underground varies with the geographical location and other factors, such as the depth of the mine, geological conditions/age of formations and other human-induced temperature variations Contrary to these results, Lee et al. reported that the increase of temperature results in FA-CPB slurry mixtures with lower yield stress In As shown in This study investigated the rheological performance of CPB material when mixed with different binder types and contents. Portland cement (i.e. PC-CPB) and a new binder, Minecem, which is prepared mainly as a mixture of cement and slag (MC-CPB), were used as the primary binders, while fly ash was used as a supplementary binder. Moreover, the effects of water type and content, and temperature, on the rheological properties of CPB materials were investigated. Based on the results obtained, the following conclusions appear to be warranted: Regardless of binder type, the yield stress decreases with an increase in water content. However, the MC-CPB showed a more significant increase in fluidity after an increase in water content. Hence, the variations of MC-CPB viscosity appears to be more sensitive to water-content change. With regards to the UCS performance, the replacement of 4% PC-CPB (28 days UCS 425 kPa) to 3% MC-CPB (28 days UCS 519 kPa), reduced the slurry yield stress from 210.7 to 178.5 Pa. The FA additive increased the yield stress of the CPB mixtures. This may be due to the dense particle packing. However, lower increments were shown with MC-CPB when compared to PC-CPB. The use of mine-processed water increases the yield stress of fresh CPB, and thus reduces its flowability. An increase in the salinity of the pore fluid causes an increase in the yield stress. This effect is more evident for PC-CPB than MC-CPB. Some elements (Ca and Mg) can enrich the binder coagulation, hence further increasing the yield stress. Overall regardless of binder type, the yield stress increase with an increase in temperature; however, the increase in temperature influences the two components of CPB yield stress in different ways. The results indicate that the influence of temperature on yield stress for MC-CPB are much more sensitive than that for PC-CPB, while the water content is equal to or less than 23%. Thus, when using MC as an alternative for conventional PC, a better regulatory system might be required for both in situ water content and temperature condition. The authors declare no conflict of interest. This research was partially funded by