The influence of 50%, 75% and 90% cold work on the age hardening behavior of Cu–3Ti–1Cr alloy has been investigated by hardness and tensile tests, and light optical and transmission electron microscopy. Hardness increased from 118 Hv in the solution-treated condition to 373 Hv after 90% cold work and peak aging. Cold deformation reduced the peak aging time and temperature of the alloy. The yield strength and ultimate tensile strength reached a maximum of 1090 and 1110 MPa, respectively, following 90% deformation and peak aging. The microstructure of the deformed alloy exhibited elongated grains and deformation twins. The maximum strength on peak aging was obtained due to precipitation of the ordered, metastable and coherent β′-Cu4Ti phase, in addition to high dislocation density and deformation twins. Over-aging resulted in decreases in hardness and strength due to the formation of incoherent and equilibrium β-Cu3Ti phase in the form of a cellular structure. However, the morphology of the discontinuous precipitation changed to a globular form on high deformation. The mechanical properties of Cu–3Ti–1Cr alloy are superior to those of Cu–2.7Ti, Cu–3Ti–1Cd and the commercial Cu–0.5Be–2.5Co alloys in the cold-worked and peak-aged condition.World wide-research on the binary Cu–Ti alloys has indicated that they have to serve as substitutes for the expensive and toxic Cu–Be–Co alloys. Extensive research has been carried out by many researchers on the mechanisms of spinodal decomposition and precipitation strengthening in Cu–Ti alloys Our earlier studies Our recent studies on Cu–Ti alloys with 1 wt.% Cr addition revealed that the tensile properties of the Cu–Ti–Cr alloys increased considerably during peak aging after solution treatment A Cu–Ti–Cr alloy was prepared with the aimed composition of 3 wt.% Ti, 1 wt.% Cr and Cu as the balance. A 30 kg melt of the alloy was made by melting the appropriate proportions of pure copper, titanium and chromium in the graphite crucible of Stokes vacuum induction melting (VIM) furnace and then casting into a graphite mould. The ingot was homogenized at 850 °C for 24 h and analyzed for its composition. The analysis report confirmed the composition to be 2.97 wt.% Ti, 0.99 wt.% Cr and balance Cu. The ingot was subsequently hot forged and rolled after soaking at 850 °C to obtain 10 mm thick flats and 12 mm diameter rods. After solutionizing at 860 °C for 2 h, the samples were given different amounts of deformation viz., 50%, 75% and 90%, at room temperature. Vickers hardness at 10 kg load was measured after aging the deformed samples at 400, 450 and 500 °C to establish peak aging time and temperature. A total of 6 indents were taken for each sample at frequent time intervals after aging at the above temperatures and the average value of hardness recorded. Flat tensile specimens as per ASTM E8M standard were prepared from the solution treated Thin slices were cut from the cold deformed and aged bulk samples using a low-speed Isomet cutting machine and then mechanically polished to obtain 40–50 μm thick slices. Discs of 3 mm diameter were punched out of these slices and electropolished in a twin-jet electropolisher in a solution of 30 vol.% HNO  The variation of hardness with the amount of prior cold work before and after aging is shown in  The mechanical properties of the cold deformed Cu–3Ti–1Cr alloy and peak aged at 400 °C are compared with those of the binary Cu–2.7Ti, Cu–3Ti–1Cd and Cu–0.5Be–2.5Co alloys in The microstructure of the undeformed Cu–3Ti–1Cr alloy  TEM studies were carried out on 50% and 90% deformed Cu–3Ti–1Cr alloy to understand the structural changes that occurred during peak aging and over-aging after high deformations.  The present investigation has revealed that the hardness and strength of solution-treated Cu–3Ti–1Cr alloy are significantly improved by cold work and subsequent peak aging at 400 °C. Cold rolling to a 90% reduction in thickness increased the hardness of the solution-treated Cu–3Ti–1Cr alloy (118 Hv) by 115%, to 254 Hv. By comparison, the same processing of a Cu–4Ti–1Cr alloy resulted in only a 40% increase, but in that case the initial solution-treated hardness was 224 Hv The hardness of the Cu–3Ti–1Cr alloy increased considerably on cold working followed by aging, reaching a maximum hardness of 373 Hv after 90% deformation and aging for 1 h at 400 °C. The highest hardness values for all the deformations were obtained when the alloy was aged at 400 °C whereas the undeformed alloy exhibited its peak hardness after aging at 450 °C The YS and UTS are increased significantly on peak aging the deformed alloy at 400 °C. The precipitation of a very fine dispersion of β′-Cu The precipitation hardening, in addition to the strain hardening, plays a major role in strengthening the Cu–3Ti–1Cr alloy. A coherent, ordered and metastable precipitate, the β′-Cu The precipitation of the fine, coherent, metastable β′-Cu Over-aging of the alloy is reflected in decreases in hardness. Aging of 90% cold-worked Cu–3Ti–1Cr alloy at 500 °C for 24 h resulted in a drastic fall in hardness, reaching to a level below that in the solution-treated condition. This was not observed in the undeformed Cu–Ti–Cr alloys When the deformed Cu–3Ti–1Cr alloy becomes over-aged, the formation of incoherent equilibrium precipitates of β-Cu The following conclusions are drawn from the present investigations on the age hardening behavior of cold-worked Cu–3Ti–1Cr alloy: Substantial hardening occurred during the aging of the deformed alloy at 400 °C. The maximum hardness of 373 Hv; YS of 1090 MPa and UTS of 1110 MPa were obtained on material cold worked 90% then aged for 2 h at 400 °C. The ductility is decreased significantly in the peak-aged alloy due to prior cold work, reaching 2.5% elongation on 90% CW Deformation accelerated the aging, the peak aging time and temperature decreasing significantly to 1 h and 400 °C, respectively, for 90% deformation. For all the deformations, the predominant strengthening mechanism of age hardening is the precipitation of an ordered, metastable and coherent β′-Cu Over-aging in these alloys is associated with the formation of the equilibrium phase, β-Cu The mechanical properties of the Cu–3Ti–1Cr alloy were found to be superior to those of Cu–2.7Ti, Cu–3Ti–1Cd and the commercial Cu–0.5Be–2.5Co alloys in the cold-worked and peak-aged condition. The authors greatly acknowledge the Head, Department of Metallurgical Engineering, IT, BHU, Varanasi, for providing laboratory facilities. The authors are thankful to the Research and Development Organisation of Ministry of Defence, Govt. of India, New Delhi for financial support. The authors thank Director, Defence Metallurgical Research Laboratory, Hyderabad, for permission to publish this work. One of the authors (RM) is thankful to Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Hyderabad for granting leave under QIP.