Natural fractures are generally well developed in most hydrocarbon and geothermal reservoirs, which can produce complex fracture networks due to the activation of fractures during hydraulic stimulation. The present paper is devoted to developing a method to investigate the activation characteristics of fracture under injection-shearing coupled condition at laboratory scale. The fluid is injected into the single-fractured granite until the fracture is activated based on the triaxial direct shear tests. The results show that injection process can significantly influence the shear stress distribution field, resulting in release of shear stress and relative slip between the opposite sides of the fractured surface. The injection-induced activation of fracture is strongly dependent on the stress states. When the normal stress increases, the injection-induced activation pressure increases, and the comparatively high normal stress can restrain the fracture activation. The fracture deformation mechanisms during fluid injection are also discussed preliminarily with the experimental data. The sensitivity of shear stress to fluid injection increases with increase of shear stress level, while it decreases under high normal stress. The results can facilitate our understanding of the natural fracture activation behavior during fluid pressure stimulation.Hydraulic fracturing is critically important in improving productivity of deep oil/gas reservoirs, and has recently been widely used in geothermal reservoirs ( During hydraulic fracturing, the natural fractures are likely to be activated under shear stress, and more complex fracture networks will be created subsequently. This can maximize the stimulated reservoir volume and effectively improve the productivity of reservoirs ( Nevertheless, the above-mentioned studies mainly focused on the fracture permeability evolution, frictional behavior, and fault activation-induced seismicity. Parts of the experimental achievements are completed under low stress conditions, which is only suitable for practical projects in shallow depth. In addition, studies on fracture or fault activation are mainly based on numerical methods (e.g. The studied granite was sampled from Suizhou, Hubei Province, China. The mineral composition of the sample was obtained using X-ray diffraction (XRD). The XRD results indicate that the granite is mainly composed of albite (55.31%), microcline (28.85%), quartz (14.35%), and biotite (1.49%). The Brazilian test was adopted to create a single fracture along the length of the granite sample (see The injection-induced fracture activation was investigated by triaxial direct shear test. The shear test device was placed in the hydro-mechanical coupling test system ( This experiment was performed at room-temperature (25 °C) under different normal stresses (e.g. Step 1: Silicone is applied along the fracture on the sample outer surface for preliminary sealing in order to make the outer surface flat, and then the sample and shearing discs are sealed with a plastic jacket (see Step 2: Apply confining stress ( Step 3: Apply axial force (  where  Step 4: Water is injected at a rate of 0.5 mL/min into the fracture simultaneously through the permeable holes arranged along the diameter inside the shearing discs which are placed on the upper and lower ends of the sample (see Step 5: The decrease in Step 6: Continue increasing When the fracture is activated, the shear stress is noticeably reduced (see Fluid injection can result in reduction of effective normal stress, and Mohr's circle moves towards the sliding failure envelope until it triggers a slide (e.g. As shown in According to the above deformation analyses, the fracture slides continuously under constant shear stress at the multi-shearing stages, while the fracture opening onset occurs under a certain injection pressure. The inflection point of normal displacement is highly consistent with initial reduction of shear stress (i.e. the starting point of phase II), and the corresponding injection pressure can be considered as the fracture critical-initiation pressure (point In each experiment, the first injection-induced fracture activation can weaken the shear resistance of the fracture to some extent, including the damage of surface asperities, softening caused by fluid injection, and self-propped fracture formed after activation. As the shear stress increases gradually, subsequent repeated activation will significantly reduce the fracture critical-initiation pressure. This also well explains that the cyclic hydraulic fracturing can reduce the breakdown pressure and further enhance reservoir fracture connectivity ( The larger The main conclusions based on the experimental results can be drawn as follows: The proposed method is valid for investigation of injection-induced fracture activation at laboratory scale. The injection-induced activation of fracture is strongly dependent on the stress states. The fracture activation is mainly due to the fact that the fluid injection will decrease the effective normal stress, resulting in alteration of shear stress distribution field and releasing the shear stress accompanied by the relative slip between the opposite sides of the fractured surface. The injection-induced activation pressure increases with increase of the normal stress. It decreases with increase of the shear stress under the same normal stress. However, the activation of fractures can be restrained under high normal stress (e.g. Higher injection pressure may be required for deeper fractured reservoirs to activate the pre-existing natural fracture system and to improve productivity during hydraulic stimulation. Furthermore, the injection activities should also be well controlled in combination with site-specific conditions to prevent large-scale fault activation-induced seismic hazards, especially in wastewater reinjection. Nevertheless, in this method, the additional resistance resulting from the deformed silicone in the shearing discs is not considered. This may induce an overestimation of shear stress acting on the fracture, which should be addressed in future work. In addition, the settings of stress conditions in the following studies should focus on practical cases of reservoirs. The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. The financial support by the