In this study, the role of pyrite in sulfuric acid leaching of chalcopyrite (CuFeS2) was investigated by leaching experiments, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and electrochemical measurements. The leaching experiments showed that the addition of pyrite remarkably promoted chalcopyrite dissolution by controlling the redox potential over an appropriate range. XPS analysis revealed that the presence of pyrite (FeS2) significantly promoted the formation of elemental sulfur (S0) from <5% to >10% on the mineral surface and almost completely inhibited the formation of polysulfide (Sn
                     2−). Electrochemical measurements further verified that the addition of pyrite inhibited the oxidation of chalcopyrite to polysulfide. Therefore, the pyrite-promoted chalcopyrite dissolution in sulfuric acid was not primarily due to the galvanic effect. In sulfuric acid leaching of chalcopyrite, polysulfide rather than elemental sulfur was the primary cause of passivation. The addition of pyrite primarily controlled the redox potential over an optimum range in which the formation of polysulfide on the mineral surface was inhibited, resulting in higher copper extraction.Chalcopyrite (CuFeS It has been found that the addition of pyrite (FeS In addition, sulfuric acid is an important and common leaching agent in many hydrometallurgical systems. Therefore, the effect of pyrite on sulfuric acid leaching of chalcopyrite was studied, and different viewpoints were obtained in the present study. The chalcopyrite and pyrite samples were obtained from the geological museum of the Guangxi Province of China. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis showed that they were of extremely high purity. The chemical element analysis ( In the sulfuric acid leaching experiments, 1 Cyclic voltammetry measurements were conducted under a N The mineralogical compositions of solid samples leached for a different number of days (7, 15, 22, 30 X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was used to determine the surface species of samples during the dissolution process. The samples leached for different days were filtered and rinsed with deionized water three times, and then, they were transferred to a vacuum drying oven (DZF-6050) to prevent any further oxidation. Subsequently, the dry samples were transferred to the spectrometer in an argon atmosphere before the tests. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was conducted using model ESCALAB 250Xi. Spectra were recorded at a constant pass energy of 20  The redox potential has been widely considered as the determining factor in chalcopyrite dissolution, and it should be controlled over an optimum range (approximately 360–480 It can be speculated that the addition of pyrite significantly increased the concentration of Fe The mineralogical compositions of mixed samples (chalcopyrite/pyrite ratio is 1) leached for 15 and 22 Sulfur species of polysulfide, elemental sulfur and jarosite were widely considered as the main components of the passivation layer. Therefore, XPS was applied to investigate the sulfur species during sulfuric acid leaching of sole chalcopyrite and the mixed samples (1:1) in this study.  After fitting the S 2p  Therefore, polysulfide should be the main component of the passivation layer of chalcopyrite in sulfuric acid leaching at relatively low potentials below the optimum range for the reduction-oxidation pathway, as limited by the experimental conditions. The mixed samples (1:1) leached by sulfuric acid for 15 and 22 By fitting the S 2p In addition, as shown in The percentages of sulfur species on the surface of mixed samples (1:1) leached by sulfuric acid for 15 and 22 If chalcopyrite was passivated, then the dissolution process will be controlled by internal diffusion process; thus, the stirring speed would not be expected to have significant effect on the chalcopyrite dissolution. However, in this work, when the stirring rate was 100, 200, 300 and 400   Polysulfide (S This work was supported by the