Despite a strong thermodynamic tendency, cementation by aluminum of relatively noble metals from sulfate solutions involves a rather slow kinetics due to the presence of the passive oxide film on the aluminum surface. We know from the literature that small amounts of chloride ion can reduce the dimension of the problem. In this paper, we investigate the additional effect of concurrent ball milling on the enhancement of the cementation kinetics of Cu-Al system as a case study. The cementation tests were carried out in a polyamide jar placed in a planetary ball mill. In the first part of the study, the effect of rotation speed of the milling jar, number of alumina milling balls, particle size of the aluminum powder, and the initial hydrogen ion concentration on the copper recovery was studied and optimized using a central composite design of experiments. In the second part, we investigated the kinetics and mechanism of the cementation process under the optimum conditions obtained from the first part. The results show that the concurrent ball milling can shorten or even remove the initial slow rate period, known as the induction period. It also alters the rate-controlling mechanism from chemical to boundary layer diffusion revealed by a decrease in the activation energy from 79 to 18 kJ mol−1. The morphology of copper deposits obtained under ball milling condition was found to be botryoidal in contrast to the typical dendritic structure. The findings overall support the beneficial role of the simultaneous ball milling in lowering the kinetic barrier of cementation reactions on the aluminum surface.Cementation is probably the oldest hydrometallurgical process that involves reductive precipitation of a metal ion from a solution by a more active metal ( The theoretical consumption of aluminum is only 32% of iron by weight comparing their molar masses (27 and 56 g mol  Aluminum has only one oxidation state whereas iron has two. This causes unwanted side reactions for iron to take place. In air or an oxygen atmosphere, there is a slight decrease in the cementation efficiency as a result of the partial oxidation of Fe  By using aluminum as the reductant, a useful solution of aluminum salt (sulfate, chloride, etc.) is obtained that can be crystallized as a valuable by-product. Vast amounts of aluminum swarf generated during machining and manufacturing of aluminum parts with a high surface area can effectively be utilized in the cementation process. However, a kinetic barrier on the aluminum surface, the adherent oxide film that protects it from environmental corrosion, causes aluminum to exhibit a slow reaction rate in both the main cementation reaction and side reactions, such as evolution of hydrogen gas:   There are ample information on the pitting corrosion of aluminum by chloride ion. It is known that the surface of aluminum in aqueous solutions is usually composed of an oxyhydroxide type material such as AlOOH. It has a positive charge at pH values less than 9 (the isoelectric point of Al in aqueous solutions) (  In several papers,  In addition to the usage of chloride ions, the problem of the surface passivity of aluminum may be tackled by conducting the cementation reaction under ball milling conditions. With this idea in mind, we devised a ball milling-assisted cementation set-up to explore the effectiveness of the intended process. The conventional experimentation methodology of the so-called “one-factor-at-a-time” employed by most researchers is incapable of showing any interactions between the process variables, and therefore, do not lead to the real optimum condition. An alternative and better methodology that gives the most amount of information out of a given expenditure of experimental effort is statistical “design of experiments” (DOE). It is based on Fisher’s factorial concept by testing all possible combinations of factor levels ( In the present paper, we report the results of our investigation concerning the effect of concurrent ball milling on the cementation of copper by aluminum powder with the aim of improving the efficiency and kinetics of the cementation reaction. The research consisted of two consecutive parts. In the first part, we adopted a statistical experimental design approach to identify the most influential factors and optimize the recovery of copper by a response surface methodology (RSM). In the second part, we performed experiments at the optimum conditions obtained from the first part to explore the kinetics and mechanism of the adopted process. We chose Cu-Al cementation system as the case study because of the vast availability of the kinetic data on copper cementation that makes comparison possible between the results of different studies. In each test, we used 100 mL of acidic copper sulfate solution containing 600 mg Cu All cementation experiments were conducted in a polyamide jar with an approximate volume of 250 mL. The jar (the reaction vessel) was fixed together with another balancing jar in a planetary ball mill (VTW PM2, Iran). Alumina balls with 15 mm of diameter served as the milling media during cementation. The concentration of copper in the solution at any time was analyzed using atomic absorption spectroscopy (Avanta Σ, GBC Scientific). The cemented copper deposits were characterized by X-ray diffraction (JDX-8030, JEOL) and scanning electron microscopy (VEGA II, TESCAN). In the first part of the study, we used a central composite design (CCD) with four factors: rotation speed of the jar (X The selected CCD comprised a 2-level 4-factor full factorial design, two axial (star) points for each factor, and five replicated center points (29 experimental runs in total). The design matrix was created and randomized using Design-Expert® software, version 7.0 ( All experiments were conducted at room temperature for the duration of 30 min. After finishing each test, the solutions were filtered and diluted to analyze the remaining copper content. The adopted response variable was the recovery percent of copper after 30 min of cementation (%R To explore the kinetics and mechanism of the cementation reaction assisted by simultaneous ball milling, we performed experiments at different temperatures using the same experimental setup described above to observe the recovery percent of copper at short time intervals both in the absence and presence of the balls ( The results of the CCD experiments have been shown in The analysis of variance (ANOVA) can generally be used to examine the statistical significance of the model terms ( We can examine the magnitude of factor effects to determine which variables are likely to be important. The mean response value at different levels of a particular factor may serve to construct a main effect plot. According to The number of balls (BALL) moderately increases the copper recovery. We may attribute this effect to several plausible reasons. The first and most obvious reason is the intensification of turbulence due to the complementary stirring effect of the flying balls and the resulting increase in the mass transfer coefficient. The second is accelerating the removal of the passive layer on the Al particles caused by ball collisions, which exposes more active sites for the reduction of copper ions. The third is the breakage of Al particles that increases the surface area for the reaction. The fourth and final reason might be assisting the detachment of hydrogen bubbles on the Al particles that again increases the available surface for the reduction of copper ions. The bubbles, while attached, prevent the access of copper ions to the active sites. The observations presented in the following sections, may help to support the validity of these reasons. The sharply descending linear correlation of particle size with the copper recovery in We notice from There exist only one significant interaction effect between the rotation speed (RS) and the number of balls (BALL) as seen in A collection of 3D response surface plots has been presented in The results of the 32 separate runs corresponding to short time cementation experiments at different temperatures and under the presence or absence of the milling balls are presented in Kinetically, it is known that the rate of a cementation reaction is of the first order ( By plotting such a relationship, The activation energies of the cementation reaction relating to the induction and enhanced kinetic periods for the absence and presence of ball conditions can be calculated from the temperature dependence of the apparent rate constants according to Arrhenius equation, The activation energies for cementation of copper by aluminum reported by other investigators are widely varied due to different experimental procedures and conditions. We make a comparison to identify the cause of the differences. As shown in The reddish copper deposits cemented at 50 °C for both “no ball” and “with ball” conditions were collected, washed several times with distilled water, dried and analyzed by XRD. The results ( The morphology of the recovered copper deposit in the “no ball” condition as seen in the SEM micrograph ( Copper cementation by aluminum powder from sulfate solution containing 6 g L