Wind turbine blades that face end-of-life recycled mechanically. The recycled material was first comminuted via a hammer-mill through a range of varying screen sizes, resonated (polymeric Methylene diphenyl isocyanate (pMDI)) and then hand-formed and hot pressed. The hot press temperature and time were set as 138 °C and 5 min accordingly, typical for pMDI composite processing. Mechanical properties (Modulus of rupture (MOR), Module of elasticity (MOE) and Internal bond(IB)) dataset of composites made from recycled wind turbine blades(rWTBs) presented. Dataset also presented the influence of resin level, moisture content, mill screen size and density on the mechanical properties of composites [1,2].  Presented dataset shows consistency among the samples and helps researcher to see the actual trend among these second generation composites with different formulation. Raw dataset presented on mechanical properties of rWTB composites helps other researcher in this field to understand the original condition of these second generation composites. Data on Mechanical properties of second generation composites manufactured from rWTB materials gives the researchers clear vision about the potential utilization of these second generation composites. Based on presented data, researchers could be referred to this dataset to design and analyze different experiments on rWTBs.   The various size fractions of the rWTB materials were sprayed with resin (3,6 and 10%) and water (to obtain the targeted MC (3, 5 and 8%)) within a drum blender. The blended rWTB was then hand-formed and hot pressed to a size of Datasets demonstrating physical condition of each specimen prepared for Flexural and IB test are as follow: The rWTB composites with 10MDI, 5MC and 12.7 mm MSS has the maximum amount of MOE and is equal to 5254 MPa and the rWTB composites with 1.59 mm MSS, 6MDI and 5 MC has the minimum amount of MOE equal to 2910 MPa. Similar to MOE, rWTB composites with 10MDI and 5MC has the maximum amount for both of the MOR and IB that are 41.6 MPa and 2.35 MPa respectively. The rWTB composites with 1.59 mm MSS has the minimum amount of MOR equal to 23.8 MPa and composite with 3MDI, 5MC and 12.7 mm MSS has the minimum amount of IB equal to 0.82 MPa. The best results for IB is for 1.59 mm MSS ( The authors gratefully appreciate the financial support by Transparency data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 