Response surface methodology was used to investigate the main effects and interactions of sodium caseinate (SC, 0–2%), microbial transglutaminase (MTG, 0–0.6%) and carrageenan (CGN, 0–0.8%) on water binding, textural and colour characteristics of pork gels. Higher κ-carrageenan and sodium caseinate content favored hydration properties and thermal stability, yielding lower cooking loss and higher water holding capacity. Their addition also increased hardness of pork gels, but was unable to improve springiness or cohesiveness. Sodium caseinate either alone or in combination with MTG generally has been found to be inferior to κ-carrageenan for functionality in comminuted meat systems. Although MTG had no effect on binding properties it was found to increase strength of the gels at higher SC levels. Addition of SC and ic-carrageenan significantly altered colour, while no significant influence of MTG on gel colour parameters was observed.Gelation of muscle proteins is largely responsible for the physical and chemical stabilization of fat and water in comminuted meat products and thus contributes to desirable binding characteristics, texture and appearance of the products ( The interactions between proteins (muscle and non-muscle) and polysaccharides are also important in determining meat products binding and textural properties and have been the subject of many investigations ( Post-rigor pork meat ( The protein concentration of the ground pork was determined by the The ingredients used in the homogenate formulations included curing salt (containing 99.5% sodium chloride and 0.5% sodium nitrite), and sodium erythorbate (Fujisawa Pharmaceutical Co Ltd., Japan). Sodium caseinate (SC) was purchased as a commercial product from PHZ SM “Lacpol”, Poland. Carrageenan (SECOGEL MF) was purchased from BIOMAT, Poland. Sodium caseinate was hydrated with chilled brine for 30 min. prior to adding to meat ingredients. Microbial transglutaminase (MTG), (Ajinomoto, Barentz, Poland) was a mixture containing 99% maltodextrin and 1% microbial transglutaminase (activity of approx. 100 units/g). The enzyme concentration is reported in the present study as the commercial concentration. Before processing, the meat was tempered at 4 °C for 15 h prior to use. Meat protein content was adjusted to a constant level of 8% in all formulations. Shredded ice was added to the batters to ensure the same protein level. Treatments (200 g each) were prepared by mixing ground meat and non-meat ingredients for 15 s using a BUCHI “MIXER B-400” (9000 rev/min). The levels of non muscle proteins, MTG and carrageenan to be added were determined using a 3-level factorial design as shown in Immediately after homogenate preparation, the batters were stuffed into three cylindrical plastic tubes (30 mm × 115 mm). The tubes were closed and allowed to stand overnight in a cold room at 5 °C. The homogenate samples were then heated isothermally at 75 °C to a final internal temperature of 72 °C in a water bath, and thereafter cooled down in ice water until a core temperature of 20 °C was reached. Internal temperature was measured using thermocouples inserted in the geometrical center of the samples. The gel samples were stored at 4 °C until analyzed. Total moisture was determined in quadruplicate by AOAC method 950.46 B ( Following overnight storage each chilled gel was removed from the plastic tube, blotted dry with a paper towel and weighed for a cook yield. Overall cook loss was calculated as a percentage based on the raw stuffed weight. The modified Hamm ( Colour of the meat gels was measured using a MINOLTA CR 200b spectrocolorimeter (Minolta, Co., Ltd., Osaka 541, Japan) and expressed as CIE Textural characteristics of gels were analyzed according to the texture profile analysis (TPA) method ( Five center cores (25 mm in diameter, 15 mm height) of gel samples were compressed twice to 25% of their original height at a constant cross-head speed of 60 mm/min. The TPA parameters, namely hardness (HD) (peak force on first compression [N]), cohesiveness (ratio of the active work done under the second force-displacement curve to that done under the first compression curve [dimensionless]), springiness (SPR) (distance the sample recovered after the first compression [mm]), and chewiness (CHW) (hardness × cohesiveness × springiness [N*mm]) were computed. Response surface methodology (RSM) was used to study the simultaneous effect of the three experimental variables or factors. Experimental design and statistical analysis were performed using Statistica 5.1 for Windows (STATISTICA Three levels of each factor were chosen based on the three-level factorial plan principle ( The following second-order polynomial equation of function The pH values of the meat gels ranged from 5.98 to 6.13 (average pH of 6.07). pH values of the gels were directly proportional to the SC content ( Analysis of variance indicated that among the regression models for the binding properties of gels processed with varying levels of SC, MTG and CGN addition only the model for cooking loss was highly significant ( Varying SC levels in the homogenates had an appreciable inverse effect on the cooking loss (CL), as manifested in significant linear ( The results of this research indicate that thermal stability of homogenates was markedly improved by addition of κ-carrageenan. Treatments up to 0.8% κ-carrageenan content had lower cooking losses than the samples containing only 0.4% and without the hydrocolloid. Addition of κ-carrageenan also decreased the percentage of water loss from gel samples after pressing the gel samples, indicating that the hydrocolloid improved water retention of meat gels. The greatest WHC was observed in treatments containing SC and κ-carrageenan, which suggests protein–hydrocolloid interactions between SC and CGN might have occurred. However, Non-meat proteins are often used as alternative gelling agents in comminuted meat products to enhance the yield by improving water binding properties. However, non meat proteins may also impose some negative effects or interfere with the gelation of the myofibrillar proteins (  MTG did not produce any significant effect on CL. Furthermore, the absence of any interaction effects on cooking loss indicates that the influence exerted by each variable was not affected by the others. The lack of relationship between MTG addition and cooking loss in this study is consistent with findings of Analysis of variance indicated that in our study, the regression models for yellowness and redness were highly significant ( Both SC and CGN were shown to be significant factors in the regression model for MTG addition had no significant influence on colour parameters of experimental gels. Previous reports on the effect of transglutaminase addition on colour have been contradictory. As in our study an addition of pig plasma TG in the 0–1% range did not produce significant differences in colour of low-salt chicken meat balls ( Analysis of variance indicated that the regression models developed for textural parameters were all significant ( The variable that most influenced the textural characteristics of the gels was CGN concentration, as reflected in highly significant linear terms. Product hardness generally increased, while cohesiveness and springiness decreased with increases in CGN level ( Conflicting reports are found in the literature on the effects of CGN concentration on texture of comminuted meat products. The specific mechanism of CGN effects on meat product texture and interactions in a meat–carrageenan multicomponent gelling system is not fully understood. However, as noted with respect to water binding properties, the effect of CGN addition on texture of comminuted meat products is probably not due to molecular interaction between proteins and the hydrocolloid but rather may be related to physical rearrangement of CGN and meat protein molecules ( Significant linear effects were observed for MTG concentration on hardness ( MTG also exhibited an influence on springiness of gels through positive interaction with CGN concentration ( Generally, results of our study are in agreement with findings reported by Varying levels of SC contributed to the regression model for cohesiveness through negative linear and quadratic terms, and its interaction with CGN, and exhibited an influence on hardness and springiness of gels through positive linear terms ( Increase in SC concentration led to formation of less cohesive but harder and more springy gels, however the effect was dependent on the content CGN in homogenates. In fact, increased addition of SC resulted in decrease in cohesiveness only in treatments without CGN ( Many researchers have analyzed the effects of non-meat proteins on textural properties both of gels made from individual salt-soluble proteins and of complex muscle foods such as frankfurters and bologna. Many studies indicate sodium caseinate indirectly contributes to water retention and texture of an emulsion, therefore can be used as protein additives in comminuted meat products without adversely affecting their physical characteristics.  The results of this research indicate that increased addition of CGN resulted in meat gels, which were harder, chewy, and had better binding properties. However, carrageenan was unable to improve springiness or cohesiveness of pork gels and led to formation harder but more brittle gels. Increased cook yield and harder texture of gels upon addition of CGN were probably due to physical entrapment of protein and water by CGN. Although addition of SC had beneficial effects on reducing cook loss and increasing hardness and chewiness, the non muscle protein generally was found to be inferior to CGN for functionality in comminuted meat systems. This can be due to the fact that SC lacks the gelation ability on heating, thus unlike CGN cannot form a three-dimensional matrix, which can imbibe water and fat. MTG had no effect on water binding properties although it increased hardness of the gels at higher SC levels. Therefore the use of MTG proved to enhance the effect of SC on some textural properties of gelled meat system. No significant influence of MTG on gel colour parameters was observed.