The influences of wet ultra-fine grinding parameters on the rheological behavior of pyrite–heptane slurry in a laboratory stirred media mill were investigated with solid concentration, dispersant dosage, grinding time and carbon numbers of organic acid as dispersant. The results reveal that when the solids concentration is increased from 64wt% to 79wt%, the rheological behavior of slurry with 1wt% of stearic acid transforms from Bingham characteristic to the pseudoplastic one with a yield stress. The Casson model fits well for the experimental data. And the apparent viscosity of the pyrite–heptane slurry increases exponentially with increase solid concentration at a given shear rate. The increase of viscosity is propitious to reduce the particle size of pyrite. When the solid concentration is 64wt%, stearic acid is superior to octadecanol for the reduction of the slurry viscosity, and the slurry with 1wt% of stearic acid possesses the best flowability. The extrapolated Bingham yield stress with dispersant almost stays constant when the dosage is over 2wt%. Besides, the rheological behavior and particle size are also related to the grinding time and carbon numbers of organic acids as dispersant.With the increasing demand for ultra-fine powder in industry, wet ultra-fine grinding has found its extended applications in many fields such as minerals ( Most of the mills used in ultra-fine grinding are stirred media mills, rather than conventional tumbling ball mills. Although many studies related to slurry rheology in conventional tumbling ball mills have been concerned, there is still little understanding of the slurry rheology relevant to wet ultra-fine grinding characterized by very fine product and high slurry concentration and organic liquids as medium due to the complex slurry rheological behaviors in stirred media mills. Especially the organic liquids as medium will be widely used in the wet ultra-fine grinding in many fields. Also, the principles from tumbling ball mills concerning the role of slurry rheology on the grinding results are not completely applicable to the stirred media milling due to their different breakage mechanisms ( This work focuses on the rheological behavior of the slurry in a stirred media mill in the medium of heptane with different dispersants by varying the grinding parameters such as solid concentration, additive dosage of dispersants, grinding time, carbon numbers of dispersants, shearing rate. The grinding results are evaluated by the particle size of the ground product. The cubic crystal of pyrite provided by Hunan Sinophile Mineral Museum was used for grinding experiments. The pyrite was crushed to powder of less than 0.2  The stirred media mill used in the grinding experiments is a vertical bar mill which is designed and produced by Changsha Mining and Metallurgical Research Institute. It consists of a stainless steel cylinder chamber ( A pyrite–heptane slurry was prepared by addition 150 A NXS-11A rotational viscometer (Intelligent Instrumentation Inc., Chengdu, PR China) was used to determine the rheological property of the pyrite–heptane slurry. It employs concentric cylinder geometry with a rotating inner cylinder and a stationary outer cylinder. The concentric cylinder system can be configured with 5 different measurement systems ( The viscometer directly measures the rotation speed of a rotor ( In the experiment, it was found that the rheology of pyrite–heptane slurry in the absence of dispersant settled quickly. Polar dispersants such as organic acids are indispensable for wet ultra-fine grinding. The polar group of dispersants absorbing on the pyrite surface can change the surface nature and the non-polar group running out of the organic phase can produce less attractive inter-particle force, which can improve the slurry flowability by decreasing the viscosity and reducing or eliminating the yield stress of slurry. In this way, the fineness of products in wet ultra-fine grinding can be obtained. The effect of solid concentration on the rheological behavior and particle size distributions was studied with a fixed stearic acid concentration (1 According to the rheological behavior, Bingham model, Herschel–Bulkey model and Casson model were adopted to fit the shear stress The data of rheological characteristics analyzed by adopting the model of non-Newtonian fluid are shown in With regard to the parameters of simulation and error, Casson model fits well for the experimental data. The Bingham model is also applicable for the rheological property at low solid concentration. The results of Casson simulation indicate that the yield stress of pyrite–heptane slurry increases from 0.13 Besides, the viscosity of the pyrite–heptane slurry increases exponentially with increase of solid concentration at a certain shear rate (   Besides, the pyrite–heptane slurry displays shear thinning at low shear rate (the same as The extrapolated Bingham yield stress The particle size distribution of pyrite with different dispersants dosage shown in The rheological behavior of slurry increases usually with grinding time as the reduction of particle size. The rheological behavior and the median size are shown in To study the effect of carbon numbers on the grinding of pyrite, the different carbon numbers of organic acids were prepared in the experiment. The results after grinding 3 The influences of wet ultra-fine grinding parameters on the rheological behavior of pyrite–heptane slurry in a laboratory stirred media mill were investigated with solid concentration, dispersant dosage, grinding time and carbon numbers of organic acid as dispersant. The rheological behavior of the pyrite–heptane slurry with 1 Stearic acid is superior to octadecanol for the reduction of the slurry viscosity with 64 The authors thank the sponsors of the national natural science foundation (project number 50434010) for the funding which made this work possible. The authors would also like to thank the supplier for the materials used in the test work. Support from the staff at School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, during the on-site test work is also gratefully acknowledged.