Diffusion dialysis with a series of anion exchange membranes was used to recover H2SO4 from an acid leach solution produced during the vanadium manufacturing process. The effects of sulfuric acid, FeSO4 and VOSO4 concentration, flow rate and flow rate ratio on the recovery of H2SO4 were investigated. The results showed that sulfuric acid permeated well through the membranes used, while metal ions were efficiently rejected. The recovery of H2SO4 increased as the sulfate concentration of the feed increased and the flow rate ratio of water to feed increased. More than 80% of the H2SO4 could be recovered from the leach solution which contained 61.7g/L free H2SO4, 11.2g/L Fe and 4.60g/L V at a flow rate of 0.19×10−3
                     m3/hm2. V and Fe ion rejection were within 93–95 and 92–94%, respectively. A preliminary economic evaluation revealed that an investment in this process could be recovered within 27 months.Pressure acid leaching is an effective technique for extracting vanadium from black shale because it results in a high amount of metal recovery without emitting harmful gasses Several methods other than direct neutralization have been developed for the recovery of sulfuric acid and other acids from industrial wastes and these include distillation The solution used for the diffusion dialysis experiment was a sulfuric acid solution prepared with analytically pure chemicals, a H The anion exchange membranes used were DF120-I and DF120-III (Shandong Tianwei Membrane Technology Co., Ltd., China.) and a HKY-001 diffusion dialyzer was used for diffusion dialysis. We used 40 sheets of the anion exchange membrane. The total membrane area was 3.2 A previous report indicated that 2 The concentration of free sulfuric acid was determined by titration using 0.1 The total acid recovery ratio The metal ions rejection ratio We used two anion exchange membranes, DF120-I and DF120-III, as supplied by the manufacturer. To determine which one is more efficient, we carried out a dialysis test using a synthetic acid solution under predetermined operational conditions. The feed was prepared using FeSO The acid recovery ratio for the DF120-I membrane was slightly higher than that for the DF120-III membrane. It was also shown that after 2 Concentrated H During the acid pressure leaching process, many metal oxides (such as vanadium oxides and iron oxides) are dissolved in the leach solution. To recover purified acid in the diffusion dialysis process, the metal ions must be rejected by the ion exchange membranes. The effect of FeSO The results in The behavior of vanadium ions during diffusion was similar to that of FeSO To optimize the operating conditions, several tests were conducted with an actual acid solution at ambient temperature (20 The effect of the flow rate ratio (water/feed) on H The preliminary test results shown in the previously mentioned figures demonstrate that diffusion dialysis is an efficient system for the recovery of H By incorporating diffusion dialysis, the free sulfuric acid contained in the acid solution can be recovered and recycled in the flow scheme after the addition of fresh acid. The chemicals found in the recovered acid and in the residual solution are listed in For the steady state run of a vanadium plant that processes 300 As shown in In this study, diffusion dialysis was carried out to recover sulfuric acid from an acid leach solution. The experimental results show that the DF120-III anion exchange membrane should be favored for industrial process purposes because it leads to a high amount of acid recovery and high metal ions rejection. The optimum operating conditions for this process are: a feed flow rate of 0.19 An economic evaluation of the dialysis system was based on an industrial diffusion dialyzer supplied by Shandong Tianwei Membrane Technology Co., Ltd. This evaluation indicated that a payback time of 27 months can be realized for the capital investment. If the diffusion system is operated for 5 years, an increased profit of 2.24 million dollars can be realized. The authors express sincere thanks to the