A joint research project between the Technical University of Braunschweig and the Technical University of München investigates the possibilities for the production of stable product suspensions in a particle size range smaller than 100 nm. This paper shows the experimental setup which allows the measurement of the most important electrochemical properties and the analysis of the particle size distribution of the product suspension as well as an adjustment of the pH value for stabilization during the comminution process. Results for comminution of fused corundum with different grinding media materials and grinding media sizes are shown. In addition, results showing the influence of the electrostatic stabilization on the grinding progress are presented. Further, the rheology of the product suspension is examined depending on grinding progress and suspension stability.The fabrication of products with higher homogeneity, solubility or strength and thus higher product quality requires the use of submicron particles. Especially the chemical and pharmaceutical industry as well as the ceramic or the microelectronic industry demand more and more suspensions of materials with a high fineness and storage stability. One way to produce such suspensions is wet comminution in stirred media mills. The first comprehensive investigations on grinding in stirred media mills were performed by Stehr In the submicron particle size range, the behaviour of the product suspensions is increasingly influenced by particle–particle interactions. Due to these interactions, often spontaneous agglomeration of product particles occurs and the viscosity of the product suspension increases. If product particle sizes smaller than 1 μm are reached, these interactions can lead to an equilibrium state between agglomeration, desagglomeration and comminution, thus no further comminution progress results in spite of increasing energy input. Fundamental theoretical and experimental investigations about grinding and crack formation in solids have been undertaken by Schönert Investigations of the comminution of fused corundum (Al A laboratory stirred media mill was used for all comminution experiments (see In the first step, experiments were performed with an Al The experimental setup For the determination of the ζ-potential, the electroacoustic part of the device uses the electrokinetic effect. In the used ultrasonic spectrometer, an ultrasonic field with a frequency of 3 MHz is applied to the dispersion. This ultrasonic field induces an alternating electric current, the so-called colloid vibration current (CVI) Before the product suspension is pumped into the measuring cell, a suitable pH value for the electrostatic stabilization is adjusted in the stirred vessel by addition of potential determining ions. The product suspension is pumped back into the mill behind the ultrasonic spectrometer. Torque and number of revolutions are measured by a torque sensor shaft. A highly pure fused corundum (Al The electrochemical properties (ζ-potential) of the used alumina were determined in the above-mentioned electroacoustic cell. For Al Grinding media differing in size, material and composition were used for the comminution experiments. The grinding media densities and the composition of the used media are shown in Based on considerations of Kwade First Al Since no Al In During the comminution of fused corundum with Al Regarding the ζ-potential,  In this section, it is discussed whether reagglomeration of product particles during wet comminution in a stirred media mill can be prevented by an additional electrostatic stabilization and whether an influence of electrostatic stabilization on the comminution result exists. In After a specific energy input of about 55,000 kJ kg In addition, first experiments could be realized with smaller ZrO For an analysis with the ultrasonic spectrometer, the solid concentration of the suspension has to be known. It was externally measured by a thermobalance before each analysis with the ultrasonic spectrometer, because it steadily increases during the comminution due to grinding media wear. At the beginning of each experiment, the solid mass concentration was adjusted to So far, the results have shown that no increase in viscosity and thus no increase in pressure arises if the product suspension of fused corundum is stabilized by addition of nitric acid during the comminution. Furthermore, an electrostatic stabilization prevents deposits in the plumbing system and choking of the sieve cartridge. For an adjustment of the pH value to pH 5 during the whole comminution time, the addition of a greater amount of acid is necessary than for an adjustment of a pH value of 6 Increasing values of the conductivity lead to a decreasing thickness of the electrochemical double layer as well as the ζ-potential and thus to a negative influence on the stability conditions of the product suspension. Furthermore, if the critical salt concentration is exceeded spontaneous agglomeration of the particles in the suspension can arise. Therefore, it should be discussed whether a stabilization at pH 5 is necessary or whether higher pH values are sufficient to reach comparable results. For instance, only half of the volume of acid is necessary  For an estimation of the grinding media wear, the mass of the grinding media is weighed before and after each experiment (Joost With this value, a comparison of wear of grinding media types with different compositions and different densities is possible. With increasing grinding chamber volume, the grinding media wear decreases. Therefore, due to Joost The results in In addition to measurements with the ultrasonic spectrometer (DT 1200), particle size analysis with a dynamic light scattering technique (UPA, Microtrak) was performed. A comparison of the results from comminution experiments at pH 5 are shown in The TEM images (JEOL, 2010) clearly show that there is a large amount of very fine particles (50 nm and smaller) already produced besides some larger ones partly agglomerated. The latter has a strong influence on the volume distribution (see In addition to the above mentioned effects, the pH value and thus suspension stability have a strong influence on the rheology of product suspensions Due to higher solid concentrations (due to grinding media wear), a higher internal shear rate is realized in concentrated samples. This fact is compensated by introducing a shift factor B that relates the shear rate at a given shear stress of the concentrated sample to that of the pure suspending medium (e.g. water). In this contribution, results from experiments investigating the comminution process of submicron alumina particles in stirred media mills were presented. The influence of different operating parameters and of suspension stability on the progress of the comminution and the rheology was examined in detail. No distinct influence was yet found for the stirrer tip speed. However, the size of the grinding media influences the comminution progress. For the investigated grinding media sizes, it follows that the smaller the used grinding media, the better is the comminution result. The investigations show that the production of a stable suspension of fused corundum with a median particle size lower than 50 nm is possible by wet grinding in a stirred media mill. During the comminution process, no absolute limit of the grindability was reached. In addition, no influence of stabilization on the comminution progress itself was found. If Al However, due to increasing particle–particle interactions for particle sizes below 1 μm stabilization is necessary to prevent an increase in viscosity and a resulting increase in pressure in the mill. Furthermore, without a stabilization reagglomeration phenomena in the product suspension lead to depositions in the plumbing system and to a choking of the sieve cartridge. The rheology of the product suspension can be adjusted to a desired value by tailoring the particle interactions. solid mass concentration (–) grinding media diameter (m) energy during comminution time specific energy (kJ kg specific energy including the grinding media wear (kJ kg energy related to the grinding chamber volume (J cm mass of the grinding media (kg) grinding media wear (kg) product mass (kg) revolutions per minute (min power input at time stress number (–) stress energy (kJ kg stress energy of the grinding media (N m) comminution time (s) stirrer tip speed (m/s) grinding chamber volume median particle size of the product suspension (m) diameter of a product particle (m) filling ratio of the grinding media (–) density of the grinding media (kg/m The financial support for the joint research project (Peu 427/3-2 and Schw 233/8-2) by the Deutsche For Schungsgemeinschaft (DFG) is gratefully acknowledged.