On 11 February 2014, a considerable volume (0.82 to 1.29 × 106 m3) of unstable and hot rocks detached from the lower–eastern flank of the New Southeast Crater (NSEC) at Mt. Etna, producing a pyroclastic density current (PDC). This event was by far the most extensive ever recorded at Mt. Etna since 1999 and has attracted the attention of the scientific community and civil protection to this type of volcanic phenomena, usually occurring without any clear volcanological precursor and especially toward the mechanisms which led to the crater collapse, the PDC flow dynamics and the related volcanic hazard. We present here the results of the investigation carried out on the 11 February 2014 collapse and PDC events; data were obtained through a multidisciplinary approach which includes the analysis of photograph, images from visible and thermal surveillance cameras, and the detailed stratigraphic, textural and petrographic investigations of the PDC deposits. Results suggest that the collapse and consequent PDC was the result of a progressive thermal and mechanical weakening of the cone by repeated surges of magma passing through it during the eruptive activity prior to the 11 February 2014 events, as well as pervasive heating and corrosion by volcanic gas. The collapse of the lower portion of the NSEC was followed by the formation of a relatively hot (up to 750 °C) dense flow which travelled about 2.3 km from the source, stopping shortly after the break of the slope and emplacing the main body of the deposit which ranges between 0.39 and 0.92 × 106 m3. This flow was accompanied a relatively hot cloud of fine ash that dispersed over a wider area.
                  The results presented may contribute to the understanding of this very complex type of volcanic phenomena at Mt. Etna and in similar volcanic settings of the world. In addition, results will lay the basis for the modeling of crater collapse and relative PDC events and consequently for the planning of hazard assessment strategies aimed at reducing the potential risks to scientists and tens of thousands of tourists visiting Etna's summit areas every year.Pyroclastic density currents (PDCs) are hot flows of ash, gas and coarse volcanic debris that can race down slopes at speeds as great as 100 m/s, travel 10 to 30 km from the vent, destroying nearly everything in their path (e.g., Volcanoes fed by mafic magmas were considered less prone to produce PDCs; this is because of the chemical and physical properties of these magmas, as well as eruptive dynamics resulting in different volcanic manifestations, which are usually less intensely explosive than those occurring on volcanoes fed by silicic magmas. However, over the last decades, deposits ascribable to PDCs have been recognized down to low elevations on the flanks of several basaltic volcanoes. They formed mostly by the collapse of a crater rim ( At Mt. Etna, in southern Italy ( More recently, the rapid growth of the SEC since 2006 and of the New Southeast Crater since 2011 (NSEC; Most of these events have not received proper attention in the past. Access problems (e.g. risk due to potential repeating of similar events, extreme weather conditions and presence of ice/snow on the ground, tephra and/or lava deposits burying the volcaniclastic deposits shortly after their emplacement) often prevented to map these deposits, preventing any description of the stratigraphic units, and collection of samples for textural and compositional analyses. The most impressive PDC event at Etna thus far occurred on 11 February 2014 ( In this paper, we investigate the 11 February 2014 PDC event by merging INGV–OE video–camera images, images provided by tourists and local residents with detailed stratigraphic, textural, and petrographic studies of the PDC deposits. This is the first case in which a detailed description of PDC at Etna is provided via the fixed monitoring camera network, coupled with the estimation of its temperature and the characterization of the emplaced deposits. This multidisciplinary approach allowed to hypothesize the possible source and to get clues on the triggering mechanisms of 11 February 2014–like PDCs, and their flow dynamics. Our results may improve the hazards assessment from this type of events at Etna, thus reducing the potential risks to scientists and tourists visiting the summit area of the volcano. The experience gathered on Etna may help in defining the hazards connected to this type of events also in other geological and geographical contexts. The NSEC, is a composite cone born on the east flank of the South–East Crater in 2011, which has rapidly grown during 46 paroxysmal eruptive episodes between 2011 and late–2013 ( As of early 10 February 2014, several effusive vents continued to be active on the lower eastern flank of the NSEC. Volcanic activity was prevalently effusive with minor vapor and ash emissions from a vent located at a hundred meters below the eastern rim of the crater. Below the eastern crater rim of the NSEC cone, an incandescent spot appeared where a high–temperature fumarole was previously located ( In the night of 10th February, the Strombolian activity at the summit of the NSEC was the most intense since 21 January and took place from two vents inside the NSEC crater. Conversely, the rate of lava effusion was lower than during the previous days with active lava lobes extended <1 km from the vent. The NSEC cone was also characterized by high temperature fumaroles and pervaded by a system of fractures producing a strong thermal anomaly clearly visible from the thermal images recorded by EMCT ( In the early morning of 11 February, the system of incandescent fractures was also photographed by a tourist ( Shortly after (06:07:10 GMT), a reddish–brown cloud was observed to expand rapidly over the NSEC cone and move along the VdB in the form of a hot flow (thermal images from EMCT camera; The flow stopped after the break–in slope attaining a distance of 2.3 km from the source ( Visible and thermal images taken on 11 February from Mt. Zoccolaro and Serraccozzo, located respectively on the southern and northern crests of the VdB ( The volume of the landslide detachment zone was then calculated using a Digital elevation model (DEM) provided in 2014 ( The second one is the natural neighbor, which finds the closest subset of input samples to a query point and applies weights to them based on proportionate areas to interpolate a value ( The volume of the main PDC deposit was estimated assuming that its thickening and emplacement are controlled by the slope and roughness of the pre–existing topography ( During the campaign, we also surveyed and sampled the volcanic products associated to the 11 February 2014 event. During the fieldwork, the main PDC deposit and the deposit emplaced after the red–brown ash-cloud billowed from the PDC ( We performed particles shape analysis on three samples from the main body of the deposit and on the red–brown layer. The morphological analysis of particles forming representative samples was carried out on randomly selected clasts from the −5Φ (32 mm) to −1Φ (2 mm) size fractions. High–resolution 2D digital images (24 megapixels) were acquired with a digital camera, and shape parameters were calculated on the binarized projected outline of each particle using the ImageJ freeware ( External characteristics and physical properties of the ash–size fraction were analyzed under a stereomicroscope. About 100 clasts for each sample from 1Φ and 2Φ (0.5–0.250 mm) grain–size fractions were randomly chosen and mounted on glass slides for SEM observations with a Zeiss EVO MA 10 scanning electron microscope (SEM) at INGV–PI. Then the same samples were embedded in epoxy resin and prepared in thin sections for micro–textural studies. The 11 February 2014 event deposit consists of a lobate body which extends down to 2.3 km from the base of the landslide scar and terminates at 1900 m elevation, corresponding to the bottom of the steep western wall of the VdB between Mt. Simone and Mt. Centenari ( Section 5 (2249 m a.s.l.; The deposit is in general poorly sorted with crude internal bedding and contains an abundant matrix of medium to fine ash increasing in abundance toward the base. Three main units can be distinguished on the basis of color, grain–size and component which produce the crude layering ( The lowermost Unit 1 (sample FC5; Intermediate Unit 2 (sample FC6; The uppermost Unit 3 (sample FC7; On the whole, Units 1 to 3 represent the main body of the 11 February 2014 PDC; the extent of the deposit was estimated in ~0.37 km The deposit emplaced by the dense hot ash cloud that billowed from the main flow of 11 February 2014, named Unit 4 (sample FC1 and FC2; The volume of the PDC deposit ranges from minimum to maximum values of 0.39 and 0.92 × 10 Components forming the 11 February 2014 main PDC deposits comprise: i) dark gray, very irregular fragments, centimeters to decimeters in size, rarely with smoothed and variably abraded surfaces; ii) coarse scoriaceous lapilli and bombs; iii) gray, dense lava blocks and chips with blocky and angular external morphologies; iii) reddish–orange, variably altered and abraded scoriaceous clasts. Components of the ash matrix comprise three main type of fragments distinguishable for their external morphologies, i.e. blocky, spongy and fluidal particles. These are all moderately to incipiently vesicular ( The blocky particles are the most abundant, constituting 52 to 65% of the ash matrix; they are dense to incipiently vesicular and commonly abraded and broken. Most blocky particles are reddish to orange in color. Particle rims are often lined by feathery oxides and/or crystallites of pyroxenes ( The spongy particles constitute 10–27% of the ash matrix; particles are shiny black to reddish in color, moderately vesicular, with mostly spherical vesicles. The fluidal particles represent 18–31% of the ash matrix; fluidal particles are mostly shiny black, incipiently vesicular, often elongated with some of them exhibiting fusiform morphology ( The external surfaces of the spongy and fluidal particles are smooth, often with cracks and wrinkles and show considerably less adhering dust if compared to the blocky particles. Despite their external morphologies, the texture of the groundmass ash particles is highly variable and ranges from microlite–poor ( Analysis of ash–grained particle morphologies was performed to test if the different shapes of particles forming the deposit could be related to different behavior in the clast interaction within the different units of the PDC. In the particle shape analysis, we assume that values of Solidity (S), Aspect Ratio (AR) and Circularity (C) approximating to 1 correspond to equiaxial, rounded particles. On volcanic materials this is the result of processes of comminution and surface abrasion, whereas relatively low values of S and C and high values of AR indicate complex and elongated shapes more typical of unbroken and pristine juvenile particles. Results of clast shape analysis are shown in In general, for the three stratigraphic units the shape descriptors show variable values with C ranging from 0.46 to 0.83 (mean = 0.70; st.dev. = 0.07), A/R that varies from ca. 1 to 2.8 (mean = 1.39; st.dev. = 0.26) and S that varies from 0.78 to 0.97 (mean = 0.93; st.dev. 0.03). There are neither any evident variations of the shape descriptors between the different units, nor are there between the different grain–size classes within each single unit. Collapse of small portions of the volcanic cones at Etna's summit and the generation PDC have been observed several times during eruptive periods, but the 11 February 2014 event was by far the largest ever recorded and potentially the most hazardous. Possible triggers of PDCs at Etna are multiple; for example, the origin of the 16 November 2006 event that occurred during an episode of strong Strombolian activity ( The triggering mechanisms for the 11 February 2014 event were probably rather complex as well, and consisted of a combination of factors leading to the general gravitational instability of the flank of the NSEC cone. Differently from past collapse, PDC–producing events, which mostly occurred during paroxysmal episodes, the 11 February 2014 collapse took place in a period of relatively quiet activity, characterized by mild Strombolian explosions and low–rate lava effusion ( At the time of collapse, the NSEC cone consisted of quite compacted and possibly sintered to partially welded scoria and lapilli deposits, emplaced following the powerful Strombolian and lava fountaining activity which took place during the 46 paroxysms occurred between 2011 and 2013 ( In this structural context, the repeated opening of various eruptive vents right prior the 11 February 2014 over the east side of the NSEC cone, with the consequent conspicuous and incessant passage of magma, gas and heat inside the cone, presumably led to extensive fracturing and mechanical weakening of the cone itself, making it susceptible to subsequent destabilization. The final trigger of the NSEC cone collapse may have been linked to the final intrusion and accommodation of magma in the fissure system feeding the vents on the cone's flanks. Magma propagation and dilation may have increased the compression on rocks forming the cone, driven its flanks outward and finally destabilized the whole structure. In particular, the appearance of new vents on the upper east flank of the cone, which emitted gas and periodically minor amounts of ash on 10 February, followed by the opening of new effusive vents high on the same flank during the following night, may indicate the increasing magma movement from the main conduit within the cone toward its eastern flank. We infer, therefore, that the presence of glowing fractures ( The study of facies architecture, sedimentological features and textural and component analysis of 11 February 2014 PDC deposits provides clues into flow mechanisms and temperature. The deposit is composed by a fine grained basal ash layer (Unit 1–2) with alignment of cm–sized lapilli overlain by a massive, upper part composed of bombs and angular blocks set in a matrix (Unit 3). These characteristics are analogous to those described for small volume, channelized PDC deposits generated at Stromboli volcano after the large 1930 eruption, when syn–eruptive gravitational collapse of hot pyroclastic deposits rapidly accumulated over the steep slopes of the volcano generated PDCs ( The presence of a similar architecture can give us information on the dynamics of the 11 February 2014 flow. According to the model proposed by At the same time, we observe that the grain–size distributions (GDS) of all 4 units forming the 11 February 2014 PDC deposit have the same mode at 3Φ. Even the tail (coarser than 2Φ) is very similar. Also interesting is the extent of the dilute ash cloud and dense flow, which are the same. This suggests that the dilute flow motion was driven by the dense basal layer. This has been seen experimentally ( In this framework and to classify the 11 February 2014 flow, we estimated the T Abrasion and comminution of particles forming a PDC during transport have been commonly recognized as a potential source for the production of ash and as a cause of increasing the effective runout and mobility of the PDC ( The study of the nature and texture of particles forming PDC deposits can also yield information on the temperature of the flow. In a deposit like the one here discussed, it is not easy to distinguish which components are “juvenile”, e.g. relatively hot and erupted just before the collapse, and which are accessory and accidental lithics constituting the cone structure or eroded from the substrate during the flow. As mentioned above, the components forming the Unit 3 comprise fresh lava clinkers and bombs, angular lava clasts and altered fragments. While the former clearly indicate that portions of the active lava flows and feeder conduits were involved in the collapse of the NSEC flank, the features of angular clasts (i.e. their sharp edges) and “old” altered material imply that a portion of the rocks involved in the initial failure (the superficial portions of the cone's flank) was not hot enough to behave in a plastic manner. Unlike in other basaltic PDC deposits, where syn–eruptive and post–depositional plastic deformation are common (e.g. in the 1930 PDC deposits of Stromboli; We have attempted to estimate also the temperature of the dense ash cloud that rose from the main flow. This is significant, because if the cloud was relatively hot, the volcanic risk associated with events such as that of 11 February 2014, would affect an area much larger than those affected by the main PDC. However, textural and micro–textural analysis of ash particles forming the Unit 4 (ash cloud) revealed a quite complex thermal history. These show textures similar to those developed during experimental reheating of Etnean natural basaltic ash at high temperatures, as shown by Until recently, scarce attention has been given to pyroclastic flows at Etna (except for the well–documented and published event of 16 November 2006). These were not considered among the most hazardous volcanic phenomena on this volcano and consequently the assessment of their potential hazard has thus far been largely underestimated. The cone collapse and consequent PDC event of 11 February 2014 has forcibly drawn the attention of the scientific community and the national Civil Protection authorities toward this type of phenomenon and has promoted the detailed study of deposit to gain insights into possible triggers, flow dynamics and hazard assessment strategy. The hazard posed by cone collapses and consequent PDCs largely derives by the fact that they are largely unpredictable, very fast, involve very hot materials, and can reach considerable distances from the source. A minor hazard that should be not underestimated is the possible formation of a hot, ash–grained billowing cloud, which can hit larger areas well beyond the main body of the PDC. Unfortunately, as in other geological contexts, at Etna it is very difficult to forecast if and when the collapse of a volcanic cone will occur, if this collapse will produce a pyroclastic flow, and in this case, how big the PDC will be, because there are no clear precursors for such type of volcanic manifestations. The results of our investigation on the event of 11 February 2014 shed light on the boundary conditions that led to the collapse of the NSEC cone and the resulting pyroclastic flow: a) a weak volcanic cone, of considerable size, rapidly built on the steep wall of the VdB depression; b) the presence of mild to intense Strombolian explosive activity and active lava flows capable of overloading and oversteepening of the summit portion and flanks of the volcano prior the collapse; c) an active system of shifting effusive vents and fractures which mechanically and thermally weakened the cone, making it susceptible to the ensuing collapse; d) the movement of a body of magma/gas that mechanically pushed the slope beyond the stability condition and triggers the final destabilization of the cone. A valid instrument to mitigate the volcanic risk deriving from abrupt phenomena like collapses of volcanic cones is monitoring their slopes by video–thermal camera and geophysical networks integrated by satellite observations. This is essential for “feeling the pulse and the heat” of the volcanic edifice and detect possible conditions leading to potential instability. The study of the 11 February 2014 pyroclastic density current at Etna provides insights into the possible eruptive dynamics and processes triggering this category of volcanic events at Etna. Volcanological observations, stratigraphic study of deposits and textural analyses on erupted products indicate that the collapse of the lower portion of the New Southeast Crater cone was followed by the formation of a relatively hot and turbulent flow emplacing the main body of the deposit. This flow was surrounded and accompanied by a more fluidized and ash–rich portion which emplaced the fine–grained basal part of the PDC deposit and generated a relatively hot cloud of fine ash that dispersed over a wider area. Results of textural and micro–textural analyses point to a relatively high and potentially lethal – temperature of the main body of the flow, possibly up to 750 °C. The collapse and ensuing PDC was likely a result of the progressive weakening of the cone by repeated surges of magma passing through its steep eastern flank during several weeks of eruptive activity prior to the 11 February 2014 events, as well as pervasive heating and corrosion by volcanic gas. An increase in magma transfer from the cone's main conduit toward the active effusive vents on its flank may have been the ultimate trigger of the collapse. The data presented here are intended to contribute to the assessment of the potential hazard from pyroclastic density currents at Etna and lay the basis for the simulation of this type of volcanic manifestation including their propagation around the summit of the volcano. This will hopefully aid with reducing the potential risks to scientists and tens of thousands of tourists visiting Etna's summit area and upper slopes every year, but also be useful for hazard evaluation in similar volcanic settings elsewhere on this planet. We are strongly indebted to Gianfranco Lombardi (Soccorso Alpino della Guardia di Finanza di Nicolosi, Catania) and Francesco Ciancitto for support during the September 2016 field survey in VdB. Special acknowledgements are due to the helicopter pilots of the 15° Stormo dell'Aeronautica Militare, which allowed INGV–OE to obtain aerial photography of the summit area of Etna in the wake of the 11 February 2014 events. Our warmest thanks also go to Max Berger, Carmen Cutuli and Toti Domina who provided precious photographs for the narrative and better understanding of these events. Finally, we are deeply indebted with all our INGV colleagues who participated to the monitoring activity and surveillance of Etna in the weeks before, during and after the 11 February 2014 PDC emplacement. A special thanks to the INGV staff in charge of the surveillance videocamera network. This work was partially funded by the Italian “Dipartimento della Protezione Civile” in the frame of the INGV 2012-2021 Agreement with