Introduction and Aims
                  Several studies have reported that angiopoietin-like protein 2 (Angptl2) is expressed abundantly in adipocytes and is associated with adipose tissue inflammation. In the present study, we found that osteoblasts and mesenchymal stem cells also expressed Angptl2 at high levels. The aim of this study was to understand the role of Angptl2 in osteoblastic cell differentiation.
               
                  Methods
                  Angptl2 expression was examined during osteoblast and adipocyte differentiation. The role of Angptl2 on cell differentiation and associated signaling was analyzed by gene knockdown using Angptl2 small interfering ribonucleic acid (siRNA).
               
                  Results
                  Angptl2 was highly expressed in MC3T3-E1 cells, ST2 cells and primary osteoblasts, but not in RAW264 cells. Inhibition of Angptl2 expression using siRNA markedly inhibited alkaline phosphatase (ALP) expression and osteoblastic differentiation in MC3T3-E1, ST2 cells and primary osteoblasts. Angptl2 siRNA also inhibited adipocyte differentiation in ST2 cells. Treatment of MC3T3-E1 cells with Angptl2 siRNA led to the down-regulation of the activities of several cell signaling pathways, including extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), Jun amino-terminal kinase (JNK), Akt, and nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) signals. It also down-regulated the expression of Osterix, but not that of runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2), suggesting that Angptl2 is a positive activator of Osterix and its down-stream signals. Treatment of MC3T3-E1 cells with anti-Angptl2 antibodies suppressed ALP gene expression. In addition, treatment of Angptl2 siRNA-treated cells with culture supernatants of normal MC3T3-E1 cells restored ALP gene expression, indicating that Angptl2 acts in an autocrine manner.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The results suggest that Angptl2 is an autocrine positive regulator of cell differentiation. Thus, it is suggested that Angptl2 regulates not only adipose tissue metabolism but also bone metabolism.Angiopoietin-like protein 2 (Angptl2) has been reported to be abundantly expressed in adipose tissue, especially under obese conditions, and to be associated with adipose tissue inflammation We recently found that Angptl2 was also expressed in osteoblastic cells at relatively high levels, and that its expression level was almost compatible with that in adipocytes at both the gene and protein levels. This observation may suggest that this molecule has a distinct role in mineralized tissue physiology, as this gene was also reported to be highly expressed in bone tissue according to a reported data base ( Murine calvaria-derived osteoblastic cell lines MC3T3-E1, murine macrophage cell lines RAW264, murine pre-adipocytes cell lines 3T3-L1 and murine bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cell lines ST2 were used in this study. MC3T3-E1, RAW264, and ST2 were obtained from Riken Cell bank (Tsukuba, Japan), while 3T3-L1 was obtained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC; Rockville, MA). MC3T3-E1 cells were maintained in α-modification of Eagle's Minimum Essential Medium (α-MEM) (Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Biowest, FL), while RAW264 cells were maintained in MEM medium (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) containing 10% FBS and 0.1 Human recombinant tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) was obtained from Wako (Osaka, Japan). MC3T3-E1 cells were differentiated into mature osteoblasts as described previously 3T3-L1 cells were differentiated into adipocytes as described previously Angptl2 siRNA and control RNA were purchased from Invitrogen (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Two types of Angptl2 siRNA were used. The sequences of these RNAs were as follows; Angptl2 siRNA #1 (sense 5´-CCCGACAAGUGCACCUACACUUUCA-3´, antisense 5´-UGAAAGUGUAGGUGCACUUGUCGGG-3´), #2 (sense 5´-GCUGACGAACCAAGGCAACUACAAA-3´, antisense 5´-UUUGUAGUUGCCUUGGUUCGUCAGC-3´). Angptl2 siRNA and control RNA were injected using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Transfection efficiency was confirmed at both gene expression and protein level by real time polymerase chain reaction (real time PCR) and Western immunoblotting. Total RNA was isolated using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen), followed by the construction of complementary deoxyribonucleic acid (cDNA) using Prime Script RT Master Mix (Takara Bio, Shiga, Japan) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Real time PCR was performed using KAPA SYBR (Kapa Biosystems, Roche Sequencing, Pleasanton, CA) as fluorescent dye according to the manufacturer's instructions. The reaction and subsequent analysis were performed using Step One Plus (Life Technologies, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data are expressed as relative expression levels of target genes against those of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH; internal control). The primers used in this study were as follows; Angptl2 (5′- GGAGGTTGGACTGTCATCCAGAG -3′ for forward primer, 5′-GCCTTGGTTCGTCAGCCAGTA-3′ for reverse primer): ALP (5´-GTTGCCAAGCTGGGAAGAACAC-3´ for forward primer, 5´-CCCACCCCGCTATTCCAAAC-3´ for reverse primer): runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2) (5´-CCCAGCCACCTTTACCTACA-3´ for forward primer, 5´-TATGGAGTGCTGCTGGTCTG-3´ for reverse primer): Osterix (5´-AGAGGTTCACTCGCTCTGACGA-3´ for forward primer, 5´-TTGCTCAAGTGGTCGCTTCTG-3´ for reverse primer): matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) (5´-GCCCTGGAACTCACACGACA-3´ for forward primer, 5´-TTGGAAACTCACACGCCAGAAG-3´ for reverse primer): adaptor protein 2 (AP2) (5´-GTCACCATCCGGTCAGAGAGTAC-3´ for forward primer, 5´-TCGTCTGCGGTGATTTCATC-3´ for reverse primer): GAPDH (5´-TGTGTCCGTCGTGGATCTGA-3´ for forward primer, 5´-TTGCTGTTGAAGTCGCAGGAG-3´ for reverse primer) Either cell lysate or culture supernatant was used for Western immunoblot analysis. Supernatants were obtained following centrifugation of the culture medium for 5 Alkaline phosphatase staining of the cells was performed by using TRAP/ALP staining kit (Wako) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Von Kossa staining of the cells was performed as described previously Mineralized nodule formation in primary mouse osteoblast cultures was evaluated by staining the nodule using alizarin-red solution contained in commercially available mineralization kit (PG Research, Tokyo, Japan) according to the manufacture's protocol 14 The method for Oil Red O staining of the cells followed the protocol as described previously Cell proliferation assay was performed by direct cell counting using Automatic Cell Counter (Bio-Rad Laboratories) according to the supplier's instructions. All experiments were performed at least in triplicate. Data are expressed as the mean We first confirmed Angptl2 expression at both the gene and protein level in RAW264 macrophages, RAW264 osteoclasts, MC3T3-E1 pre-osteoblasts and 3T3-L1 adipocytes. As shown in Interestingly, Angptl2 expression patterns during cell differentiation appeared similar to that of ALP, which is an early osteoblastic marker, but not to those of Runx2 and Osterix, whose expression gradually increased during differentiation ( Interestingly, Angptl2 expression patterns during cell differentiation appeared similar to that of ALP, which is an early osteoblastic marker, but not to those of Runx2 and Osterix, whose expression gradually increased during differentiation (Supplementary Fig. 1A). In addition, TNF-α treatment down-regulated Runx, Osterix and ALP expression (Supplementary Fig. 1B). Similar observations were seen when the cells were treated with the bacterial endotoxin, LPS (Supplementary Fig. 1C). Since Angptl2 appeared to be abundantly expressed in osteoblastic cells like adipocytes and its expression level gradually decreased during differentiation, we were interested in elucidating the role of Angptl2 in osteoblastic differentiation. Therefore, we used Angptl2 siRNA to knock down its expression. As indicated in Since MC3T3-E1 cells are believed to be more committed to osteoblastic differentiation, we then used a more undifferentiated cell line to further elucidate the role of Angptl2 for cell differentiation. We, therefore, used ST2 cells as the mesenchymal stem cell line, and analyzed Angptl2 expression levels during adipocyte differentiation. As in We next analyzed Angptl2 expression during osteoblastic differentiation when the cells were treated with an osteoblastic differentiation medium. As in Since Angptl2 appeared to be a positive regulator of osteoblastic differentiation, we were interested in understanding the underlying mechanisms at the signaling level. First, we intended to understand whether Osterix or Runx2, two well-known transcription factors important for osteoblastic differentiation, are regulated by Angptl2. As shown in Since Angptl2 appeared to be a positive regulator of osteoblastic differentiation, we were interested in understanding the underlying mechanisms at the signaling level. First, we intended to understand whether Osterix or Runx2, two well-known transcription factors important for osteoblastic differentiation, are regulated by Angptl2. As shown in To see the effects of Angptl2 gene knock-down on reduced ALP expression in normal primary osteoblast, we utilized mouse primary osteoblasts and repeated the same experiments. We first checked the basal expression level of Angptl2 gene and compared its expression level with that in MC3T3-E1 and ST2, and found that basal expression level of Angptl2 in primary osteoblast was also high ( Angptl2 is a secreted protein belonging to the angiopoietin-like family, and it is reported to exert several biological processes including angiogenesis, and induction of inflammation Angptl2 is a secreted protein belonging to the angiopoietin-like family, and it is reported to exert several biological processes including angiogenesis, and induction of inflammation These results suggest that expression is relatively higher in bone tissue, at least osteoblasts, under normal physiological conditions. However, once the inflammation is induced, its expression was markedly down-regulated, affecting normal mineralized tissue turn over, as loss of function of Angptl2 resulted in decreased ALP expression and subsequent mineralization. Interestingly, knocking down Angptl2 resulted in Osterix down-regulation, while Runx2 expression was unaffected ( These results suggest that expression is relatively higher in bone tissue, at least osteoblasts, under normal physiological conditions. However, once the inflammation is induced, its expression was markedly down-regulated, affecting normal mineralized tissue turn over, as loss of function of Angptl2 resulted in decreased ALP expression and subsequent mineralization. Interestingly, knocking down Angptl2 resulted in Osterix down-regulation, while Runx2 expression was unaffected ( In this study, we revealed that Angptl2 acts as an autocrine regulator of osteoblastic differentiation as inhibition of Angptl2 by antibodies abolished ALP activity ( In this study, we revealed that Angptl2 acts as an autocrine regulator of osteoblastic differentiation as inhibition of Angptl2 by antibodies abolished ALP activity ( Additionally, although not fully confirmed yet, integrin α5β1 has been suggested as a putative receptor for Angptl2 Additionally, although not fully confirmed yet, integrin α5β1 has been suggested as a putative receptor for Angptl2 In this study, we also obtained similar observations when more undifferentiated ST2 cells were used. In ST2 cells, it appeared Angptl2 promoted both adipocyte and osteoblast differentiation under each promoting condition ( Finally, to confirm the effects of Angptl2 as positive regulator of osteoblast differentiation, we utilized normal primary osteoblasts derived from mouse calvaria, and supportive results of our initial observations using immortalized cells were obtained, in which treatment of the cells with Angptl2 siRNA resulted in ALP suppression as well as reduced mineralization. We, therefore, conclude that Angptl2 is involved in osteoblast differentiation ( In this study, we found that Angptl2 is a positive regulator of osteoblastic differentiation and its expression was suppressed by inflammatory stimuli. Therefore, further understanding at the cell signaling level, including confirmation of the specific cell surface receptors involved, is helpful for fully understanding the physiological role of this molecule and its clinical use. The following are the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at AT designed the study under the supervision of FN. AT, TF, TS, MI, KY, and MT carried out the experiments. AT and FN analyzed the data and wrote the manuscript. EM and TS critically reviewed the study and gave the necessary suggestions. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript. This work was supported by Grant-in-Aid from None of the authors have potential conflict of interest to disclose. We would like to thank Takanori Nakamura, Megumi Kiyota, and other staff for their valuable technical assistance at The Research Support Center, Research Center for Human Disease Modeling, Kyushu University Graduate School of Medical Sciences.