Synthetic effect between sulfate minerals (gypsum) and iron oxide (hematite) on the anaerobic transformation of organic substance was investigated in the current study. The results showed that gypsum was completely decomposed while hematite was partially reduced. The mineral phase analysis results showed that FeS and CaCO3 was the major mineralization product. Methane generation process was inhibited and inorganic carbon contents in the precipitates were enhanced compared to the control without hematite and gypsum. The inorganic carbon content increased with the increasing of hematite dosages. Co-addition of sulfate minerals and iron oxide would have a potential application prospect in the carbon sequestration area and reduction of the greenhouse gas release. The results would also reveal the role of inorganic mineral in the global carbon cycle.Under anaerobic condition microbial methanogenic process was a pathway for carbon transformation. Methane is one of the main greenhouse gases and the greenhouse effect of CH Sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB) process had been extensively used in the treatment of acid mine drainage and bioremediation of organic pollutants contaminated sites ( SRB accelerates the decomposition of organic pollutants, while the metabolite product of H Anaerobic sludge from Wangxiaoying sewage treatment plant was used to obtain enriched SRB inoculums. Enriched MPB inoculums were achieved using the anaerobic granular sludge in Fengyuan chemical plant. Gypsum was collected the mineral plant in DingYuan, Anhui province. Gypsum was ground and dilute acid was added to remove the carbonate. Artistically synthetic hematite (Fe 150 CH Compared to control (Y1), the methane that was produced in Group Y5 with gypsum addition was reduced significantly by approximately 40.2% (  The total production of H As shown in Various forms of carbon in each group were determined and shown in 164.7 Soluble TIC in control group and Group Y5 were 395.0 and 345.2 TOC in the solid phase was mainly microorganisms and their metabolic products. Solid organic carbon content in control group was only 10.1 The pH values in Groups Y1 and Y6 increased to 7.5, while it was 7.0 in other groups. It was observed that significant fluctuation of Fe The concentration of sulfate in Group Y1 was maintained at 500 It was shown from the variation of iron ion concentration that the reduction of hematite was earlier in the groups with hematite and gypsum than that of gypsum in the anaerobic biochemical reaction process. This agreed well with the redox potential for Fe SEM analysis showed that bacteria and some flocculent substances were observed in control Group Y1 ( The FE-SEM images for solids show similar characteristics in other experimental groups with minerals addition. There were lots of microbial cells with obvious morphological characteristics as well as many lamellar iron sulfide and columnar carbonate minerals ( Since both sulfate minerals and iron oxide widely exist in nature, their combination effect would effectively suppress the methanogenic process. On the other hand, In the Groups of Y2–Y5, the concentration of sulfate released from gypsum arrived at 4500–5000 Dosing iron oxide and sulfate mineral simultaneously can improve the conversion rate of organic substrates and reduce methane production rate. Such process was mainly decided by the reaction kinetics but not the thermodynamic. The main products of anaerobic microbial mineralization are calcite and iron sulfide, and lack of siderite. Iron oxide could precipitate and effectively eliminate the negative impact of S The authors wish to thank the Natural Science Foundation of China (41130206 and 41102214), Special Program for Key Basic Research of the Ministry of Science and Technology, China (2011CB411904) for the support of this study. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 