An experimental apparatus has been developed in order to perform tests of primary fragmentation of solid fuels under severe heating conditions (up to 2200K and 12bar). Particles are laid on the strip and pyrolyzed under inert conditions, fragments are recovered and analyzed by a laser granulometer to assess the fragmentation propensity of the fuel.
                  Experiments have been carried out at temperatures between 1400K and 1900K, heating rate of 5000K/s, pressure in the range 1–12bar. Four different coals have been studied: Gracem, Venezuelan, Omsky, and Kleincopje, classified respectively as anthracite, high and medium volatile bituminous coals.
                  Results show that primary fragmentation at high heating rate and high temperature may result in the formation of relatively coarse fragments and sometimes in a multitude of fines. The probability of fragmentation and the propensity to form coarse versus small fragments varies from coal to coal. For a given coal fragmentation increases monotonously with temperature, whereas the effect of pressure is nonmonotonous.
                  The role of different chemico-physical properties of coals on the pattern and the extent of primary fragmentation is discussed, in particular volatile matter content, ash melting point, rigidity and porosity of the carbon structure and swelling index.Combustion and/or gasification of solid fuels is often associated with the occurrence of particle comminution phenomena: primary fragmentation, secondary fragmentation, fragmentation by percolation and attrition which occur in series or in parallel with each other or with combustion. Primary fragmentation takes place during particles heating up and devolatilization as a consequence of build up of internal overpressures associated with volatile matter release and, possibly, thermal shock Previous studies have documented primary fragmentation of solid fuels under fluidized bed conditions, therefore at temperatures of 1100–1200 Very limited information is available in the literature on primary fragmentation of solid fuels under conditions relevant to pulverized combustion, coal–water combustion, oxy-fuel combustion The present paper attempts to investigate primary fragmentation of coal particles under such severe heating conditions. To this end a special experimental device has been set up in order to perform primary fragmentation experiments at temperatures up to 2500 Four coals have been used in the experiments, namely Gracem, Omsky, Venezuelan and Kleincopje, classified as anthracite, medium and high volatile bituminous coals. Properties of these coals are reported in Notably coals were ground and sieved to obtain a nominal size cut of 850–1180 The experimental apparatus used is a pressurized version of an heated strip reactor (HSR) detailed in a previous paper In each test a batch of coal particles of given nominal size is laid on the strip. The chamber is preliminarily evacuated by air and then pressurized with nitrogen. Particles heat up by physical contact with the strip and by thermal radiation from the semispherical vessel. A two color LAND Infrared pyrometer and a near infrared (1.5–5 Tests have been carried out at pressure in the range 1–12 A Laser Light Scattering particle size analyzer, Malvern Instruments Mastersizer 2000, for the measurement of emulsions, suspensions and dry powders, has been used to measure the volumetric particle size distribution of samples before and after the tests in the heated strip apparatus. This instrument allows to measure particle sizes ranging from 0.02 Heat treatment in the HSR changes the particle size distribution of the sample basically in two ways, which are exemplified in the probability density function curves (PDF) of The particles size distributions obtained from the particle size analyzer have been worked out as follows. Assuming that particles used for the experiments are spherical in shape and uniform in size, the following relationship holds between the total volume of the sample before and after the test: Accordingly the particle multiplication factor can be calculated as: The total number of particles that undergo fragmentation can be calculated as Notably the number fractions Notably the procedure described for the calculation of  Evidence of fragmentation has been found for all the coals tested. Results of the elaboration of particle size distribution curves obtained upon heat treatment of all coals at 1400 Analysis of The effect of temperature and pressure during heat treatment on the extent of primary fragmentation has been extensively investigated in the case of Gracem. This choice was made in order to limit the contribution of melting and sintering at high temperature, since this coal had the lowest ash content among the coals tested. The corresponding PDF curves are reported in  Experiments showed that upon heating at high heating rate and high temperature primary fragmentation is extensive and can produce a population of small particles as well as a multitude of fines. The phenomenon is however more or less pronounced depending on coal type, temperature and pressure. In the following we will try to discuss the role of some chemico-physical properties of coal on the propensity to undergo primary fragmentation, in particular: volatile matter, carbon structure, mineral matter, swelling ratio. On this basis we will suggest a tentative interpretation of the experimental behavior of the four coals investigated and the observed effects of pressure. Volatile matter content is of course the first property of a coal that one might expect to play an important role in primary fragmentation, because a large and abrupt release of volatiles during pyrolysis should result in large internal overpressure, unless a very open porous structure is present that facilitates volatiles escape. Among the coals investigated Venezuelan has the highest volatile matter: consistently it exhibited the maximum value of If we now focus on the structure of coal, we expect both the rigidity and the porosity to be important: rigidity because it determines the mechanical resistance of the structure, porosity because is allows the escape of volatile matter and determines the build up of internal overpressure. As a matter of fact Omsky, whose char porosity is the highest among the fuels investigated, exhibits the smallest propensity to undergo fragmentation. Conversely Venezuelan coal, whose char has the smallest porosity and also the largest volatile matter content, exhibits the highest propensity to fragmentation. Gracem among the coals tested is second in order of probability of fragmentation, moreover the multiplication factor for this coal is very high and the production of fine fragments (<100 It is quite intuitive that melting of the mineral matter included within the solid matrix of coal/char would drastically reduce primary fragmentation. In the present work all coals have been tested at 1400 It is commonly agreed that swelling is closely related with metaplast fluidity. The fluidity of the metaplast of the softening coal, in turn, facilitates bubble transport to the particle surface and helps to release internal overpressure. In this perspective one may expect that swelling limits primary fragmentation by reducing the internal overpressure associated with volatiles release. However it must also be considered that swollen chars generally have a cenospheric type structure, with thin and weak walls, easy to break under the effect of additional stress. For these reasons it is nonpossible to guess a priori if a swelling coal should be more or less subject to primary fragmentation than a nonswelling coal. In fact two out of the four coals investigated in the present work underwent swelling, namely Venezuelan and Omsky, which resulted the most and the least susceptible to fragmentation. Gracem and Kleincopje have been used also for tests of primary fragmentation at different pressure. Interestingly nonmonotonous trends of The described behavior is apparently contradictory, but it is not surprising. It has been reported in the literature that pressure reduces the total volatile yield up to an apparent limiting value at 10–14 The fragmentation behavior that is established for each coal as a function of temperature and pressure results therefore from the superposition of several and complex phenomena, whose final result is really hard to predict and interpret. Tests of primary fragmentation have been carried out in a novel pressurized heated strip reactor characterized by the possibility to carry out experiments at high heating rates, up to 10000 The main experimental results can be summarized under the following points: Under severe heating conditions two patterns of primary fragmentation have been observed: relatively small fragments originate from the outer shell of the particles as a consequence of thermal stress, while relatively larger fragments originate from the fracture of the inner core as a consequence of internal stresses produced by volatile release. This phenomenology has been encountered for all the coals tested, although the prevalence of the first over the second fragmentation pattern varied among the coals. Two coals, a high and a medium bituminous (Venezuelan and Omsky), underwent swelling followed by fragmentation and their fragmentation produced relatively large fines (>100 Two coals, an anthracite (Gracem) and a medium bituminous coal (Kleincopje) did not undergo extensive swelling and produced a multitude of fines (<100 For a given coal the propensity and the extent of fragmentation increased monotonously with temperature and depended on pressure in a nonmonotonous way. Evidence summarized under point 2 has been explained assuming that the primary cause of fragmentation was internal overpressure. In this case, indeed, the fracture occurs at some inner radial position. Coals with a large volatile matter are particularly susceptible to exhibit this type of behavior. The evidence summarized under point 3 has been explained assuming that fracture occurred at some outer radial position, probably by the action of thermal stress. Large volatile matter content, small porosity and rigid structures seem to favor this type of rupture. Evidence summarized under point 4, may be the consequence of changes in volatile matter yield (which increases with temperature and decreases with pressure) and in swelling ratio (with initially increases and than decreases with pressure). Authors acknowledge ENEL Servizi S.r.L. for its financial support. Moreover authors acknowledge Ing. Nicola Rossi, Dr. Eleonora Melone and Ing. Marco Gazzino of ENEL Servizi S.r.L. for helpful discussions and Mr. Sabatino Russo for his precious help in the experimental set up.