Lead recovery from the nonmetallic portion of exhausted lead-acid batteries, also called sludge, was investigated using an electrohydrometallurgical process. Among 13 aqueous solutions studied in solubility tests, only the following three were chosen for the whole process (leaching and electrowinning steps): tetrafluoroboric acid (200 g/L), glycerol (92 g/L)+sodium hydroxide (120 g/L) and sodium potassium tartrate (150 g/L)+sodium hydroxide (150 g/L). The tetrafluoroboric acid showed an attractive performance as leaching electrolyte due to its low cost and reasonable leaching strength. In the electrowinning process using the solution obtained from the leaching of a desulfated sludge with this acidic electrolyte, compact, adherent and highly pure lead deposits were produced at 250 A/m2. Scanning electron micrographs (SEM) of lead deposits obtained at different current densities in the range of 250–500 A/m2 revealed a marked influence of the current density on the deposit morphology.The annual production of automotive batteries in Brazil is approximately 15 million units, from which ca. 150,000 t of lead can be recovered. With the new Brazilian government regulations The electrohydrometallurgical route comprises a preliminary stage in which the exhausted lead-acid batteries are crushed, followed by a separation into sulfuric acid and the plastic, metallic and nonmetallic portions. The plastic portion is submitted to reprocessing and the metallic portion is remelted. The nonmetallic portion, also called battery sludge, consists of distinct lead compounds, basically metallic lead (Pb), lead dioxide (PbO Most of the works reported in papers and patents concerning lead recovery from exhausted lead-acid batteries start from a sludge with metallic lead and antimony contents of 13% Samples of an industrial sludge provided by Plajax Indústria e Comércio de Plásticos Ltda. (Bauru, SP, Brazil) were investigated. The PbO, PbO The sludge was firstly treated with NaOH in order to convert all PbSO Samples (∼1 g) of the original sludge, as well as pure PbO, PbO After the solubility tests, only the electrolytes tetrafluoroboric acid (200 g/L), glycerol (92 g/L)+sodium hydroxide (120 g/L) and sodium potassium tartrate (150 g/L)+sodium hydroxide (150 g/L) were selected for the leaching tests. Thus, mixtures of the original or desulfated sludge with the mentioned electrolytes were prepared in the concentration of 200 g/L and then stirred for different times. The Pb Firstly, only electrowinning tests using aqueous electrolytes obtained by dissolving analytical grade PbO in the electrolytes tetrafluoroboric acid (200 g/L), glycerol (92 g/L)+sodium hydroxide (120 g/L) and sodium potassium tartrate (100 g/L)+sodium hydroxide (100 g/L) were investigated. These tests were carried out under magnetic stirring in a glass cell of about 600 mL containing three electrodes: a strip from an AISI-304 stainless-steel foil (Acesita) as cathode (15 cm After electrowinning tests using aqueous electrolytes obtained by dissolving analytical grade PbO in the electrolytes tetrafluoroboric acid (200 g/L), glycerol (92 g/L)+sodium hydroxide (120 g/L) and sodium potassium tartrate (100 g/L)+sodium hydroxide (100 g/L), only the first was chosen for the leaching tests using samples of desulfated sludge. The lead recovery from the resultant acidic electrolyte was carried out using the same experimental conditions described above. The quality of the lead deposits obtained from the acidic electrolyte at different current densities in the range 250–500 A/m According to a Brazilian company After washing a sample of the original sludge, a solution of pH 6 was obtained, indicating the absence of sulfuric acid. The lead compounds content in the original and desulfated sludge, determined by different experimental procedures including each one an EDTA titration, are summarized in The observations of the qualitative solubility tests carried out at room temperature using samples of original sludge in different aqueous electrolytes are summarized in From the previous results, the following aqueous electrolytes were selected for the quantitative leaching tests of samples of original and desulfated sludge: tetrafluoroboric acid (200 g/L), glycerol (92 g/L)+sodium hydroxide (120 g/L), and sodium potassium tartrate (150 g/L)+sodium hydroxide (150 g/L). The leaching strength was evaluated by determining the Pb As mentioned before, the electrowinning tests were firstly carried out using electrolytes obtained by dissolving analytical grade PbO in the electrolytes tetrafluoroboric acid (200 g/L), glycerol (92 g/L)+sodium hydroxide (120 g/L), and sodium potassium tartrate (100 g/L)+sodium hydroxide (100 g/L). The results obtained in these tests are summarized in  Taking into account all the above results and also the lower cost of tetrafluoroboric acid, the lead recovery from samples of desulfated sludge of exhausted lead-acid batteries was carried out using only this acidic electrolyte [tetrafluoroboric acid (200 g/L)], containing phosphoric (1 g/L) and boric (10 g/L) acids and animal gelatin (2 g/L) as additives. For these experiments, the leaching time used was always 1 h. The electrowinning tests were always performed at a constant current density of 250 A/m Unlike the battery sludge obtained from exhausted lead-acid batteries in other countries, the Brazilian sludge contains a low content of metallic lead. Due to this fact, none of the leaching electrolytes investigated in this work totally dissolved such sludge. Lead dioxide was the majority component in the solid residue after the leaching tests. Tetrafluoroboric acid showed an attractive performance as leaching electrolyte, due to its reasonable leaching strength and low cost. When the desulfated sludge obtained from exhausted lead-acid batteries was leached with this acidic electrolyte, compact, adherent and highly pure lead deposits were electrowon. Therefore, the electrohydrometallurgical process used in this work presented a suitable and promising performance for lead recovery from a typical Brazilian sludge of exhausted lead-acid batteries. Scholarships granted by RHAE-CNPq (contract no. 610044/98-2) to authors L.C.F., L.O.R., R.A.D. and D.J.C. and by CNPq to author A.R.F. are gratefully acknowledged.