Porphyry ore deposits are generally located above plutonic apexes, described as finger-like extrusions from a large underlying silicic magma chamber. Fractures and faults that concentrate around these shallow structures allow mineral-enriched hydrothermal and magmatic fluids to circulate and exchange heat and mass with the host rock. Plutonic apexes, however, are not necessarily mineralized. The physical mechanisms invoked for their development and fracturing are focused on the role of volatile pressure, and we have no clear explanation on the associated thermo-mechanical processes. Here we present (a) a semi-quantitative scenario to explain how significant relief could form at the magma chamber roof to give apexes frozen within the shallow crust, and (b) the results of our numerical modeling of fracturing at plutonic apexes. We suggest that morphologic instabilities, expressed by two-directional corrugations (crests and troughs) at the crystallizing roof of the magma chamber, could arise at the top of large silicic batholiths as a result of thermo-mechanical interactions between the reservoir and its surroundings. The corrugated roofs could form with local apexes several kilometers high. Given that a local extensional tectonic regime would surround such systems, crystallization of the apexes would promote a concentration of fractures and faults in their vicinity. In modeling the thermo-mechanical regime around a plutonic apex to show how fractures and faults could develop, we tested different values for temperature contrasts, extension rates and magma viscosity. Two main regimes can be identified, depending on the rheological contrast between the magma and its host rock: the one, a single thick fault connecting the apex to the surface (analogous to a breccia pipe), and the other a network of fractures surrounding the apex (analogous to a stockwork). Where two apexes are close together, one will cluster the shear stresses, regardless of its vertical extension, and thus only a single fracture will develop. We thus infer that barren apexes can be located near mineralized apexes if the distance between them is no greater than the thickness of the brittle layer, which in turn is highly dependent on local thermal and mechanical conditions.A number of porphyry ore deposits have been extensively described and studied over the last decades Most reviews on the geology of porphyry-type deposits refer to cylindrical intrusions, small-diameter stocks of plutonic rocks, or small ‘cupolas’ emplaced at a few kilometers depth and connected to a large underlying batholith Numerous types of porphyry ore deposit can be illustrated by the oversimplified sketch of a shallow granite cupola surrounded by a dense fracture network and topped with vein sets and breccia pipes, each allowing hydrothermal fluids to deposit their metals ( Field accounts often refer to both radial and concentric fractures surrounding plutonic apexes (e.g. San Juan deposit, Arizona, The main objective of our study is to understand how favorable conditions for fluid circulation become established – the fluids themselves are not incorporated in the models because we consider the formation of faults and fractures above a hot magmatic source to be a prerequisite for mineral deposition. We first present a possible mechanism for the development of plutonic apexes, such as those drawn in numerous conceptual sketches, and then concentrate on analyzing the thermo-mechanical behavior of the host rock/apex system in order to enlighten the processes that could lead to a given degree of fracturing. Porphyry ore deposits are related to igneous intrusions emplaced at shallow levels of 1 to ∼4 km depth with shapes ranging from elongated to cylindrical and diameters of 1 or 2 km The case of the Yerington batholith (western Nevada) and its associated porphyry copper deposits has been described in many papers (e.g. Heithersay and Walshe Field examples show that there is no general rule relating the number of plutonic apexes to the number of mineralized bodies. Before attempting any correlation, one has first to understand the apex-forming mechanisms and the related type of fracturing at their margins. Many studies have provided examples where the roofs of large batholiths form peaks and troughs, which we term here as two-directional corrugations. For example, the first part of the Titley and Beane The few published field studies on fracturing above and around apexes indicate that, once apexes are formed, the surrounding rocks may be too hot to behave mechanically in the brittle regime Thermal convection in a silicic magma reservoir provides an efficient means of enabling excess heat to escape. It occurs as soon as the Rayleigh number ( The computed When silicic magmas are emplaced in the shallow crust, cooling from the edges leads to crystallization. This then provokes other interactions with the thermal convection, such as increase of the crystal and volatile content and thinning of the convective layer (and thus decrease in the Rayleigh number). The result is a complex behavior due to the evolution of the thermal and mechanical properties of the magma–host rock system with time. Among the many geological systems in which thermal convection plays a significant role, silicic magma reservoirs are particular in that rheological variations are strongly involved during the lifetime of the system. The thermal and mechanical contrasts in high-viscosity silicic magmas are much lower than in hot, low-viscosity magmas. Thermal processes during the lifetime of a silicic magma chamber result in a dramatic decrease in rheological contrasts between the magma and its host rocks. Coupling of thermal and mechanical processes during magma ascent and emplacement within the brittle–ductile upper crust may thus induce geometric changes to the reservoir. Before tackling the apex fracturing issue, therefore, we shall describe how plutonic apexes can be explained once a realistic rock rheology is taken into account. Some recent studies of large intrusive bodies of igneous rock emplaced at shallow depths We therefore performed preliminary modeling tests for a diapiric-like context in order to shed light on the BDT evolution when a rising magma chamber encounters the upper brittle crust (see From a dynamic standpoint, the BDT corresponds to the transition from the solid conductive part of the upper boundary layer to the ‘mushy’ zone, where fluids and crystals are intermixed while remaining dynamically stable (e.g. Theoretical analyses of crystallization processes in magma chambers have been tackled by a few authors Since most recent work on these particular thermal interactions only deals with simplified cases in terms of geological systems, it is difficult to apply experimental laws or theoretical studies to the thermal and mechanical interactions that take place at silicic magma chamber roofs. In low-viscosity magma chambers, the relief developed at the bottom of the mushy layer In order to focus our study on porphyry deposits related to plutonic apexes, we performed numerical tests on the conditions for fracturing around small stocks of silicic magma (apexes). Contrary to the experiment shown in We modified the fully explicit time-marching large-strain finite-element algorithm initially developed by Podladchidkov and Poliakov The model presents one or two small magmatic apexes connected to an underlying magma chamber ( The upper surface is free with no limitations on the stress and velocity components. At the bottom, we impose a lithostatic pressure with free slip in the horizontal direction, Winkler (i.e. hydrostatic) restoring forces are set in the vertical direction, assuming slightly denser (+10 kg m The background geotherms for the initial crustal thermal state were calculated using a conventional half-space cooling model for continental crust The experiments were parameterized with minimum rheological contrast, hereafter called Because the viscosity of a particular magma depends on its exact composition, it is rather difficult to define it ‘in general’; but it can be very small compared to that of the host rock. The time step of the numerical computations is controlled by smallest allowed viscosity, but using ‘real’ magma viscosities for geological time scale computations would make these impossibly long. A common way to circumvent the problem is to derive and use a minimum physically significant viscosity value because the viscosity contrasts between host rock and magma are very high (>10 Having demonstrated the possible formation of localized magma apexes as a result of thermo-mechanical instabilities at the interface between a competent dense upper crust overlying a low-resistant positively buoyant magma, we concentrated on the interaction between these apexes and the brittle–ductile crust with varying For the apex experiments, In the next experiment ( In the next experiment set ( The variations in fault occurrence and spacing observed in the experiments with increasing The interaction between two spatially distributed apexes was studied in the next experiments ( As can be seen, two apexes first provoke a stress concentration above each summit, following which the deformation starts to localize around a single apex. Despite the apparent incipient fracturing above the apex on the right ( In nature, the fact that the systems choose one apex to localize deformation may result from natural heterogeneities: the host rock over one of the apexes may be either slightly weaker or the magma below it slightly faster, so that one fault first localizes over this apex. As soon as this happens, the stress field becomes redistributed to the detriment of the possible simultaneous formation of a second fault, which may form later. In the code, heterogeneity in the material properties is modeled via the introduction of a slightly arbitrary (2% Gaussian noise) disturbed grid Previous attempts to explain the development of plutonic apexes have invoked degassing of the reservoir and a clustering of volatiles at the top of cupolas (small stocks) that are considered to be pre-existing structures. Our preliminary calculations ( In addition to the condition of a large aspect ratio for the reservoir geometry, the reservoir ascent must be not too rapid – if the density and temperature contrasts are too high, then thermo-mechanical interactions will not result in a corrugated BDT because the entire reservoir will ascend rapidly towards the surface Porphyry ore deposits related to plutonic apexes fall into two main groups. With the first group, the mineralization can be distributed throughout a fracture network around and near the flanks of the apex. Such stockworks (high fracture density) were obtained in the numerical experiments ( In the model where two apexes are close together ( Our study being focused on the prediction and analysis of fracture patterns formed above plutonic apexes as a consequence of long-term thermo-mechanical processes, post-plutonic effects such as fluid circulation were not incorporated in the model. Obviously, for a complete study of the mineralization processes, hydrological and chemical mechanisms would be required in addition to the thermo-mechanical mechanisms. But, whereas faulting is an irreversible phenomenon, fluid circulation can vary strongly with time. In other words, apex-related fractures that are not initially mineralized by fluid circulation, could become so following dramatic changes in the magma dynamics (e.g. replenishment) and consequent changes in the hydrological regime. Hydraulic fracturing, however, is one of the short-term processes that is not necessarily triggered by long-term thermo-mechanical interactions. This is why we consider it essential that the long time scale fracturing conditions be first understood through a rigorous analysis with appropriate thermal and rheological parameters. At the scale of a magmatic system that develops corrugations before completing its ascent, we must consider a number of mechanisms such as thermal convection, location of the BDT, solidification of apexes, and magma dynamics in general, as time-dependent. Any of these processes can strongly modify some of the results presented above. However, once the reservoir is emplaced and the apexes have begun to solidify through crystallization, the fracturing processes will be controlled mainly by local conditions and the geometric features of the pluton. Consequently, we believe that our results would be modified only by large-scale phenomena such as changes in the regional tectonic regime or changes in the regional erosion rates – large-scale phenomena that may indeed play a role in the development of corrugations, but not necessarily in the fracturing phase where local extension dominates. Questions concerning the preferential tectonic regime for porphyry deposits might not be so important because it is local extension (in addition to rheological contrast) that governs the development and fracturing of plutonic apexes. We must emphasize that the fracturing phase is ‘instantaneous’ compared to the magmatic or regional processes, and our results must be considered as ‘snapshots’ of a long-lived system in which apexes have formed. Although morphologic instabilities were obtained in our numerical experiments, the magmatic processes (crystallization, focusing of convecting currents) were not included in the calculations. Few laboratory experiments have been dedicated to observing corrugations and their effects on local heat transfer, and we suggest that laboratory studies on magma dynamics with a non-predefined reservoir geometry could help in understanding the interactions between associated thermal and mechanical processes. The most difficult part of such studies will be finding suitable analog material to represent the brittle–elasto-ductile crust; a real challenge for future laboratory experiments dedicated to magma dynamics. Field studies clearly show that even though two classes of fracturing can effectively be defined, i.e. the ‘breccia’ type and the ‘stockwork’ type, the timing of these events is not clear since the dynamic history of a magmatic system can lead to both types of fracturing. A better knowledge of the magmatic system history may thus help to understand the timing of the fracturing events above plutonic corrugations. However, despite the fact that two regimes have been modeled and compared with field observations, numerical experiments cannot provide a detailed picture of the fracture distribution and connectivity because, at present, higher numerical resolution would require time-consuming calculations that we cannot afford at the scale of the model. We thank R. Cattin, J. Dilles, L. Lavier, and J.P. Richards for useful comments on different versions of this manuscript. The version of the code Paravoz used is this study was derived from original source code developed during 1991–1997 by A. Poliakov in association with Y. Podladchikov, who are deeply thanked for their generous help and availability. We would like to thank Patrick Skipwith for proofreading the final text and English editing. This is BRGM publication BRGM-CORP-02310. The two-dimensional numerical scheme was developed from the Paravoz code In the numerical scheme, the solution of the equations of motion provides velocities at mesh points from which it is possible to calculate element strains. These strains are then used in the constitutive relations to calculate element stresses and equivalent forces, which form the basic input for the next calculation cycle. The Lagrangian coordinate mesh moves with the material; and at each time step the new positions of the mesh grid nodes are calculated and updated in large-strain mode from the current velocity field using an explicit procedure (two-stage Runge-Kutta). To explicitly solve the governing equations, the Paravoz (FLAC The FLAC