In this study, the corrosion behaviour of plasma nitrocarburised AISI4140 steel before and after post-oxidation was investigated. Plasma nitrocarburising was carried out at 530°C, 570°C and 630°C for 5h in an atmosphere consisting of 80vol.% N2, 17vol.% H2 and 3vol.% CO2. After nitrocarburising, plasma post-oxidation was performed at 450°C for 1h in a gas mixture of 50vol.% O2 and 50vol.% H2. The microstructure of the treated samples was characterized using X-ray diffraction, scanning electron microscopy and surface roughness techniques. Dynamic polarization test was also used to evaluate the corrosion resistance of the samples. The results indicated that the compound layer was composed of ε-Fe2–3(N,C) and γ′-Fe4(N,C) phases. The amount of ε-Fe2–3(N,C) phase increased as the treatment temperature rose from 530°C to 570°C and decreased at 630°C. The X-ray diffraction patterns of post-oxidized samples confirmed the formation of the highest amount of magnetite after post-oxidation of samples that had been nitrocarburised at 570°C as compared with the samples that had been treated at 530°C and 630°C. Nitrocarburising at 570°C followed by post-oxidation also provided the highest corrosion resistance among all treatment conditions.Nitrocarburising is a thermochemical process that is classified in two groups of ferritic and austenitic depending on the treatment temperature. These treatments are performed below and above 590 The phase composition of compound layer has been found to play a significant role on the final phases formed on the surface after post-oxidation. The purpose of this work is to understand the effect of nitrocarburising temperature (both ferritic and austenitic) on corrosion resistance of AISI The specimens were in the form of 20 The microstructures of nitrocarburised and post-oxidized layers were observed by Philips XL30 scanning electron microscope. The thicknesses of the compound, oxide and nitrogen austenite layers were measured from scanning electron microscope (SEM) cross sectional micrographs of the treated samples. Bruker D8 X-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα ( The scanning electron micrographs in     The SEM micrographs in Potentiodynamic polarization curves of the untreated and nitrocarburised specimens treated at different conditions as well as post-oxidized specimens are shown in Thick oxide layer can seal the pores in the compound layer more effectively and positively affect the corrosion resistance of the sample. According to the results listed in Thickness of compound layer increases with increasing nitrocarburising temperature due to the increased nitrogen and carbon mobility. Nitrocarburising at 630 Post-oxidizing treatment reduces the thickness of compound layer and increases the thickness of intermediate layer between compound and diffusion layers (nitrogen austenite zone). The X-ray diffraction analysis revealed formation of ε-Fe Nitrocarburising improved the corrosion resistance of AISI The highest corrosion resistance belonged to the post-oxidized sample that had been nitrocarburised at 570