DR. FLATOW: We will present cases that will reinforce some basic principles, as well as hopefully generate further discussion among the distinguished panel members. Furthermore, not all of the cases will involve shoulder arthroplasty. The first case involves a 27-year-old, left-hand–dominant male who fell hard on his left shoulder while snowboarding. Initial treatment involved application of a sling by the ski patrol. On examination he demonstrated good range of motion including 165° of forward elevation, 60° of external rotation, and internal rotation to the T8 level. His strength was full in all planes. Additionally, he was very tender anteriorly and showed significant apprehension and guarding with abduction and external rotation. There was no evidence of a sulcus sign or ligamentous laxity. The patient reported no prior history of dislocation. Dr. Brems, would you begin by interpreting the patient’s initial plain films and MRI ( DR. BREMS: There appears to be an anterior labral tear in this patient as seen on the axial MRI images. A West Point projection might assist us in evaluating the bony anatomy of the anteroinferior portion of the glenoid rim more properly. As for treatment, I personally feel that there is little value in undergoing formal, protracted rehabilitation and would consider fixing the labral tear arthroscopically. DR. FLATOW: Would any of the other panel members wish to offer their own expert opinions regarding this patient’s management? DR. SEITZ: I would not rush into offering this patient surgical intervention. My approach with first-time dislocators, with or without significant labral pathology, is to place the patient in a sling for a period of about 3 weeks followed by therapy. In addition to the above MRI findings, the coracoid seems to be fractured as well. DR. FLATOW: That is correct. The fracture can be seen more easily on other axial MR images. Dr. Bell, does the presence of the coracoid fracture change your management strategy? DR. BELL: Yes, it probably would. I would address the presence of the fracture as well as the instability in this patient. DR. BIGLIANI: Evan, can you tell us the status of his neurovascular examination? DR. FLATOW: He was neurologically intact in the left upper extremity. DR. BIGLIANI: And there was no reported seizure activity for this patient? DR. FLATOW: No. DR. BIGLIANI: I bring up these points because, in my experience, patients with a coracoid fracture after dislocation oftentimes have a seizure etiology. I have picked up seizures in patients who presented with similar clinical and radiographic findings. DR. FLATOW: That is an excellent observation, but in this case the patient suffered a violent fall while performing some extreme snowboarding maneuvers. There is a subtle impaction injury to the posterior superior aspect of the humeral head. My feeling is that he probably dislocated anteriorly and his humeral head hit against the coracoid process. I have personally encountered this particular mechanism a few times in my career. DR. GALATZ: What does he do for a living? Is he an active, athletic individual or does he usually lead a more slow-paced lifestyle? DR. FLATOW: He works in an office, but in his free time he cannot resist high-impact sports, including extreme snowboarding. DR. BIGLIANI: Evan, before we proceed with management options, I think that the importance of obtaining the axillary view in traumatic injuries should be again emphasized. One can easily miss the coracoid fragment on the AP view unless one looks closely. Of course, we would expect to see the fracture on either a CT scan or MRI. DR. FLATOW: Again, another important point. So let’s discuss what our experts would do. Rob, would you place a screw in the coracoid and, additionally, would you perform a formal arthrotomy and open instability repair, perform the repair arthroscopically, or treat this patient conservatively? DR. BELL: I perform all of my instability repairs arthroscopically. However, that being said, I would fix this through an all-open approach given its level of complexity. DR. FLATOW: That sounds fine. What would you do with the coracoid fragment? Is there any role for using it to augment the glenoid articular surface? DR. BELL: No, there doesn’t appear to be any significant glenoid bone loss contributing to the instability. I would fix the fracture to the remaining coracoid base. DR. FLATOW: Dr. Galatz, what would you do? DR. GALATZ: In the majority of first-time dislocators, I opt for nonoperative treatment. An argument regarding both operative and nonoperative treatment can be made based on current literature. But, in this young office worker, even though he is very active, I think that there is little downside to starting with initial nonoperative treatment. DR. FLATOW: Does it worry you that the coracoid process fragment is translated anterior to the joint and potentially can cause scarring of the rotator interval and that the musculocutaneous nerve can adhere to the subscapularis muscle? This might increase the level of complexity of any future open surgeries. DR. GALATZ: That scenario doesn’t worry me particularly. The presence of the coracoid fracture would just be an added step in the event that an open instability repair was needed. I think I’d probably just try an initial course of therapy and, if he remained symptomatic, I would address that at a later time. Again, I don’t generally operate right away on first-time dislocators. DR. FLATOW: Louie, any further comments regarding this case? DR. BIGLIANI: If one was to proceed with surgery, a careful evaluation of the subscapularis muscle and the biceps tendon should be performed because they can be injured along with the labrum in these high-energy dislocations. For this patient, I would address the soft tissue injury through an open approach combined with fixing the coracoid fracture. What did you find during the procedure and what was your approach? DR. FLATOW: We performed an initial evaluation of the glenohumeral joint arthroscopically and determined that there was a fairly large labral tear ( DR. SEITZ: In your opinion, Evan, do you think that this degree of labral injury needed to be repaired? It appears from the arthroscopic image that you used two sutures. DR. FLATOW: In fact, there are a total of three sutures that we used. Given the acuity of the injury, mobilizing the labrum was not particularly difficult. Furthermore, we didn’t perform any significant capsular plication because it was a fresh injury—it was more of a direct labral repair. DR. SEITZ: You seem to have gotten good fixation of both components of this injury. I probably would have performed screw fixation of the coracoid alone and treated the instability in a closed fashion. I feel as though an attempt should be made to treat this nonoperatively and reevaluate the patient should he have a recurrence. DR. BELL: Well, if ever there was somebody that’s going to pose a risk of a recurrence, that’s this patient while he snowboards. DR. FLATOW: Dr. Yamaguchi, any final comments on this case? DR. YAMAGUCHI: I might be in the minority among the panel members, but I would definitely treat this patient without surgical intervention because this is his first dislocation. The odds of him developing a recurrent instability are less than 50%. By extension, if we operate on all patients in this age group following an initial dislocation, we are potentially operating on 50% of patients who probably don’t need an operation. DR. FLATOW: This patient had the added issue of the coracoid fracture to contend with. DR. YAMAGUCHI: I am not sure I agree that the presence of the coracoid fracture changes how I would manage this case. Other surgeons utilize the coracoid to augment glenoid deficiencies and don’t report long-term problems. DR. FLATOW: You make an interesting argument. My only point of contention is that, in those cases, the coracoid doesn’t remain free-floating anterior to the joint. Here, we have a displaced coracoid fracture sitting in the front of an active young person’s shoulder and that could induce scarring and create later problems during surgical approaches. It is certainly easier to mobilize and fix the fracture in the acute setting. DR. YAMAGUCHI: I think that it should be emphasized, however, that not all first-time dislocators necessitate operative intervention. DR. FLATOW: I agree completely. Dr. Arciero’s work examined people between 18 and 21 years of age who were involved in very high energy activities, including martial arts and combat. Their activities made them prone to a significant number of traumatic dislocations, which were closed reduced by physicians. You are quite right that the rate of recurrence falls significantly after the early 20s. DR. YAMAGUCHI: Similarly, the rates of recurrent dislocation are also documented well by Dr. Hovelius’ 10-year follow-up study, and I believe he is due to present his longer term follow-up in the near future. With over 20-year follow-up, the redislocation rates are far lower than suggested by the earlier literature. These studies include the more athletic patients as well. DR. BELL: Ken, we need to take into account multiple risk factors for recurrence, not just the patient’s age. For instance, issues including hand dominance, activity level, and occupation among other things should play a part in the decision as to whether earlier intervention is required. In my opinion, it’s not simply a matter of age at time of first dislocation. I have a mental image of the stereotypical snowboarder who, despite my recommendations for activity modification, would return immediately to his sport. So in that particular scenario, I might consider earlier operative intervention. Age to me is not the sole criteria. DR. YAMAGUCHI: From my point of view, the patient can help to dictate his ultimate treatment. If he redislocates, then he is likely to exhibit recurrence and warrants an operation. This obviates the surgeon from assuming the patient with a first-time dislocation needs an operation. DR. FLATOW: We have had some thought-provoking comments from the panel on a case that on its surface appears routine. My concern with the coracoid fracture had to do with increasing difficulty of the case should this patient need either arthroscopic or open instability surgery. Without the coracoid fracture, I might have treated this patient conservatively. With that, let’s proceed to our next case. The patient is a 30-year-old, right-hand–dominant male who presented with recurrent instability of the right shoulder for the past 4 years. His shoulder dislocates fairly easily while reaching forward and can be easily self-reduced. On examination, he demonstrates a lot of apprehension, some degree of excessive laxity, and presented with this radiograph ( DR. SEITZ: I would request further cuts of the axial CT scan to get a complete feel of the bone loss. In general, however, with this history of recurrent instability and this amount of bone loss, I would perform an open reconstruction. Additionally, I would obtain an MR arthrogram to evaluate the redundancy of the capsule—my feeling is that a capsular advancement will be necessary as well. My ultimate goal would be to advance the capsule into the defect and use the capsule as an anterior restraint. DR. FLATOW: Does anyone on the panel use Dr. Gerber’s radius rule to guide their management in these cases? Rob, any comments regarding this? DR. BELL: For measurements, yes. That being said, I still believe it’s very difficult to make an absolute determination from it, and one needs to individualize management based on the patient’s history and examination. In this particular case, I would opt for a Latarjet procedure. DR. FLATOW: So you would choose the Latarjet procedure. Would any of the panel members recommend other approaches, perhaps the use of iliac crest graft? The Latarjet procedure is precisely what we chose to do, in addition to a capsulorraphy because of residual instability ( DR. BELL: I find it to be a good procedure that has been gaining in popularity because the technique has been refined and the results have become more predictable. DR. BIGLIANI: We should point out the essential differences between the Latarjet procedure and the Bristow. With the Latarjet, the surgeon takes a much bigger piece of the coracoid, rotates it into the glenoid defect, and fixes it securely with two screws. DR. FLATOW: Yes. When you take it right back to the knuckle, almost to the coracoclavicular ligaments, you get a nice curved piece of bone that, when rotated, fits very nicely into the defect. The piece can accommodate two screws which hold it solidly. The last step is to make a small hole in the subscapularis and pop the piece through, which ends up being very satisfying. DR. SEITZ: Evan, what percentage of the glenoid was missing when you looked at it in the operating room? DR. FLATOW: It was actually larger than it appeared on the films, encompassing almost a third of the glenoid. The defect started above the equator and continued distally, so it was truly a large defect. DR. BIGLIANI: Can you tell us the level at which you poked through the subscapularis? DR. FLATOW: We opened the muscle at about the junction of the upper two-thirds and the lower third. The bone piece fit through at that level quite comfortably. DR. BELL: I think that everyone on this panel has at some point addressed some rather substantial bony defects arthroscopically, and we have gotten away with it. But this history of such easy dislocation and reduction should concern us. We should be careful not to underestimate the history of instability and keep in mind glenoid deficiencies when dealing with such a degree of instability. DR. FLATOW: That is a wonderful point. If I hear that a patient redislocates in the sling following successful closed reduction, you can almost bet that the glenoid has been injured, especially when the humeral head cannot be maintained in the glenoid. You often can’t tell from the history. DR. BIGLIANI: The subscapularis may also be off of its insertion. DR. FLATOW: Yes, good point. Let’s proceed to the next case. This case involves a 65-year-old, right-hand–dominant female who sustained an anterior dislocation in August of 1994 and then underwent a rotator cuff repair in 1995. She never regained her ability to lift the arm, has a lot of pain, positive lift-off and stomach press signs, and has deficits of active elevation. These radiographs were obtained ( DR. BREMS: Well, we’re faced with a chronic anterior dislocation. What is her biggest issue—pain or functional limitations? DR. FLATOW: Her functional limitations bother her more, but she complains of significant pain. DR. BREMS: Some time ago, Dr. Hawkins published a paper on chronic anterior shoulder dislocations and essentially left them alone, whereupon they did relatively well. Here, however, we are faced with a painful dislocation with very little remaining glenoid bone stock. DR. FLATOW: Dr. Rowe wrote the first article concerning that topic and found that they did pretty well. Dr. Neer and I wrote one on chronic anterior dislocations where about two-thirds of them were treated nonoperatively. But this patient has significant functional limitations and pain. DR. BREMS: I don’t see any simple solution of trying to reduce this and performing a shoulder replacement. I’ve done that in the past and been burned, primarily because of the soft tissue compromise and readjustment to her physiologic position. I think it will be quite difficult to reduce the joint and maintain the reduction. DR. BELL: Evan, do you have other images? Is the glenoid bone loss as significant as we are all probably thinking it is? DR. FLATOW: Yes ( DR. SEITZ: You said that she had a cuff repair. Were you able to glean from the operative report what portions of the cuff were gone and what was done to repair them? DR. FLATOW: It was reportedly fairly big and it didn’t sound like a very successful repair. DR. BIGLIANI: Did she have any brachial plexus symptoms? DR. FLATOW: She had some paresthesias, but nothing else. DR. BIGLIANI: I’ve had several patients similar to this one that I’ve dealt with. A couple were rheumatoids, some were old fracture dislocations, and I’ve handled it a couple ways. My strategy was to rebuild the anterior buttress of the glenoid with either soft tissue or bone, depending on what was present. Then I’ve done a hemiarthroplasty, placing suture anchors in the glenoid just to keep it off the brachial plexus. If I think there isn’t enough bone, I’ll do a Bristow or Latarjet, depending on the deficiency. They’ve all done relatively well. So the principles are to keep the head or the prosthesis off the brachial plexus and create anterior stability. DR. GALATZ: This is a really difficult problem. She’s lost a lot of her glenoid surface. No matter what you do, she’s always going to have a tendency to redislocate anteriorly. Postoperative dislocation is going to be a real issue no matter what option you consider. I would consider a reverse arthroplasty in this person, because it looks as though she has enough glenoid. I’ve actually done this for a chronic anterior dislocation of several months duration and I could get a base plate on there. She had great functional improvement and is doing well so far. DR. FLATOW: So we performed a reverse arthroplasty. We monitored her brachial plexus with SSEPs because of the concerns raised by Louie, although she never really had a gross deficit. We corrected about a third to a half of the anteversion with a bone graft. I didn’t want to take the fixation out of the native bone, so we used the trabecular metal pegged component with a good friction fit into the native glenoid, and by aiming the screws, we obtained solid fixation ( DR. BELL: So Evan, if not for the graft you probably wouldn’t have had adequate bone stock? DR. FLATOW: That’s correct, it would have been inadequate. And by grafting, we were able to get it so we had just the right purchase and the right shots with the screws. However, we retroverted the humerus to compensate for the glenoid anteversion and spent a lot of time checking the position to see what the range of motion was and how it would catch at the extremes. DR. BREMS: What did you do for soft tissue release? Her pectoralis and strap muscles must have been contracted and quite short. DR. FLATOW: We didn’t try to lateralize her completely, so some of the soft tissue distortion was allowed to remain. We placed two screws, one going obliquely up and one goes down obliquely and catches posteriorly and inferiorly. So this is a 57-year-old man with this proximal humerus fracture. ( DR. GALATZ: I would definitely go ahead and plate that. DR. FLATOW: What fracture characteristics would make this more amenable to rigid plating than to percutaneous fixation or other approaches? DR. GALATZ: It would be the metaphyseal comminution. Once you have that kind of comminution and a loss of the medial calcar of the humerus, the reduction of the head on the shaft is very unstable. I think locking plates give you great fixation in these situations. DR. FLATOW: We seem to be unable to find anyone on our panel that does locked intramedullary rodding anymore. It seems to have fallen out of favor. DR. BIGLIANI: I don’t think you could ever rod this successfully because there’s nothing to hold the rods. The thing that’s attractive about this case and why you’d want to restore the head to the shaft is that, despite the presence of multiple pieces around the head, there’s very good blood supply to the head. So if you can stabilize the fracture, there’s a good chance it will do well because those pieces are not severely displaced. DR. BELL: The greater tuberosity is going to be displaced posteriorly and you really need to fish it out and secure it with suture, whatever your technique is. If you look at the films, you see it’s posteriorly and superiorly displaced. DR. BIGLIANI: If you think you’re going to do an arthroplasty in this case, you must keep in mind that you’ve lost a lot of bony support for the proximal humeral shaft. And the temptation is to remove the comminuted bony fragments. The idea is that if you’re going to put in a prosthesis, you better rebuild all the bone around the implant. DR. FLATOW: It sounds like a plate is the least treacherous of the options. That’s what we did and he did extremely well ( This case involves an 83-year-old active woman with pain and poor motion ( DR. SEITZ: First thing I’d want to know is how long it’s been in there. DR. FLATOW: It’s been in there 10 years. DR. SEITZ: And when did her pain begin? DR. FLATOW: It’s been painful for a long time. DR. SEITZ: No sudden onset of pain? DR. FLATOW: No. DR. SEITZ: And she has poor motion. My first approach would be to obtain a sedimentation rate and white count. DR. FLATOW: Both were normal. DR. SEITZ: Then I would probably do a sterile aspiration just to make sure. DR. FLATOW: How many on the panel would do an aspiration for culture? DR. BELL: I would. DR. BIGLIANI: It depends on her history and what her blood test results were. I would only perform an aspiration if I had a high suspicion for infection. The problem with aspirations is that they yield a lot of false positives. DR. BREMS: If your white count, sedimentation rate, and CRP levels were all normal, the chance for infection is low. DR. FLATOW: They were all normal, in addition to a negative indium white blood cell scan. DR. BELL: If you aspirate and a bacterium grows out, what are you going to do with that result? Will it dictate your next step? DR. FLATOW: In addition, she had no redness and no history of draining. DR. SEITZ: That doesn’t matter to me. We’ve all encountered the situation where subacute infections appear this way. My point is that I would want to pick up something before surgery, in addition to intraoperative cultures. Obviously this is a patient you’re going to operate on, assuming there’s no infection. I suspect she’s got metallosis here with pain from metal on the glenoid. DR. FLATOW: Dr. Seitz’s suspicions were well grounded. We did intraoperative pathology, and she was loaded with polys and two of three cultures were positive for DR. SEITZ: The implant would come out. I would try to get all of the cement out. If it’s extremely well fixed, you might not be able to get all the lower cement out, but I would get out everything that I could. DR. FLATOW: You’d leave some cement? DR. SEITZ: If I put an extractor on the implant and everything came out in a nice, big block, I might leave some cement down below. But I would try to get everything out. Then I would use an antibiotic-impregnated spacer. DR. FLATOW: John, would you leave a little cement in there if it was inconvenient to get it out? DR. BREMS: I would get it out. Spare no effort, even splitting the humerus, which I bet you would on something like this. DR. FLATOW: No matter the cost, you’d get the cement out? DR. SEITZ: It’s not the cement that’s infected, it’s the tissue around it. DR. FLATOW: So we got out all the cement and put in an antibiotic-laden cement spacer ( DR. BIGLIANI: Isn’t that some cement left in the bottom there? You know, when we look back at a bunch of our infections, we had left some cement in the canal and it didn’t seem to affect healing that much. That being said, you want to try to get it all out. DR. FLATOW: What looks like cement there is actually the intact cortex next to the broken cortex ( DR. GALATZ: Assuming her infection is cleared and we’ve gotten all appropriate studies and confirmed that, then my revision option would be a total shoulder. DR. FLATOW: Before we go further, what’s your standard treatment for an infected prosthesis? Take it out and put in an antibiotic cement spacer? DR. GALATZ: Yes. They receive about 6 weeks of antibiotics. Then I leave it out for about 6 weeks and make sure the infection doesn’t recur. DR. FLATOW: Do you take cultures when you remove the spacer to ensure that they’re sterile? DR. GALATZ: Yes. DR. FLATOW: Okay. So you perform a debridement, take out the infected prosthesis, place an antibiotic spacer, give 6 weeks of antibiotics, and then remove the spacer. Finally, you wait several weeks and, if all looks well, you would do your definitive reimplantation. DR. GALATZ: I have not always done a second procedure to take the spacer out. In some cases I’ve just taken them off of antibiotics and left the spacer in, thereby eliminating the middle surgery. DR. FLATOW: I’m told that there are people all over Philadelphia with Gerry William’s spacers in their shoulders who are very happy and don’t want them removed. Anyone had that experience? DR. SEITZ: Yes. I’ve always taken them out, but I’ve had patients ask me why. It’s amazing how comfortable they get with the cement spacer. They form a pseudocapsule and although they don’t have normal motion, they’re quite comfortable. Compared with the degree of pain they had before, they’re pretty happy. This example here is one of the reasons why you don’t necessarily want to go to the tip of the prosthesis and dig out the cement, because this is exactly what can happen. You create a stress riser. DR. FLATOW: No question, that is definitely a risk. We had several people on whom we’ve performed resections, who are surprisingly functional. They can reach the other armpit, the top of their head, and their hip pocket. And for debilitated, sick patients, we definitely consider that an option. And many of them are surprised at how well they do. In this patient we did a revision with an allograft ( DR. SEITZ: No. The allograft makes a nice medium for potential infection. DR. FLATOW: No question. DR. SEITZ: I think the take home message here is that you would have done a long stem prosthesis even had you not fractured. DR. FLATOW: Right. This is a 35-year-old, right-hand–dominant, juvenile rheumatoid arthritic. She had a total hip arthroplasty 16 years ago at age 19. She’s been on chronic prednisone and complains of right shoulder pain of 2 years’ duration. ( DR. BREMS: I’d probably do a total shoulder. I would have little qualms about putting a glenoid socket in a 20-year-old with JRA. DR. FLATOW: Any dissent from that? Everyone agrees on a pretty standard total shoulder? DR. BELL: You know, I have a handful of patients, young rheumatoids with bony changes, in whom I’ve done arthroscopic synovectomies as a means of buying them time. DR. BIGLIANI: But she’s got posterior wear on her glenoid. The other thing that you possibly could consider is a surface replacement with meniscal allograft. DR. SEITZ: I don’t know if I’d do the meniscal allograft, but I think in this one I would probably do a surface replacement. She’s still pretty well contained and has got a reasonable soft tissue sleeve. I certainly would do an aggressive synovectomy at the time, but I think she’d be a good candidate for a resurfacing for two reasons: First because she’s young and it doesn’t take away any bone stock; and second, because these patients with JRA frequently get bad elbows, and you don’t want two stems meeting in the middle. DR. FLATOW: What are you going to do with that bone stock, though? What are you saving that bone stock under her surface replacement for? DR. SEITZ: The revision. DR. GALATZ: The other option is to put in a short stem. There are some systems with a very short stem so that you can preserve space for an elbow if she needs it. DR. FLATOW: Well, I showed it to my elbow colleagues who said that the stem we put in would fit their elbow, so that’s what we did ( Thank you all very much. I want to thank our distinguished panel for discussing these cases and offering their insights on how to deal with these oftentimes complex situations.