Hydroxyapatite (HA) ceramics serve as an alternative to autogenous-free bone grafting by virtue of their excellent biocompatibility. However, chemically synthesized HA lacks the strong load-bearing capacity as required by bone. The bio-mimetic growth of HA crystals on collagen surface provides a feasible solution for synthesizing bone substitutes with the desired properties. This study deals with the utilization of the collagen hydrolysate recovered from leather waste as a substrate for promoting HA crystal growth. Bio-mimetic growth of HA was induced by subjecting the hydrolysate to various mineralization conditions. Parameters that would have a direct effect on crystal growth were varied to determine the optimal conditions necessary. Maximum mineralization was achieved with a combination of 10mM of CaCl2, 5mM of Na2HPO4, 100mM of NaCl and 0.575% glutaraldehyde at a pH of 7.4. The metal–protein interactions leading to formation of HA were identified through Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy and x-ray diffraction (XRD) studies. The crystal dimensions were determined to be in the nanoscale range by atomic force microscopy (AFM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The size and crystallinity of bio-mimetically grown HA indicate that hydrolysate from leather waste can be used as an ideal alternative substrate for bone growth.Bone is a biological nano-composite comprising of fibrous type I collagen as a scaffold, upon which hydroxyapatite crystals [(Ca) Bone grafts are used to correct bone defects including bone restoration or stabilization of a broken joint Since HA is a major component of bone and HA crystals synthesized in vitro are biocompatible with living systems, numerous techniques have been used either to synthesize HA or to extract it from natural sources, including corals and bovine bones The process of biomineralization, through which bone is formed, involves a series of molecular events in which the surface interaction between the inorganic phase and specific amino acid sequences of the organic phase regulates the morphology of the final composite product with high precision. Functional groups such as Bio-mimetic preparation of HA crystals on pure collagen necessitates the isolation and purification of collagen from an animal source. Chrome shavings, an underutilized chromium-containing leather industry waste, mostly disposed off as landfill can provide itself as an alternative cheap source of collagen The chrome shavings were degraded by a patented protocol using a chromium tolerant proteolytic bacteria and the chromium was removed to obtain the protein-rich hydrolysate Chrome shavings were obtained from pilot tannery, Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai, India. Sodium chloride (ACS grade), calcium chloride (ACS grade), disodium hydrogen phosphate heptahydrate (ACS grade) and KBr (FTIR grade) were bought from Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, USA. Tris salt, formalin and 23% glutaraldehyde (EM grade) were bought from Himedia, India. The collagen hydrolysate was extracted from the tanned leather waste using a patented protocol involving hydrolysis of the chrome shavings by the bacterium Formol titration was performed to determine the number of free carboxyl groups in the hydrolysate according to the protocol given by Denis et al. The total free carboxyl groups, N (mmol The degree of hydrolysis (DH) of the protein was calculated from the following formula given by Angeles Navarrete del Toro et al. The HA crystal growth was carried out according to the protocol of Gafni et al. Among the various factors that affect mineralization in vitro, five parameters that have been recognized to influence crystal growth, viz., calcium and phosphate concentrations, protein content in the hydrolysate, pH of the medium, cross-linker concentration and ionic strength of the reaction medium For FTIR studies, 2 XRD analysis was performed using a Shimadzu XRD 6000 Diffractometer. CuKα radiation (30 SEM images were taken with the use of an FEI-Quanta 200 scanning electron microscope at an accelerating voltage of 20 Chrome shavings, apart from being rich in protein (75–85%) also contain 2–3% chromium (on dry matter basis) and are therefore categorized as hazardous The formol titration finds wide application for the evaluation of free carboxyl groups during proteolysis A total of 30 reaction systems were used to study the effect of variation of parameters. As displayed in In general, most of the samples displayed typical IR bands of collagen and hydroxyapatite. The presence of collagen in the crystals was confirmed by the presence of amide I (C The XRD data show well characterized peaks of HA in the range of 30–80° 2θ, which were indexed according to the standard pattern (JCPDS 09-0432). The following planes: 002, 102, 211, 202, 203, 004 and 313 were identified in most of the samples. The effects of each individual variation on the bio-mimetic set up and the resultant variations in IR and XRD patterns are listed in Variation in calcium and phosphate concentration exhibited similar types of crystal growth profiles. Test sample 2, with 5 The diffraction pattern depicted a clear difference between the two samples. As displayed in To sum up, (i) crystals formed at Ca/P ratio 2.6 (in solution) displayed sharper peaks and high crystallinity in FTIR and XRD, (ii) crystals formed at a higher Ca/P ratio exhibited poorly formed peaks and (iii) reaction set-ups with Ca/P ratio less than 2.6 failed to result in any crystal formation. For the next reaction systems, CaCl A suitable ratio of organic substrate to the ions is required for the precise nucleation of HA The XRD peaks followed the pattern described in Cross-linking imparts structural stability to the scaffold by chemically linking functional groups across collagen molecules. Cross-linked scaffolds have an increased Young's modulus, high swelling resistance and higher resistance to enzymatic digestion As seen in The S/N ratio was higher for sample 19 with well-defined planes 102, 211, 112, 300, 212, 310, 212 and 004 in contrast to the poorly formed peaks for the 211, 212 and 300 planes in sample 17. Cross-linking reduces the random orientation of the peptides, giving rise to a more stable three dimensional structure, thereby facilitating the growth of the HA crystals following a common axis. A concentration of 0.575% glutaraldehyde was found to be optimal and the same was maintained for experimental reaction systems 21–30 along with the previously fixed concentrations of CaCl Variation in pH (from 2 to 10), as done in reaction systems 21–25 brought about drastic alterations in the results. Crystal growth was observed only in sample 24 (pH The pH range of 7–8 was found explicitly suitable for bio-mimetic HA growth probably due to the result of the individual stability and solubility of the reaction components. At highly acidic pH (2 and 4), the carboxyl groups in collagen mostly remain in the proton-bound state and therefore, remain unavailable for chelating Ca NaCl concentration was varied from 0 to 200 An increase in NaCl concentration thus seems to have a definite impact on the mineralization process. The presence of NaCl increases the ionic concentration of the reaction medium, stabilizing and facilitating the ionic interaction between the minerals and the free carboxyl groups in the hydrolysate One of the major research topics in orthopedic tissue engineering concerns the topography of the material used. It is a commonly observed trend that roughness and disorder of surface features can alter cell adhesion and extra cellular matrix (ECM) deposition. The prevalence of nano-scaled structural units found in bone tissue clearly demonstrates that bone-forming cells are accustomed to interacting with surfaces of nanometer roughness The reaction systems have been arranged so as to bring about a gradual progression of optimized parameters moving from the least optimized to the most optimized, adding each optimized parameter to a subsequent reaction system. In that respect, the last reaction system in which all the parameters have been optimized is expected to give the best results. Sample 29, synthesized with the maximum number of optimized parameters, displays maximum HA-specific FTIR bands, with a prominent band at 1385 The nanoscale topography or ‘roughness’ at a nanoscale level in a grafted material can modulate the interfacial forces guiding receptor organization and can, therefore influence intracellular signaling. The problems with currently utilized implant surfaces stem from the fact that at nanoscale dimensions, these surfaces appear smooth, thus favoring callus formation which may lead to stratification of connective tissue around the material Mineralization of collagen is an intricately organized process and the exact mechanism is yet to be deciphered In the present study, moving from reaction system 1 to 30, an increase in the number of HA-specific bands was noted that could be attributed to the optimization of the mineralization conditions. The band at 1384 To summarize, increased HA crystal formation on the hydrolysate was concordant with an increase in Ca–carboxyl interaction, formation of carbonate and decreased N Proteins and other organic molecules serve as ‘templates’, providing preferential sites for nucleation and controlling the orientation of the resulting crystals. Hydrolysis results in low molecular weight peptides, consequently leading to an increase in the availability of carboxylic groups (as reported in It is evident from the study that collagen hydrolysate is amenable to be used as an effective substrate for bio-mimetic growth of HA. Characterization of the HA crystals indicated that under optimal conditions, collagen hydrolysate provided potential nucleating centers for HA growth. The good biomineralization was explained as due to the availability of a greater number of unmasked The authors Pradipta Banerjee, S. Madhu, N.K. ChandraBabu and C. Shanthi declare that they have no conflict of interest. The authors are grateful to Vellore Institute of Technology University, Vellore, India and Central Leather Research Institute, Chennai, India where the work was carried out.