The removal of Cd(II) and Cu(II) ions from aqueous solutions was studied by sorption onto microcapsules prepared by copolymerizing ethylene glycol dimethacrylate (EGDMA) and styrene (ST). The microcapsules were prepared by an in situ radical polymerization method by adding the extractant compound, 2-ethylhexyl phosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester, and the monomers to the continuous aqueous phase.
                  The extractant was immobilized within the microcapsules (MCs) which presented a spherical shape with rough surface. High productions of MCs with an important retention of extractant were achieved. Microcapsules constituted by a copolymer of 65% EGDMA and 35% ST presented best capacity of sorption of both metals. These MCs presented sufficient degree of cross-linking and a suitable balance of hydrophilic–hydrophobic character.
                  The experimental data from chemisorption of metals onto the microcapsules fitted well the applied pseudo-second-order kinetics model. The alkylphosphonic extractant presented a higher rate constant and a higher equilibrium sorption capacity for Cd(II) than for Cu(II) at the pH used in this study.It is well known that the development of industrial activities in most countries generates huge quantities of a variety of wastes, including effluents of mining and chemical industries. Most of these residuals are acidic waste waters containing in many cases variable amounts of dissolved metals which must be removed owing to their toxic characteristics or recovered due to their intrinsic value, especially if they constitute useful and scarce metals. The challenge is how to extract them from this kind of aqueous solutions by using simple and economical methods. The current available extraction technologies for metallic ions are the use of chemical precipitants, the employment of ionic exchange solid resins (IX) For example, there is no doubt that SX processing is in these days by far the most important industrial method to separate and recover metallic ions from aqueous solutions being easily applied in large-scale continuous steps. However, many difficulties appear in its practical operation, for example the loss of extractant due to reasons such as entrainment and crud formation, solubility of organic solvent into the metal-containing aqueous feed phase and volatilization of the diluents employed to dissolve the extractant and the phase modifier The immobilization of the extractant in a solid polymeric matrix would constitute a practical manner to overcome these disadvantages. There are two known methods to retain the extractant in a solid phase: the use of solvent impregnated resins (SIRs) Up to date, in hydrometallurgy it has had major advances in the use of SIRs than microcapsules as much in their preparation as in their application in specific areas Particularly, MCs and their applications have been investigated in many fields like agricultural Some researchers have focused their works with the goal to produce microcapsules using common monomers and polymerization initiators In this work, the removal of Cd(II) and Cu(II) using microcapsules containing the compound, 2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester, have been studied. The microcapsules were prepared by copolymerization of styrene (ST) with ethylene glycol dimethacrylate (EGDMA) by using the oil in water suspension method. In the literature it has not found information on the use of EGDMA to prepare this type of microcapsules, which would present several interesting characteristics. The synthesis of MCs under different experimental conditions and the determination of microencapsulated extractant were studied first. Furthermore, the characterization of the yielded microspheres by means of scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and porosimetry was accomplished. Finally metallurgical sorption tests of both metals from single acid aqueous solutions were carried out in batchwise. Equilibrium and kinetics information derived from these experimental results are analyzed and discussed. 2-Ethylhexyl phosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester, C Stock solutions of Cd(II) and Cu(II) were prepared by dissolving CdCl The syntheses of microcapsules were carried out in a batch-type reactor having a 1.0 The measurement of the content of the organophosphonic extractant retained within the microcapsules was carried out by the same potentiometric titration method reported in our previous works The microcapsules containing 2-ethylhexyl phosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester were observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) in an apparatus JEOL, JSM 6380LV following a normal procedure which includes a prior gold-coating of microcapsules before their analysis with the purpose of minimizing the eventual surface charging effect. The pore diameter, the void fraction and the surface area were determined by means of BET porosimetry with a Micromeritics ASAP 2010 porosimeter. In order to test the feasibility to extract metallic ions from aqueous solutions with the microcapsules, the next step was to carry out some metal uptake equilibrium and kinetics experiments. The experiments were carried out in a batchwise by contacting 0.2 First the production of MCs was determined varying the proportion between the two monomers employed in this study, namely styrene and ethylene glycol dimethacrylate. It is clear by observing their chemical structures that styrene is more hydrophobic than EGDMA however this compound would present improved characteristics as an excellent cross-linker. Microcapsules were prepared by changing the monomer feed composition between 0 and 100% of each monomer. The copolymerization reaction was carried out at 70 Typical SEM micrographs of the microcapsules obtained are shown in The relation between the quantity of the alkylphosphonic extractant retained within the microcapsules and the mass fraction of ethylene glycol dimethacrylate employed in the synthesis are also shown in When microcapsules are used for metal uptake from aqueous solutions, it is interesting to measure their metal loading ratio which becomes a value feasible to compare with the chemical sorption capacity of other adsorbents. We have defined the metal loading ratio as the weight of metal encapsulated to the molar mass of extractant held in the microcapsules, expressed as (mg Many adsorption rate models have been studied trying to explain the experimental results obtained in a number of works whose aim has been focused on the sorption of existing metallic ion contaminants in aqueous solutions onto different natural or synthetic adsorbents. In most of these cases the sorption process includes a chemical reaction between the adsorbent and the metal to remove by a mechanism called chemisorption. The extractants bond to the metal through the formation of coordination compounds, salt formation, or ion-pair formation, thereby extracting them from their dilute solutions. The global mechanism also includes the diffusion of metal ions through aqueous film and diffusion of metal complexes through the pores of microcapsules, becoming any of them the rate-determining step of the overall process. Then, the extraction of metal ions by microcapsules would be ruled by a mass transfer process accompanied by chemical reaction that allows the metal ions to be separated and concentrated from the aqueous feed solution toward the acceptor aqueous. In a previous work concerned with the sorption behavior of Ga(III) and In(III) and lanthanides into a microcapsule loaded with the alkylphosphonic extractant used herein, our results indicated that both chemical reaction and diffusion processes would affect the rate-determining step It would be reasonable to think that when the microcapsules are prepared by the chemical method employed in this study which is based on the copolymerization of the monomers in the presence of the extractant in an organic diluent at 70 This model is proposed on the basis of the sorption ability of the microcapsules and is written as follows: Eq. For the boundary conditions at Eq. This pseudo-second-order kinetics model to the experimental results of kinetics of extraction of Cd(II) and Cu(II) with the microcapsules loaded with the phosphonic extractant is applied in  The use of a cross-linking agent such as ethylene glycol dimethacrylate allows the introduction of a certain degree of reticulation in the structure of the matrix, depending on the initial content of the cross-linker compound, leading to the formation of polymers with a porous three-dimensional network whose structural flexibility makes it possible to obtain microspheres with an improved capacity for diffusion of species through them. Also, the use of monomers such as styrene with a hydrophobic character lower than that of divinylbenzene allows an adequate hydrophilic–hydrophobic balance and degree of swelling of the MCs and favors their wettability, facilitating the adsorption of the metal ions from aqueous solutions. The results presented in this study show that the use of microencapsulation of commercial extractants in these polymeric matrix constitute an interesting alternative methodology to be employed specially for treating dilute aqueous solution polluted with metallic ions. These microcapsules have a large specific surface area, a very high and improved selectivity with respect to ion-exchange resins and are less expensive since they are prepared following a low cost method using simple and commercially available materials. The use of microcapsules can be considered a clean technology in separation processes. The application of this MCs system at an industrial level considers the use of a column technology. The simplicity of the reactor and the ease of operation of the columns make it possible to believe that a column packed with MCs can be easily adapted to industrial applications. Hydrophobic interaction between the polymer structure of the MCs and the extractant retained in their structures can be assured, thus avoiding loss of the organic compound from the polymer matrix. Moreover, the typical loss of extractant of SX processing caused by its dissolving or entrainment in the aqueous phase is also avoided since the extractants are immobilized on the polymer structures that make up the microcapsules. Once the adsorption process has occurred, the final step consists in back-extraction of the metal from the MCs by means of a desorption step by contacting them with a suitable stripping phase consisting of a metal-acceptor solution and where the enrichment of metal is achieved by a continuous increasing of its content in this solution. In the stripping stage, the MCs release the adsorbed metals, where then it will be available for a new adsorption–desorption cycle. This point is especially important in continuous-columns experiments whose results are currently being analyzed and will be reported shortly. Microcapsules based on copolymers of Styrene (ST) and ethylene glycol dimethacrylate (EGDMA) containing 2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester as extractant were prepared by It was found that most of the extractant employed in the synthesis was immobilized within the microcapsules whose structures are spherical and having rough surfaces. Results of experiments accomplished by varying the proportion of both monomers showed that the high production of MCs and the content of extractant retained in their structure were independent of the amount of methacrylate monomer used as crosslinking agent in their synthesis. Microcapsules whose structure were constituted by 65% EGDMA and 35% ST showed best results with respect to the sorption of both metals. This monomer feed composition resulted in obtaining a polymeric matrix with appropriate degree of cross-linking and a suitable hydrophobic character for the retention of the extractant and the metal-complex formed. The extraction of metals with the alkylphosphonic compound immobilized in the microcapsules followed the same chemical pattern of behavior of this extractant than that observed in SX processing. This means that the chemical adsorption of metal ions in the microcapsules proceeds by a cation-exchange reaction on the surface of microspheres, which is facilitated by the polarity of the components that participate in it. The chemisorption of both metals onto the microcapsules containing 2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester follows a pseudo-second-order rate kinetics. PC-88A presented a higher rate constant, Results obtained in this study confirm the feasibility of applying the extractant microencapsulation method for the recovery or removal of toxic and valuable metallic ions from dilute aqueous solutions. The information achieved in this study will be of great value in subsequent steps of this research addressed to the employ of continuous columns packed with microcapsules loaded with suitable extractants. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of The Fondo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología de Chile (CONICYT) through project FONDECYT No. 1070608. The authors also express their gratitude to Daihachi Chem. Co. for providing PC-88A extractant. C. Araneda and C. Fonseca acknowledge Doctoral Fellowship from CONICYT.