Differences in forest productivity due to climate change may result in permanently altered levels of litterfall and litter on the forest floor. Using experimental litter removal and litter addition treatments, we investigated the effects of increased and decreased litterfall on early-stage litter decomposition and the abundance of meso-arthropods in a moist tropical forest. Litterbags containing freshly fallen leaves of Cecropia insignis (above and below the litter on the forest floor, and with and without fungicide) and Simarouba amara, or untreated birch wood (Betula sp.) were placed in either (1) plots where all litterfall was removed monthly (L−); (2) plots where litterfall was doubled monthly (L+), or (3) control plots (CT). Litter removal significantly slowed decomposition of both species and reduced the abundance of meso-arthropods on Simarouba litter. The fungicide treatment did not reduce apparent mass loss of Cecropia leaves. The litter addition treatment accelerated the decay of birch wood, probably because of increased nutrient availability from the extra litter; but there was no change in leaf-litter decomposition or meso-arthropod abundance in the L+ treatment. After 68 days, the concentrations of nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, and magnesium in partially decomposed Cecropia litter were higher in the L+ treatment and lower in the L− treatment. The accumulation of phosphorus and nitrogen was greater in the litter in L+ plots and lower in the L− plots while the release of potassium and magnesium from decomposing litter was lower in the L+ treatment and greater in the L− plots. Thus, differences in the quantity of litterfall affect decomposition with consequences for carbon and nutrient storage and cycling.In many tropical forests litterfall and decomposition represent the major pathway for the transfer of nutrients between the plants and the soil ( The litter layer helps to maintain favourable conditions for decomposition by regulating the microclimate (e.g. Litterfall has been shown to increase with rising atmospheric CO In a model of litterfall and decomposition in a tropical forest, Despite the substantial number of studies on decomposition in a wide range of ecosystems, the influence of a sustained change in litter quantity on decay rates has thus far been largely neglected. In the humid tropics, micro- and mesoarthropods and fungi are considered to be among the most important decomposers (e.g. The study site is in old-growth lowland moist tropical forest located on the Gigante Peninsula of the Barro Colorado Nature Monument in Panama, Central America. The soil is an oxisol with pH ca. 5.0, a low ‘available’ phosphorus concentration, but relatively high total nitrogen and exchangeable potassium, magnesium, and calcium ( Fifteen 45 To investigate how changes in litterfall affect decomposition rates, a litterbag experiment was set up in the 15 litter manipulation plots. Leaves of the common forest species In May 2004, four bags of wood, four untreated bags of The dried contents of the untreated litterbags of A second litterbag experiment was set-up to assess whether changes in litterfall affect meso-arthropod abundance on decomposing litter. Freshly fallen leaves of The comparison of litter decomposition in the treatments was based on the values of dry mass remaining at each collection. Repeated measures ANOVAs were performed to assess differences between litter manipulation treatments (CT, L+, L−) in decomposition for each experiment separately: (i) untreated Differences between treatments in the final nutrient concentrations and the accumulation or release of nutrients from All analyses were carried out using Genstat 7.0.2 (VSN International Ltd., Hemel Hempstead, UK). Litter removal slowed the decomposition of untreated Wood decomposed faster in the L+ treatment than in the L− or the CT plots, which did not differ (  The total number of meso-arthropods on Mass loss of The concentrations of nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, and magnesium in decomposing Litter removal treatments slowed the decomposition of leaf-litter. Although litterbags in the CT and L+ plots were covered by litter during the experiment while the litterbags in the L− plots remained exposed, it is unlikely that the decreased decomposition rates in litterbags in the L− plots were due to greater exposure. Frequent rainfall during the study period (rainy season) prevented drying-out, especially as litterbags usually keep litter wetter than under natural conditions ( Litter removal reduces the amount of substrate for microorganisms and the habitat space for arthropods ( Surprisingly, the total abundance of meso-arthropods in the litterbags did not differ greatly between the CT and L+ treatment, despite the increase in substrate and habitat space with the addition of litter, and we observed only transient increases in mite and springtail abundance in the L+ plots. Similar results have been reported for temperate forests, where changes in both abundance and community composition in litter addition treatments were generally less than expected ( Although the initial nutrient concentration of the litter is important in determining decay rates, nutrient availability in the surface soil may also have some influence ( In contrast to the patterns of decomposition for leaf-litter, wood decomposed faster in the L+ treatment than in the CT or L− plots, which did not differ. As our litterbags excluded larger saprophagous insects such as termites and beetles, fungi were the main decomposers of woody debris in this experiment; this result therefore suggests that fungal activity in the forest floor is greater in the L+ plots than the other treatments. Higher nutrient availability in the forest floor in the L+ plots appears to have reduced the nutrient limitation of decomposition for nutrient-poor, high-lignin substrate such as wood. Although it has been suggested that fungi are more critical for decomposition processes in the dry season than the rainy season ( There remain two possible explanations for the similarity in mass loss between treated and untreated litterbags: Untreated leaf-litter decomposed faster than fungicide-treated litter, but fungal biomass in the untreated litterbags compensated for the lost weight. Casual observation of the samples supports this suggestion, as there was no visible evidence of fungal mycelium in the treated litterbags, while untreated bags often had a high proportion of mycelium on the litter. The application of fungicide reduced the competition between fungi and bacteria and bacterial decomposition increased ( It is probable that a combination of these two factors contributed to the lack of differences in decomposition between fungicide-treated and untreated We could find no studies on the effects of chlorothalonil on soil fauna and did not measure meso-arthropods in the fungicide experiment, so there is a small possibility that chlorothalonil affected decomposition via an effect on litter fauna. Litter manipulation modified the timing and degree of nutrient release or accumulation during early-stage decay in this experiment, and resulted in differences between treatments in the concentrations of nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, and magnesium in Despite the lack of effects of the fungicide treatments, the differences in the concentrations of potassium are suggestive of greater fungal activity in the L+ plots. Potassium is selectively taken up by fungi during the decomposition process ( Decreased litter standing crop slowed the decomposition of leaf-litter by decreasing the population of decomposers and by reducing the supply of available nutrients in the soil. Increased litterfall appeared to have little effect on early-stage leaf-litter decomposition, but the accelerated decomposition of wood suggests greater availability of nutrients to decomposer organisms in the L+ treatment. It is possible that greater fungal biomass in litter in the L+ plots obscured increased mass loss due to decomposition compared to the controls; this merits further study. Litterfall in forests may be affected by climate change through changes in precipitation and increased primary production. Thus, although many studies have found that differences in litter quality under elevated CO We thank Jesus Valdez and Ruscena Wiederholt for help with fieldwork, Dr. M. Kaspari and Mary Johnston for helpful comments and the use of the Berlese funnels, and two anonymous reviewers for critical comments that improved this manuscript. This study was funded by the Mellon Foundation, the Gates Cambridge Trust, the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, a Worts’ Travelling Scholarship, and a Cambridge Philosophical Society Travel Grant. The entire study was carried out at the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, to whom we are very grateful.