Pure aluminum matrix composites reinforced with 40–55 vol.% Al2O3 particles of various sizes (5, 10, 29, and 58 μm) are produced by gas-pressure infiltration. Comparison of compressive flow stresses of these composites at quasistatic and dynamic strain rates shows that, in accord with the literature, the increase in flow stress of dynamically compressed composites results from the sensitivity of the matrix to strain rate. The accumulation of damage in the composites is quantified through high-precision density measurements. Damage accumulates primarily as a function of strain due to particle cracking followed by separation of the broken-particle segments and, to a lesser extent, by matrix cavitation. Composites reinforced by smaller particles have a higher flow stress, lower strain-rate sensitivity, and accumulate less damage, while a greater concentration of reinforcement increases the flow stress, strain-rate sensitivity, and the rate of damage accumulation.Metal matrix composites for structural applications are potentially subject to dynamic loading. Thus the effect of strain rate is an important consideration for a complete understanding of deformation processes in these materials. Investigations of the dynamic deformation of reinforced metals at room temperature include a diverse range of whisker, short fiber and particle-reinforced aluminum matrix composites, typically with ceramic concentrations of 25 vol.% or less A critical review of the dynamic mechanical properties reported in the literature (for strain rates <5000 s Microstructural damage, usually associated with the reinforcement, also plays an important role in the deformation of metal matrix composites at both low and high rates of deformation. Intensified damage in the form of reinforcement fracture is documented in some whisker-reinforced systems as the strain rate is increased In the present study, a significant strain-rate sensitivity is demonstrated for infiltrated composites that contain more than 40 vol.% Al Alumina-reinforced aluminum composites were prepared by gas-pressure infiltration using 99.99% pure aluminum and α-Al Details of the gas-pressure infiltration process are discussed elsewhere The cast composites feature uniformly distributed Al Cylindrical test specimens were machined from the as-cast composites using electro-discharge machining. The same nominal geometry was used for both dynamic and quasistatic compression tests: 7 mm in length and 8 mm in diameter. A screw-driven universal testing machine was used to perform quasistatic compression tests at constant cross-head speed with an initial strain rate of 1.4×10 A conventional split Hopkinson pressure bar (SHPB) was used for dynamic compression tests at nominal strain rates between 500 and 3000 s It has been shown that nearly all plastic work during SHPB testing is converted into heat The microstructure of the as-cast composites was characterized by optical and scanning electron microscopy. Specimens were prepared for metallography after Ref. Damage accumulation was monitored through density measurements based on Archimede's principle with distilled water as the immersion fluid. A microbalance with sensitivity of 0.01 mg was used to ensure density measurements within 0.01%. For dynamically tested specimens the density was measured before and after compression. For specimens tested at low strain rates the density was measured before and after compression to a specific deformation. This procedure was repeated such that the change in density for the composites could be determined as a function of the accumulated plastic strain. Damage monitoring in the quasistatic tests was performed on at least two specimens utilizing different strain increments to verify that damage measurements are not dependent on the magnitude of the strain increment. The volume fraction of reinforcement in the as-cast composites was also determined from the density measurements, assuming that the composite is initially pore-free and that the densities of aluminum and alumina are 2.6989 and 3.97 g cm Quasistatic compressive flow curves show that the composite flow stress increases significantly as the average particle size is decreased, The flow stress reaches a nominal plateau near 10% strain, and eventually begins to decrease at higher strains: the 10A material reaches a maximum near 12% strain, while the 29A material does not reach a maximum until near 40% strain. The 29A material was compressed to strains of 75% without failure. The 5A and 10A materials, on the other hand, sometimes fractured in compression along planes approximately 45° to the loading axis as described for a whisker-reinforced composite in Ref. Dynamic compression increases the flow stress of all of the composites. The flow stress at 5% strain is plotted in Optical metallography of compressed specimens shows that microstructural damage is dominated by particle cracking, as was previously observed in these materials subjected to tensile loading In the 10A and 5A materials, matrix cavitation was also observed in the regions where the matrix is most constrained by the particles, Accumulation of damage is quantified through the damage parameter The flow stress in particle reinforced metals is known to increase as the average interparticle distance is decreased The 10A material exhibits the same trends as for the other materials in flow stress, strain-rate sensitivity and damage; however, it is distinguished by a higher fraction ceramic resulting in somewhat different quantitative results. Thus, a comparison of the 10A material to the 58A, 29A and 5A materials is deferred to the final section of the discussion. We provide in Several authors have used finite-element models to study dynamic deformation of aluminum matrix composites using a matrix flow law of the form: In a published study conducted on high-purity (99.995%) aluminum the difference in flow stress between strain rates of 10 In the present study, a result similar to that observed for cold worked aluminum is obtained with the composites. The difference in flow stress between quasistatic (10 When reloaded at a low strain rate, the flow curve of the dynamically-tested specimens essentially rejoins the quasistatic flow curve, There is a small transient of higher flow stress upon quasistatic reloading of dynamically compressed specimens, The present observations are interpreted in terms of a composite flow law after The damage micromechanisms observed in these composites, namely particle cracking and matrix cavitation in narrow interparticle regions, are in accord with previous studies on particle reinforced metals. In particular, particle cracks are oriented parallel to the imposed stress axis (and are as a consequence perpendicular to a principal tensile stress axis) as in Refs. Previous studies of particulate metal matrix composites in tension have shown that the accumulation of damage can be characterized by the change in density of the material with strain The basic trend of decreasing damage with decreasing particle size, This significant difference between high (≥40 vol.% as studied here) and low (<20 vol.% as found in the literature) volume fraction composites can be rationalized by consideration of their different microstructures. In metals reinforced with isolated particles, the applied stress is transferred to the particles primarily by the matrix, hence a higher matrix flow stress results in more fractured particles. In high volume fraction composites, on the other hand, and especially in compression, stress can be transferred directly from one particle to another across contact points where peak particle stresses are expected to be found. This explains the observation that damage accumulation depends primarily on strain in the present composites and significantly less on the matrix flow stress. The 10A material, which is distinguished from the three other composites by a higher fraction ceramic (55 versus 42 vol.%), exhibits a compressive flow stress that significantly exceeds its flow stress in tension This difference in behavior as a function of particle volume fraction may perhaps result from a difference in the relative stability of the network of touching ceramic particles to loading. At higher fractions ceramic, there are more interparticle contact points per particle The 10A material displays greater strain-rate sensitivity compared to the other composites, The compressive flow stress of Al Dynamic compression tests performed in this study show that the absolute increase in the composite flow stress at high strain rates (near 1000 s Damage accumulates in these composites as the compressive strain increases, predominantly by particle cracking parallel to the compression direction and to a lesser extent by matrix voiding in regions of high triaxiality. The rate of damage accumulation (as measured by the density-derived damage parameter This work was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation under Contract No. 20-55291.98, by core funding of the Laboratory for Mechanical Metallurgy at EPFL, and by a one-year grant from the Chinese Government for the stay of one of the authors (Fahe Cao) at EPFL. The authors also wish to thank Shiyu Tian who performed the dynamic compressive tests at the Inner Mongolia Institute of Metal Research.