Reverse flotation of a subbituminous coal was investigated and it turned out that a large amount of DTAC was needed in this process. The application of the zero-conditioning time method along with the use of PAM significantly reduced DTAC consumption from over 6kg/t down to 1.375kg/t.
                  Dextrin was necessary to improve the selectivity. The addition of a dispersant (tannic acid) improved further the quality of concentrate. The concentrate ash content of 16.7% at 50.4% yield was obtained for the feed ash content of 34.6%. Although this gives only about 64% combustible recovery, since the inherent ash content for this coal was determined to be 10% the room for further improvement is very limited.
                  The best separation was obtained around a natural pH of 7.5–8.4 for this coal.In Part I of this paper ( Two methods of dealing with the problem of high DTAC consumption were considered. First, we decided to use a polymer as a blinder, and second, to use the zero-conditioning time method. Since adsorption of polymers onto a given mineral may prevent a collector from adsorbing onto such a mineral, in some flotation processes the polymers are used as blinders. For instance, the use of blinders is common in potash ore flotation in which long chain primary amines are utilized to float sylvite (KCl) from halite (NaCl). However, the ore also contains a few percent of slimes (clays, anhydrite, dolomite, etc.) which adsorb large quantity of the amine making the process highly unselective. The process is only possible with the use of blinders (e.g. carboxymethyl cellulose, guar gum, starch, etc.). The zero-conditioning time technique was another method which was studied to reduce the high collector consumption.  According to the discussed thermodynamic treatment, to improve probability of particle-to-bubble attachment in flotation, the bubbles should carry as much of flotation agents as possible to increase adsorption at solid/gas interface, or conditioning time should be kept short to reduce the adsorption at solid/liquid interface. This is what we call here “the zero-conditioning time method”. The process can be carried out either without any conditioning step prior to flotation, or, better, with the reagents introduced to the flotation system with the stream of bubbles ( There are a few papers on the aerosol addition of frother (MIBC) or oil to the flotation systems and the commercial installations of frothmisers have also been reported ( The LS20 subbituminous coal was used throughout this project. The proximate analyses, particle size distribution, and other characteristics were given in Part I of this paper ( Arquand 12–15 (AKZO) which contains about 50% of dodecyltrimethyl ammonium chloride (DTAC) was used as a collector. Dextrin was used as coal depressant. Tannic acid was used as a dispersant in the flotation tests and the 1% stock solution was prepared using distilled water. A polyacrylamide, trade name A-100, which was kindly provided by Cytec Canada Inc., was used as a blinder and 0.2% stock solution was prepared using distilled water. The molecular weight of A-100 is high and its degree of anionicity is within the 8.5–12.5% range (according to the supplier). Flotation tests were carried out in a 2-L Denver laboratory cell. The basic experimental procedure consisted of using 200 The flotation procedures were the same as in the conventional reverse flotation tests except that DTAC was not conditioned with the pulp at all prior to flotation. The air valve of the cell was opened before addition of DTAC. The flotation began as soon as the collector was added. The effect of DTAC and PAM on the conventional reverse flotation of coal is shown in The addition of dextrin slightly decreased the yield of rejects (curves 3 and 4 in The yield and ash contents of the concentrate are presented as a function of collector dosages in These results are significant since they showed that the addition of PAM greatly reduced the consumption of DTAC. More than half of DTAC was saved by adding 500 Although DTAC consumption in coal reverse flotation was greatly reduced from 6 The zero-conditioning method was tested to reduce further collector consumption. The results are shown in The addition of dextrin again reduces the yield of reject (curves 3 and 4 in The concentrate yield and ash content decreased with increasing DTAC consumption in the reverse flotation process with the zero-conditioning ( The significance of these results is obvious. First, the results show that the reverse flotation of subbituminous coal is possible and that with the zero-conditioning method along with the use of PAM the high dosage of DTAC can be reduced to a low level. Second, since amines are also widely used in potash and phosphate industry, the zero-conditioning time concept may have much broader implications. The zero-conditioning time concept and its application in flotation are further discussed in another paper ( The effect of dextrin on reverse coal flotation is shown in PAM plays a critical role in the studied reverse coal flotation process. The addition of PAM significantly reduced DTAC consumption by blinding the coal surfaces, so the amount of the collector adsorbed by coal was apparently reduced. As curve 1 in The effect of pH on the reverse coal flotation is also significant. For this coal the optimum flotation was achieved over the 7.5–8.4 pH range (this is a natural pH for this coal). The tests reveal that further increase of pH by adding sodium hydroxide into the pulp resulted in a sharp decrease of the yield of the reject. ( A large amount of amine (DTAC) was needed to float gangue minerals from coal by the reverse flotation when only amine was used. The addition of a blinder (PAM) significantly reduced the collector consumption. The application of the zero-conditioning method along with the use of the blinder further reduced collector consumption. Dextrin is necessary to improve the selectivity in this process. The addition of a dispersant (tannic acid) decreased the concentrate ash content by a few percent, improving further the quality of the concentrate. The best separation was achieved over a natural pH range of 7.5–8.5 of this coal. The results showed that both the use of the blinder and the application of the zero-conditioning time method contribute to the significant reduction of DTAC consumption from over 6 Funding for this project was provided by the National Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada through its Strategic Grant.