This paper concerns the liquid phase sintering (LPS) process for the fabrication of SiC based ceramic materials and their characterization. The submicron SiC powder was also utilized for the improvement of LPS-SiC materials. A thermal exposure test was carried out to examine the high temperature stability of LPS-SiC materials. A mixture of Al2O3 and Y2O3 particles was used as an additive in the LPS process. LPS-SiC materials were fabricated by various sintering parameters such as sintering temperature, additive composition ratio (Al2O3/Y2O3) and additive amount (Al2O3
                     +Y2O3). The strength of LPS-SiC materials was examined at room temperature using a three-point bending test. LPS-SiC materials fabricated at 1820°C had a density of about 3.1g/cm3 and a flexural strength of about 780MPa. However, the strength of LPS-SiC materials substantially decreased after the thermal exposure at 1400°C for 10h in the Ar atmosphere, due to the dramatic increase of weight loss by severe erosion.SiC fiber reinforced SiC matrix composite (SiC The purpose of present study is to investigate the effects of process parameters including sintering temperature, additive composition ratio and total additive amount on the properties of LPS-SiC materials. The retained strength of LPS-SiC materials after the high temperature exposure is also evaluated. A commercial SiC powder (β-type, Ibiden Corp., Japan) with average size of about 0.3 The microstructure of LPS-SiC materials was analyzed using a scanning electron microscope. The surface of the as-pressed sample was etched by Murakami's solution for the microstructural observation, after a mechanical polishing by diamond powders. The densities of LPS-SiC materials were determined by the Archimedes’ method. The mechanical properties of the LPS-SiC materials were examined at room temperature using a three-point bending test. The thermal exposure test for the LPS-SiC materials was also conducted at temperatures of 1200 and 1400   The microstructure of LPS-SiC materials sintered at 1820   The dependence of flexural strength of LPS-SiC materials on the thermal exposure temperature is shown in LPS-SiC materials had a good density of about 3.1 This work was supported by Korea Institute of Science & Technology Evaluation and Planning (KISTEP) and Ministry of Science & Technology (MOST), Korean government, through its Basic Atomic Energy Research Institute (BAERI) Program.