The flotation and adsorption behaviors of two quaternary ammonium collectors DTAC (dodecyl trimethyl ammonium chloride) and CTAC (cetyltrimethyl ammonium chloride) on diaspore and kaolinite were investigated in this work. The flotation recovery of diaspore increases with the increase of pH and the decrease of particle size, however, the situations for kaolinite are opposite. Furthermore, the influence of pH on flotation of kaolinite decreases with the decrease of particle size, and for the fine particles (undersize 0.045mm), the flotation recovery with CTAC which has a longer hydrocarbon chain and is believed to have a stronger collecting ability is lower than that with DTAC. The dramatic differences of the flotation behaviors between diaspore and kaolinite are correlated to the differences of their crystal structures. The morphologies of diaspore and kaolinite particles in different size were studied by SEM. The kaolinite particles have much larger specific surface areas (about 7 times) than the diaspore particles due to their layered structure. This leads to the differences of collector adsorption behaviors on kaolinite and diaspore and results in the different flotation behavior.Diaspore-type bauxite is the major aluminum resource in China. However, for most of them, the mass ratio of Al During the latest ten years, many studies have been conducted to investigate the flotation behaviors of kaolinite and diaspore in order to understand and control the diasporic bauxite reverse flotation ( Generally, many flotation phenomena can be interpreted by considering the adsorption of collectors and modifying reagents. Several experimental techniques such as electron spin resonance ( To make a contribution toward the understanding of the bauxite reverse flotation, the flotation and adsorption behaviors of diaspore and kaolinite in different size fractions with two quaternary ammonium collectors (DTAC and CTAC) were studied. The morphologies of the particles in different sizes were characterized by SEM and AFM. The differences of flotation behaviors between diaspore and kaolinite were interpreted by focusing on the differences of crystal structure and adsorption behaviors of collectors. Kaolinite and diaspore were obtained from Xiaoguan in Henan province, China and Xiaoyi in Shanxi province, China, respectively. The samples were handpicked and ground by porcelain mill and sieved into three size fractions (0.075–0.1 DTAC and CTAC of analytical grade from Nanjing Robiot Co., Ltd. were used as collectors as well as frothers. Bromothymol blue (BTB) of analytical grade from Damao Chemical Reagent Factory China was used as an indicator. HCl and NaOH of analytical grade from Damao Chemical Reagent Factory China were used to adjust the pH of the system. Deionized water was used in this experiment. Flotation tests of pure minerals were performed in a 40 Zeta potentials were determined using a Brookhaven ZetaPlus Zeta Potential Analyzer (USA). The mineral samples were ground to −2 The morphologies of the particles in different sizes obtained by sedimentation were characterized by SEM (JEOL, JSM-5600LV, Japan) and TMAFM (DI Nanoscope multimodeV, USA). The specific surface area of diaspore and kaolinite in different size ranges were determined by the BET nitrogen adsorption. The amount of collectors adsorbed on minerals surfaces was determined by UV spectrophotometry (Unico UV-2012, China) in this work. At a pH 7.5–8.5 buffer solution of phosphate, the color of bromothymol blue solution will decrease due to the association reaction between quaternary ammonium saltsand bromothymol Pure mineral sample (2  As shown in  The specific surface areas of diaspore and kaolinite in different size fractions determined by the BET test were shown in The adsorption measurements of DTAC and CTAC on diaspore and kaolinite were shown in The adsorption isotherms of DTAC and CTAC on diaspore and kaolinite surface were shown in The crystal structure of diaspore consists of hexagonal closest packed oxygen sheets with Al filling two thirds of the octahedral site. Each occupied octahedron shares four edges with adjacent Al octahedral to form double chains in the As the pH increases, the zeta potential of both diaspore and kaolinite decreases (see The flotation behavior of diaspore can be explained by classical understanding of cationic flotation of oxides and silicates. As pH increases, the increased adsorbed collector density (see The flotation behaviors of kaolinite are more complicated with respect to those of diaspore. As the pH increases, the mild increase of adsorbed collector density (see Due to the difference of particle morphology between diaspore and kaolinite, the specific surface area of kaolinite is about 7 times larger than that of diaspore with the same particle size fraction. This intrigues many different adsorption behaviors between diaspore and kaolinite: (1) adsorbed collector density of diaspore increases dramatically with increasing the pH, while that of kaolinite just has a slight increase; (2) adsorbed collector density of diaspore is larger than that of kaolinite at the same size fraction; (3) residual concentration of diaspore solution is much larger than that of kaolinite solution. The lowest collector residual concentration of diaspore solution in this study is about 1 There are several anomalous kaolinite flotation behaviors in this work. The flotation recovery of kaolinite undersize 0.045 The authors would like to thank the Project support by