It is often necessary to identify close-packed or nearly close-packed planes in a crystal. This can be done by inspection in crystal structures where one atom occupies each lattice point – i.e. face-centred cubic and body-centred cubic crystals. However, in more complex crystal structures intuitive inspection becomes rather difficult. The present paper describes a simple method for identifying close-packed or nearly close-packed planes in crystals containing more than one atom per lattice point. The method also distinguishes between “flat” planes, where all the atom centres lie in the plane, and “rumpled” planes, where the atom centres do not lie in the plane. The extent of the departure from true “flatness” can also be estimated.Not only do close-packed planes play a prominent role in the crystallography of phase transformations The identification of close-packed or nearly close-packed planes can usually be done by inspection in simple crystal structures with only a single atom per lattice point. However, in more complex crystal structures, with more than one atom per lattice point, identification by inspection becomes difficult, if not impossible. In fact, a great many intermetallic phases fall into this category. An extreme example is Al In a number of the edge-to-edge matching papers A large structure factor | Calculate the structure factor | Calculate the volume Calculate the interplanar spacing The area per atom in the plane ( Clearly the larger the structure factor | For a truly close-packed plane made up of atoms of diameter In a fcc crystal of lattice parameter Examples of the application of Eq.  For a constant value of Eq. When the first order reflection from a plane ( When the first-order planes, such as (1 In a bcc structure with lattice parameter This shows predictions that are generally similar to the earlier results for the fcc structure, with non-zero values of | Before moving on to lattices with more than one atom per lattice point, it is worth making an important point. When | In a hexagonal close-packed (hcp) structure with lattice parameters When compared with fcc and bcc, the hcp case illustrates another feature associated with structures with more than one atom per lattice point. When | The value of | For the hcp structure analysed above, two of these situations are of particular interest. The first of these is the case where An important consequence of having nearly close-packed planes that are not atomically “flat” is that some of the atom rows lying in these planes will not be straight rows of atoms, but will be “zigzag” rows where the deviation from the overall direction of the atom row has a component that does not lie entirely in the plane being considered. If one of these “zigzag” rows is selected as a matching atom row, then it must be remembered that the plane defined by the “zigzag” character of the row does not lie in the ( Eq. The diamond structure has two non-zero values of | Eq. The first is that of the carbide cementite (Fe The interesting features of this table are as follows: The most close-packed plane is the (1 The three closest-packed planes – (1 The two closest-packed planes in austenite (1 Only one of the reasonably close-packed planes – (2 There are some relatively close-packed planes with quite small The second more complex structure examined is that of the intermetallic Mg The interesting features of this table are: The two closest-packed planes are (3 This would suggest that the other planes with a reasonably high degree of close-packing would be (6 The (4 The other pair of planes in the table with the same value of ( The simple formula in Eq.