This chapter provides suggestions about the kinds of ecological processes that need to be reconsidered. The new dynamical soil detritus food web model should model indirect effects explicitly, it should incorporate spatial heterogeneity to predict nutrient availability, and it should reproduce and estimate how soil food web structure evolves over time. There are a number of other shortcomings independent of life status, while there is an intra-group differentiation in feeding preferences and reaction to environmental stress factors. The new model concept can be extended with mechanisms that appear important from the conducted experiments. Until now, only a few studies have verified the equilibrium DFW model against overall ecosystem fluxes. In contrast, the dynamical model does not start with observed biomasses, and therefore verification is even more important. This should not only be based on overall ecosystem fluxes, but on the observed dynamics of individual populations. Consideration of experimental results in food web models will allow a better integration of interactions in belowground communities into food web models and improve their acceptance by the community of soil ecologists, thereby achieving the ability to build more general soil food web models in the future.  A shortcoming of the DFW model is that it does not address temporal variations within years, which is important, given the objective of the model to relate soil food web structure to nutrient availability in agroecosystems.  The consecutive step of adding dynamics to the model starts from observed biomass dynamics ( A more general idea about dynamics in populations is to be preferred, for instance by describing the population dynamics in terms of differential equations of the Lotka-Volterra type (  There are a number of other shortcomings (e.g., that the functional group approach assumes similar contributions within the group) independent on life status, while there is intra-group differentiation in feeding preferences, reaction to environmental stress factors, etc. Furthermore, the lack of loops such as cannibalism and intra guild predation, grazing-induced changes in the structure of microbial communities and the lack of consideration of mutualistic interactions, are not considered here because of limitations of space. Detritivorous and microbivorous decomposer fauna significantly enhance decomposition through so-called ‘indirect effects' of their feeding activity ( A systematic representation of indirect effects in DFW models requires a better understanding of the underlying mechanisms such as litter fragmentation and translocation, transport, inoculation, and growth limitations. The present DFW-model has six different model parameters that can be changed to take account of theses indirect effects: the input rate of substrate ( A particularly challenging task in future soil food web models is to incorporate non-trophic indirect interactions, which is probably indispensable for depicting and forecasting the dynamics of populations. In the following we make a few suggestions how an indirect effect could be modelled, and which environmental and population dynamical model parameters should change: The most important indirect interactions in soil food webs are those that are transferred in the food web through the abiotic forces, namely nutrients. By feeding on microbes, grazers produce nitrogen rich faeces. In a closed system this N can be taken up by prey species (microbes), which escaped from consumption. These “escaped” microbes compensate the loss of prey individuals by increased growth due to the N enrichment. Bacteria or plants that are not grazed can take up the same N that is liberated after the grazing process ( Indirect effects are not only based on limiting N, but can also on other limiting resources like oxygen or phosphorus. Due to feeding and engineering of for instance earthworms, oxygen becomes more available, relaxing the limitation of growth rates by oxygen. A new model should not only capture C and N limitations but also other limiting resources. Different field mesocosms experiments show that in the presence of epigeic macroarthopods the decomposition and humification processes both in litter and underlying soil are significandy promoted ( Other indirect effects related to changes in the microbial community composition, changes in the distribution of litter resources in soil (bioturbation) and indirect mutualistic interactions may also need to be incorporated into future food web models to better understand and predict decomposer food webs ( Given the objective of the new model (i.e., to simulate temporal variation within years), spatial heterogeneity is important ( The spatial variability of soil biota is not only dependent on the spatial patterning of detritus or roots, but of all resources. Bengtsson and Berg (  As a result, if we want to simulate ecosystem processes on a large spatial scale then we should use many point models in space. The output of these point models must be scaled up to the larger spatial scale. For every point model, forcing variables as resource input and environmental conditions are used as input. Given the objective to relate nutrient availability within years, these point models should have a dynamic character. As also stated in the indirect effect section, a disadvantage of including more organic matter pools in the DFW model is the increase of model parameters. To solve parameter identification problems, we should have other experiments and observations. Cousins et al. (see Building complex interactions in belowground systems into a food web model to predict fluxes of matter and dynamics of populations is a challenging task. The basis of each food web model is that trophic species are In conclusion, at present there are enough opportunities to build dynamic soil food web models, which are able to depict and predict the dynamics and control of invertebrate populations. However, we call for a closer integration of experimentation and modelling to allow for model verification. The new model concept can be extended with mechanisms that appear important from the conducted experiments. Until now, only a few studies have verified the equilibrium DFW model against overall ecosystem fluxes ( In contrast, the dynamical model does not start with observed biomasses and therefore verification is even more important. This should not only be based on overall ecosystem fluxes but on the observed dynamics of individual populations. Other independent estimates of model parameters will depend on what kinds of experiments or observations can be carried out. For example, Cousins et al. (see