The various applications of solvent-extraction and liquid-membrane techniques for college students and researchers in the chemistry industry are limited at present because more comprehensive reference books are scarce. The present book provides a much-needed resource in this field. This book is a collection of articles, each written by different authors who presented papers at the 1999 International Solvent Extraction Conference. It seems that the idea was to develop this book as a joint project among expert authors whose new ideas will improve understanding of applications of solvent-extraction and liquid-membrane techniques in the future. I am sure that college students and researchers who already use these techniques, but who desire to improve their understanding or to solve existing process problems, will welcome this book, which fills a gap among the many books that deal with aspects of solvent-extraction and liquid-membrane techniques. The book covers applications within a wide range of chemistry, metallurgy, hydrometallurgy, chemical and mineral processing, and waste treatment. It begins with a foreword written by the editors, who provide a useful, informative introduction. The first chapter focuses on current and future prospects of solvent-extraction and liquid-membrane techniques, largely in the context of metal extraction. The next two chapters deal with the relevant thermodynamics, kinetics, and interfacial behavior principles. The latest developments and approaches applying modern methods in chemical-equilibrium analysis used for calculating extraction equilibrium and kinetic parameters are also introduced. Subsequent chapters describe engineering and technological aspects of various applications. The most recent applications, including hollow-fiber membrane-separation technology in pharmaceutical and biotechnological settings, gas absorption and stripping, and solvent-extraction technology for separation and purification in the primary recovery of metals from their ores, have entire chapters devoted to them. In addition, the methodology needed for mathematical modeling of solvent-extraction and liquid-membrane processes is presented for solving the coupling between chemical-reaction rates and mass-transfer rates, leading to multi-parametric expressions. The three final chapters are concerned with preparation and application processes for functionalized organic and inorganic sorbents, solid polymeric extractants, and solvent-impregnated resins, which are new materials for metal extraction and separations. Furthermore, characterization of the metal-extraction reactions involved and kinetics of adsorption are described in detail. The methodologies described in the different chapters are well documented and illustrated with specific examples. Extraction reagents, experimental results and the physical data associated with particular compounds are given. The book is particularly well illustrated with diagrams and formulae where appropriate, along with suggestions for optimizing assays. Each chapter includes relevant books and references. These references extend to the primary research literature in many cases and are a good supplement to up-to-date papers on most aspects of modern technologies for solvent extraction and liquid membranes. With just over 600 references, this is one of the best-documented books ever seen. There is also a comprehensive subject index. In any case, this book provides a comprehensive review of the most important principles, calculations, and procedures and the most up-to-date information on the uses of solvent-extraction and liquid-membrane techniques available, and will serve for the students and researchers in the field to focus on new ideas as well as working scientists and engineers, who wish to learn about applications in areas other than their own. I therefore recommend it highly to those working in this field.