The mineral Atlas monograph of West Africa is a collection of research papers and extended abstracts summarizing the geology, metallogenesis and prospectivity of several gold deposits from the Archaean and Palaeoproterozoic domains of the West African craton (WAC), with inclusion of a summary of a Cu The limitation of the mineral Atlas monograph lies in the fact that the majority of contributions present data for gold deposits (Neoarchean to Paleoproterozoic). However, the insight given from these contributions conclusively shows that gold mineralization in the Paleoproterozoic formed prior to, and during the Eburnean orogeny (ca. 2130–1980 From Mauritania, Heron et al. describe the Tasiast gold deposit from the Mesoarchean Aouéouat Belt in Mauritania, which are hosted in the Tasiast thrust. The Tasiast deposit has a calculated age of 2.83 The papers by Ouiya et al., Augustin et al. and Tshibubudze and Hein for Burkina Faso present new data on the vein-hosted mineralization at the Nassara deposit in the Boromo-Goren belt (southwestern Burkina Faso), the Wona-Kona gold deposit in the Houndé belt, and sheeted and stockworks quartz-carbonate and tourmaline veins of the Essakane goldfield (Oudalan-Gorouol greenstone belt, northern Burkina Faso), respectively. They highlight the importance of syn-Eburnean metallogenesis developed in gold camps that are strongly structurally controlled. McCauig et al. describe the 2.09 Gold metallogeny throughout the life of the Eburnean orogeny is also evident from gold deposits in Ghana, which has been a major producer of gold ore in West Africa from world class deposits such as Obuasi, Bogoso, Tarkwa-Damang and others (c.f., In their paper on the gold mineralization at the Ity skarn deposit in western Cote d'Ivoire, Béziat et al. show that gold mineralization is restricted to veins in the hanging-wall and footwall of a granodiorite-tonalite body, with mineable gold grades in saprolite. Gold deposits in the Syama-Tabakoroni trend in southeast Mali are presented in companion papers by Ballo et al. and Traore et al. The structurally hosted deposits are largely mined from an upper oxidised-weathered zone that overlies a sulphide ore zone. The several deposit styles present a number of potential exploration targets along the Syama-Bananaso Shear Zone and associated splay shears. In contrast, Salvi et al. describe the Kalana deposit which is hosted by a group of subhorizontal quartz veins in the Bougouni-Keikoro sedimentary basin of southern Mali. At Kalana gold occurs in arsenopyrite, but is also present as free gold, which is common for syn-Eburnean gold deposits in the WAC. From the Paleoproterozoic Kedougou-Kenieba Inlier in western Mali, Lambert-Smith et al. present chemical data for the Gounkoto gold deposit in the Loulo district which supports research work by The final paper in the Monograph by Hein and Tshibubudze present exploration data for several manganese deposits in West Africa from the Oudalan province in Burkina Faso and the Ansongo Inlier in Mali. The geological and deposit styles indicate potential for manganese resources in manganiferous saprolitic profiles above which mangacrete duricrust may be developed. It is unfortunate that apart from studies by