The size–energy relationships in comminution have been the subject of much thought. One of the first theories, developed by Rittinger, postulated that the energy dissipated by the process is proportional to the new surface area generated. By incorporating a fractal description of the surface area — a scaling law — to Rittinger's theory, it is demonstrated that a generalized size–energy relationship, consistent with Hukki's generalized form, is the result. All the parameters required by the model are measureable, including the exponents. The model finds that the 80% passing size, commonly used by size–energy models such as Bond, is inappropriate; smaller particle sizes must be used in energy–size models to properly represent the particle distribution, as required by the Mean Value Theorem. The model includes a definition of the work index and efficiency, based on physical parameters, notably the feed and product temperatures. A discussion of the theory and topics of further investigation is presented. Finally, the properties of several minerals are tabulated.The size–energy relationships in comminution — comminution being the mechanical breakdown of solids into smaller particles without changing their state of aggregation — has interested many researchers for over a century. Notable theories were conceived by Rittinger, Kick and Bond ( Here, it is proposed that the Rittinger mechanism leads to Hukki's general relationship, as long as the fractal definition of the specific surface energy is adopted. Furthermore, the parameter set required to complete the model is fully measureable, including the Hukki exponent Since large thermal energies are inherent to comminution, they are included as part of the analysis — a discussion of the efficiency is not possible if they are excluded. A grinding circuit is a collection of machines that mechanically break ore, so that the valuable mineral can be economically selected out. If a particle, an element of the ore being processed, is followed, its energy can be written as During the operation of the comminution circuit, each machine will impart some energy to the particle. Specifically, the conventional operation of the machines is meant to increase the strain energy of the particle until a critical value is reached. Then, the strain energy rapidly decays and is partly converted to surface energy — the particle breaks. The increase in elastic energy can involve changes in kinetic, potential, and thermal energy, such as in a tumbling mill. The heat capacity at constant pressure is used in defining the thermal energy, implying that the total energy described above is in fact an enthalpy, which is appropriate for mass transport problems such as mineral processing ( As the circuit transforms the ore, each machine in the circuit will take a feed, at a specific mass rate or tonnage, and produces a product while consuming some power, as well as generating heat and other losses including sound, vibration and wear. This process is illustrated in The specific energy, as described by Eq. The feed and the product consist of more than just a single particle. A large population of particles, with a measurable distribution, flows through the circuit. The size distribution density of the mass fraction is given by This is related to the mass fraction distribution The specific energy must account for this distribution, particularly since certain terms are size dependent. Therefore, the specific energy is integrated over the distribution This is expanded to Using Eq. The area and the volume depend on the size of the particle — the remaining part of the integral is evaluated and re-expressed by making use of the Mean Value Theorem for Integrals, as outlined in the Comminution processes do not break particles cleanly — a rough and irregular surface area is produced, having properties similar to fractals. Because of this, fractal geometry is used to describe surfaces ( In regular geometry, d is strictly 2. In fractal geometry, the dimension relating surfaces to the length scale If this equation is substituted back to the specific energy, it becomes Multiple energies flow in and out of a comminution machine, as illustrated in The left hand side of Eq. It is assumed that all of the heat generated or the energy dissipated by the machine is entirely associated with and is a consequence of the breakage activity of the machine. All other secondary losses, such as transmission or drive losses, are neglected. Therefore, to simplify the expressions, a ratio of the thermal losses to the surface energy, is introduced It is observed that If the efficiency is defined as the ratio of the power used to create surfaces and the total power, then The power is then written as This equation is the fundamental result of applying the Rittinger breakage model and the fractal geometry description of areas to comminution. The final result can be compared to the Hukki form, as given by Eq. Here, it is proposed that From this, the work index, the specific energy required to break a particle from an infinite size to a characteristic size equal to 100 The rod mill work index is the specific energy required to break 1/2 Given the size difference between the feed and the product, the rod mill work index can be simplified to Similarly, the ball mill work index becomes It is important to note that the values for the efficiency, the area–volume constant and the dimension need not be the same for the indices. This model can be contrasted with others ( The methodology for determining the model parameters is presented next. A number of parameters need to be determined to complete the proposed fractal size–energy model, as specified by Eq. The density The tabulated values of the surface energy density At sizes greater that 1 In this case, it is expected that the particles dimension approaches 2. To use the nanomaterial size–breakage relationship, the Tolman length of the nanomaterial must be known. For surfaces or perimeters, there are seven basic methods to measure the fractal dimension ( the divider (or ruler) method, the box method, the triangle method, the slit-island method, power spectral method, the variogram method, and the size distribution method Some of these methods can be applied directly to the surface profile ( From the slice, the perimeter fractal dimension can be obtained using one of the seven aforementioned methods ( Moreover, there is a relationship between the surface area fractal dimension Therefore, by measuring the perimeter fractal dimension, the surface area fractal dimension can be estimated. Griffith energy balance concept can also be used to find the surface area dimension ( Other methods for determining the exponent The determination of the characteristic size Alternatively, with the area dimension This result is similar to the expression derived by Austin in his discussion of breakage laws ( As an example, the characteristic size based on the measured distribution is calculated using SAG feed data from the literature, as illustrated in The characteristic size calculation can be repeated for the VTM, using feed and discharge data, as plotted in Similarly, HRC feed and discharge distributions, as shown in Finally, for the ball mill feed and discharge distributions, as shown in Using Eq. There is a large difference between the characteristic sizes required by any of the models and the 80% passing size commonly used in mineral processing, regardless of the machine analysed. The implications of this difference are explained in the In the presence of strong acids, ore will dissolve, as the surface is eaten away. The mass loss per unit mass is When integrated, this equation produces a mass–size dissolution relationship If a known mass m It is assumed that the leeching effects will influence the determination of the area–volume constant; this effect needs to be qualified and quantified. Alternatively, commercial surface analysers, produced by vendors such as Quantachrome Instruments, Beckman Coulter, Intertek, BAM, and Micromeritics exist, as pictured in One system operates by exposing a cold particulate sample under a vacuum to a fixed quantity of gas. Under these conditions, physisorption takes place. Physisorption, or physical adsorption, is the process by which gas, vapor atoms and molecules are adsorbed onto the surface of a solid. This process relies on weak attractive forces, only possible at cryogenic temperatures. Based on the work of Finally the area–volume constant can be calculated for a number of solids. In geometry, polyhedra are three dimensional solids with flat, polygonal faces. There are many types for well-known polyhedra, including the Platonic, Archimedean, Johnson, and Catalan solids. The simplest polyhedra are listed in Fractal geometries have high area-to-volume ratios, far greater than their regular counterparts. Therefore, in the analysis of ores, if k is unknown or has not been measured, k As defined earlier, the thermal energies and heat flows are described by the ratio If the system is isolated — realistically, such adiabatic conditions are only a possibility for laboratory tests — then the heat produced by the machine If the feed and product temperatures are measured, then the thermal-surface energy fraction If the temperature measurement is not possible, the power measurement can be used to determine the efficiency directly, as long as all other values are obtained experimentally or in the literature This is a direct measure of how well the supplied power is directed towards the comminution process, particularly when the Alternatively, with the help of Eq. This expression for the efficiency is similar to the result derived by To compare the efficiency derived here with the Tromans & Meech expression, D is set to 100 For regular shapes, Therefore, the efficiency estimate obtained here is similar to the value calculated by If the physical properties of the ore are known, the efficiency This expression is useful since an estimate of the work index is possible without the need for testing. Only the material properties are needed, and those can be obtained as described in Differences between the calculated and experimental work indices are observed, the causes of which are explored in Section The development of the model relies on a few arguments and assumptions. To help ground the model in reality, some additional explanation is given. This formulation does not target a specific class of machines. The internal details do not play a role the derivation of the theory. It is only the state of the feed and product, the applied power and the heat generated that are used. Therefore, this theory may be applied to any machine that is of the type shown in The ore consists of a solid mixture of different minerals. Therefore, when breaking the ore, different materials are exposed along the new surface. Moreover, the breakage can occur along a grain boundary or within a grain. Finally, some of the energy is consumed by the plastic deformation at crack tips ( Fractals are not exotic. They extend classical geometry the way fuzzy logic extends logic. Many examples of fractals in the physical sciences can be found ( The fractal dimension is not constant over all particle size ranges — a different value may be obtained at different sizes without violating the fractal nature of the ore ( Holmes presents a modified version of Bond's law ( However, the Holmes exponent does not depend on the size — it depends on the material. Several values of the exponent Using empirical relationships presented in Fractal surfaces have a high surface-to-volume ratios, much higher than the ratios for regular geometric solids. Therefore, the expected ore values for k are expected to be greater than any found in The shape of ores affects the way they break ( The The Mean Value size is more representative since the smaller particles represent an investment of much more energy per unit mass than the larger particles, particularly since the surface area greatly increases as the size decreases — more specific energy goes into creating the small particles. The The thermal energies are major components of the energy flow in comminution and cannot be neglected ( The presence of water has a strong effect on the thermal energy terms ( The changes consist of the addition of water at the feed and the discharge. In addition, water vapor is added at the discharge. This quantity is important due to the high latent heat of vaporization; water vapor carries a much more energy in comparison with liquid water at the same temperature. Parallel to the thermal evolution of water throughout the comminution process, other substances undergo chemical changes. For example, sodium carbonate (soda ash) is added to SAG feed as a way to control the pH. The soda ash neutralizes the sulphuric acid generated by the sulphide ore. The reaction is exothermic and produces CO By neglecting any chemical changes and any water, the energy expressions were simplified. If these factors are kept, the equations become more accurate. Here, the power was simplified to This leads to an expression similar to This equation accounts for the thermal contribution of the process water, water vapor, and any chemical changes. This equation is much more complicated but represents much more of the physics. To be of any use, a method to determine the individual mass flows and temperatures, as well as the chemical reaction rates, must be found. The heat generated by the machine Using the model, an expression for the work index can be derived. This expression for the work indices Once ore and breakage parameters are more accurately determined, it is expected that the work index expressions will produce better agreement with experimental results. If an expression for the work index is possible, perhaps a similar expression for the SAG grindability index (SGI), the SAG mill comminution (SMC) test and the Drop-weight Test can be derived. Until that work is undertaken, empirical relationships can be used as a guide. The expressions for these useful — Based on Finally, the signature plot is expressed as In current usage, the term with the characteristic size is assumed to be P This assumption introduces some errors such that the intercept and slope cannot be defined as expressed in Eq. The efficiency of each test is a term in the above expressions. To obtain this parameter, the temperature is needed. At present, temperature is not part of the routine testing procedure. The use of this breakage model does not add many additional steps to a standard mineral processing analysis. Firstly, when the breakage progeny are collected and screened, a sample can be set in epoxy and sectioned to reveal a surface for microscopy. Once imaged, this section can be analysed to find the perimeter fractal dimension. Alternatively, multiple tests can be used to minimize the error on the work index as a function of the dimension. This method also produces the appropriate model fractal dimension. Once the surface fractal dimension is known, the particle distribution can be used to determine the characteristic size. Thirdly, a sample of the particles can be analysed to find the surface-to-volume constant The model also offers a definition of the work index. With enough measurements, justifiable values for An interesting modification to the procedures is the measurement of feed and discharge temperatures. This formally adds a thermodynamic measurement to the standard measurements. It is a recognition of the entropic nature of comminution, one that cannot be ignored. The importance of the measurement of the temperature is applicable to all scales, from lab to plant to industrial settings. The theory derived here supports Rittinger's assertion that the energy consumed is proportional to the surface energy. The extension of Rittinger's model, by the inclusion of a fractal geometry description of the area — a development introduced nearly a century after Rittinger's work — leads to Hukki's form. All the parameters are measurable and are defined by the physical properties of the machine and the ore. The presented formalism is not directed at one specific device. Any device that breaks particles is subject to this theory, as long as an area scaling law exists. Only the inputs and outputs — including the heat and mass flow — were examined. No internal details were required, particularly since steady state was assumed. A consequence of this model is the use of a different particle size for size-energy relations. By convention, the 80% passing size is used. However, the Mean Value Theorem suggests that this size is inappropriate, as it doesn't ensure the exactness of the energy when accounting for the particle distributions. A smaller measured characteristic size is suggested, regardless the breakage exponent used. This theory also explicitly defines the efficiency as the ratio of the surface energy and the total energy. The efficiency plays a role in the work index. An operating work index can be used to calculate the efficiency of the process. Alternatively, it can be found directly, using a few additional temperature measurements. The additional level of work required to implement this model in not onerous. All of the technology exists and is currently in use. This theory is not meant to supplant Bond, Kick or Rittinger. Rather, it is meant to underline the fact that a general overarching formulation exists — the three classic models are but special cases, with assumed exponents and characteristic sizes. The reader is invited to use the model with measured parameters, characteristic sizes and exponents. However, assumed values consistent with other models can be used. In such a case, the assumptions are impactful as they can introduce large errors. All comminution machines wear down. If the liners and the media are considered to be large particles, perhaps the analysis presented above can be used in a theory to estimate their level of wear. Finally, there is room for further work — understanding the generated heat, as well as finding appropriate and accurate values of the model parameters, particularly the surface energy density, requires more study. The author thanks Peter Radziszewski for his insightful comments. They were very helpful in framing the paper and orienting some of the development. The author would also like to thank Metso for granting permission to publish this work, the associated data and the results, as well as the Let If Eq. From the literature, the values of the surface energy, the density and the heat capacity are collected in The value for the specific surface energy used in this theory depend on how the particles break; the values change if the breakage is inter- or intra-granular. Furthermore, the ores are solid solutions of minerals. The parameters must reflect this and may have to be averaged by the mass fraction of the mineral composition of the ore. For example, the specific surface energy becomes The atomic spacing has an effect on the surface energy density. As this spacing changes with temperature, so does the surface energy density — there is a temperature effect. This and other factors underscore the complexity of the surface energy density. This is a topic for further research. In finding the characteristic size, a number of distributions are used in the calculations. The distribution data is collected here (see