In a recent article (Tilton et al., 2011), we argue that even when investor stocks are declining an increase in investor demand can cause a commodity's price to rise, a conclusion that is both contrary to conventional wisdom and counter-intuitive. In his comment on our article, Olle Östensson (2011) challenges this finding. After assessing his concerns in this reply, we maintain that our original finding is valid: investor demand can be driving commodity prices higher even when investor stocks are falling.In this short article, we respond to the concerns that Olle Östensson raises in his Comment ( On the first question, we conclude that a surge in investor demand that pushes prices higher on a commodity's futures markets will have an immediate and comparable effect on the commodity's spot price when these markets are in strong contango (that is, when futures prices are sufficiently above the spot price to cover the storage and other costs of inter-temporal arbitrage). When markets are in weak contango or backwardation, however, price movements in the futures markets are likely to be less correlated with movements in the spot price. On this issue, Östensson concurs with our analysis and conclusions. On the second question, we contend that increases in investor demand can be driving the spot price of a commodity up even as the stocks of the commodity are declining. We realize that this finding conflicts with intuition and accepted wisdom, which is why we believe it is of some importance. On this issue, however, Östensson contends that we are in error: that when investors are building up their inventories they must be adding to demand and pushing prices higher; and when they are selling off their inventories they are adding to supply and pushing prices lower. In making his case, he first critiques the two hypothetical supply and demand situations we employ to illustrate how rising investor demand can push up prices even though stocks are declining. These situations are reflected in While we are convinced that our original conclusion on this second question is valid, we welcome Östensson's comment, as it provides us with an opportunity to explain our reasoning in greater detail. Clearly he may not be alone in needing a more in-depth discussion of the logic behind this finding. Focusing first on In reflecting on the situation portrayed in Our differences here arise because Östensson and we are comparing two different situations. He is considering a situation where investors are selling stocks with the situation where they are not selling stocks – that is, a situation where investor demand is zero (or possibly positive). When investor demand is zero, the spot market price would be determined by the intersection of the supply curve (SS) and the consumer demand curve (CD This, at least as we understand it, is the argument that Östensson is making. However, in the real world, investor demand is at times negative. Our analysis compares a situation where an increase in investor demand (that is, a shift in the investor demand curve to the right) causes the spot price to rise  In assessing On his first point it is true that the increase in consumer demand is driving the spot price up, from Of course, there may be times when the useful comparison is between the current market situation and the market conditions that would prevail if investor demand were zero. For example, if government were to prohibit investor demand in the belief that investors were unnecessarily burdening consumers by artificially driving the market price higher, we might want to compare the market price with no investor demand with the market price when investor demand is negative (that is, investors are depleting their stocks). In this case, Östensson's market comparisons are appropriate and useful. And, as he has argued (and as our However, much more often we are interested in how changes in investor demand, consumer demand, or supply contribute to trends over time in commodity prices. What Östensson also suggests that Finally he concludes: Here again, it appears that Östensson is contrasting a situation where investors are destocking with the situation where there is no investor demand, rather than a situation where investor demand has increased (shifting the investor demand curve to the right) but remains negative, which is the situation of interest to us. Moreover, his Second, why does his investor demand curve not become horizontal or very flat once the gap between the futures price and the spot price becomes sufficient to encourage inter-temporal arbitrage? Or, to turn the question around, how is it possible for the gap between the futures and spot price to exceed the cost of holding physical stocks where futures markets exist and inter-temporal arbitrage is possible? Third, Fourth, why do the five equilibria portrayed in Finally, and most importantly for the discussion here, even if one assumes that Östensson's demand curve is preferable to ours, how does this refute or undermine the conclusion that investor demand can be pushing commodity prices higher even during periods when commodity stocks are falling? In conclusion, after examining the concerns that As a result, one cannot contend, as many have, that during periods of declining investor stocks, any increase in the price of a commodity must be due solely to changes in fundamentals (that is, to changes in supply, consumer demand, or both).