A typical graphene@graphite-based gas diffusion electrode (G-GDE) with high conductivity and remarkable electrocatalytic activity was prepared for the electro-Fenton (E-Fenton) system in order to achieve an efficient degradation for organic pollutants. The G-GDE was characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), X-ray powder diffraction (XRD), and nitrogen adsorption-desorption analysis. Continuous on-situ generation of H2O2 through an oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) was achieved at the non-metallic G-GDE cathode. Rhodamine B (RhB) was used as a model organic pollutant to evaluate the performance of the E-Fenton system with G-GDE cathode. The effects of pH, Fe2+ concentration were investigated. After 60 min, the removal rate reached 98% with G-GDE in the optimal condition, which was higher than that with traditional graphite-based gas diffusion cathode (GDE) and graphite sheet cathode (GE), and the energy consumption with G-GDE was only 84% of that with GDE under the same condition. The calculated electron transfer number (n) of the ORR with G-GDE was 2.1–2.2 in the selected potential range using rotating disk electrode. The results demonstrated that the addition of graphene could enhance the ORR activity by virtues of improving electrochemical conductivity and porous structure. Moreover, excellent corrosion resistance and reuse ability were also presented for the G-GDE electrode. So the G-GDE can be used as a low-cost and efficient cathode material for degradation of organic wastewater in E-Fenton system.Electro-Fenton (E-Fenton) process, derived from traditional Fenton reaction, has become one of the most interesting environmental treatments. The main characteristic is that H Notably, the degradation efficiency of E-Fenton is mainly determined by the electrogeneration ability of H Graphene is known as an interesting material with advantages of high surface area Considering its remarkable properties and relatively simple preparation method, graphene as main raw material, was used to prepare a new type of graphene@graphite-based gas diffusion electrode (G-GDE) in this work. The homogeneous E-Fenton process using G-GDE as cathode was applied in the decomposition and mineralization of Rhodamine B (RhB). The removal performance and mineralization capability are compared with graphite-based GDE, and graphite sheet electrode (GE) as cathode in E-Fenton process. The inﬂuences of pH, and iron ion concentration on degradation of RhB, as well as the cathode stability were investigated. The proper mechanism for the great enhancement of RhB degradation was analyzed in detail. The G-GDE is expected to be a promising E-Fenton cathode material and it offers possibilities to design new heterogeneous systems for wastewater treatment. Graphene oxide (GO) was synthesized by a modified Hummers method. First, graphite powder (3.0 g) together with NaNO GO (100 mg) was ultrasonically dispersed into 100 mL H The structure and morphology of the sample was characterized by scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Quanta 400F, Philip) and transmission electron microscope (TEM) (JEM-2010, Japan). X-ray diffraction (XRD, XRD-6000, SHIMADZU) analysis was performed using a diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation, with the XRD working voltage at 40 kV, tube current of 30 mA, scanning range is 5°–60°, scanning speed at 4°·min The ORR was determined in 0.05 M Na The electron transfer numbers in ORR was calculated according to the Koutecky–Levich (K–L) equations as follows: The degradation experiment was carried out in a cylindrical single compartment cell equipped with a magnetic stirrer. 50 mL simulated wastewater was consist of RhB (20 mg L For expanding the potential application of traditional GDE in E-Fenton, we have focused on the introduction of graphene into GDE with the goal of improving the structure, conductivity, and electrocatalytic activity. A typical G-GDE with optimal mass ratio of graphene, graphite powder and PTFE of 1:8:2 was prepared by means of cold pressure technique. The details of component optimization experiments are given in supplementary information (SI). It is known that the conductivity of graphene sheet generally decreases with its layer number increasing. So the morphology of as-prepared rGO was examined by TEM. As shown in XRD patterns of GO, rGO, calcined rGO (300 °C), GDE and G-GDE were measured. As shown in In order to investigate the catalytic oxidation ability with G-GDE cathode in E-Fenton process, the degradation efficiency of RhB was determined under the optimal operation condition (pH = 3, initial It has been proved that it is not enough to test the chroma removal rate of organic dye, while monitoring main pollutants removal efficiency of COD is necessary. The COD removal efficiency and energy consumption directly determine whether the electrode is economically feasible to degrade organic pollutants in E-Fenton system. As can be seen from The value of pH is not only an important condition in E-Fenton oxidation process, but also a main operating parameter in actual wastewater treatment. The effect of initial pH on the catalytic oxidation ability of G-GDE in E-Fenton reaction was evaluated and shown in Due to the key role of iron ions in E-Fenton system, it is essential to further study on Fe There was a phenomenon of iron evolution with the degradation process proceeding in E-Fenton system. As shown in The main purpose of this research was to investigate whether it was efficient to use G-GDE cathode in the treatment of organic wastewater. Considering the actual application, the stability of electrode is also a critical issue. So it was necessary to check the reusability of G-GDE cathode in E-Fenton system. To this end, G-GDE cathode was used for degrading with six consecutive runs, and each run maintained 60 min. In E-Fenton process, oxygen would migrate to the cathode surface after its dissolved To reveal why G-GDE cathode has a very high yield of H In general, an excellent E-Fenton cathode not only has the good catalytic activity, but also displays the excellent electrochemical performance. First, the electrical conductivities of rGO, GDE, and G-GDE were measured by a four-point probe method. The values were 872, 4.6, and 15 S m To further understand the ORR catalytic mechanism at G-GDE and GDE cathodes, liner sweep voltammetry curves were recorded at different rotation rates, as shown in To further probe the reaction mechanism of G-GDE in the E-Fenton system, two other group of contrastive studies were carried out. Firstly, the pumped gas in the E-Fenton was changed from O Based on the above results, we proposed a possible mechanism to explain the RhB degradation in the E-Fenton system as shown in A E-Fenton system with G-GDE as cathode had been investigated for the degradation of RhB. The G-GDE was fabricated with the optimal mass ratio of graphene, graphite and PTFE of 1:8:2 successfully. It has a high H This work was financially supported by the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at