An experimental program of nine steel deck roof diaphragm specimens was carried out to assess their seismic characteristics. The dynamically loaded diaphragms were able to develop the shear strength but not the shear stiffness values calculated using current diaphragm design methods. Furthermore, the shear stiffness decreased with increasing excitation amplitude. Diaphragm ductility decreased with the use of thicker deck panels and when the deck was oriented parallel to the loading direction. Most of the damaged diaphragms could be repaired to recuperate their original strength. A seismic retrofit scheme was effective in increasing the shear strength and stiffness of an arc-spot weld/ button-punch diaphragm.Single-storey steel buildings ( These contrasting findings resulted in the initiation in 2007 of an experimental study on the dynamic performance of representative roof deck diaphragms and buildings as well as an extensive numerical study using non-linear time history dynamic analyses of both roof diaphragms and single-storey buildings. In order to better understand the overall seismic building response it was necessary to first investigate the behaviour of the roof diaphragm in both the elastic and inelastic ranges to assess the stiffness, strength, ductility and energy dissipation which are key properties for seismic resistance. This seismic diaphragm testing component of the research project, which was divided into three phases, is also to be used to aid in the calibration of dynamic models for later study. The overall project objective to develop recommendations for the seismic design of single-storey steel buildings incorporating the effect of the roof diaphragm will be based, in part, on the results of the diaphragm testing described herein and more importantly on the findings of the subsequent numerical study of overall building response. Seismic diaphragm testing Phases I and II The Phase III test program involved nine 7.31×21.02 A 1000 Two different deck layout patterns were included in the scope of testing. Layout I tests ( The specimens were composed of ASTM A653 0.76 Diaphragm specimen 11 was retrofitted prior to testing with additional nails at weld locations ( All diaphragm specimens were subjected to a suite of loading protocols ( The tests were conducted at different amplitudes of loading to characterize the dynamic properties from elastic to inelastic response. Each of the diaphragm specimens was subjected to five broadband (white noise) excitations (BB), single-frequency excitations (BF), elastic seismic excitations (SS1 and SS3), and a sinusoidal protocol to bring the diaphragm into inelastic behaviour (SS2). The broadband excitation consisted of a random signal with the same energy content over a range of frequencies. The bandwidth used in the context of testing ranged from 0 to 25 A sweep of single-frequency sine excitation protocols were then applied over a range of frequencies surrounding the anticipated first mode of vibration. A total of eight acceleration levels were used at each frequency. Resonance curves, which again show the change in dynamic properties of the diaphragm specimen, could then be obtained and damping could be derived from those same results. A limit of 60% of the nominal shear resistance, again as calculated using the SDI Design Manual Two elastic seismic signals were then used as loading protocols. Seismic signal SS1 is an acceleration record from the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake (Stanford Univ. 360°) with a peak value of 0.29 As a final test each of the specimens was subjected to a protocol devised to bring the diaphragm into inelastic behaviour. The signal (SS2) consisted of sine waves linearly increasing in amplitude until a four peak maximum amplitude was reached. The amplitude and the frequency of this protocol were determined numerically with a non-linear dynamic inelastic truss model developed by Shrestha et al. The natural frequencies of the test specimens at increasing excitation amplitudes were determined from the white noise and seismic signal results. A corresponding shear stiffness was then obtained through an equation proposed by Medhekar and Kennedy At ambient levels, it was determined that the SDI method accurately predicted the shear stiffness of all specimens, except for diaphragms 15 and 15R in which only every second flute was fastened to the frame. In this instance, the SDI predictions accounted for a significant flexibility contribution due to warping of the cross-section, which at low levels of vibration was not yet engaged due to friction between components. Similarly, for all other specimens this friction would have been present for the low amplitude tests resulting in an apparent higher stiffness. At high amplitudes of motion, the average stiffness of Phase III diaphragm specimens was 0.65 that of the SDI prediction. This decrease may be due, in part, to some slackness or minor damage that may have accumulated at the connections from the previous tests resulting in specimens that were more flexible than would normally be assumed. However, this result is consistent with the findings of Essa et al. A stiffness comparison between Layout I and II specimens of the same configuration, including Phase II specimens Shear force and deformation profiles were calculated along the width of the diaphragm specimens. By converting displacement data into accelerations and multiplying by the tributary mass, the inertia force at a particular location could be obtained. Summing these inertia forces from zero at the centreline of the frame to the end beam gave the magnitude of the shear force carried by the diaphragm. The results for the elastic and inelastic seismic signals ( The inelastic performance of the diaphragm specimens could be evaluated by observing the shear force vs. end-panel deformation hystereses from the SS2 seismic protocol. All new diaphragm specimens were able to achieve or surpass their nominal SDI shear strength predictions ( Failure of the specimens initiated from the ends of the diaphragm at the location of maximum shear. The 0.76 and 0.91 The shear strain at failure,  Specimen 10 from Phase II of the research project Dynamic tests were conducted on nine diaphragm test specimens 7.31×21.02 Funding for this research was provided by the