Background
                  Low energy distal femur fractures often occur in a fragile elderly population that is prone to local and systemic complications following operative treatment of extremity fractures. The nonunion rate and early complication rate following laterally based locked plating in this specific fracture are not well described.
               
                  Methods
                  We conducted a retrospective cohort study conducted at three affiliated tertiary care hospitals to evaluate nonunion, early post operative complications, discharge disposition, length of stay, and mortality in patients over 60 years old undergoing laterally based locked plating of a low energy distal femur fracture.
               
                  Results
                  Forty-four out of 176 patients were deceased at one year (25%). Predictors of one year mortality included older age, higher Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI), and delay to surgery greater than 2days (p<0.001). Of 99 patients alive and with follow up at one year, 24 (24%) developed a nonunion and 21 of 24 required nonunion surgery. Development of a surgical site infection was statistically significantly correlated with development of nonunion. Age and CCI did not predict development of nonunion. Average length of stay was 10days and 82% of patients were discharged to a skilled nursing facility. Thirty eight percent of patients experienced at least one postoperative systemic complication.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Laterally based locked plating of the low energy geriatric distal femur fracture is most often followed by a tumultuous post-operative course with a high rate of local and systemic complications including death, nonunion, and extended hospital stays.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level III prognostic.Low energy distal femur fractures represent a significant public health problem in the elderly population, yet there is insufficient data to fully inform providers and patients of the expected post-operative course. Although laterally based locked plating is widely accepted as a preferred treatment for these fractures, the incidence of local and/or systemic complications in the elderly population may be significantly underestimated. The unique challenges of treating the geriatric fracture patient with a femur fracture have been illuminated by extensive work on morbidity and mortality after fracture of the proximal femur in this particular population Union rates of 80–93% Despite the prevalence of the distal femur fracture in the geriatric population we lack adequate evidence on both local and systemic complications to appropriately set expectations for health care providers and patients. The purpose of this study was to quantify the rates of local and systemic complications, including nonunion, following laterally based locked plating of the low energy supracondylar femur fracture in a geriatric population. After Institutional Review Board approval, a retrospective cohort study of patients admitted to three affiliated hospitals within a large health care network over a ten-year period (July 2004–March 2014) was conducted. We searched for CPT codes 27507 (open treatment of femur fracture with plates and screws), 27511 (open treatment of condylar femur fracture), 27513 (open treatment condylar fracture with shaft extension), 27514 (open treatment femur, distal end), and 27472 (fixation nonunion or malunion of femur with graft). Inclusion criteria included age greater than 60 years old, treatment of an AO/OTA 33 fracture with a laterally based periarticular locking plate, and a low energy mechanism of injury. Patients with less than one year of clinical and radiographic follow up were excluded from evaluation of fracture union. Patients who presented initially to our institution with a nonunion were excluded. Patient charts and radiographs were reviewed. AO/OTA classification One hundred and seventy six patients met the inclusion criteria. The average age of patients was 78 There were 99 living patients who had a minimum of one year follow up. Follow up in this group ranged from one to 10 years and averaged 34 months. Evaluation the rate of nonunion and factors associated with nonunion was based on this cohort. One hundred and forty three out of 176 patients (81%) were either deceased at one year or had adequate follow up to evaluate for union. The AO/OTA classification was as follows: 33A1–84 (48%), 33A2–32 (18%), 33A3–17 (9%), 33B1–3 (2%), 33C1–12 (7%), 33C2–21 (12%), 33C3–7 (4%). Seventy-two fractures (41%) were periprosthetic above a total knee arthroplasty. There were 25 open injuries, accounting for 14% of fractures. Additionally, patient comorbidities present at the time of injury were collected from the electronic medical record to allow calculation of the Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI) Date of death was extracted from the publicly available Social Security Death Index (SSDI). Length of hospital stay, delay from admission to surgery, and post hospital disposition (home or skilled nursing facility) were noted. Complications during the post operative period including deep vein thrombosis (DVT), pulmonary embolism (PE), pneumonia, respiratory insufficiency, urinary tract infection (UTI), acute kidney injury (AKI), myocardial infarction (MI), congestive heart failure (CHF), and gastrointestinal bleed (GIB) were extracted from the electronic medical record. Presence of surgical site infection was noted. Nonunion was defined as a fracture requiring a reoperation to promote union or treat a symptomatic nonunion. This included conventional nonunion surgery as well as conversion to distal femoral replacement. Descriptive statistics including mean, range, standard deviation and frequency were calculated for all recorded variables. To identify predictors of 1-year mortality, an independent samples Patients with a minimum of one-year follow up were included for analysis of nonunion. To identify predictors of nonunion, an independent samples There were 176 patients included in mortality analysis. The 30 When further subdivided by age, the one year mortality was 11% (5/46) for patients aged 60–69, 17% (8/47) for patients aged 70–79, and 33% (31/83) for patients aged over 80. The one year mortality for patients over 80 was significantly higher (p Statistically significant predictors of one-year mortality included older age (82 There were 40 patients operated on more than two days after presentation to our institution. There was no difference in the CCI of patients operated on before two days and after two days (3.5 vs. 3.3, p Patients deceased or lost to follow up prior to one year were excluded from analysis of nonunion. Eight out of 44 patients deceased at one year had been followed to clinical and radiographic union prior to death, however did not have adequate follow up and therefore were not included in the nonunion analysis. There were 99 living patients with a minimum one year follow up. There were 24 nonunions (24%). Twenty-one patients were treated with revision ORIF or conversion to distal femoral replacement. Despite having symptomatic, and radiographically evident, nonunions, three patients were treated non operatively due to debility or overall medical condition. Age, when used as a continuous variable, did not reach statistical significance (p When evaluating the entire cohort, CCI, age adjusted CCI, BMI, smoking status, or delay to surgery were not significant predictors of nonunion. Patients with nonunion tended to be younger (71 OTA fracture classification, presence of metaphyseal comminution, or presence of total knee arthroplasty were not significantly associated with development nonunion Development of surgical site infection was significantly associated with development of nonunion. Six out of 24 patients (25%) who developed nonunion had a surgical site infection compared to 3 out of 75 (4%) who went on to union (p One year outcome is known for 144/176 patients (82%). This outcome, stratified by age, is shown in Postoperative medical complications occurring within the initial hospital stay were recorded, specifically clinically significant venous thromboembolism (DVT or PE), cardiac complications (MI or CHF), respiratory complications (pneumonia or respiratory failure), acute kidney injury, gastrointestinal bleed requiring transfusion or intervention, and urinary tract infection. Sixty-six patients (37.5%) experienced at least one complication, and 20 patients (11%) experienced more than one complication. Respiratory complications, urinary tract infections, and cardiac complications occurred at significantly higher (p The average total length of stay was 10 One hundred and forty five patients (82%) were discharged to skilled nursing facilities. The low energy geriatric distal femur fracture represents a significant public health problem. The affected patient population is inherently fragile, and prone to extensive local and systemic complications. This study sheds light on the rate of nonunion and on the postoperative medical complications in this particular population while confirming the high rate of associated mortality. It begins to draw attention to the financial implications of this injury, with extended hospital stays and requirement for post hospital care. The overall one year mortality in this series was 25%, consistent with one year mortality rates reported in the literature for this fracture, which range from 18% to 30% In the demographically similar hip fracture population, delay in operative intervention has been associated with increased short and long term mortality The inpatient stay associated with operative treatment of this fracture is often long and tumultuous, with an average length of stay of 10 Following hospitalization, the vast majority (82%) of patients are discharged to skilled nursing facilities. While we did not have access to financial data, in this era of cost consciousness and bundled payments, the financial impact of the geriatric distal femur fracture deserves further study. Previous reports on laterally based locked plating of distal femur fractures have reported nonunion rates of 7–20% Higher than rates previously reported, the nonunion rate in this series was 24% for patients alive and with one year follow up. Contrary to our hypothesis that older patients would be at higher risk for nonunion, we found a significantly higher rate of nonunion in the young old, aged 60–74, when compared to patients over 75. However, the rate of nonunion in older patients could be underestimated due to limited clinical and radiographic follow up in the cohort of patients who died prior to one year. There was no association between, CCI, age adjusted CCI, fracture pattern, or presence metaphyseal comminution and rate of union. Development of surgical site infection was associated with a six-fold increase in rate of nonunion. However, other factors commonly associated with nonunion including diabetes, smoking, and open fracture While not directly investigated, there are also financial implications to the treatment of nonunion. Despite inclusion of a younger, healthier population, previous work on the cost of tibial nonunions has demonstrated that treatment of a nonunion more than doubles the cost of care One major strength of this study is that it includes a large cohort of patients treated at three hospitals within a large health care network that captures patients from a broad geographic area. By including multiple hospitals, surgeons, and fracture patterns, we sought to determine the complication and nonunion rate representative of the general population, rather than reporting a series from a single tertiary referral center. However, conducting a retrospective review at a large hospital system also has inherent weaknesses. Because of the distance some patients travel for care as well as the limited mobility and resources of some geriatric patients there is a subset of patients with inadequate follow up to evaluate fracture union. Additionally, by excluding patients treated with less invasive intramedullary nailing, and limiting the population to patients treated with laterally based locked plating there may be some selection bias introduced. Initial fracture fixation strategy, timing of fracture treatment, and treatment of nonunion were determined based on surgeon preference, and therefore not controlled. In this population, consisting most commonly of obese older women with underlying comorbidities, it is important to acknowledge the high rates of morbidity, mortality, and the need for nonunion surgery. Overall, greater than one in three geriatric patients (37%) will be deceased or require nonunion surgery within one year of sustaining a low energy distal femur fracture treated with a laterally based locked plate. An increased awareness of the prevalence of postoperative local and systemic complications is imperative for both providers and patients and further work should focus on methods to decrease nonunion rates and systemic complications in this population. The authors have no conflict of interests related to this work financial or otherwise. The authors give a special thanks to Dana Farrell for her assistance in the data collection and construction of this manuscript.