Metaphyseal fractures of the distal tibia near the ankle joint are difficult to manage. Poor soft tissue coverage and comminution of the fracture complicate open reduction. This prospective study aims to evaluate the practicability of using interlocking nails to treat such fractures. Using the method of closed reduction and internal fixation with a shortened tibial interlocking nail, 20 consecutive cases of distal tibial metaphyseal fractures within 4cm of the ankle joint line were enrolled from 1997 to 2001. All patients received regular post-operative radiographic check-up and the ankle function was evaluated with the Iowa Ankle-Evaluation rating system. Our result was satisfactory and all of the fractures united solidly with a mean union time of 17.2 weeks. No major complication occurred. We conclude that tibial interlocking nailing is a reliable and safe method for managing metaphyseal fractures of the distal tibia near the ankle joint.Fractures of the distal tibial metaphysis are often caused by axial and rotational force and account for 7.2% of fractures over the distal end of the tibia. Locked intramedullary nailing has been in clinical practice for tibial diaphyseal fractures since the early 1970s and has gained universal acceptance. Few studies have assessed the use of this technique in dealing with fractures below the tibial isthmus. Early reports recommend interlocking nails to fix fractures of the lower limb, provided that the proximal and distal metaphyses were intact. Some studies have successfully demonstrated that interlocking nailing could be used in treating fractures of the distal tibia, From 1997 to 2001, a prospected study was carried out. The selection criterion was oblique or transverse fractures within 4 The operations were performed under spinal anaesthesia. Five patients with open fractures were managed within 8 One or two distal locking screws secured inter-fragmental fixation and provided sufficient rigid stability in all of the fractures. After fixation of the tibia, five persistently displaced fibular fractures causing talar instability were fixed with small dynamic compression plates. The wounds were closed primarily except the patient with Gustilo type IIIA open fracture, whose wound was closed 48 Active range of motion exercises of the knees were started immediately after the operation and encouraged after removal of the splint for the ankle. Protected weight bearing (10 All of the fractures united solidly with a mean union time of 17.2 weeks (range: 12–28 weeks). No early post-operative complications occurred. No loss of reduction, implant failure, or mal-union was noted ( All of the patients regained full range of motion of both the knee and ankle joints. Leg length discrepancy greater than 1 The use of interlocking nails has been shown to be an excellent treatment for long bone fractures, not only in the lower limbs but also in the upper extremities (humeral shaft fractures). However, the role of interlocking nails in treating metaphyseal fractures of the distal tibia has not been clearly defined. We treated displaced fractures of the distal tibial metaphysis with interlocking nails successfully in this series, which might extend the indication for such an application to fractures as distal as the distal end plates of tibias. Malalignment or loss of reduction may occur after nailing, mostly due to improper reduction, poor nail position (e.g. not centering the nail in the distal fragment), or loose fixation. Regarding the reduction, we reduced the fractures manually and kept the reduction with reduction forceps. Then, our reduction was ensured by placing the nail in the exact central canal of the distal fragment perpendicular to and engaged with the distal end plate of the tibia, which was believed to be the correct nail position. As for the fixation, some authors have stated that for a rigid and static intramedullary nail fixation, at least 3–4 The mechanism resulting in distal tibial metaphyseal fractures usually consists of a high-energy trauma that not only creates complicated fractures but also extends the injury to the soft tissues. To minimise soft tissue injury, Scheck in 1965 combined skeletal traction with limited open reduction to treat fractures of the distal tibia. In our series, there was no wound or soft tissue problems, which shows the superiority of the closed application of interlocking nails for preservation of the soft tissue envelope and rigid fixation for the fractures. Recently, one method of using minimally invasive plate osteosynthesis has been proposed for distal tibial fractures. The technique of intramedullary nailing has already been adequately standardised and is not difficult to practice. In the current study, we bear witness to how the shortened intramedullaty nail fixation provided sufficient rigid fixation for distal tibial metaphyseal fractures within 4