In mining and construction industries, selection of appropriate excavation method and equipment significantly affects the project feasibility. In the selection, the most important parameters are the geomechanical properties of the rock mass in the excavation route as extensively reviewed in literature. The most widely used geomechanical parameter is uniaxial compressive strength (UCS). However, UCS laboratory test requires time consuming and expensive sampling and core sample preparation processes, which can be quite difficult or sometimes impossible for a weak rock material taken from foliated, laminated or thinly bedded rock masses of low Rock Quality Designation (RQD) values (0–20%). For these reasons, Block Punch Index (BPI) test, which has thus gained an importance for the last decade because of its simplicity, has become applicable to determine rock strength for highly-jointed and weak rocks of low RQD. BPI provides significant convenience particularly for laminated-foliated-anisotropic rocks. In this study, the excavability of various rocks with impact hammer was investigated using Geological Strength Index (GSI), power of impact hammer (P), BPI. Valuable results from which the users could benefit were obtained.There have been various research studies on rock excavability. These studies, generally, are based on the selection of equipment which is compatible with the rock structure and the performance of the selected machines. Rock engineers on the method selection consider the economical impacts of selection on the project. However, numerous research studies performed in this area, emphasized the importance of geomechanical rock properties and excavability ( The most widely used geomechanical rock property in defining the rock strength and excavation performance is uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) ( Rock fragmentation ( The historical development of the BPI test and its use was presented by The corrected form of the BPI considering the disc specimen having 50 In Eqs. The conversion factor to obtain UCS of the rock material from BPI The most commonly utilized equations to determine the excavation performance of excavation machines, i.e. roadheaders and impact hammers, were developed by In this study, various rock masses at different locations were analyzed using impact hammers of different characteristics in Bartın Kurucasile (tunnel and slope excavation), Amasya (tunnel and slope excavation), Tokat (tunnel excavation), Ordu (slope excavation), Kayseri (tunnel excavation), Aliaga (slope excavation), Foça (slope excavation), Van (tunnel excavation), İzmir (tunnel excavation), Bartın Kirazlıkopru (slope excavation), and Cine (slope excavation). Geotechnical information of the study areas is given in In this study, in order to determine the excavability of rock masses and to estimate the performance of impact hammers, BPI and GSI ( Rock mass properties are of paramount concern to rock engineers in their studies. Rock material properties are determined using experiments in laboratories. The BPI test, due to the progresses in the last decade, has become an important test method to estimate rock strength. In recent years, rock mass assessment has become an important parameter for the solution of rock engineering problems. Rock mass properties are often the major factors that affect the local rate of rock removal and hence the excavation performance. Parameters such as discontinuities in the rock mass, the volumetric joint number in the rock mass, and structural characteristics play an important role in the rock mass excavability. Of course, the properties of the machine used in an excavation are the other important parameters. Accordingly, estimating the machine performance, which is affected by many parameters and variables, is a very complex problem. Therefore, a practical and empirical formula that combines machine related and rock mass related properties to estimate the excavation performance will be very useful for practitioners. With this intent, the results of field studies, obtained GSI values and observed excavation amounts are presented in As In the light of field experiments and obtained results, an empirical equation, as a function of GSI, BPI, and machine power, was proposed to estimate the excavation performance depending on the rock mass excavability properties for slope, tunnel and both tunnel and slope excavations. In this assessment, totally 241 GSI data, 450 excavation data, 845 BPI data and 13 machine power data have been utilized. Average values for excavation, GSI, and BPI data have been taken and the empirical equation was developed using the least squares method satisfying experimental data in Let us suppose that there exist a non-linear hypersurface on This hypersurface can be transformed to the linear form as follows: Finally, the least square method can be used for determining the coefficients In In the suggested equation, rock material is represented with BPI, rock mass is represented with GSI and the machine is represented with its power in Determining the machine performance in excavations carried out using impact hammers is significant to the success of the project. Performance forecasting provides useful information to engineers, applicants and decision makers to achieve the planned production and to avoid big variations in the productivity. For this purpose, in this study, to provide a general approach for slope and tunnel excavation projects or projects involving both excavations, an empirical model was developed by analyzing totally 241 GSI data, 450 excavation data, 845 BPI data, and 13 machine power data. It was determined that the average excavation amount of an impact hammer could be estimated for slope excavation, for tunnel excavation and for both slope and tunnel excavations with an 84%, 93%, and 88% correlation coefficient respectively using the proposed model. This study was conducted under the scientific Project numbered 109M604 of TUBITAK (The Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey). The authors would like to thank Erdal SEKERCIOGLU from Akpinar Inc. and Sukru SONGUR from ATAC Inc. for their technical contributions.