The effect of organophosphorous moieties of three acid ligands, D2EHPA, PC88A and Cyanex 272, dissolved in light liquid paraffin, on extraction of U(VI) and mineral acid was studied using the Bulk-Liquid Membrane (BLM) technique. A kinetic model was developed to predict the concentration of acid and U(VI) in the feed, organic and the strip phases during extraction. Acid extraction by complexing ligands was found to be significant. The extraction of U(VI) by these three acidic ligands in different mineral acids followed the order HNO3
                     >HCl>H2SO4. The distribution coefficient for acid and U(VI) extraction increased with increase in ‘–OR’ moieties in the acid ligands i.e. in the order D2EHPA>PC88A>Cyanex 272. The suitability of a ligand for liquid emulsion membrane (LEM) application depends upon the ratio of rates of extraction of U(VI) and acid (HNO3). The study showed that the ratios are in the order D2EHPA>PC88A>Cyanex 272.Di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (D2EHPA), 2-ethylhexyl phosphonic acid mono-2ethylhexyl ester (PC88A) and bis-(2, 4, 4-trimethylpentyl) phosphinic acid (Cyanex 272) have found extensive usage as acidic ligands for recovery of various metal ions from aqueous solutions. Among these, D2EHPA is frequently used in nuclear industry for recovery of U(VI) due to its chemical stability and extremely low solubility in acidic solutions. Tri-n-butyl phosphate (TBP) is the most popularly used as a ligand in the nuclear industry because of its ease of stripping from the loaded organic phase with plain water and also because of its low price. However, it suffers from inherent problems like tendency to form the third phase and high propensity for acid extraction ( PC88A and Cyanex 272 were developed by the researcher mainly to recover cobalt from nickel. The Co/Ni separation factors for these ligands are in the order Cyanex 272 The present work is conducted with the aim to study relative rates of co-extraction of U(VI) and acid by D2EHPA, PC88A and Cyanex 272. These three ligands are acidic in nature and fall under the same class of organo-phosphorous compounds containing P Since ‘OR’ groups are mainly involved in complexation with uranyl ion, we expect the extractability to reduce in the order D2EHPA  Kumar et al. carried out a brief review on solvent extraction from acidic solution and reported D2EHPA as one of the most efficient phosphorous based extractant for U(VI) extraction ( Few researchers worked with ligand PC88A for extraction of U(VI) and other heavy metals. Dinkar et al. studied the separation and recovery of thorium and uranium from nitric acid solution using PC-88A as ligand and found an optimum concentration of extractant ( The literature survey reveals that no attempts have been made for carrying out the studies on co-extraction/co-stripping of acid and U(VI) using these acidic ligands. Therefore, an attempt is made to compare the effect of organophophorus moieties on the equilibrium and kinetics of the co-extraction of U(VI) and acid. The ligand, D2EHPA (M.W. 322.42), was obtained from M/s Sigma Aldrich Co Ltd. Cyanex 272 (M.W. 306.4) was supplied by M/s Fluka density. PC88A (M.W. 299.43) was supplied by Daihachi Chemical Industry Co. Ltd. Japan. All other chemicals were of analytical grade and were obtained from the companies of repute. All extraction and stripping experiments were conducted at ambient temperature i.e. 30 For the determination of acid concentration, the organic phase was extracted with aqueous solution containing 30% NaF and the extract was analysed for the acid by titration with standard NaOH solution (0.05 For kinetic studies, the extraction was carried out using the bulk liquid membrane (BLM) apparatus shown in The volume of each phase was equal to 100 The feed and the strip phases were sampled at regular intervals and the concentration of U(VI) in the samples were estimated using ICP-AES. Samples of 0.5 ml of the organic phase were withdrawn at appropriate intervals of time and were extracted with 1 It is hypothesised that the co-extraction of U(VI) and HX ( Literature reveals that these acidic ligands exist in the dimer form (HA) The respective reaction equilibrium constants can be defined as The distribution coefficients of U(VI) and HX in the organic and aqueous phases can be defined as From Eqs. In a BLM extraction, the solute [acid, U(VI)] is extracted by complexing with the ligand (HA) Here, “ The corresponding mass balance equations for the acid (HX) can be written as The following initial conditions are used The above equations are coupled ordinary differential equations and are solved numerically. The distribution coefficients of U(VI) between the organic phase, 5% (v/v) D2EHPA in paraffin and aqueous phase, containing different mineral acids (HNO It is observed from It is observed from The values of the distribution coefficient of acid extraction ( Therefore, from the above experimental studies we observed that in general, extraction of U(VI) is highest and acid extraction is lower in HNO The order of extractability of U(VI) in different acids is caused by the following two effects: i) The first step during U(VI) extraction is the formation of UO ii) The U(VI), along with UO The first step of extraction of acids by the organophosphorous ligands involves protonation of the ligand. The resulting protonated ligand is shown in The acid anion will form an ion pair with the protonated ligand. The greater the charge in acid, the more stronger the ion pair will be, the greater would be the extent of the formation of the ion pair. So therefore, the order of the extraction of acid extraction by the ligand should follow the H  The corresponding plots for distribution coefficient of HNO In order to transport acid (HX) the ligand (HA) should be protonated according to the following reaction The acid carrying capacity will depend upon the stability of the protonated ligand. The order of stability of structures of these three protonated ligands are D2EHPA The structure of the three U(VI)–ligand complexes are shown in In all these structures the ligand appears as a dimer. So the concentration of the dimer decides the ability of the ligand to form the complex with U(VI). The greater the stability of dimer is, the greater the extent of extraction of U(VI) is. Since D2EHPA has a greater tendency to be protonated thus it has a lesser tendency to form dimer, therefore the extent of potonation decreases with decrease in concentration of acid. Thus the differences of three ligands will progressively reduce as the acid concentration decreases. The pKa for the three ligands follows the order D2EHPA (pKa The stripping equilibrium studies were conducted for the extraction of U(VI) from plain water and aqueous Na Extraction of acids occurs in their neutral form as described in Eq. D2EHPA can extract U(VI) even in plain water (  The reaction stoichiometry for both acid extraction with U(VI) by different acidic complexing ligands (HA) Eq. As seen in From the values of the equilibrium constants, we conclude that the affinity of ligands for acid extraction is in the order D2EHPA The above equilibrium extraction samples were also analysed for Uranium(VI) in order to compare the distribution coefficient, Eq. The values of the From the values of the equilibrium constants, The kinetic studies were conducted in BLM setup as shown in If we examine the concentration profiles, we find that both the concentration of the HNO  From the concentration vs. time profile of acid in  In the case of U(VI) extraction by PC88A, the strip phase alkalinity reduced from initial concentration of 0.5  There is an increasing trend observed in concentration vs. time data of acid in the feed phase. In the case of U(VI) extraction by Cyanex 272, the strip phase alkalinity reduced from initial concentration of 0.5 The values of feed side and strip side mass transfer coefficients of U(VI) The best fit concentration–time profiles are shown by solid line and they are also in good agreement with the experimental data. It was observed that the mass transfer coefficients It can be inferred from the The equilibrium studies indicate that the distribution coefficient of acid and U(VI) extraction increased with increase in number of –OR moieties in the ligands. The result shows that extraction of U(VI) is in the order Cyanex 272 The author wishes to thank the Quality Control Division of Uranium Extraction Division (QCS-UED), Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, India for allowing us to carry out the experimental work.