Pelvic fractures are uncommon but complex injuries associated with a high degree of morbidity and mortality. Most fractures involving the pelvis, specifically the sacrum, can be effectively stabilized with iliosacral screws alone. However, significantly unstable fractures, particularly vertical shear patterns, as well as U-type variant sacral fracture patterns that create spinopelvic instability, require the addition of lumbopelvic fixation. The surgical technique involves neurologic decompression as necessary, multiplanar reduction of the pelvic ring and sacrum, and placement of stable fixation. Treatment of these severe injuries requiring lumbopelvic fixation is challenging and requires active collaboration between spine trauma and pelvis trauma surgeons. Although not routinely used, lumbopelvic fixation is an essential technique for the stabilization of complex pelvis fractures.Fractures of the pelvis are relatively uncommon, accounting for only 3% of all skeletal injuries. Treatment of pelvis fractures should primarily be performed at Level I trauma centers Iliosacral (IS) screws are part of the lumbosacral fixation construct, so it is important to understand variations in the anatomy of the sacrum. Sacral dysmorphism affects nearly half of the population. The sacral roots (S2-S4) along with the autonomic nervous system are responsible for urinary, bowel, and sexual function. The paired sacral nerve roots originate from the conus medullaris and exit the ventral and dorsal foramina ( Differences in the orientation of the spinopelvic junction can also influence the type of strategy selected for sacral fracture stabilization. The patient׳s pelvic incidence, in particular, can be an important determinant of the shear forces exerted across the spinopelvic junction and may therefore dictate the type of instrumentation required to best stabilize a particular sacral fracture, with more biomechanically robust constructs perhaps being favored in patients with high pelvic incidence. As in most fractures, there is a bimodal distribution to the prevalence of pelvis fractures. Classically, fractures of the pelvis were associated with high-energy mechanisms such as with motor vehicle and motorcycle collisions or falls from a height. With the increase in the geriatric population, there has been an increase in the incidence of low-energy pelvis fractures in the elderly from trivial mechanisms such as ground level falls. There are limited physical examination maneuvers for evaluation and diagnosis of a pelvis fracture. Any report of pelvic pain or tenderness during physical examination with anterior-posterior compression or lateral compression of the pelvis should prompt the clinician to obtain imaging, especially in high-energy mechanisms and falls in the elderly. However, a thorough neurologic examination is essential to evaluate for lumbosacral plexus injuries (L5 and S1 are most common). In situations, where the neurologic deficits are limited to the S2 and more caudal nerve roots, lower extremity neurologic function may appear normal. A rectal examination should therefore always be done to evaluate sphincter tone and perirectal sensation, as well as to diagnose open fractures communicating with the intestinal tract. A urogenital examination is also necessary to determine the presence of bladder or urethral injury and of an open fracture communicating with the vaginal canal. As part of a proper trauma evaluation, an anteroposterior (AP) pelvis radiograph should be obtained as the first imaging study for the diagnosis of a pelvis fracture. Once a pelvis fracture is identified on the AP pelvis view, inlet and the outlet views should also be obtained. Historically, these views were obtained with a 45° inlet tilt and a 45° outlet tilt. Recent literature has indicated that improved visualization is obtained with ~20° inlet and ~60° outlet tilts. The 2 common classification systems used for describing pelvic ring instability are the Burgess Additional classifications have been developed to specifically describe sacral fracture patterns. These become particularly important for sacral fractures that involve spinopelvic instability and dissociation. The Denis classification of sacral fractures ( Early case reports often characterized zone III injuries as solely transversely or vertically oriented possibly owing to limitations in imaging technology. The advent of CT revealed that most transverse fractures of the upper sacrum have complex, multiplanar fracture patterns. Most Denis zone III injuries are now believed to consist of a transverse fracture of the sacrum with associated vertical injury components. The so-called U fracture usually consists of a transverse fracture with bilateral transforaminal fractures that extend rostral to the lumbosacral junction. Variations in fracture line propagation include the “H,” “Y,” and “lambda” fracture patterns ( These injuries may result in severe instability and cauda equina syndrome. A recent AO-led effort to establish a spinopelvic injury classification has focused on categorizing sacral fractures based primarily on the extent and type of sacral fracture instability. Type A fractures range from inconsequential injuries to severely displaced transverse fractures that occur below the SI joint, and therefore, result in neither posterior pelvic nor spinopelvic instability. Type B fractures are vertical fracture patterns that result in posterior pelvic instability, generally without compromise to the spinopelvic junction. Type C injuries are complex sacral U fracture variants, bilateral vertical fractures, or vertical fractures that involve the S1 superior facet, all of which result in spinopelvic instability. Within each type, there are 3-4 subtypes, categorized according to worsening prognosis or greater likelihood of operative intervention owing to greater risk of neurologic deficit or of instability. The high likelihood and variable grade of neurologic impairment in lumbosacral fractures is not accounted for by any of the classification systems mentioned earlier. In light of the absence of any spinal cord injury classification system specifically addressing sacral plexus injuries, Gibbons suggested a differentiation based on motor, sensory, and bowel or bladder function. He categorized patients into those having (1) no injury, (2) lower extremity paresthesias only, (3) lower extremity motor deficit with intact bowel and bladder function, or (4) impaired bowel or bladder control or both. Initial treatment of unstable pelvis fractures can involve placement of a sheet or binder, skeletal traction, or external fixation depending on the pattern of fracture displacement. Definitive fixation of unstable pelvis fractures requires a mechanical construct that is sufficiently stable to avoid hardware failure and nonunion. This might require fixation of both the anterior and posterior aspects of the pelvis, depending on the fracture pattern and extent of instability. Particular focus on stabilizing the posterior pelvis is essential, especially in vertical shear patterns and spinopelvic dissociation. The indications and technique for IS screw fixation, the current workhorse for the treatment of sacral fractures and pelvic ring instability, has been well described. For cases where a closed reduction or anterior open reduction is planned, we prefer to place IS screws in the supine position. One can bias the patient to one side of the table or use a sacral bump to assist with oblique trajectories into the sacrum. The surgeon must have a clear understanding of sacral osteology with proper utilization of the inlet, outlet, and sacral lateral views for safe placement of IS screws. In the nondysmorphic sacrum, 2 screws can be placed in the first sacral segment with one screw anterior and caudal, and the second screw more posterior and cranial relative to the first screw. If one plans to place a screw in both the first and the second sacral segments, it is easier to first place a screw in the first sacral segment given that a screw in the second segment can obscure the radiographic line of the anterior border of the first sacral segment on the inlet view. In the dysmorphic sacrum, the second sacral segment is larger than the first Depending on the bone quality and degree of instability, these screws alone can be sufficient for fixation. For example, it has been demonstrated However, the use of transiliac, transsacral screws is recommended whenever possible in fracture patterns creating spinopelvic instability—the so-called U-type variants. As described earlier, the U-type sacral fractures are characterized by a transverse sacral fracture component with bilateral longitudinal components. Transiliac, transsacral screws augment fixation strength, given the individual anchor points on each side of the sacrum. Unfortunately, the amount of relative dysmorphism dictates the ability to place transiliac, transsacral screws. There are several indications for the addition of lumbopelvic fixation when treating sacral fractures. The first indication is spinopelvic instability or dissociation with significantly displaced U-type variant sacral fractures Significantly displaced sacral U-type fractures, with their inherent spinopelvic instability, are treated collaboratively between the pelvic trauma surgeon and the spine trauma surgeon at our institution. We have found, in general, that stabilizing pelvic ring injuries beforehand facilitates reduction of the sacral fracture and posterior pelvic ring. The patient is then placed prone, and the spine surgeon performs an open approach to the lumbar spine and sacrum. For sacral U-type variants, this is generally a midline approach as described later. If spinopelvic fixation is being placed unilaterally, as in the treatment of a Denis zone I or II sacral fracture, a paramedian approach is often used. The pelvic trauma surgeon usually takes the lead in reducing the pelvic ring deformity (when applicable), and the spine surgeon does the same in reducing the sacral kyphosis and decompressing the sacral spinal canal and neural foramina (see later). Many fracture patterns the sacral fracture reduction involves both the kyphosis and the pelvic ring simultaneously. Once an acceptable reduction has been achieved, fixation with IS screws is typically done first, for several reasons: (1). This provides provisional fixation while the reduction, particularly the sacral kyphosis reduction, is being held in place manually. (2) The safe zone for IS and transiliac-transsacral screw placement is typically narrower than for spinopelvic fixation. (3) Prior application of spinopelvic fixation would be likely to compromise the clarity of radiographic imaging required for safe IS or transiliac-transsacral screw placement. An additional use for lumbopelvic fixation at our institution is for displaced unilateral pelvic fractures either with insufficient safe zones for adequate IS screw fixation owing to sacral dysmorphism or significantly displaced sacral fractures, particularly with vertical instability, in which there is concern that percutaneous IS screw fixation alone will be insufficient ( Neurologic injuries are commonly seen with sacral fractures. The incidence increases to 60% in SI separation and severe sacral fractures (zone III according to Denis classification). Decompression of the neural elements can be achieved by either direct or indirect means. Reduction of the fracture and restoration of alignment can indirectly decompress the lumbosacral plexus at the level of the spinal canal and neuroforamina. The results of indirect reduction are improved if attempted before consolidation of the fracture hematoma. If neural compression persists, direct decompression should be performed. As mentioned earlier, patients with a sacral fracture are predisposed to lumbosacral neurologic deficits to the bowel and bladder and sexual dysfunction, as well as L5 and S1 motor root deficits. In patients with such deficits, direct decompression by laminectomy may enhance neurologic recovery. Surgical exposure is preferably performed through a straight posterior midline approach. A sacral laminectomy is performed from S1-S4 to expose the sacral roots, with dissection continued laterally to further delineate longitudinal components of the fracture and displacement of each hemipelvis. The laminectomy is initiated at the cephalad end of the sacrum where the canal is larger, and directed caudally until the fracture line is encountered in the cases of a transverse fracture. The decompression is extended laterally with Kerrison rongeurs to identify the takeoff of the ventral roots and the bone of the vestigial pedicles. In the instance of L5 root entrapment (traumatic far-out syndrome), decompression is performed by following the root laterally onto the shoulder of the ala and removing the offending fragment. Following decompression, surgical stabilization is performed to avoid prolonged immobilization, as well as to achieve neurologic decompression and structural stabilization. Hart et al Lumbopelvic fixation provides the most rigid biomechanical fixation of sacral fractures. Subperiosteal exposure is performed to the lateral aspect of the sacral ala and the transverse processes of the lumbar vertebra to be instrumented. The paraspinal musculature is elevated to expose the posterior aspect of the ilium to the posterior inferior iliac spine. In severe injuries, the muscle is often avulsed off of one or both ilia and may be devascularized and require debridement. Reduction of the fracture is performed using techniques already described for the “vertical” components of the injury. The transverse sacral fracture can be challenging to reduce owing to difficulty accessing the fracture and significant shortening. Restoration of length is essential to successful fracture realignment and can be achieved through bifemoral traction or the use of a femoral distractor or both ( In young patients without facet injury, we avoid performing a formal posterior lumbosacral arthrodesis and plan on removing the spinopelvic instrumentation 6 months or more postoperatively, if CT scan confirms successful healing of the sacral fracture. In patients with injury to the L5-S1 facet or in patients with significant pre-existing spondylosis or instability (eg, L5-S1 isthmic spondylolisthesis), a posterior arthrodesis is performed. Layered wound closure is performed over a suction drain, followed by placement of either a wound vacuum-assisted closure or tegaderm seal to keep the incision from being soiled, particularly in the obtunded patient. Sacral fractures are severe injuries, which are often associated with compromised soft tissue, extensive hematoma, Morel-Lavallée lesions, or open wounds. Extensive surgery in this area of physiologically thin soft tissue coverage over the bony prominences of the posterior pelvic ring carries an increased risk of postoperative infection and wound compromise, resulting in the need for surgical wound debridement and supplemental nutritional support. Development of a decubitus ulcer may occur owing to iliac screw prominence at the PSIS. Precautions such as appropriate skin care measures and recessed screw positioning at the PSIS are absolutely necessary. Early iliac screw removal or exchange may be indicated in case of significant prominence or wound breakdown. Seroma and pseudomeningocele formation have been described in operatively treated high-grade sacral fracture dislocations. Hardware failure has been described in up to 30% of patients, particularly those with complex sacral fractures and spinopelvic instability. Loss of reduction can occur in a small percentage of posterior pelvic instability injuries treated with percutaneous IS screw techniques but has not generally been a concern with lumbopelvic stabilization techniques in spinopelvic dissociation injuries. Neurologic deterioration following surgical treatment is a known complication in severe trauma to the spine. It may occur following sacral laminectomy, foraminotomy, indirect fracture reduction, and direct removal of bony fragments. If postoperative neurologic deterioration occurs, then diagnostic imaging may be required to clarify underlying reasons such as compressive hematoma. Persistent pain after healing of the fracture seems predominantly associated with persistent neurologic deficits. Higher levels of pain tend to correlate with sexual dysfunction and dysesthesias in the lumbosacral plexus distribution. Typically, there is a period of 6 weeks of limited weight bearing prescribed for patients after surgical fixation. However, in patients who have undergone lumbopelvic stabilization in which there are no concerns for the presence of compromised fixation owing to injury characteristics or metabolic bone disease, the biomechanical characteristics of this construct generally allow weight bearing as tolerated unless contraindicated by other lower extremity injuries. Patients with multiple injuries will have specific rehabilitative and follow-up needs that can be far reaching and need to be addressed in a multidisciplinary manner. Particularly relevant is the importance of inpatient rehabilitation for the treatment of newly acquired bowel or bladder dysfunction. Pelvis fractures are associated with a high incidence of genitourinary nerve injury including bowel and bladder incontinence, erectile dysfunction, and dyspareunia (women). Patients with any of these should be referred to rehabilitative medicine, urology, and gynecology as indicated. Pelvic fractures are uncommon but complex injuries and should be treated at dedicated trauma centers. Lumbopelvic fixation is an essential treatment modality for U-type variant sacral fracture patterns that create spinopelvic instability. It can also augment IS screw fixation for complex pelvic ring fractures without spinopelvic instability. Close collaboration between spine trauma and pelvis trauma surgeons is requisite. Future research is needed to further understand which fracture patterns and patients would most benefit from lumbopelvic fixation.