Mineralogical laboratory technology has undergone seismic shifts since the introduction of automated mineral analyzers and other quantitative tools such as XRD Rietveld analysis. During the last 25years, these changes have positioned mineralogical data into the front line of ore characterization, process control and plant optimization. The continuous deterioration of ore quality in regard to grade, hardness, finer particle sizes and the increase of metallurgical complexities have made modern process mineralogy an integral part of new project development. In addition, it has supported improvement of existing plants and the better utilization of tailings or other residues. Automation in mineralogical (and chemical) laboratories from sample preparation to analysis has been the baseline for these improvements. This paper will highlight key benchmarks of mineralogical work from ore characterization to advanced process mineralogy including the increasing importance of mineralogical mine site laboratories. A roadmap for the future of operations-oriented process mineralogy will be provided.The dramatically increasing cost in mining owing to rising water, power, reagent and steel prices, less favorable ore characteristics, lesser oxide ores and dominance of primary sulfide feeds coupled with economic aspects of sustainability require a large re-focus of operations on process mineralogy. With high(er) throughput operations, lack of adequate mineralogical data may inevitably lead to not using the full potential of the ore body. The merging and blending of standard and new process technologies will carry more risks without continuous information on ore variability. The focus on “minimum liberation” with a coarser grind will mandate a detailed liberation-locking profile of the ore types. The focus on minerals with fast float kinetics could conceivably down-size a float circuit. Mineralogy-related intelligent circuit design with tailored equipment (not cookie-cutter, mass-produced machinery) will be instrumental for future concentrators. Mineralogical input for better regrind circuit design and adaptability of processing flow sheets ( Minimizing downtime due to mineralogical ore variability. Based on recent data ( Further, the long(er) lead times for mega projects need to be shortened. Changes in process equipment are significant (i.e. bigger and fewer in the future). This includes the use of ever increasing float super cells (>600 Bigger may be better, but only if “bigger” is engineered, flow-sheeted and operated properly. The processing with “bigger” will also imply “fewer” which makes it imperative that the ore characterization has to be “better”, “bigger” and “more frequent”. Mineralogy’s impact of detrimental gangue on flotation will not be smaller with bigger and less equipment. The critical importance of routine gangue analysis is highlighted in the following: High throughput plants will promote metallurgical challenges related to the following: Unless mining adopts substantially more use of process mineralogy, current and future operations will continue to be handicapped by “Achilles’ Heels” in startup. They may include:  Start-Up & Ramp-Up Delay. Throughput Less Than Design. Equipment/Circuits Undersized. Higher Wear. Poor Design of Re-Grind. Failure of Equipment.  Increased Downtime – Lower Availability. Thickener Overflow Problems. Flotation Problems. Inadequate Reagent Use. Lower Metal Recovery.  Production Loss & Replacement Cost. Higher Maintenance & Operating Cost. Although in the past, the purchase of a “tonnage-enhancing tool” (e.g. a new truck) was on the priority list, mining companies are realizing that top-of-the-line laboratories are equally important when high-throughput is required. With the increasing use of engineered stockpiles for bio leaching of low-grade ore or waste rock in copper (and/or lower-grade heap leaching), bio-metallurgy with high(er) extractions will outperform the expectations only if a thorough feed mineralogy is performed in concert with “down-hole” chemical–analytical work. Important recommendations include: Optimizing the high-cost areas of crushing and grinding with better blast indexing and blast fragmentation based on daily mineralogy control ( Subsequent tracking of ore characteristics in blasted muck via radio-frequency transponders and optimization of ore routing, reduction of dilution and better stockpile forecasting. Addition of bulk gangue mineralogy data to the (too frequent) exclusive use of comminution test data. Gangue mineralogy (more than just hardness, abrasion, and breakage) governs and/or limits flotation performance. Deeper mining and challenges of more underground operations will require high-quality and extensive mineralogical information to permit robust modeling. The skill crisis in the mining industry will mandate more lab automation for operations in remote locations. The path to future automation efforts is described by CSIRO (2009). Ore characterization-related losses continue to represent a major cost factor for mining, routing, processing and tailings handling. De-bottlenecking of existing or recent design and plant restarts can be executed faster and more cost-efficiently with process mineralogical support. Although the trend to big plants will alleviate some issues, mineralogy’s troublesome process features (both for leaching and flotation) will not disappear with bigger equipment. New (faster and better) mineralogical tools will have to focus on providing 12–24 Due to the capability of producing mineralogical data in ever increasing quantities and faster turnaround times, the mineralogists of the future also have an obligation to maintain high quality and thorough interpretation of the data. With the availability of powerful lab technology, we need to remember that A poor mineralogical analysis from fast-track automated mineral analysis can be more detrimental than no analysis. Experienced process mineralogists will play a different role in the future. They will become the “flight deck managers” of highly automated laboratory cockpits. Filtering out the process implications from the plethora of automated mineral data will be at the cross-roads for top process mineralogy vs. mere high volume data spreadsheets based on short-cut analytical approaches. Emerging metallurgical sectors (such as bio leaching of low-grade chalcopyrite ores) with innovative leach concepts (e.g. hybrid stockpile and heap leaching involving large in-pit HPGRs) will require strong mineralogical guidance. As recent efforts in engineered stockpile bio leaching ( Clearly, sufficient ore characterization and, especially, metallurgical testing have suffered in recent years as it is assumed that a clearly defined mineralogical analysis and metallurgical testing plan can be substituted with modeling and simulation: The impact of clay minerals on reduced grinding efficiency, packing of clays in lifters, and on mill loading is significant. Yet, many projects are developed without a quantitative clay model. The interference of alteration minerals with pulp viscosity, air dispersion and froth characteristics. The impact of middlings on the recycle streams. Sulfide/gangue mineralogy on collector–frother optimization. Minor changes of alteration and/or aged ore on collector dosage. The formation of Run-Away-Float Conditions caused by acidic minerals, clay and other gangue slimes. Hydrophobic gangue’s impact on froth structure, froth drainage issues and dry froths. The more aggressive application of benchmark concentrator and heap leach surveys (“audits”) constitutes one of the most important (continued) process optimization tools. Many circuits are over-reagentized and/or do not even have a baseline mineralogical material balance for the grinding, rougher and cleaner circuits. In the past, these surveys have generated tremendous values ( Gold recovery increases of 5–6%. Reduction of lime consumption by 1–3%. Quantifying the molybdenite losses in the rougher and cleaner tails. Introduction of high intensity conditioning. Identify areas (pH and particle size) for good, mediocre and poor Cu recovery. Identification of “Re-Grind Sweet Spot” for pyrite rejection. The use of “Kicker–Collectors” for recovering previously lost copper. The preventive/prophylactic value of quantitative, baseline, process mineralogy in combination with rougher kinetics flotation testing has been outlined by The introduction of seawater for processing will mandate even more mineralogical scrutiny as we are just on the threshold of understanding the impact of this water type. The use of de-salinated water will increase the operating cost and reducing mineralogical variance will also be more critical. Capital discipline equals more discipline in ore characterization. Re-tooling for process mineralogy also encompasses the imperative effort to include downhole logging tools in heap or stockpile leach applications. Such as: Modeling, simulation and geo-metallurgy are contingent on: High quality quantitative mineralogy.  An interpretation of the mineralogy data – “What do the data mean for metallurgy?” ( With the persistant lack of skilled technical staff and dismal improvement prospects for the near future, the mining industry has been using modeling and simulation extensively. Although these models contain some very good data, many of them still have deficits in mineralogical information. Models for copper or gold heap leaching, copper or moly flotation without good quantitative gangue mineralogy, are prescriptions for “casino metallurgy”. Bond Work index (BWi) tests are costly, time consuming and prone to operator/SOP errors. Rapid, quantitative XRD analysis could provide large data bases which may actually be more reliable than a small amount of BWi data ( Blast Indexing. Agglomeration. Acid curing. Permeability. Slope Stability. Acid Consumption. Mill Throughput. Froth Stability. Pulp Density. Thompson (2012) has shown that test errors made in design and metallurgical work can result in a very large gross revenue impact. For a hypothetical 200,000 Design and metallurgical testing can be more reliable and precise with the use and assistance or process mineralogical data. Likewise, modeling of flotation circuits without the proven Mineralogical (baseline) Surveys, could result in inefficient or potentially misleading decisions on geo-metallurgy, grinding, and flotation. The increasing shift to underground mining mandates more and faster mineralogical and chemical lab support and/or cross belt analysis. With the growing size of new and expanded concentrators (150,000–250,000 Automated Central Labs or Smaller Automated Mine Site Labs can provide high efficiency, better quality and fast lab data for exploration/mine geology samples, geo-metallurgy programs, daily blast holes, and all other production samples ( Sample preparation (for Mineralogy & Chemistry). Optical microscopy. XRD and NIR. Automated Mineral Analysis (QEMSCAN, MLA, TIMA or others). Digestion/XRF/Leco/Titrators/Density/Others. Deteriorating economics will be rapidly alerting the operations that the Resource control, mine planning, production forecasts and plant support via 24/7 mineralogy data will become imperative for competitive operation and best-practice metallurgical performance. One can even go as far as concluding that high-quality quantitative on-line mineralogy may permit the processing of resources thus far considered uneconomic ( It is tentatively concluded that the mines of the future will be outfitted with down-hole probes, cross-belt technology and automated central labs or in-plant robotics mineralogy modules. An efficient metallurgical operation with excellent ore characterization and frequent process mineralogy support, superlatively equipped and run, will overcome the inferiority of an ore deposit. Process mineralogy and lab automation in the future need to continue to make mineralogical data more applicable for daily production support and establish mineralogy “lab modules” which can provide 12–24 Specifically, the following areas require continued bold development and rapid implementation: Site labs, central labs or smaller plant lab modules. Mineralogy needs to be available 24/7. Daily blast hole XRD & NIR should become a routine (as much as assays). Clay content. Permeability control of heaps. Daily rougher feed mineralogy to monitor gangue and sulfides. The use of Down-Hole Analysis for heaps and ROM stockpiles. The mineralogical ore characteristics govern and drive any choice and design of process technology. Mining companies, consulting groups, engineering firms and equipment manufacturers need to re-focus their future efforts on mineralogy-related process and equipment selection. Further, continuous, daily production mineralogy (analogous to daily chemical analyses) will become a key business and operating parameter for optimal metallurgical performance and mine economics. It represents the most powerful “risk reduction factor” for process plants. Step-changes for future mineralogy labs may include:  Robot Circuits & 24/7 Labs.  Optical Microscopy/Imaging. XRD–NIR–FTIR. LA–ICP–MS & LIBS. X-ray Micro CT.  Fast-High-Capacity Lab Systems. Field Systems/Plant Modules. Mine Site Mineralogy Labs. Cerro Verde, Climax, Anglo, Xstrata, Rio Tinto, Barrick, Others.  PFTNA, PGNAA Wirelog, ECS, APT, NMR, et al. Cross Belt Neutron Analyzers, Blue Cube. NIR or LIF Systems & Others. With the focus on Autonomous Mining, the future mineralogy labs will play an increasingly critical role if they can adapt to robotics modules in order to accommodate 12–24