Curcumin and rosemary oil nanoemulsions (CUR and RON), having 184.3 nm and 158.3 nm average diameters, were successfully produced by a single sonication technique. Effectiveness of nanoemulsions against P. aeruginosa, E. coli, and S. typhimurium were tested by agar diffusion method. Total mesophilic bacteria (TMABc) growth in fish fillets treated with RON and CUR nanoemulsions was acceptable for human consumption up to the 9th day. Total psychrophilic bacteria counts (TPBc) in the fish fillets treated with RON and CUR was found to be lower (26% and 17%) than the control group samples, respectively. While TMAB growth in fish fillets treated with RON was effectively declined from 5.59 to 3.48 log CFU/g, TMAB count of the fish fillets treated with CUR was decreased from 7.42 to 6.53 log CFU/g during the analysis period. Therefore, the obtained novel nanomaterial could be effectively used to limit the rapid increase in bacterial spoilage of fish meat in the food industry.Different food preservation methods have been using for a long time in the food sector all over the world. However, some preservation methods are not cost-effective while some of them are not healthy for human. Therefore, in addition to conventional food preservation methods, the necessity of towards to novel application or approaches related to food safety is getting increase day by day in the scientific area and food industry ( Medicinal plants have been used for many years in order to protect the quality of seafood stored at cold conditions ( The primary goal of the presented study was successfully to obtain rosemary and curcumin nanoemulsions. For this aim, the nanoemulsions were characterized in terms of morphological, colloidal properties. The main target of the presented study was to reveal to what effective RON and CUR nanoemulsions providing a higher contact area Skinless fish fillets ( Preparation of nanoemulsions were done according to the method proposed by ( The size (ZS), zeta potential (ZP), and polydispersity index (PDI) of CUR and RON nanoemulsions were determined Fish fillets (10 ± 2 g) were randomly separated into three groups. The untreated first group was coded as the control (C). The fillets of the second group were only treated with curcumin loaded nanoemulsions (CUR) and third group were solely treated with rosemary loaded nanoemulsions (RON). 100 μL nanoemulsion was applied onto the rainbow fish fillet surface for each group. The all samples were placed into polyethylene bags that were kept for 9 days at 4 ± 1 °C. Total psychrophilic bacteria count (TPBc) and total mesophilic aerobic bacteria count (TMABc) The antibacterial effects of RON and CUR nanoemulsions against Statistical analyses were done using JMP version 9.0.2 (SAS Institute, Inc. Cary, USA). All data were reported as means ± SD (standard deviation). Tukey's multiple range tests were used to compare the samples (p < 0.05).  In the In addition to the ZS and PDI values of the nanoemulsions, a greater ZP value leads to repulsive forces between particles that may improve the physical stability of multiphase systems. In this respect, oil concentration plays an important role in determining ZP. As oils are composed of fatty acids, the negative charge could be attributed to carboxylic acid groups of fatty acids ( SEM images of CUR and RON nanoemulsions are given in The inhibitory effect of RON and CUR nanoemulsions against tested microorganisms is presented in Effect of nanoemulsions obtained from curcumin and rosemary oil on microbial growth of fish flesh during storage at 4 ± 1 °C is shown in Moreover, it was clearly seen that fish flesh treated with RON nanoemulsions did not exceed the limit value until the 7th day of cold storage. Similarly, TMAB count of fish flesh treated with CUR nanoemulsions reached 5.39 log CFU/g, at the end of the 7th days of cold storage. At the end of the 9th day of storage, TMAB count of fish flesh treated with RON and CUR reached unacceptable levels for human consumption with 6.37 and 6.53 log CFU/g, respectively. Besides TMAB growth in fish flesh samples, in the present study, TPB count was also observed. In this sense, TPB count of C samples rapidly increased from 3.85 to 8.80 log CFU/g up to the 9th days. Also, once TMAB growth in C samples exceeded 6 log CFU/g value, TPB count of C samples was detected to be 8.73 log CFU/g. The amount of used active material in the present nanotechnology application on fish flesh was lower than the amount of micro and macro size materials. In this respect, the results indicated that RON nanoemulsions were CUR and RON nanoemulsions were successfully obtained. CUR and RON nanoemulsions inhibited some pathogenic microorganism, which can be determined in the fish meat. Also, the use of nanoemulsions with 184.3 nm diameters delayed the rapid TMAB and TPB growth in fish fillets during the 9 days as compared to the untreated fish samples. Moreover, this nanoscience study can play a guiding role in further food studies.  There is no conflict of interest among the authors. This project was supported by the