Alternative low cost materials are evaluated through the valorization of by-products derived from mining and metallurgical industry for solid sensible heat based energy storage systems. They were used either as received or formulated as aggregates in mortars, and their thermal and mechanical properties were characterized. A selection methodology was applied in order to compare them with available materials found in the literature for applications as (STES) materials, and with materials from Cambridge Educational Software (CES) Selector database. It was demonstrated that these recycled materials have a high potential for these thermal energy storage applications.Last years have been characterized by an energy consumption increase as well as a constant rise in prices for energy. Assuming the necessity of more effective utilization of energy in all spheres of human activity, energy storage is a key element to improve the efficiency of energy utilization in different economical aspects. It is the way of bridging the time gap between the energy supply and the energy demand. Thermal energy storage (TES) plays a significant role in improvement of energy efficiency. There are mainly three types of TES systems, chemical, latent and sensible storage, depending on the type of process or property of the material that is profitable. In latent heat storage (LTES) the property we are interested in is the energy that is required to change the phase of a material, usually between liquid and solid phases. In chemical energy storage storing heat is through the use of reversible chemical reactions. And the last one is the storage of sensible heat (STES), which uses the energy released (or absorbed) by materials when its temperature is decreasing or increasing. STES is classified on the basis of the heat storage media as liquid media storage (like water, oil based fluids, molten salts etc.) and solid media storage (like ceramics, metals and others) For the application of a solid as a thermal energy storage media several properties like density ( When integrating the thermal storage in the energy system, economics are an important driven force. Because of the increase of the cost of storage materials, it is a very interesting issue to evaluate low cost alternative materials through the valorization of by-products derived from mining and metallurgical industry for solid sensible heat storage. Moreover, the expected extensive development of TES in the future could lead to a lack in TES materials availability and sometimes to major conflict of use with other applications. The aim of this work is to evaluate the potential of several materials to be used as storage materials: by-products of the pyrometallurgical refining process of copper (Slag P and Slag B), the powder material produced during the steelmaking process in electric arc furnace (WDF), they are basically metal oxides. IB and WrutF are two by-products of the mineral industry. IB is a chloride (mainly sodium chloride) by-product of the potash production and WRutF is a derivative from ilmenite mining that contains mostly silica oxide. These materials are compared with the materials described in the CES Selector database. CES Selector is software from GRANTA that combines the information on materials and process properties In order to evaluate the potential of the by-products used in this paper as thermal energy storage materials they were characterized. Previously the particle size was homogenized as the materials were supplied as granulates or powders. To do so, different jaw crusher steps were used obtaining particles size lower than 1 Mortars were prepared using three types of binders: Portland cement, CEM I 52,5R (according to EN-197–2000), calcium aluminate cement (according to EN-14647-CAC) aluminous and phosphate cements, (KMgPO Samples for DSC and picnometer were prepared by crushing and milling the samples if required (for mortars). The specific heat capacity of the materials was evaluated by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). DSC was performed in nitrogen atmosphere using the dynamic method with a DSC-822e/40 Mettler Toledo, at a heating rate of 10 The thermal conductivity was measured with the device described by Olivès et al. (2001) The thermal stability was studied using a thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), at a heating rate of 5 In In Thermal stability is important to define the proper working temperature range of the studied materials. At the maximum service temperature the material can be used without an excessive change of its mechanical properties and chemical stability. Thermal stability of the recycled materials, as well as the mortars that include them, was first evaluated with thermogravimetrical analysis and they did not show significant changes that may suggest changes in stability during their service. In In a previous work a theoretical case study was analyzed using the CES Selector database When looking for STES materials we are interested on maximizing the energy density and thermal conductivity. To reduce the universe of selectable materials constrains previously used were applied: limit the service temperature (lower limit for minimum service temperature was 400  Also, the cost per unit of mass of the studied materials may be considered and compared with those of the database, see A more exhaustive selection can be performed following the selection strategy  or The optimum design can be considered to be the selection of the material and geometry which maximize (or minimize) According to this strategy, to perform the selection of heat storage medium, it has to be maximize the thermal energy storage per unit material cost through the equation that describes the system. Nevertheless, a minimum working temperature of 400 As described by Fernández A.I. et al. (2010) In For short term storage, Fernández A.I. et al. (2010) If α vs. The main properties of several materials have been characterized to evaluate them as sensible thermal energy storage materials. They have high energy density and medium conductivity, and lower prices when they are compared with the solar salt (60 Materials selection methodology is used to evaluate the studied materials and compare them with common materials as well as materials reported in the literature. For long term storage the materials that perform better are WDF, Cofalite, IB and WRutF, in decreasing order. They have the highest energy density and lower cost. For a short term storage those that perform better are WDF, the Halite mineral, concrete, WRutF, Cofalite and IB. It was demonstrated that WDF, IB, Cofalite and WRutF are cost effective materials for STES for an application such as CSP industrial TES. Further studies need to be done concerning other properties that are relevant when incorporating the materials into the storage systems, such as thermal expansion, resistance to thermal cycles and corrosion. This work was partially funded by the Antoni Gil would like to thank the Col·legi d'Enginyers Industrials de Catalunya for his research appointment and the Departament d'Universitats, Recerca i Societat de la Informació of Generalitat de Catalunya for the AGAUR research stage scholarship (BE-DGR 2010).