Proximal femoral fractures are a very common disease which affect elderly patients after low energy trauma, but can also affect the young population as a consequence of high energy trauma. Classification of sub trochanteric fractures has not yet been clearly defined representing a major issue in comparing different treatment techniques among the scientific literature.These fractures are well known by orthopaedic surgeons for intraoperative difficulties in reduction and post-operative high rate of non-unions and malunions.We present two clinical cases, one treated with an intramedullary device and one with an extramedullary device, both failed and revised with open surgery using a condylar angled bladeplate, following AO principles of anatomical reduction and stable fixation.Proximal femoral fractures are a very common disease which affect elderly patients after low energy trauma, but can also affect the young population as a consequence of high energy trauma (road traffic accidents). According to several epidemiological studies [ We present two clinical cases, one treated with an intramedullary device and one with an extramedullary device, both failed and revised with an open re-osteosynthesis using a blade-plate, following AO principles of reduction and fixation. Both patients underwent primary surgery in nearby hospitals and came to our attention several months later due to persistent painful weight bearing and functional limitation. Revision surgical procedure was performed by the same orthopedic surgeon at the Traumatology and General OrthopaedicDepartment of our hospital. The first case is a 74 year old woman, BMI 28.4, Barthel preoperative score of 80. Clinical history included BPCO, Hypothyroidism, previous skin melanoma treated by surgery, appendicectomy, fatty liver disease and depressive disorder. Primary fracture was a su btrochanteric fracture of the right hip treated by ORIF in 2013 in Dominican Republic. Synthesis device used was a proximal, contoured femoral plate with angular stability, with 4.5 screws; at removal it was impossible to determine the type of plate used, for it was impossible to find clear marks of manufacturing. She came to our attention two years later, in 2015, for pain and the x-rays performed at that time showed the non union and failure of device with proximal screw breakage. Clinically the patient complained of hip pain at weight bearing and showed an evident limping related to pain and asymmetric limbs. The right inferior limb was shortened and externally rotated. The patient was not convinced to undergo new surgery and refused our proposal for almost one year. When she came back in December 2016 a preoperative CT scan was taken and in March 2017 we performed the new intervention. We had to remove the broken plate and correct axes and length of the femur. We selected as new ostheosyntesis device a Condylar Angled Blade Plate (De Puy Synthes, Raynham, Massachusetts, USA). Surgery was performed under general anesthesia on a radiolucent table with intraoperative use of image intensifier. Antibiotic prophylaxis was done with IV 2 g cefazolin. Plate and screws were removed (including the broken ones), and lateral biplanar intertrochanteric osteotomy of 25° of varus correction with associated 35° of external rotation of the proximal femur was performed. A large femoral distractor was applied to maintain biplanar correction during reduction and osthesynthesis. Finally the new blade plate was applied. ( Progressive knee and hip mobilization into flexion was allowed from 2nd post-operative day. The perioperative course was quite aneventful except for postoperative hemorrhagic anemia (Hb 7,0 g/dl) corrected by blood transfusion. Patient was discharged 13 days after surgery. At the moment of leaving the hospital she was already able to ambulate with 2 crutches with no or touch-toe weight bearing on the right inferior limb. Sitting position was allowed. At 6 weeks from surgery AP X-ray of the pelvis, lateral X-ray of the hip and femur were performed showing a stable construct. Partial weight bearing was then allowed with weekly progression as tolerated. X-rays and clinical examination were performed at 12, 24 and 36 weeks follow up and showed progressive healing of the fracture with correlated clinical improvement till complete healing( The second patient is a 70 years old woman, BMI 26,3, non-smoker. Barthel score of 65. Clinical history reports hypothyroidism, hypertensive cardiopathy and osteoporosis with fragility fractures of the spine. The original fracture was a sub trochanteric fracture occurred in August 2016 treated with CRIF (Cephalic medullary nail). Primary surgery was complicated by rotational defect at the fracture site and the patient underwent early revision for correction of rotations, changing the position of the distal screw of the nail. Follow up x-rays and clinical examination showed pain and delayed union, and therefore in the index hospital another surgery was performed (nail dynamization). Nonunion of the fracture persisted and because of hip pain and functional limitation in daily activities the patient arrived to our attention. The patient complained of pain during weight bearing and ambulation was compromised with limping; she used two crutches. Inferior right limb was externally rotated and shortened with swelling of the thigh and peripheral edema without other neurovascular deficit. Surgery plan was the removal of the short nail, correction of the deformity and a new synthesis with a condylar angled blade plate. Surgery was performed under general anesthesia on a radiolucent table with intraoperative use of image intensifier. Antibiotic prophylaxis was done with IV 2 g cefazolin. The nail was removed and to correct rotation and varus an osteotomy was necessary. It was done following the original fracture line, which was still visible on intraoperative images. Also in this case the use of a large femoral distractor was necessary to perform and control external rotation and varus correction. After correction of the deformity a new synthesis with 95° condylar angled stainless steel blade plate was applied. ( Touch toe weight bearing was immediately allowed after surgery as tolerated. During 2 Patient was discharged 8 days after surgery. Ambulation with 2 crutches with weight bearing as tolerated on the right inferior limb was allowed. After 6 weeks from surgery AP X-ray of pelvis, lateral X-ray of hip and femur were taken and showed stable synthesis. Progressive weight bearing was allowed. X-rays and clinical examination were performed at 12, 24 and 36 weeks and showed progressive healing of the fracture with correlated clinical improvement till complete healing ( Classification of sub trochanteric fractures remains challenging; several classification system emphasize the direction of fracture line and the presence of fragmentation of medial and posterior wall to identy fracture at risk of complications and term these fractures as unstable ones. Extension of the fracture to femoral diaphysis complicates treatment and makes extramedullary devices less appealing [ Recent reviews of large series suggest the use of intramedullary device in these fractures, expecially if instability signs are present. However, we should not compare results of low energy fractures in elderly people to high energy fractures occurring in younger subjects. Most reviews [ This case report have been presented to support application of AO principles of anatomic reduction, stable osteosynthesis and early mobilization, proving that they are effective also in treating complications in this difficult area.Technique pearls, such as the use of femoral distractor and surgery on a radiolucent table can be helpful in planning revision of non union in this area. We did not recommend a new fixation without reduction of the mal union or non union and if revision surgery is performed at long time distance osteotomy of the non union is mandatory to achieve the reduction. It seems also advisable to be prepared to bone grafting for defects after correction can be appreciated. None of the authors have a conflict of interest.