In order to further study rock fracture mechanism cutting by conical picks, a number of indentation experiments were undertaken. In these experiments, the chips formation and their shapes were initially observed. Then, a model of specific energy was developed and the effects of relevant cutting parameters on the specific energy were investigated based on Evans’ rock cutting mode and indentation experiments. The results showed that fracture toughness, elasticity modulus of the rock, and depth of cut have significant influence on specific energy. Applications of fracture mechanics to cutting indicated that the maximum indentation depth linearly increases with the increasing of depth of cut. There is positive power correlation between maximum cutting force and depth of cut. The total work done by the pick is approximately proportional to the square of cutting depth. The dataset of specific energy yields on a power fitting curve with the depth of cut. Theoretical analysis and experimental results revealed that there is only approximately 3% of the external work of the pick contributes to the generation of new chipping surfaces while most the external energy is dissipated in producing the crushing zone.The basic mechanism of rock cutting has developed in the recent decades by experimental and numerical modeling techniques. At the beginning of designing the cutting machines, empirical theories were utilized to predict the excavation rates and machine performance. A series of equations were propounded based on geometrical assumptions and mechanical characteristics of rocks at that time. Evans’ rock cutting theories using chisel and conical picks first shed light to predict the tool forces for the improvement of cutting head designs. As a general rule, it is known that the tool forces begin to increase gradually depending on the wear rate of the pick when the pick is penetrated to the rock and moved through the cutting direction. Those forces which acts on the tool-rock interface consist of normal and cutting forces. The normal force plays an important role at the beginning of cutting since it is applied to penetrate the pick into the rock. However, cutting force becomes more important as soon as the pick advances and fragmentation process starts. To better understand the mechanism of rock penetration occurring at the beginning of rock cutting/fragmentation process, experiments using a conical pick were conducted on sandstone and also the effect on specific energy was investigated. Specific energy is defined as the work to cut a unit volume of rock. Rock cutting experiments have led a better understanding of the effects of rock properties on specific energy Although fracture mechanics has been widely applied for studying rock cutting, no systematical theory of specific energy has been developed yet sufficiently to explain the experimental behavior of conical picks. In this study, a better understanding of the theory of specific energy was attempted. In this regard, the fragmentation process of a conical pick was analyzed based on fracture mechanism of Evans’ The first cutting theory about the cutting action of wedge shaped picks was propounded by Evans’ As can be seen from theory, mechanical properties of rock and cutting parameters play an important role on the cutting forces. Therefore, each parameter should be considered carefully when an attempt to predict the forces is made. In the experimental tests, Evans’ The indentation tests were conducted in the laboratory using linear cutting machine (LCM) where a conical pick shown in The tests were conducted on sandstone samples which were collected from quarries in Sichuan province in China. All rock samples used for experiments were carefully selected in the field and there were no obvious fractures and discontinuity planes within the structures. In order to perform the laboratory tests, each block sample was trimmed to the required size for the indentation tests which is 150 × 150 × 200 mm in dimension. The density, uniaxial compressive strength, Brazilian tensile strength and elasticity modulus were also determined to be 2.215 g/cm When analyzing the performance of an excavation machine, the specific energy is considered carefully. In order to calculate the specific energy, the area underneath the pick is taken into account because the amount of rock chips cut from the surface becomes supremely important. For this reason, particular attention was devoted to the geometry of the chips, dimensions, and shapes, each of which contribute strong constraints on cutting behavior of conical pick. Experiments were conducted with a constant load applied in the vertical direction. The boundaries of rock cutting test is shown in During the tests, it was seen that the fracture process starts with the initiation of two orthogonal, penny-shaped median-radial cracks from the corners of the pyramid. With increasing load, the cracks propagate stably throughout the line parallel to side wall and a V-shaped chip is formed as a result of the tests. A general view of a chip in a plane of symmetry can be shown in Rock cutting tests were carried out at the cutting depths of 6, 12, 18, 24 mm and morphology of the chips depending on the cutting depth are shown in The data listed in The relationships between the geometrical parameters of rock chips and cutting depth are presented in During the cuttability tests using conical picks, the load was applied systematically, i.e. the pick was penetrated at slow displacement rate vertically, in the experimental test rig. Hence, quasi-static state of the rock was ensured. The pick initially crushed the surface, then two cracks spread from the crushed zone to the other free surface. An inelastic deformation zone occurred around the pick. The load on the pick and the work done by the pick were processes by monitoring the cutting forces and specific energy ( The graphs were plotted until a chip is completely formed. The tests were repeated for different cutting depths ranging from 6 mm to 24 mm. As can be seen from The result of an indentation test reflects the cuttability of the rock mass. Both low and high indentation depths, the cutting depth is almost 10 times greater than indentation depth. At high indentation, the cutting force increase significantly since a large rock chip is formed and macro tensile cracks can be visualized clearly. However, at low penetration depth, the tensile cracks could not be observed very well because the stress range underneath the pick is very low as well as cutting force. The objective of the cutting experiments is on the one hand to obtain approximately similar tool forces as in a real cutting action, and on the other hand to realistically monitor the rock-tool interaction with the crack patterns. These data provide basic information for the selection and the geometrical configuration of the cutting tools. In this regard, specific energy evaluated from experiments have effective accuracy for performance prediction of an excavation machine. Pang et al. According to the Pang et al. In order to simplify the analysis, we assume that The maximum total work ( On the other hand, the energy required to generate a new surface or to form a chip from edge of the specimen can be written as follows. According to the Griffin-Irwin theory, the total energy needing to generate a new surface is proportional to the area of the new surface as given in Eq. For the plane stress condition; where It has been shown above that the rock chips have similar geometric shapes and the area of the new surface generated increases with the increase of cutting depth. Thus, the area of new surfaces generated of the rock can be generally expressed as follows. Therefore, the Eq. Combined with Eq.  The specific energy would be defined as the maximum total work ( Inserting Eq. As a result, it is a fact that the specific energy is not only related to the rock properties, but also have connection with of pick and cutting parameter, i.e. cutting depth. A comparison between the test data listed in It can be seen in  Based on the fitting equations presented in The fracture toughness of rock is also an important parameter used in theoretical studies and engineering applications. Laboratory testing is the most straightforward way to examine it. There are three methods for measuring rock fracture toughness suggested by the ISRM As stated in the regression equation presented in  Generally, it is well known that ductile failure is characterized by crushing of grains around the pick and it is observed at shallow cutting depths typically less than 1 mm for sandstones. On the other side, the brittle failure is characterized by the macroscopic chips and cracks around the pick at the greater cutting depths. In terms of the fracture energy, the energy is predominantly dissipated through crushing in ductile failure whereas the energy is dissipated through chipping in brittle failure. Since the higher amount of energy (97%) dissipated through crushing during our experiments, the failure mechanism could have assumed as ductile although the post-peak behavior of the cutting force in According to the Eq. Rock cutting is considered to be a discontinuous process due to heterogenic structure of rocks. Distinct stages such as crushing, crushing-chipping, and major chip formation are identified while the pick moves and cutting forces vary. All these stages are evaluated from different aspects of rock fracture basis. This study has theoretically established a specific energy model using fracture mechanics. All these parameters associated with the model were discussed based on rock indentation on a sandstone using a conical pick and the main conclusions are drawn as follows: The volume of the maximum rock chip is proportional to the cube of cutting depth; the maximum indentation depth linearly increases with the increasing of cutting depth; the specific energy decreases with the increasing of cutting depth in a power correlation. There is very low effort on the external work used for the maximum rock chips breaking (only 3% in this study), and most of the rest dissipates in the process of the rock indentation. The result indicated that the specific energy not only related with the rock properties, but also concerned to the cutting parameters. Especially, the effect of cutting depth on specific energy is very critical and should be considered sensibly in new pick designs based on innovative technologies and predicting the excavation rates of mechanical excavators such as roadheaders.