The study focuses on the generation and distribution of mineral species in fly and bottom ashes. These were formed during a fluidised co-combustion of a fossil fuel (coal) and a non-fossil fuel (tyre rubber) in a small fluidised bed combustor (7cm×70cm). The pilot plant had continuous fuel feed using varying ratios of coal and rubber.
                  The study also focuses on the lixiviation behaviour of metallic elements with the assessment of zinc recovering.The recovery and re-use of waste products are high priorities in todays’ markets due price increases in raw materials and the global energy crisis. This is very much the case with end-of-life tyres The main pollutants emitted from the co-combustion of tyre with coal are: solid particles, non-condensable gases (carbon monoxide, sulphur dioxide, nitrogen oxides), trace elements and organic compounds (Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and chlorobenzenes) This non-fossil fuel can contribute between 10% and 25% of the initial fuel mixture during co-combustion In 2007 the 15 member states of the European Union produced over 61 Fly ashes and bottom ashes, solid by-products of combustion, show different characteristics The classification of bottom ashes as toxic waste will depend on their heavy metal content Different hydrometallurgical procedures were assessed for the recovery of secondary zinc-rich by-products There has been further research on the lixiviating behaviour of fly ash from incinerating municipal solid waste (MSW). This research assessed the environmental impact for its disposal in dumps and also for the detoxification of metals or their recovery. In addition a lixiviation efficiency comparison was established with different reactants, such as hydrochloric acid, sodium hydroxide and water. It concluded that hydrochloric acid attains better results in the lixiviation of elements like cadmium, lead, zinc and potassium These procedures appear state of the art and so it seemed appropriate to study the mobility of inorganic species in the ashes. These result from the combustion of varying coal and tyre rubber mixtures (90%/10% and 30%/70% respectively). The ashes were produced under different combustion temperatures (750 The use of end-of-life tyres as a non-fossil fuel, together with their co-combustion with coal of different ranks, has been widely reported The study is focussed on zinc partitioning between gaseous emissions (as a trace element) and solid products from the combustion of coal, tyres and blends of both fuels in different ratios. The highest zinc concentration was seen to be in the ashes. Zinc lixiviation from the ashes by hydrometallurgical techniques was intended to reduce environmental impact whilst increasing zinc compounds recovery. Zinc and its oxides are used in a wide variety of processes including the galvanising of iron and steel, the production of brass, laminates, as a catalyst in the production of synthetic rubber and in die cast alloys The atmospheric fluidised bed combustion (AFBC) pilot plant used allowed the combustion of different rank coals mixed with wastes of varied natures The study also focus the lixiviation of zinc contained in coal combustion products (CCPs) and tyres, determining the influence of parameters such as temperature, lixiviation period, choice of reactants and their concentration The fuel raw materials were a low-rank Spanish coal (classified as sub-bituminous and originating from the EMMA mine in Puertollano, with a 0.5–1 The combustions of the coal and tyre (isolated and their blends) were performed in a laboratory scale atmospheric fluidised bed reactor (size: 70 The results show the fuel characteristics for coal and tyre are very different: The ash content is greater in coal (41.46% as received) than in tyre (3.30% as received). Tyre has a much higher calorific value (38.82 Almost half the total sulphur content of coal is inorganic, whilst in the case of tyre is organic sulphur. The total zinc content in coal is very low (0.06%) in comparison with that of tyre (1.13%). The products resulting from the different fuels proportions were characterised with a Philips PW-1404 X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometers, with a Sc–Mo tube. The crystalline phase identification was performed by X-ray Diffraction, using a Philips PW-1710 diffractometer with CuKα radiation, equipped with a graphite monochromator and an automatic divergence slit and operating at 40 The lixiviation process used 2 The pulp was filtered out. The liquid and solid phases were qualitatively and quantitatively analysed by using Atomic Absorption Spectrometry (Phillips 9.100X) and UV–VIS (Perkin–Elmer, Lambda 3 UV/VIS model). The mineral species present in the initial tyre were isolated by low-temperature ashing (LTA) in a high vacuum oxygen plasma reactor. This allowed analysis of the fuels mineral matter without any modification during the combustion process. Once the fuel organic matter was eliminated, the mineral matter was analysed by XRD pre and post lixiviation. Zincite (ZnO) was the main crystalline phase detected followed by a lower presence of calcite (CaCO Amorphous silica is the other main rubber component; it is found in similar percentages to those of zincite. This silica cannot be detected with X-ray diffraction as it is not in crystalline phase, although it is detectable with Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometry (FTIR), (see Ashes from fixed bed combustion at 800  The comparison of fly ash with bottom ash collected in the ash pan ( A series of solid deposits (slaggings) appear on the walls of the reactor during the combustion of tyre rubber due to the agglomeration of ash particles. These cause operational problems and affect the availability and thermal efficiency of tyre combustion as they modify the fluidisation. The mineral matter of this slag has been analysed ( The particle sizes of all the combustion products were measured and recorded. It should be noted that ash, due to the combustion temperature and the reaction time, is a product whose mineralogical components have not reached a thermodynamic balance. The additives, zinc oxide, amorphous silica, limestone, clays, quartz and other varied compounds, all start reacting with each other. This occurs randomly on contact according to the composition of the particles and normally as a solid–solid reaction (without fusion). Reactions take place via diffusion of the elements from one particle to another. Fast cooling leads to many grains of ashes that do not have an “exact” composition corresponding to its crystalline phase and therefore with diverse areas having different concentrations. The evolution of mineralogical species during tyre combustion in both fluidised bed and muffle furnace (as special “fixed bed”), was studied to compare the influence of the different combustion conditions as demonstrated in the diffractograms of  The fly ashes generated in the tyre rubber combustion in the fluidised bed plant are collected in the cyclones. The tyre rubber fly ash composition varies significantly from the ashes collected in the ash pan. In the diffractogram of the fly ash produced at 800 There is particle fragmentation due to friction in the bed, where the small particles can be elutriated outside the combustion reactor together with the fly ash. The organic matter contents found in the fly ashes can be high, particularly in the case of combustion at 750 The evolution of mineral species from the tyre rubber/coal mixture during combustion was tested using bottom ashes in a proportion mixture of 70% coal–30% tyre and 90% coal–10% tyre at 750 The bottom ashes from 90% coal/10% tyre mixture were analysed by SEM to check the inorganic species in detail. The majority of the grains correspond to coal ashes (iron oxides, silica, calcium compounds, silicates) with only a few generated from the tyre ashes. An example of a coal particle that comes from the 90% coal/10% tyre mixture is shown in detail in There is a suggestion, from the scanning electron microscope study, that in the co-combustion of the 90% coal/10% tyre mixture in AFBC, the grains of each component tend to preserve their individual nature. This leads to no significant interaction or transfer of matter between the different types of mineral residues. It further suggests that in the lixiviation, each type of grain would behave as though typical of the fuel it originated from. It is important to highlight the non-uniformity of the grains of coal and tyre. When the tyre is predominant the tyre grains interact and can add to the scoria production (possibly due to their low melting point) as it is discussed in the next paragraph. Studying the formation of scoria or slaggings from tyre combustion should include elucidating the evolution of the species in order to understand their formation and, thus, to try to avoid them. Previous to this publication, the slag produced during tyre combustion at 800 After analysing the effectiveness of zinc extraction by different lixiviants under the same working conditions, it was proved that: Acid agents were more effective than alkaline agents. Sulphuric acid (at both concentrations) and hydrochloric acid gave a recovery rate over 90% in the solution. Sodium hydroxide (NaOH) and ammonia (NH The water lixiviation test showed zinc to be absent. Sulphuric acid was shown to be more appropriate for zinc recovery than hydrochloric acid The influence of the different lixiviants in zinc extraction is shown in Following from these results sulphuric acid was used as the lixiviating agent of choice, at different temperatures and for different time periods. The results, expressed as zinc recovery rate and zinc content in solid residue of the sample, are shown in For the metals nickel and iron; the amounts recovered via acid lixiviation were very low compared to those with zinc (given the same time and temperature conditions) (see Zinc recovery depends on the combustion temperature and the ash type. As the combustion temperature is higher the more difficult becomes the zinc recovery. Besides, when fly ashes are elutriated, they are exposed less time in the reactor and as consequence their temperature is lower than the temperature of the bottom ashes. As fly ashes reaction time is shorter, its mineral material suffers less evolution which makes zinc recovery much easier.  In summary: the lixiviation tests on the ashes from fluidised bed of coal/tyre blend combustion show the mineral species behaviour in the lixiviation is characterised by the individual nature of the grains. This is shown in the SEM study of the ashes from the 90% coal/10% tyre mixture at 750 In view of the results obtained from the study of zinc recovery by hydrometallurgies techniques such as leaching, we recommend the following valorisation process of these wastes of combustion materials taking some previous steps to optimize the process: As a first step we must optimise the mix of raw materials, with the double aim of increasing the zinc content of the ash to be valorised and reducing the leaching of undesirable elements. In addition, another goal to be met is to reduce the formation of slag during the combustion process. Mixtures candidates for this process can be tyre rubbers and coals with lower% ash content, or even burning tyre rubber only using an inert diluent such as silica or alumina, which are substantially non-leachable and avoid the formation of slag. The leaching process proposed, would consist of several upstream stages, so that the new acid is used in the last stage of solid inert leaching coming from previous stages of leaching, and besides the enriched solution with zinc is virtually neutralized with the initial ash incoming stream. The final operation would consist on the precipitation of zinc as a compound with an acceptable level of impurities that can be recycled in metallurgical companies involved in recycling. There is also the possibility of trying to recover the zinc as zinc sulphide precipitated from the final weak acid solution of the last lixiviation step and sent to the zinc metallurgies. Of course, this entire process of valorisation waste for zinc recovery would require careful economic assessment.  The conversion of tyres to energy in an atmospheric fluidized combustion offers the advantages of a high calorific power and a minimum moisture and mineral matter content, making it a proper fuel to generate energy when mixed with other fuels e.g., high ash coals. The coal/rubber mixtures combustion leads to higher zinc concentrations in fly ash than in bottom ash. In addition, the higher the combustion temperature, the lower the zinc solubility, independently the ash be fly or bottom. The zinc recovering of fly ash from the coal/rubber mixtures is always greater than from bottom ashes due to the smaller evolution of zinc mineral species in the fly ash. Acid lixiviation provides the best zinc extraction results. By Increasing lixiviation time and temperature an increase in zinc extraction is observed. Many thanks to Mr. Emilio García for his technical assistance in several analyses, and a special grateful to Mr. Nick Dusting for his valuable comments and revision of this paper translation.