Infrared laser probe 40Ar/39Ar geochronology, instrumental neutron activation analysis (INAA) and analytical electron microscopy have been performed on four 0.5×1.0×0.3cm polished rock tiles of Apollo 16 and 17 granulitic breccias (60035, 77017, 78155, and 79215). Pyroxene thermometry indicates that these samples were re-equilibrated and underwent peak metamorphic sub-solidus recrystallization at 1000–1100°C, which resulted in homogeneous mineral compositions and granoblastic textures.
                  
                     40Ar/39Ar data from this study reveal that three samples (60035, 77017, and 78155) have peak metamorphic ages of ∼4.1Ga. Sample 79215 has a peak metamorphic age of 3.9Ga, which may be related to Serenitatis basin formation. All four samples contain moderately high concentrations of meteoritic siderophiles. Enhanced siderophile contents in three of the samples provide evidence for projectile contamination of their target lithologies occurring prior to peak metamorphism.
                  Post-peak metamorphism, low-temperature (<300°C) events caused the partial resetting of argon in the two finer-grained granulites (60035 and 77017). These later events did not alter the mineralogy or texture of the rocks, but caused minor brecciation and the partial release of argon from plagioclase. Interpretation of the low-temperature data indicates partial resetting of the argon systematics to as young as 3.2Ga for 60035 and 2.3Ga for 77017. Cosmic ray exposure ages range from 6.4 to ∼339Ma.
                  Our results increase the amount of high-precision data available for the granulitic breccias and lunar highlands crustal samples. The results demonstrate the survival of pre-Nectarian material on the lunar surface and document the effects of contact metamorphic and impact processes during the pre-Nectarian Epoch, as well as the low-temperature partial resetting of ages by smaller impact events after 3.9Ga.
                  The mineralogy and chemical composition of these rocks, as well as exhumation constraints, indicate that the source of heat for metamorphism was within kilometers of the surface via burial beneath impact-melt sheets or hot ejecta blankets.Lunar granulitic breccias comprise a suite of metamorphic rocks recovered at most Apollo and Luna landing sites and found within non-mare lunar meteorites (e.g., ALHA 81005, SaU 300, NWA 3163/4481/4483). They typically occur as lithic clasts in breccias, but some monolithic rocks have been sampled (e.g., 78155 and 79215). Those occurring as lithic clasts have been incorporated into polymict impact-melt breccias. Their diagnostic feature is a granoblastic to poikiloblastic matrix texture attributed to heating to ∼1000 Age data for the granulitic breccias is limited. Those that have been dated range from ∼3.8 to ∼4.2 To assess whether granulitic ages reflect the time of impact metamorphism or whether granulite metamorphism causes only incomplete de-gassing of Compositionally, the granulitic breccias can be divided into ferroan (plagioclase Although their bulk compositions resemble the average composition of lunar highlands crust ( In this study, we present the results of a petrological, chemical, and The four samples (60035, 77017, 78155, and 79215) were selected because they cover the range of fine- to coarse-grained, poikiloblastic to granoblastic, and ferroan to magnesian granulitic breccias. Each of the four samples was prepared as a ∼0.3 The samples were then cleaned in methanol and de-ionized water prior to being packaged in aluminum foil and irradiated at the McMaster University Research Reactor (Canada) for 100 In situ laser microprobe A total of 76 Laser step-heating experiments were also performed on all four samples using the same laser but incorporating a beam splitter to reduce the laser power by 95% ( For INAA (instrumental neutron activation analysis) we were allocated (via JSC) two splits each of samples 60035, 77017, 78155, and 79215. We prepared two sub-splits of each split (A and B, Table 4) for a total of four subsamples of each sample. Analyzed subsample masses were 100–150 The four granulitic breccias exhibit considerable textural and chemical variation ( The granulitic breccias studied here range from fine- to coarse-grained and exhibit poikiloblastic to granoblastic textures, as described for other granulitic breccias (e.g., Sample 60035 is a fine-grained, polymict, clast-rich granulitic breccia ( Plagioclase mineral fragments enclose chains of rounded mafic minerals along their boundaries, which may indicate the location of their pre-metamorphic grain boundaries (cf., Sample 77017 is a poikiloblastic granulitic breccia with a fine-grained matrix ( Plagioclase exhibits a restricted compositional range (An Sample 78155 is a holocrystalline, polymict, granoblastic granulitic breccia of anorthositic norite bulk composition ( The potassium-bearing mineral is plagioclase (average 0.18 79215 is a holocrystalline, polymict granulitic breccia with a granoblastic matrix comprising anorthite, pyroxene, olivine, and minor apatite, ilmenite, spinel, troilite, zircon, and Fe-rich metal ( Anorthite is the most abundant fragment and displays the greatest range in size. We observed no compositional differences between plagioclase in the mineral fragments and the matrix; both have compositional ranges of An The four samples are distinct in terms of Small pieces (several mm The release spectrum for sample 60035 yields variable ages, from 3237 The release spectrum for sample 77017 yields individual release step ages ranging from 2341 The release spectrum of sample 79215 does not indicate a trend toward higher ages with increasing release, but the data are more scattered than demanded by the standard criteria for a plateau (concordant ages from more than 50% of the Sample 78155 yielded little age variation and the data conform to the criteria for a For most lunar rocks, their cosmic ray exposure (CRE) age corresponds to the time at which they were brought to the surface via processing resulting from asteroid impacts rather than tectonic movements (e.g., Pyroxene thermometry calculations determined from electron microprobe (EMP) analyses of co-existing low- and high-Ca pyroxenes (based on the method of For a given sample, concentrations of trace elements and, in particular, siderophile elements (Co, Ni, Ir, and Au) are consistent among subsamples within analytical uncertainty ( The four granulitic breccias studied here have been reprocessed by multiple impacts and, thus, represent second or third generation rocks. In lithologies like the granulitic breccias (and impact-melt breccias), the assembly age of the rock can only be constrained to be the same as, or younger than, that of the youngest clast, while the oldest clast represents the lower limit on the age of the precursor rocks. The granulitic breccias have experienced at least four major events: (1) crystallization of the parent lithologies represented by mineral and lithic clasts, (2) brecciation and assembly of the parent impact breccia, (3) recrystallization, grain coarsening, and chemical homogenization via thermal metamorphism (at ∼1000 We will use the step-heating results here since our work has shown that the fine-grained nature of these rocks tends to average the laser spot ages. The geochronological results from sample 78155 are the simplest to interpret, since it yielded an excellent concordant step-heating plateau of 4106 Disturbed spectra indicate that the last events to affect the two remaining samples, 60035 and 77017, were lower temperature overprints, which caused partial argon resetting subsequent to their main metamorphic recrystallization and excavation. These samples both contain a mixture of target-rock clasts and mineral fragments that have a range of argon retention properties and grain sizes. In both cases, the step-heating data is more informative than the laser spot ages, and probably reflects a single anhydrous, fine-grained, potassium-bearing phase that dominates argon release. Similar patterns have been seen in fine-grained plagioclase mineral separates ( The oldest ages from 60035 (4088 In order to constrain the post-peak metamorphic processes that affected the Ar–Ar ages of the granulitic breccias, we have modeled the amount of argon lost from the two finer-grained samples during later low-temperature events ( Three models for simple (square wave) heating events are shown in Based on an average sub-grain size (roughly 25–50 Pyroxene equilibration temperatures for the four samples are significantly higher (990–1100 If cooling had been rapid and monotonic following the high-temperature granulite event then the Ar–Ar analyses should yield simple step-heating plateau ages. If the rocks had experienced later low-temperature events, then their Ar–Ar spectra should reveal variable resetting and a range of release patterns from complete resetting (a plateau with a younger age), to moderate resetting (the original age may not be preserved), to minor resetting (the original age might only be preserved in some spot ages and in the high-temperature steps of the step-heating spectrum). Combining our plateau age and high-temperature ages with the previously published Ar–Ar data ( The CRE ages of the granulitic breccias ( The dating of lunar glass spherules by The bulk compositions of the granulitic breccias ( There is a linear relationship between meteoritic siderophile element concentration and Four samples of Apollo granulitic breccias have been mineralogically and geochemically characterized, and high-resolution The peak metamorphic conditions (i.e., the granulite-forming event) are associated with ages of 4.1–3.9 The four granulitic breccia ages indicate subsequent rapid cooling following peak metamorphism, a plausible mechanism for which is exhumation via impact. In the case of sample 79215, peak metamorphism is dated at 3.9 This work was supported by a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) Canada Graduate Scholarship (D-3) grant and a University of New Brunswick J.S. Little Travel Fellowship awarded to J.A.H.; NSERC and CRC grants to J.G.S., and NASA support to R.L.K. S.P.K. and S.C.S. gratefully acknowledge funding from the Leverhulme Trust (F/00 269/J). The authors thank Vera Fernandes, two anonymous reviewers and Associate Editor David Mittlefehldt for commenting on an earlier version of the manuscript. We also thank Vera Fernandes for the use of her algorithm for calculating cosmic ray exposure ages. Samples were allocated to J.G.S. by NASA’s Johnson Space Center. PASSC contribution 56. Laser spot analyses