Most of the phosphate rocks used commercially contain small quantities of metals such as uranium, lanthanides and yttrium. During the phosphate processing, by reacting the phosphate rocks with sulphuric acid, ca. 30% of lanthanide and yttrium and more than 80% of uranium, present initially in the rocks, end up in phosphoric acid. In this work the overall extraction of uranium and lanthanides from phosphoric acid has been studied. The influence of various factors such H3PO4, SO4
                     2−, Fe (III), DOPPA and TOPO concentration on the degree of extraction has been established. Kinetic study shows that the initial extraction rates of uranium and lanthanides are of the same order of magnitude.In spite of the fact that phosphate rocks are considered as a poor source of uranium (U) and lanthanides (Ln), attention has been directed to phosphate deposits as a potential source of these elements for the following reasons: the mining and processing of phosphate rocks is already financed by the phosphate fertiliser industry, a high world production rate of phosphate rocks which is around 150 million tons/year the great demand for these metals and in particular the shortage in uranium supplies forecast for the next few years if these elements are not recovered, they should be lost, and will accumulate in soil, or they will be adsorbed by plants, which represents a health hazard. These are the main factors that encouraged researchers to develop efficient technologies for recovering these metals from the phosphoric acid wet process. Presently in the majority of extraction units only uranium is recovered. However, since 1983 several such units ceased operations owing to economic reasons after uranium price fell to a low level. The metal content in phosphate rocks is variable, being a function of the origin and deposits of these rocks The main purpose of the present work was to study the possibilities of simultaneous recovery of uranium, lanthanides and yttrium from phosphoric acid wet process produced by the ASMIDAL plant at Annaba-Algeria. For reaching this goal the choice of extractant was decisive. Examination of the mechanism of solvent extraction of uranium and lanthanides shows that these elements are extracted by two systems: those, which involve compound formation; those that involve solvation of metal ion. The degree of extraction ( An extractant which has a high distribution coefficient is, therefore, more efficient for extracting a given metallic species. For recovering lanthanides and uranium from phosphoric acid a number of extractants have been used, e.g., octylphosphoric acid (OPPA), di-2-ethylhexylphosphoric acid (DEHPA), and a mixture of mono octylphenylphosphoric acid (MOPPA) and di (octylphenyl) phosphoric acid (DOPPA) low selectivity of the individual extractants toward each group of metal, the good stability of the extractants and their low solubility in aqueous phase. All reagents used were of analytical reagent grade except DOPPA, which was synthesized and purified in the laboratory, and kerosene supplied by SONATRACH (Algeria). Uranium and lanthanide concentrations were determined by spectrophotometry, following the procedure reported by Aouadallah and Habashi Phosphoric acid produced at Annaba has the following characteristics: color, brown; density, 1270 kg/m cooling down to a temperature of 40°C, filtration for removal of suspended solid particles, treatment with activated carbon for removal of soluble organic matter, which is a very important factor for the success of metal recovery. The above treatment gave green phosphoric acid designated hereafter as acid B. Pure 30% phosphoric acid is designated as acid A. The organic phase used as the solvent for extraction was composed of kerosene, DOPPA and TOPO. This phase was brought into contact with pure 30% P For determining the extraction kinetics two methods were used: a method based on high dispersion in a separatory funnel, and a method involving a cell of constant interfacial area designed for this purpose with constant stirring rate of 80 rpm From a thermodynamics point of view the distribution coefficients ( These results indicate that DOPPA extracts uranium in its two-oxidation states (IV and VI) from phosphoric acid. Comparison of the lanthanide distribution coefficients shows that DOPPA may extract both families (heavy and light) of lanthanides from phosphoric acid. It is well known that the industrial phosphoric acid obtained by leaching phosphate rocks contains a lot of sulphate and iron ions. Thus, the extractable cations such as uranium could exist in various forms: UO To study the influence of phosphoric acid concentration on the degree of extraction, the concentration of uranium and lanthanides was fixed at 100 and 150 mg/L, respectively. Since sulphuric acid is used for leaching phosphate rocks, appreciable amounts of sulphate ions are always present in the phosphoric acid after separation of phosphogypsum. This anion can form neutral or anionic species with uranium and lanthanides as mentioned previously. Some of these species are unextractable. Thus, the influence of sulphate anions has been investigated. Experimental results indicate that sulphate ions have no influence on the extraction of uranium, but the degree of extraction of lanthanides decreases to 36% when the sulphate content is increased to 30 g/L. As was pointed out by Hurst To investigate the influence of uranium on extraction of lanthanides, we have determined the degree of extraction of lanthanides as a function of uranium concentration at two different concentrations of 0.1 and 0.5 M DOPPA. In the case of extraction by acidic extractants the reaction may be written as The expression for distribution coefficient Therefore, Studying the extraction of uranium and lanthanides by β-diketones, especially thenoyltrifluoracetone (HTTA), it was observed by various authors In this work, the effect of TOPO on the yield of extraction has been studied within the concentration interval between 0.1 and 0.5 M TOPO. The obtained results (not shown) indicate that the influence of TOPO on the degree of extraction of uranium and lanthanides is significant only for low DOPPA concentration in the organic phase and is limited for concentration between 0.1 and 0.3 M. Since the species extracted cannot be isolated, and furthermore, the equilibrium is shifted during the extraction, an indirect method based on slope-analysis is used for determining the stoichiometry of the extracted species. This method is an approximation; hence, several interactions existing in solution have not been taken into consideration. Furthermore, the solution of the two phases is far from ideal. The distribution coefficient can be written in linearized form as According to this relation, a formula for the complex formed during the extraction can be suggested. The coefficient As mentioned previously, two types of apparatus were used.  The distribution curve is the graphical plot of metal concentration in the organic phase as a function of the metal concentration in the aqueous phase at equilibrium. At equilibrium, only partial transfer of metallic cations occurs. Thus several stages of contact should be used in order to recover the maximum values of these species. In this work, the Mc Cabe type construction is used to determine the number of theoretical stages required for achieving this separation. Lanthanides and uranium could be recovered efficiently from phosphoric acid produced at the ASMIDAL plant at Annaba, Algeria by the sulphuric acid leaching of Djebel Onk phosphate rock. Using DOPPA–TOPO in kerosene as the extracting solvent, the extraction efficiency increased for both uranium and lanthanides if the extraction was carried out from phosphoric acid with a reduced iron content. An organic phase composed of 0.5 M DOPPA and 0.125 M TOPO with kerosene as diluent is optimal for simultaneous extraction of lanthanides and uranium. The law of mass action is consistent with the major part of uranium and lanthanides found in phosphoric acid being in the form of: UO Mc Cabe type graphical construction indicated that the number of theoretical stages required for achieving the overall separation is four using an organic-to-aqueous volume ratio of 0.5. Kinetic study with two types of apparatus (separatory funnel and cell of constant interfacial area) indicates that a time of three minutes is sufficient for reaching equilibrium, and the rate of extraction is 4.66×10 The stripping of the organic phase in two stages is very efficient with a mixture of 10 M phosphoric acid and 6% HF. We thank Professor K. Osseo-Asare and the anonymous referees for their critical review of the manuscript.