The HotDisk thermal constants analyzer based on the transient plane source (TPS) technique can be used to measure the hydrate thermal conductivity. In order to improve the measurement accuracy, the HotDisk setting parameters, the sample preparation and measurement method are investigated in this paper. Firstly, the evaluation criteria are proposed to determine the optimal setting parameters, mainly the output power and measurement time. Four kinds of method of the sample preparation and thermal conductivity measurement in situ are proposed and discussed. The used samples include pure Tetrahydrofuran (THF) hydrate, ice and THF hydrate or ice bearing silica sand. The results show that the optimal parameters of the output power and measurement time depend on the sample. A high purity of sample can be obtained using the temperature oscillation-aging method and the accuracy of measurement can be further improved using the “increasing temperature-decreasing temperature” method.Natural gas hydrate mainly occurs in seabed sediments, which is considered as one of the most promising new energy resources. The exploitation of natural gas hydrate has become an important goal in the world. During the production of natural gas, hydrate will be decomposed so that the mechanical strength of hydrate reservoir is greatly weakened to cause the submarine geological collapse or landslides. Therefore, it is necessary to consider the possible disasters during hydrate mining In recent years, some progress on the thermal conductivity of gas hydrate has been made. Shi et al. The HotDisk thermal constants analyzer made by Sweden HotDisk AB Company is used in this study that is based on the TPS technique. In recent years, The HotDisk thermal constants analyzer is employed to measure the thermal properties of hydrate The experimental equipment mainly includes hydrate reactor, HotDisk thermal constants analyzer, water bath and data acquisition instrument, as shown in The samples of pure THF hydrate, pure ice, THF hydrate or ice bearing silica sand were used to investigate the measurement method of thermal conductivity. The used materials include THF, re-deionized water and silica sand. The purity of THF was 99.8% (mass percentage) and was provided by Tianjin KemiOu Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. The purity of silica sand was 99.9% (mass percentage) purchased from Lingshou BaoLei Mineral Processing Co., Ltd. THF and silica sand was used without any further treatment. The particle size was measured and analyzed by Malvern laser particle size analyzer (MS2000) before experiments as shown in The HotDisk thermal constant analyzer is based on TPS technology using a double spiral probe that acts both as a heat source for increasing the temperature of the sample and as a resistance thermometer for recording the time-dependent temperature. Assuming that HotDisk contains a certain number of concentric heat sources located in an infinite sample, the resistance varies with time In the equation, The principle of the HotDisk thermal constant analyzer is that the probe is considered in an infinite sample so that the probing depth always is less than the minimum distance from the probe surface to any point on the sample boundary, i.e. the thickness of the sample must be greater than the probe radius and the diameter of the sample must be twice greater than the probe diameter. In this study, the 5501 probe is used and the sample size synthesized in situ fully meets the requirements in all cases. Before measurements, the sample should be isothermal and no temperature drift occurs, which the temperature points are random in the temperature drift graph. In general, a low output power and a long measurement time are set for the material with a small thermal conductivity. However, a high output power and a short measurement time are set for the material with a large thermal conductivity. In practice, it is necessary to repeat the experiment to determine the appropriate output power and measurement time. The evaluation criteria of the HotDisk parameter setting is as follows. (1) The total temperature increase of the sample. It is proportional to the measurement time and output power. However, the effect of the output power on the temperature increase is greater than that of the measurement time. The larger the total temperature increase is, the worse the dispersion of the residual value is. When the total temperature increase is greater than 3 K, more data points at the beginning of the measurement have to be eliminated to ensure the dispersion of the residual value. But this indicates the error of the measured thermal conductivity is greater. In order to avoid the damage of the probe by the excessive output power, the total temperature increase is limited to 2–5 K. According to a large number of experiments, a temperature increase of 2.5–4 K is recommended. (2) The calculating temperature increase. It depends on the range of the selected data points and generally is greater than 0.4 K. The greater the range of data points is, the more accurate the measured result is. Additionally, the selection of the data points should ensure that the data points in the residual graph are discrete. (3) The ratio of the measurement time to the characteristic time. It is proportional to the measurement time and the output power, mainly depending on the measurement time. But the measurement time cannot exceed the characteristic time. This ratio is ideally between 1/3 and 1.0, which helps to obtain a stable thermal conductivity. (4) Mean deviation. It is a measure of the deviations displayed in the difference temperature versus square time graph, which is generally less than 10 As mentioned above, the probe 5501 was used in experiments. In all cases, the sample sizes fully meet the measurement requirement. Therefore, the measured results of the thermal conductivity mainly depend on the output power, measurement time and the selection of data points. Besides, the ratio of the measurement time to the characteristic time and mean deviation are influenced by them. So the setting parameters optimization is usually to determine the appropriate output power, measurement time and the range of data points. But even if the appropriate output power and measurement time is given, the selection of data points in each run of the experiments may be different that need to try multiple times. The following mainly explains how to determine the output power and measurement time for the measurement of pure ice and THF hydrate according to the criteria. The setting method in the case of sediments is similar and no longer described. A wide range of the output power and measurement time is investigated and the obtained results are shown in Similarly, three sets of output power and measurement time for pure THF hydrate are also taken as examples at the temperature of 265.15 K, namely (0.05 W, 80 s), (0.1 W, 80 s) and (0.1 W, 160 s). The obtained graphs during the measurement are given in Due to no detailed description about the sample preparation and measurement method, the accuracy of the measured results in the literatures cannot be analyzed. For example, the thermal conductivities of pure ice in different literatures Taking into account the actual preparation and measurement of hydrate samples in situ, four kinds of method are proposed, namely transient state method, steady state method, temperature oscillation method and temperature oscillation-aging method. The transient method means that the thermal conductivity is measured immediately after the sample preparation is finished and no any time is given to keep a stable temperature field. So the obtained thermal conductivity is the thermal conductivity at the reaction temperature. The time interval or the relaxation time (the time between repeated experiments) is zero. The steady state method means that the thermal conductivity is measured after the preparation of the sample is completed and a stable temperature field is established in 20–30 min. The stability temperature of hydrate (sample) also corresponds to the temperature of the measured thermal conductivity and the time interval between multiple measurements is 20–30 min. The temperature oscillation method means that the hydrate sample is prepared by the temperature oscillation and the thermal conductivity is measured by the steady state method. During the measurement, multiple thermal conductivities at different temperatures can be obtained by the “increasing temperature-decreasing temperature” method. The temperature oscillation-aging method means that when it is formed by the temperature oscillation method, the hydrate sample is aged for 48 h and then the thermal conductivity is measured by the “increasing temperature-decreasing temperature” method. In this study, the samples of pure ice, THF hydrate, THF hydrate or ice bearing silica sand are prepared and the thermal conductivities are measured using the above four methods. By analyzing the literatures The thermal conductivity of THF hydrate or ice bearing silica sand used in this study has not been reported in the literatures, but the linear relationship between the thermal conductivity and the temperature in similar samples (except near the freezing point or near the equilibrium point of THF hydrate) has been reported As described above, the temperature oscillation-aging method can help to obtain a high-quality sample and a high accuracy of thermal conductivity. The detailed process of the sample preparation and thermal conductivity measurement is described below. The sample preparation of pure THF hydrate includes the solution preparation, hydrate formation, temperature shock and aging. Firstly, 500 ml THF aqueous solution with a mass fraction 0.236 was prepared. The mass ratio of THF to water is 19:81 when THF reacts completely with water. Since THF is volatile, the concentration of THF solution is slightly larger than the stoichiometric concentration in order to compensate for the volatilization during the sample preparation. Then the THF solution was put into the reactor and the HotDisk probe and the temperature sensor were inserted into the solution. Finally, the reactor was placed into the water bath and the experiment began. The preparation of THF hydrate or ice bearing silica sand is similar. The process of pure THF hydrate formation is shown in However, during the formation of THF hydrate bearing silica sand, the secondary formation of THF hydrate occurred by the temperature oscillation method, as shown in After the sample preparation is finished, the thermal conductivity is measured using the “increasing temperature-decreasing temperature” method. Here, the measurement process of pure THF hydrate is taken as an example, as shown in The uncertainties of the measured data are analyzed using the equation The HotDisk setting parameters, sample preparation and measurement method are important factors affecting the accuracy of hydrate thermal conductivity. In this paper, the evaluation criteria and the setting method of the HotDisk parameters, especially the output power and measurement time, were investigated. The results show that the setting parameters depend on the specific sample. The sample preparation and the measurement method of thermal conductivity are also discussed. A high-quality sample can be obtained by the temperature oscillation-aging method and the measurement accuracy can be further improved using the “increasing temperature-decreasing temperature” method. None. This work was funded by the