The degradation of hydroquinone (HQ) and nalidixic acid (NA) mediated by TiO2 and iron oxide immobilized on functionalized polyvinyl fluoride films (PVFf–TiO2–Fe oxide) in the presence of H2O2 under simulated solar light has been examined. The results show that the contribution of homogeneous photo-Fenton oxidation to the initial mineralization process was low. The degradation rates were not dependant of initial pH. Heterogeneous photocatalytic activity of PVFf–TiO2–Fe oxide was enhanced by increasing temperature, NaCl addition and by long-term utilization.
                  The PVFf–TiO2–Fe oxide surface was characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) at different states of utilization. Correlations between the catalyst surface composition and degradation kinetics are discussed. Long-term stability evaluated by repetitive pollutant degradations was outstanding. The presence of TiO2 seems to (i) limit contact between polymer film and highly reactive radicals in the solution and (ii) act as a charge trap. Moreover, during the photocatalysis mediated by PVFf–TiO2–Fe oxide, some leaching of supported iron increased the amount of the top TiO2 layer exposed to the light increasing the synergistic effects between the two oxides leading to enhanced pollutant degradation.The aimed characteristics for supported TiO Some recent studies described TiO The dissolution of iron ions is a common phenomenon during heterogeneous photo-Fenton oxidation. In the presence of ligands (aliphatic acids, humic acids …) and light, particularly under acidic conditions, iron is released by photo-reductive dissolution increasing the contribution of homogeneous photo-Fenton reaction The sequential preparation of PVF In this work, hydroquinone (HQ) has been selected as a model substance whereas nalidixic acid was used because it is an antibiotic present in a real saline pharmaceutical wastewater. The objectives of this study are: (i) to examine the performance of PVF Hydroquinone (C The detailed preparation procedure was described in a previous paper, part 1 of this work For iron oxide coating, PVF and PVF The photoreactor setup and the lamp characteristics were described in a previous paper The quantitative determination of organic compounds was carried out by HPLC chromatography using a LC system HPLC–UV: Shimatzu LC-2010A equipped with a UV detector. Samples were injected via an auto-sampler. Samples of the treated HQ solution were eluted at a flow rate of 1 The total iron concentration in the irradiated solutions was measured by complexing with Ferrozine X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy data were collected by Axis Ultra system (Kratos analytical, Manchester, UK) under ultra-high vacuum condition (<10 The surface morphology of the supports and the catalysts was investigated with a scanning electron microscope (Phillips XL30 SFEG) equipped with X-ray detector.  A comparison between traces b and c in These results show that the presence of a TiO   When evaluating a catalyst based on iron oxide in the presence of H For this purpose, average dissolved iron concentration ([Fe]    The XPS spectroscopy allows determining surface composition of thin outermost surface layer (few nm). In all the spectra there was an energy shift to lower binding energies (BE) of about 3 The differences in the chemical composition of PVF  The enhancement of PVF Besides photo-Fenton oxidation, radical generation and pollutant degradation are induced by photocatalysis occurring both at iron oxide and TiO In all the equations, Even though the system PVF  The [Fe] The results shown in The relative independence of degradation rates from the initial pH can be assigned to several phenomena: (i) for PVF The results obtained for HQ degradation by the system PVF  The degradation and initial mineralization (first 60 The effect induced by the addition of NaCl (5 This comparison suggests that the heterogeneous system is advantageous for the treatment of saline wastewater since the degradation process is slightly faster in salt presence. It is known that the inhibitory effect of Cl The long-term stability of PVF–Fe oxide and PVF  Iron leaching from oxides to solution is well documented and is believed to occur via photo-reductive dissolution. The leaching process can be described as follows (Eqs. Recently Sherman During this work, leaching of iron species from oxide surface to the solution was probably caused by the simultaneous presence of light, dissolved organic substances (or polymer substrate) and H The pH of the reaction media influenced considerably the iron photo-dissolution process since the more the initial pH is acidic the more iron dissolved was found in solution (see Section 3.4.1, in Finally the dissolved iron re-deposition (Eq. The observed phenomena of dissolved iron concentration depletion could have important theoretical and practical implications and may allow new alternatives for dissolved iron removal in homogeneous photo-Fenton processes. The aimed characteristics for supported TiO The photo-dissolution of iron ions and their relative homogeneous contribution to HQ and NA initial mineralization was low. HQ and NA photo-assisted degradation rates were high and mostly independent of initial pH and NaCl presence but increased with temperature. The film substrate was resistant to self-degradation by generated radicals. The photocatalytic activity was highly stable toward repetitive pollutant degradation and it was even slightly increasing after 150 The preparation method proposed is sustainable as it used solar light, water as solvent and low temperatures. The presence of TiO F. Mazille wishes to express his gratitude to Pierre-Yves Pfirter, Nicolas Xanthopoulos and Adrien Rollux for SEM, XPS, and NA degradation, respectively, to Dorothea Spuhler for her precious help in experiments and in reviewing of phrasing and to John Kiwi and Thomas Schoettl. The authors wish to thank the European Commission for its financial support under the INNOWATECH project (contract No. 036882) within the thematic priority Global Change and Ecosystems of the Sixth Framework Program (FP6-2005-Global 4 – SUSTDEV-2005-3.II.3.2).