Laboratory semi-batch flotation tests were conducted with two different sulphide ore samples using various degrees of size reduction. The selectivity curves show that some minerals are more sensitive to particle size reduction than other ones suggesting that preferential associations of minerals may exist in the ore.The grinding and flotation processes are intimately linked together. Grinding liberates mineral grains, while flotation separates them into valuable minerals and gangue. The paper analyzes the effect of the fineness of grind through the results of semi-batch flotation tests conducted using two different ore samples. The first section describes the ore samples and the test procedure and the second section analyzes the results. The ore samples used for the tests were provided by Brunswick Mining and Mines Louvicourt. The Brunswick Mining ore is a complex sulphide consisting of galena (3–5% PbS), marmatite (12–17% Zn(Fe)S), chalcopyrite (0.7–1.5% CuFeS The Brunswick Mining ore sample was crushed to −1.2 mm and separated into 2 kg batches. The batches were ground for various times in a rod mill with soda ash and water. The ground material was aerated and conditioned with xanthate prior to the flotation of 6 concentrate samples. The slurry density for the flotation was 50% w/w solids. The pulp conditions are adjusted to promote the flotation of lead and copper minerals, and to reject marmatite, pyrite and non-sulphide gangue. The results of the flotation tests are analyzed here using the rate and grade–recovery curves and will subsequently be used to build a simulator that includes hydraulic entrainment, mineral recovery by size (   Results for the Louvicourt ore sample are presented in The effect of the fineness of grind for the Louvicourt ore is shown in Semi-batch flotation tests were conducted with Cu–Pb–Zn and Cu–Zn sulphide ores with various size distributions. Results show a possible advantage of rebalancing the energy between the primary grinding mills and the regrinding units and may provide useful information for an indirect estimation of the mineral liberation and ore texture. The authors acknowledge the support of Brunswick Mining and Smelting and Mines Louvicourt for providing the samples for the flotation tests.