The running characteristics of poor-oxide manganese ores of the Russian deposits are investigated, by complex modern methods of research. Optical microscopy, image analysis, X-ray diffraction, electron microscopy (EPMA), routine chemical analysis, auger electron spectroscopy (AES), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray radiometric, gravitational-magnetic fractionating and other methods has been used.
                  There were established mineral and chemical structures of ores, including textural and structural features, and morpho-metrical and physical-mechanical characteristics of main minerals and mineral complexes, the most highly contrasting properties of divided minerals.
                  With the help of the obtained information, parameters are determined for the disclosure of valuable components and modes of ore preparation. Optimum depth of enrichment (optimum combination of mechanical, chemical and metallurgical limits), limits of possible technological parameters, degree of extraction of accompanying elements (nickel, cobalt, phosphorus, etc.), inevitable technological losses, and optimum sequence of technological operations are pointed out. The particularities of the methodical approach for the investigation of poor oxide manganese ores and the creation of technology for their enrichment were first found and exposed in this work. New principles of “phase technology”, in combination with the principles of “non-hard technology” are offered.
                  Research has allowed for making prognoses regarding mineral processing of managanese ores to evaluate the expediency of their processing. It was established that in a number of cases, the manganese concentrates containing from 42% to 56% manganese, 1÷13.8% iron, and 0.07÷0.29% phosphorus can be obtained from poor-oxide manganese ores containing 14.57÷29.00% manganese, 7.10÷21.25% iron, and 0.12÷0.83% phosphorus. These concentrates are suitable for using in metallurgy, chemical industry and agriculture. Increasing the economic efficiency of processing managanese ores ensures complex use of raw material and reduces volumes of waste.
                  The technological schemes of the processing of ores are presented.