Assessing the mechanical strength of rock is one of the important factors of concern to the engineers in the general field of rock excavation, especially for performance prediction purposes. Rock strength is commonly assessed directly by a test such as the uniaxial compressive strength test. However, testing of this mechanical property is time consuming, expensive and restricted to those rocks that can be machined into regular test samples. Therefore, indirect tests are often used to estimate this property. Most of these tests are simpler, require less preparation, and can be adapted to field testing. The Schmidt hammer is one of the widely used portable instruments for estimating rock strength indirectly. In the civil engineering and mining industries, it is used for non-destructive testing of the quality of concretes and rocks, both in the laboratory and on exposures in situ ( Due to its easy handling and cost effectiveness, wide applications of Schmidt test hammer have been made in the general field of rock mechanics. A review of the literature reveals that it has been used for a variety of specific applications. Some of these are: prediction of rock uniaxial compressive strength and other physico-mechanical properties Although the Schmidt hammer was commercially introduced in the early fifties and has found a wide application area, it may be interesting to note that testing procedure with this instrument is still not well established. There exists a wide variation in the recommended testing procedures by various researchers and institutions. The existence of such a wide variation suggests that different test procedures might be suitable for different applications. Presently, there are no universally accepted Schmidt hammer standard test procedures valid for specific applications, but such an approach might be realised in the future if sufficient data are collected and evaluated by international organizations such as the Commission on Testing Methods of the ISRM. In this technical note, a Schmidt hammer test procedure, which is thought to be a useful tool particularly for rock machineability, is suggested. To check the practical validity of the proposed test procedure, Schmidt hammer rebound values collected in situ have been correlated with the net cutting rates of a roadheader for a variety of rock lithologies. Mechanical properties such as hardness and strength are not intrinsic material properties. The type of the testing instrument and the adopted test procedure will affect the obtained hardness and strength values. Therefore, when defining a mechanical property it is extremely important to specify the test procedure adopted. Various techniques of recording Schmidt rebound hardness data have been proposed in the literature. As can be followed from One almost common approach that is followed in the testing procedures is the rejection of a certain portion of the observations, before a mean value is calculated ( A supporting paper However, due to insufficient field data, applicability of the above-mentioned statistical model to rock machineability could not be tested practically. Considering this fact, in this study, it is intended to demonstrate the practical application of Chauvenet's criterion to Schmidt hammer testing from the view point of rock machineability, basing on in situ measurements. The application of Chauvenet's criterion is demonstrated on a new Schmidt hammer test procedure suggested in this work. For comparison purposes, apart from the presently suggested test procedure, two other recognized Schmidt hammer test procedures in the literature were also performed to examine the relations between Schmidt hammer rebound values and machine performance. For the execution of this study, raw data of Schmidt hammer rebound values and roadheader performance recorded previously The Schmidt hammer rebound hardness tests were performed on tunnel faces, hammer being held horizontally and at right angles to vertical rock faces. Rebound tests were carried out with a Proceq N-type hammer, having an impact energy of 2.207 On any one rock type at least three sets of test were conducted, depending on the geology of the encountered rock formations. At each test point 15–20 continuous impacts were made, and the suspected low values were excluded from the calculation of a mean value ( Test Procedure 2: Select the peak rebound value from five continuous impacts at a point and discard the remaining values ( Test Procedure 3: Select the peak rebound value from ten continuous impacts at a point and discard the remaining values ( All the calculated mean Schmidt hammer rebound values are presented in In order to be able to show the relations between Schmidt hammer rebound values and roadheader net cutting rates, regression curves are drawn in  As also indicated by coefficient of determination ( Schmidt hammer rebound values reflect an interrelated combination of rock properties such as the strength of the cementation between grains, hardness and strength. A previous study The Schmidt hammer is a portable instrument mainly used for testing rock hardness, often related to the mechanical strength of rock. However, there is a wide variation in the employed test procedures with this instrument. Therefore, it would be useful to rationalize the large number of Schmidt hammer test procedures in current use by developing a series of standard test procedures which would prove to be valid for particular applications. The present study is a step in this direction, where extensive raw data obtained from a previous research during the construction of Istanbul's sewerage system tunnels have been evaluated. N-type Schmidt hammer rebound values collected in situ have been correlated to the net cutting rates of a medium-size roadheader for 36 different rock zones. A new Schmidt hammer test procedure proposed in this work has been performed together with two other recognized test procedures in the literature. All the performed test procedures are based on continuous impacts at a point which is claimed to be more consistent and repeatable than single impacts. To check the validity of the performed test procedures for prediction of roadheader performance, each test procedure has statistically been tested. Statistical test results suggest that incorporation of all recorded rebound values at a point, rather than selecting only the peak values, gives a better representation of overall rock hardness and hence a better performance prediction, provided the outliers are statistically discarded. Such an approach may seem quite reasonable for rock excavation purposes, where incorporation of only the relatively higher portion of the spectrum of rebound values would naturally be inappropriate. Finally, it is thought that the proposed Schmidt hammer test procedure in this work may be used as a preliminary guide for roadheader performance prediction purposes, valid for the encountered rock types. However, to be able to check its general applicability, it is emphasized that further in situ observations should be made for other rock types and roadheaders of different classes.