The present investigation aims at evaluating the die sinking electro-discharge machining (EDM) performance of TiCN–20wt.% Ni cermets containing 10wt.% of different secondary carbides: WC, NbC and TaC. Such performance is assessed in terms of making cavity of 1mm depth on a commercial high speed tool steel (HSS). The material removal rate (MRR) is found to be higher for TiCN–20wt.% Ni cermet; however tool wear ratio (TWR) is lower for TiCN–20Ni–10TaC cermet. The quality of cermet tool surface has been quantitatively assessed using surface roughness tester and it was observed that the roughness (R
                     
                        a
                      or R
                     
                        z
                     ) of TiCN–20Ni–10TaC cermet tool surface is lower, when compared with that of other investigated cermets. SEM–EDAX analysis of EDM surfaces reveal melting and evaporation of the binder as well as pull-out and spalling of brittle carbonitride/carbide grains as the dominant wear mechanisms. The layer formation due to solidification of molten layer and/or transfer of material from workpiece is commonly observed for all the cermet tool surfaces.Electrical discharge machining (EDM) is an important machining process and a potential manufacturing route to fabricate dies and moulds of conductive materials Typical materials, used as EDM electrodes, include copper, graphite, tungsten, brass, steel, copper–tungsten, copper–chromium alloy etc. In this very first study to evaluate EDM performance of these new generation electrode materials, we have selected TiCN–20Ni, TiCN–20Ni–10WC, TiCN–20Ni–10NbC and TiCN–20Ni–10TaC cermets. All the EDM experiments were carried out under identical conditions using TiCN-based cermets as electrodes and high-speed tool steel (HSS) as workpiece material. Besides presenting phenomenological data, like material removal rate (MRR), tool wear ratio (TWR) and surface roughness ( The cermets used in this study were fabricated from 30 Prior to the EDM experiments, all cermet specimens were polished to 1.0 Representative SEM images of sintered and polished TiCN-based cermets are shown in The physical and mechanical properties of investigated TiCN-based cermets are shown in The EDM testing was conducted on the TiCN-based cermets and the performance of the cermet tools is presented in The measured diameter of eroded hole and depth of cut were used to calculate the volume of the removed workpiece material. The Material removal rate (MRR) was expressed as the volume of workpiece (HSS) material removed per unit time. The ratio (expressed in percentage) of volume of TiCN-based electrode wear to volume of the workpiece is defined as Tool wear ratio (TWR) and the related experimental results are presented in Since the investigated cermets have higher amount of ceramic material, it is imperative to take fracture toughness (K The surface quality i.e. roughness characteristics of TiCN-based cermets and HSS workpiece were studied using a Surface analyzer and arithmetic roughness average ( From the above, it appears that the TiCN–20Ni–10TaC cermet, among all the investigated cermets is a better cermet composition with lower TWR and  In general, the EDM surfaces of TiCN–20Ni cermets with different secondary carbides reveal similar microstructural features as those of baseline TiCN–20Ni cermet; however, certain differences can be observed, as shown in  During Electric discharge machining, the heat is generated by the sparks produced between the conductive materials (tool and die) and the material having lower melting point preferably melt. In the present case, the melting and evaporation of Ni binder in TiCN–Ni based cermets lead to the debonding/decohesion of TiCN and (Ti, X)CN grains (where X: W/Nb/Ta). Subsequently, the resulting skeleton is not able to provide further protection against material removal. Also, the sparks during EDM cause the melting and thus material transfer from tool to the cermet surface takes place, which is supported by our SEM–EDAX analyses. The layers formed on cermet surface further influence the material removal rate. Qualitatively, the influence of toughness can also be discussed in terms of the observation of cracking induced material removal from cermet tools. In case of baseline cermet, longer cracks are widely observed on the worn surface. If we compare As far as the micro-mechanisms of tool wear are concerned, several competing mechanisms are thought to contribute to the observed material loss. The failure of the binder phase dominates during initial stages and the carbonitride grains are subsequently removed in further stages of the machining. Also, simultaneous formation of the recast/transfer layer retards the material removal and a smoother surface forms with low roughness ( The EDM tests were conducted to evaluate the performance of various TiCN–Ni based cermets against HSS workpiece. The results are discussed in terms of MRR, TWR and surface finish and the following conclusions can be drawn: Under the selected experimental conditions, TiCN–20 As far as the role of various secondary carbides (WC, NbC, TaC) is concerned, the TiCN–20 SEM observation reveals that the binder phase melting and evaporation occurs during initial stages of EDM. This is followed by the subsequent decohesion of brittle carbonitride grains. The transfer of the workpiece material to cermet tool is commonly observed. However, the material removal is retarded by the formation of smooth recast/transfer layer.