A porous Ti-based metallic glass has been fabricated by applying the principle of dealloying to the Y20Ti36Al24Co20 two-phase amorphous alloy. The initial microstructure of the two-phase glassy alloy consisted of Ti43.3Y3.7Al15.3Co37.7 and Y38.8Ti12.8Al37.1Co11.3 amorphous phases forming an interconnected structure. To fabricate the porous structure, the Y-rich phase has been selectively dissolved from the alloy using both chemical and electrochemical treatments in 0.1M HNO3 solution. The glassy nature of the porous Ti-based alloy was confirmed by transmission electron microscopy analyses. In this paper, we present an alternative technique called ‘dealloying’ for the formation of porous structure in a metallic glassy alloy. It is a process of selective dissolution of the most electrochemically active component in the alloy system. The dealloying technique has been widely applied to crystalline materials to fabricate nanoporous metal About 7 The ribbon specimens subjected to dealloying process were examined using a high resolution scanning electron microscope (SEM) with an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS) and a transmission electron microscope (TEM). The formation of the porous structure in the Y TEM images of the Y The size of the typical open pores of the dealloyed specimen ranges from 15 The formation of the porous Ti-based metallic glass can be understood by the process of continuous removal of the Y-rich phase from the two-phase amorphous alloy. As observed for crystalline alloys, the dealloying of Y-rich phase is believed to initiate at highly energetic sites like phase boundaries between the Y-rich and Ti-rich amorphous phases. The corrosion potentials, In summary, porous Ti-based metallic glass with pore sizes in the range of 15–155 The authors acknowledge the financial support from a grant (code#: 05K1501-00410) from the ‘Center for Nanostructured Materials Technology’ under the ‘21st Century Frontier R&D Program’ and the Creative Research Initiatives of the Korean Ministry of Science and Technology.