The supply of fresh water is becoming an increasingly important issue in hydrometallurgical treatment of mineral ores. The problem may significantly reduce if the extraction process can incorporate the usage of saltwater throughout the whole hydrometallurgical operation. Seawater as the main source of saltwater is a potential alternative to freshwater. In this research, the effect of the chloride ions, in a range of 0 to 40 g/L, on the solvent extraction of copper with LIX 984N was studied. LIX 984N has been commercially used in copper solvent extraction around the world. Increasing the concentration of Cl− was shown to increase the H+ activity and formation of CuCl+ and CuCl2 species. The solution acidity did not have a negative effect on the extent of copper extraction and extraction rate, in the presence and absence of chloride ion, in contrast to recent studies. The chloride addition was even showed to have a positive impact on copper extraction at pHs below 2 and at shorter mixing times. Through thermodynamic studies, it was shown that increasing chloride concentration results in both higher H+ activity and an increase in the activity of copper chloride complexes, of which the latter factor counteracts the former and overall improves the extent of copper extraction. Increasing the chloride concentration was found to negatively affect the copper extraction isotherms. The impact became more significant at lower concentrations of the extractant. It is therefore suggested that cupric chloride complex ion inhibits copper extraction by lowering the extraction driving forces. Also, it was shown that increasing aqueous chloride concentration promotes involvement of more extractant molecules per Cu2+ species in the extraction reaction in contrast to the reaction without chloride ions. The negative effect of chloride ions on copper solvent extraction then is due to the change in the reaction stoichiometry and decrease in the extraction driving force rather than the types of aqueous Cu2+ speciation. The effect of wash stages on the removal of the chloride ion from loaded organic solution was then investigated and the optimum conditions for the wash stage were found at wash solution to loaded organic ratio of 1 to 7 and sulfuric acid concentration of 10 g/L.Due to water scarcity, the use of seawater in mineral processing and hydrometallurgical processes is increasing ( Solvent extraction process is used for purification and concentration of copper bearing solution. Selective separation of copper from other impurities is done by an organic extractant according to the following reaction ( In which, HR Hydroxyoxime extractants (e.g., LIX groups) have been commercially used for copper solvent extraction since the latter half of the 1970s (  Based on these reactions, chloride does not enter the organic phase through a chemical reaction with copper. Chloride is one of the impurities that physically entrains to the loaded organic ( Inclusion of a wash stage between extraction and stripping stage is an effective way to control chloride concentration in the electrolyte ( As stated earlier, the average concentration of the chloride in the seawater is around 20 g/L. However, due to the evaporation and recirculation of water over the heap leaching operation, the concentration of the chloride ion in a PLS can double ( In this section, the thermodynamic behavior of copper with chloride is presented. The effect of chloride ion in PLS on the solvent extraction of copper was described in two main subsections: First, the effects of the different parameters, such as chloride concentration, temperature, and the initial copper concentration on the fraction of copper chloro-complexes have been investigated. Then, the effects of the chloride ions on dominant species of copper at different pH, potential, and chloride concentration have been discussed describing the assumptions, used data, and explanation of results. It is hoped that identifying the copper-chloride species will provide a better understanding of the studied system and interpretation of the results. Incorporation of chloride ions through seawater in leaching of copper ores significantly affect the aqueous species of the dissolved copper. Apart from changes in copper species, the existence of chloride ions affects the activity of aqueous species, which can potentially lower the efficiency of copper extraction during the SX process. Therefore, this paper’s primary objective is to investigate the thermodynamic behavior of the Cu-H The general reaction of the complexation of cupric ions with chloride is: The thermodynamic modeling of cupric complexation with chloride ion may be based on a few assumptions: 1. The temperature of the system was assumed constant and equal to 25 °C. 2. The system was run under atmospheric pressure. 3. The activity of the species is assumed to be equal to the concentration of the species (activity coefficients are considered to be 1). 4. All the reactions are assumed to be in the equilibrium state. The thermodynamic data to calculate the equilibrium constants was obtained from the Puigdomenec (2000) study ( The concentration of the chloride complexes of cupric can be written as a function of cupric concentration, chloride concentration, and the equilibrium constant. Considering the total concentration of the cupric and chloride, the equilibrium constant of copper complexation reactions and the concentration of chloride-cupric complexes, the total concentration of the cupric and chloride are calculated as follows: By replacing the actual value of the total concentration of cupric in the present work (3.3 g/L = 0.052 M) in Eq. As it evident in In order to fully investigate the cupric ion complexation with chloride ions, the effects of the temperature and initial cupric concentration were also studied.  For simplicity, in all the previous calculations, the activity coefficients were assumed constant and equal to 1. However, as As it is apparent, a Six main factors affect the dominant thermodynamic species in the studied system (impurities are excluded): potential, pH, [Cl The effect of the chloride concentration and Eh on the predominance area of the copper species, in a system consists of Cu-H  The PLS was synthesized using copper (II) sulfate (>99% pure) iron (II) sulfate (>99.5% pure), iron (III) sulfate (>80% pure, main impurity was molecular water) and sodium chloride (>99% pure) reagents from Merck, Germany. The organic extractant used in this research was an industrial-grade, LIX 984N, provided by Sarcheshmeh Copper Complex, Iran. The properties of the organic are illustrated in The synthetic PLS was prepared by dissolving copper and iron sulfate salts, based on Experiments were designed in two parts. First, the effect of chloride ions on the extraction of copper was investigated; then, the feasibility of controlling chloride ions concentration in loaded organic through washing stages was studied. The effect of the chloride ions on the extraction of copper was studied by mixing 20 ml of the aqueous solution containing chloride ions at three levels of 0, 20, and 40 g/L with 20 ml of the 12% v/v organic solution at room temperature (T = 30 °C), for 10 min (although equilibrium is attained faster, for confidence, 10 min mixing was chosen as the contact time). Six different initial pHs of 1, 1.25, 1.5, 2, 2.5 and 2.75, were chosen for plotting extraction-pH diagram. In each test, pH was adjusted by adding either sulfuric acid (300 g/L) or sodium hydroxide (200 g/L) dropwise. The pH of the aqueous solution was monitored by pH meter PB-11 (Sartorius, Germany) with a reference electrode of Ag/AgCl (3 M KCl). After ten minutes of agitation on the magnetic stirrer (Alfa D500, Iran), the aqueous and organic phase were separated in a separatory funnel, the aqueous solution was sampled, and the concentration of the copper was analyzed by atomic absorption spectroscopy, AAS (Agilent 200 series, United States). The concentration of the copper in the organic phase was determined through mass balance. Parameters of solvent extraction, distribution coefficient and extraction percentage of copper were calculated through the following: Equilibrium isotherms were plotted contacting a volume of 12% v/v organic solution with 20 ml of the aqueous solution for 10 min. The initial pH of the aqueous solution set at 2 in all extraction tests with sulfuric acid (300 g/L). By varying the organic to aqueous ratio, from 1/8 to 8, extraction isotherm line was plotted. The effect of the chloride ions on the copper extraction equilibriums was investigated on three levels of 0, 20, and 40 g/L in the PLS. After extraction, the aqueous solution was sampled, and the concentration of the copper in the aqueous solution was analyzed by AAS. The effect of the contact time was investigated for 20 ml of 12% v/v organic extractant mixed with 20 ml of the aqueous solution containing chloride at three levels of 0, 20, and 40 g/L. The initial pH of the aqueous solution was equal to 2 in all experiments. The contact time was varied from 10 s to 10 min. After mixing, the aqueous and organic solutions were separated, and the aqueous solution was sampled. The concentration of the Cu in the aqueous solution was determined by AAS. The same procedure was repeated; however, in the new tests, the contact time was constant (10 min), and the concentration of the organic extractant was varied from 4 to 20% v/v. To assess the efficiency of the wash stages in the removal of the chloride ion from the loaded organic, a set of experiments were conducted. The acidity of the wash solution and the ratio of wash solution to the loaded organic were the two main studied parameters. First, in the constant ratio of 1:7 of wash solution to loaded organic, the effect of the H The effects of the pH and chloride concentration on the extraction of copper were investigated. The obtained results are shown in This figure indicates that in the pH below 2, the extraction of copper in the presence of chloride ion is higher. This could be related to the activity of the species. In the chloride concentration of 20 and 40 g/L, CuCl The effect of the contact time and chloride concentration on the extraction of 3.3 g/L copper ions using an organic solution of 12% v/v at the pH of 2 is shown in Higher copper extraction at shorter mixing times, and in the presence of chloride ion, may be attributed to the species activities. At shorter mixing times, such as 10 and 30 s, the system has not reached the equilibrium state. As shown in previous sections, the presence of chloride ion shifts the reaction towards extraction by increasing the activity of the copper chloride complexes. Accordingly, due to the enhanced activity of the species, higher copper extraction in the presence of chloride ion at shorter mixing times is expected. By increasing the contact time, the system becomes closer to the equilibrium state, and the differences in copper extraction, in the presence and absence of chloride ion, become less pronounced. As was shown in In the solvent extraction plants, the aqueous and organic phases are usually contacted in mixers for at least 3 min. In this study, the copper extraction efficiency at different chloride concentrations was nearly constant after 5 min of mixing. Similarly, at around 3 min, the copper extractions in the presence of chloride at concentrations of 0 and 20 g/L are almost identical. As a result, any increase in copper extraction due to the addition of chloride ion at the mixing times below 3 min, is in fact redundant. The effect of the extractant and chloride ion concentration on the extraction of copper is shown in High chloride concentration has little effect on copper extraction at pH 2 and above, contact times greater than 5 min and extractant concentrations above 12% as indicated by the results in The presence of the chloride ions in the PLS can change the aqueous species of copper. The change in copper speciation alters the mechanism of copper extraction, respectively. As the chloride concentration increases, more Cu In which The equilibrium constant of the reaction can be written as: By assuming that the concentration of By substituting Eq. By taking logarithm from both sides of Eq. According to Eq. Based on predominance diagram plotted in Stoichiometric constants for copper extraction reaction, in the presence and absence of chloride ion, are determined and presented in plots of As shown in Similarly, the same procedure was taken to determine the extraction stoichiometry of copper from a chloride media. The slope of the log D vs. pH ( It can be seen that the presence of the chloride resulted in involving more extractant molecules in the copper extraction, in agreement with Extraction isotherm of copper with LIX 984N in three levels of chloride ions concentration is plotted in In order to understand the effect of the chloride ions on the solvent extraction circuit, in The presence of chloride ions resulted in an increase in the concentration of copper in the raffinate, lower extraction of copper, and eventually an increase in the number of the extraction stages.  An important feature of In Wash solution containing 10 g/L of H Another factor that can affect the washing stage is wash solution to loaded organic ratio (WS/LO).At this point, the effect of the WS/LO on removal and loss of copper in constant H As an overall conclusion, based on the obtained results, The influence of the chloride ion on solvent extraction of copper with LIX 984N was investigated. Thermodynamic results showed that the presence of chloride ions results in the formation of chloro-complexes of copper. In the chloride concentration of 0 to 40 g/L, the dominance species are Cu The effect of wash stages on the removal of chloride ion from the loaded organic and copper loss was investigated. Under the optimum conditions of wash to loaded organic ratio of 1 to 7, and H  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors are thankful to National Iranian Copper Industries Co. for their financial support of this project.