Mixtures of celestite concentrate (98% purity) and magnesium powders (97% purity) with a molar ratio of 1:4 were milled for increasing times. The temperature–time profile indicated a sudden increase in vial temperature between 10 and 11min for the stoichiometric mixture of SrSO4–Mg, whilst only 8–9min were required with a 25% excess of magnesium. X-ray diffraction showed that the reaction produced SrS and MgO, increasing the milling time beyond that necessary for ignition did not have any major effect on the products. The results showed the mechanochemical reaction was highly exothermic and initiated as mechanically induced self sustaining reaction (MSR). After milling, the products were washed with hot water (T=80°C) for 2h to separate the soluble SrS from the insoluble MgO.Mechanochemistry is the study of chemical changes induced by the application of mechanical energy. High intensity milling is an innovative procedure that improves the efficiency of chemical reactions via several mechanisms, the most important of which is the formation of new surfaces and creation of lattice defects ( In the late 1980s, The principal intermediate production in the manufacture of strontium compounds is strontium sulphide which is produced industrially by the carbothermic reduction of SrSO The reaction between strontium sulphate and a reducing metal such as Al or Mg can be summarized by the reactions below: Thermodynamic calculations reveal that the net free energy change of the above reactions are ΔG If a reaction is highly exothermic, the impact of the milling balls can initiate a mechanically induced self sustaining reaction (MSR) ( The above calculations using HSC Chemistry for Windows ( The present authors have studied the ball milling induced reduction in SrSO There are no reports on the reduction of SrSO Celestite concentrate was collected from Likak celestite mine near Yasouj, southwest Iran. The samples were crushed, ground, washed with 1 A planetary ball mill (Farapazhouhesh, Iran, FP2 model) was used in milling experiments. Preliminary experiments indicated that the following conditions were appropriate: 600 The milling runs were undertaken for the required time in an air atmosphere. After milling, the samples were washed for 2 XRD analyses (PHILIPS-X Pert) were performed using Cu Kα radiation over the range of 20–100° 2θ, using a step size of 0.05° and 3  The peaks for SrS and MgO are very narrow in the 10 Increasing the milling time beyond 10 All of the as-milled samples were washed for 2 The data in In order to assess the reason for the incomplete reaction, XRD of several insoluble residues was undertaken and the traces shown in Previous work on metal sulphides ( Reaction  The apparently incomplete conversion of SrSO The mass loss of the 25% excess run was 29%, lower than the 36% of the stoichiometric run. The mass losses due to SrS dissolution for these runs were predicted to be 39.2 and 42.6% respectively. Thus, the conversion in 25% excess Mg was 64% and in the stoichiometric mixture 85%. Evidently, using an excess of Mg resulted in a much lower extent of reaction and lack of Mg is not the reason for the incomplete reaction.  For the stoichiometric mixture there was a sudden increase in vial temperature between 10 and 11  In neither run was there any clear evidence of further reactions occurring as there are no other temperature rises present in the cooling curve. The extent of reaction was shown to increase with milling time, but the energy evolution after the initial reaction to have any effect on the vial temperature. Comparison with the previously investigated SrSO A stoichiometric mixture of SrSO The authors gratefully acknowledge