High pressure grinding roll (“HPGR”) technology is very rapidly gaining a wide acceptance within the mineral processing industry. Benefits, including a superior energy efficiency and a lower overall operating cost of an HPGR based circuit compared to alternative technologies have been demonstrated at a number of operations throughout the world. Increasing numbers of units are presently being installed in the minerals industry world-wide. This trend is an excellent reflection of the confidence now placed in the technology by new and existing users.
                  This paper summarizes basic principles of the equipment and of various options how to include an HPRG in the grinding circuit for most efficient use. Case studies demonstrate the application of HPGR’s in different grinding circuit set-ups and for the comminution of different ore types. Benefits of the options of open circuit grinding, closed circuit grinding incorporating wet and dry screening as well as the option of achieving a finer grind by recirculating part of the HPGR product using a mechanical splitter are discussed.
                  From a processing point of view the effects of partial product recycle are detailed and some guidance for selection of cut size between HPGR and ball mill is provided.With an increasing application of HPGR technology world-wide, the experience and confidence in the capabilities of this comminution technique increases as well. Where the initial applications in cement or limestone processing provided a basis in developing the technology and equipment to a feasible and reliable industrial device, the subsequent application of the equipment in the processing of Kimberlite and iron ores did form a basis for gathering experience and acceptance in the wider minerals industry. As a result, the recent use in the treatment of copper ore, gold ore, phosphates and the planned application in molybdenite and lead–zinc ores is expected to lead to further confidence in the applicability and advantages of HPGRs. The possibilities of HPGR in generating a fine product ahead of ball milling, from a three stage crushing system with HPGR as the third stage, puts a competitive pressure on the application of SAG mills. Also, the possibility of fine grinding at a relatively low energy input and high capacity, such as in iron ore pellet feed preparation, further expands the use of the technology. Finally, the additional advantages to the downstream process, such as a reduced ball mill work index for subsequent grinding or enhanced leaching performance in gold treatment, makes the technology attractive. HPGR circuits are presently applied or planned in: Pre-grinding ahead of downstream ball milling. Pre-grinding ahead of downstream beneficiation or CIL gold treatment. Pre-grinding ahead of heap leaching. Finished grinding in iron ore pellet feed preparation. Liberation grinding of diamonds ahead of re-treatment of DMS tailings or middlings. Several process flow sheet options find their way in the different applications that have been realized, or which are presently under investigation or construction. The full implication and benefit of these are yet to be experienced. Depending on the application, a variety of circuit arrangements are applied. This is a result of the inherent process of HPGR grinding, where the size reduction takes place in a particle bed, as disintegration of ore particles through inter-particle crushing in the created bed between the rolls. In contrast, conventional crushers rely on single particle breakage for their size reduction, as a contact crushing between grinding media (rods, balls, jaw crusher or cone compartment surface). Thus, in HPGR the particle to be crushed can be, and preferably is, of a dimension smaller than the applied operating gap. One direct effect is that the crushed particles can be led to recycle through the same HPGR unit, either directly, or after classification, or after intermediate beneficiation. In conventional crushing, this would require a subsequent separate crushing stage in a unit or in multiple units with a smaller gap setting (tertiary and quaternary crushers), or rod mills. In a HPGR unit, a fresh feed with a top size of, for instance, 63 HPGR’s can generally accept a coarse feed size up to about 90 Larger HPGR’s in the future may receive a coarser secondary crushed material. This does not automatically mean a modest size reduction; the bulk of the size reduction is achieved by inter-particle crushing from compression in the particle bed. In that, the gap opening only plays a minor role. Surely, one has to consider the technicalities of the roll surface and roll wear protection type when treating coarse sized ore. It must be noted that an increase in the feed top size from about 70 Given the above, several circuit arrangements are presently applied. These include: a “simple” open circuit tertiary crushing or pre-grinding stage, with the facility to replace conventional 3rd and 4th crusher stages or rod milling, open circuit fine grinding for iron ore pellet feed preparation, both ahead of a final ball milling, or as a final grinding stage after beneficiation, pebble crushing in (S)AG circuit, using a truncated feed lean in fines, closed circuit operation with classification (screening), to provide a defined product with a high fines content, and closed circuit operation in combination with product recycle, to provide a fine product with a lesser defined top size but a high reduction and fines ratio, without the need for classification. Three selected alternatives for flow sheet arrangements are being discussed below: open circuit crushing or pre-grinding stage, closed circuit operation with classification, and closed circuit operation with product recycles. In general, the application of a certain flow sheet depends on downstream requirements and other plant considerations such as moisture content. An HPGR unit can well be applied as a stand-alone unit, in open circuit to replace conventional 3rd and 4th crusher stages or rod milling, or as a pre-grinding stage ahead of, for instance, ball milling. Traditionally, for minerals, applications have included pre-grinding or re-grinding in iron ore pellet feed preparation circuits, or as secondary or re-crushing devices in Kimberlite processing. In the latter case, the unit was introduced in the re-crushing of DMS product, but effectively operated as open circuit unit ( Apart from fine grinding applications (such as the pellet feed cases), the HPGR product does have a top size that is mainly determined by the achieved operating gap. This gap is not a fixed setting, as is the case for conventional crushers, but depends on ore type and comminution conditions as discussed in Section In some applications the feed presented to the HPGR may be truncated, meaning the fines are screened out of the HPGR feed stream. This result in a feed of lower bulk density and larger void spaces in the initial particle bed. It has been observed that using the HPGR to grind a truncated feed stream leads to higher specific energy consumption and lower specific throughput when compared to feeding the device with a feed size distribution that contains fines. The benefits gained in by-passing part of the mass flow around the HPGR may be partly offset by the higher specific energy consumption and a reduced HPGR performance. Another issue to be considered when feeding a truncated feed is to extend in which the autogenous wear layer might be adversely affected. Observations from test work performed to compare the effect of feed size showed that the formation of an autogenous wear layer is more stable and competent when a certain amount of fines is present in the feed stream. A closed circuit operation is engaged to provide a defined stage product with a fixed top size and high fines content. Dry screening could be applied for aperture sizes down to about 5 One of the aspects to be taken into account is the handling and effect of the compacted material in the HPGR product on a subsequent classification (or, in for instance irons ore pelletization, of homogenization ahead of balling). This compacted material, also referred to as “flakes”, is generated by a the high compressing force on the bed of particles in the rolls’ gap, causing part of the ground product to discharge in the form of cake-like briquettes ( Thus the HPGR product often is composed of a mixture of loose product and a proportion of flakes and flake fragments, the latter ranging from 0% to 80% by volume, depending on ore, particle size, moisture content, and pressing conditions. In most cases these flakes are relatively brittle and fragment during handling and transfer (on belt conveyors, transfer points or in bins), but sometimes can be fairly competent. In an open circuit situation, or when the HPGR is followed by a subsequent ball mill grinding stage, de-agglomeration is seldom required, as the flake material disintegrates almost instantly when entering the mill or a pump sump ahead of a hydrocyclone cluster. In wet classification, the flake material generally disperses relatively fast, and, even for stronger flakes, only a mild pre-soaking or, at worst, a modest attrition would be required. In the Rajasthan phosphate operation ( For harder flakes, slow speed impact mills or MMD-sizers could be applied ahead of screening. Thus, if required, a suitably selected and designed de-agglomeration device can be arranged to provide for an efficient classification in all cases. Standard tests can be carried out during a pilot testing campaign to determine if any or what type of desagglomeration would be required for the individual operation. The application of classification, which could be wet screening or hydrocycloning, dry screening, or dry air classification, becomes more complex when harder flakes are encountered. Unless a suitable de-agglomeration is applied, acceptable classification efficiency will be hard to achieve. This may require installing more classifiers, de-agglomeration devices and associated auxiliary equipment such as launders and conveyors, which may increase the overall capital and operating cost. To avoid this cost increase, a product recycle arrangement may be applied as alternative. This involves the splitting of the HPGR discharge product into a final product and a part to be recycled to the head of the HPGR circuit, by simple mechanical splitting without classification. This avoids the need for large amounts of additional equipment and operating effort, and does provide a means to re-grind some or most of the oversize in the product to a final size distribution that would be acceptable in further processing. One benefit of such a product recycle arrangement is that it can effectively replace a two-stage HPGR operation, where two units would be required for a first pass and a subsequent second pass grinding. Instead, a single larger HPGR unit could be applied, operating in a closed circuit with recycling part of the product. Overall, this would result in a reduced capital investment and operating cost, as a result of scale-effects at increased equipment size. As a further development, it was recognized that product recycling may replace fine classification. In conventional practice, products from classification, such as wet screening or hydrocyclone treatment, would be wet or in the form of a more or less dilute slurry. If the product would need to be handled dry (such as in some magnetic separation plants) or at a low moisture content, such as in heap leaching, downstream conveying, recycle operations, or pelletizing, it would require dewatering. This would require an additional effort in associated sedimentation, filtration and water treatment. Product recycling thus potentially avoids the need for fine classification. This applies to many cases of iron ore pellet feed preparation. In these plants, concentrates from iron ore upgrading (by flotation, magnetic separation or gravity treatment) do carry a relative high water content, of between 8% and 13% moisture ( Wet concentrates at a moisture content of 8–13% could, however, be adequately handled by HPGR, where one could avoid the possible classification by applying a HPGR unit with a product recycling arrangement. HPGR grinding does not (strongly) depend on the achieved operating gap, and thus recycling of a fine material fraction does result in a further size reduction. This is exemplary in the case of iron ore pellet feed materials. After beneficiation the fine iron ore concentrate generally may have a top particle size acceptable for subsequent pelletizing, but the proportion of fines and the overall specific surface area is inadequate for the formation of pellets that are sufficiently strong and still permeable. In such cases, product recycling has demonstrated to be very effective. As an alternative to a closed circuit operation with classification, a closed circuit arrangement with a partial product recycle is gaining a strong interest in coarse ore (60–80 A closed circuit operation could be assumed with recycling of about 50% of the HPGR discharge to be mixed with fresh feed, the other 50% being the final product. A circulating load of approximately 100% (HPGR recycle in proportion to fresh feed) would thus be achieved, approximately representing a two-pass operation. In this approach, it should be considered that the HPGR discharge generally consists of 80–90% of center material (finer), from the zone of highest pressure between the rolls, and 10–20% of edge material (coarser), which passed the rolls at the zone of lower pressure ( One option to recycle the HPGR discharge is to install a product splitter underneath the HPGR unit. This splitter may consist of movable cutter plates that can be positioned to extract a larger or smaller proportion of the discharge ( When assuming 10% of the discharge to consist of the coarser edge material, about 56% of the center material forms the final product, whereas the recycle consists of the edge material and the balancing proportion of 44% of the center material, as illustrated in The center material can be discharged on a product conveyor as the final product from the HPGR. The edge material can be are discharged through a chute onto a common return conveyor, to be mixed-in with the fresh feed. The proportion of edge material can be increased or reduced by adjusting the position of the edge cutter plates. Alternatively, the full product may be led to a common discharge, after which it is directed over a distributor to achieve the required mass split. This does lead to a slightly coarser product, as part of the edge material will end-up in the final product. Edge splitters are successfully installed in coarse ore operations ( For a given feed size distribution, an HPGR in open circuit will generate a finer product than a conventional (cone) crusher, depending on gap setting of the conventional crusher. Even if a comparable 80% passing size would result, the proportion of fines is significantly higher in the HPGR product than in for instance a cone crusher product ( The slope of the screen undersize distribution is roughly parallel to the slope of the HPGR discharge size distribution, and will thus contain a significant proportion of fines. If subsequent ball milling is applied, a reverse circuit arrangement (with classification by hydrocyclones ahead of ball milling) could then be applied. This would allow a large proportion of fines to bypass the ball mill as finished product, thus reducing the work load of the ball mill. If one considers the reduction in bond work index for ball milling that is achieved for the HPGR product as a result of weakening of the material by the high force compression then there is a possibility of reducing either the size or number of ball mills required to produce the finer product. As closed circuit with product recycle will generally result in a product which has a “flatter” size distribution ( The installation of an HPGR in product recirculation circuit or in closed circuit with a classification stage does also affect the performance in terms of specific throughput and specific energy consumption when compared to HPGR in open circuit. In the classification case, the effective feed to the HPGR will be composed of the fresh feed and a proportion of recycled screen oversize material. Effectively, this will create a feed with a finer F80 size and steeper size distribution, when compared to freshly crushed feed. The bulk density of the feed generally tends to be lower than the freshly crushed material, due to a higher volume of void space in the particle size composition. The overall effect on HPGR is that of a lower specific throughput and higher specific energy consumption. In the product recycle case, the effective feed to the HPGR will be composed of the fresh feed and recycled discharge material, containing a significant proportion of fines. The result will be an effective HPGR feed with a fine F80 size, and a flat size distribution with an over-representation of fine sizes. The bulk density of the feed generally tends to be higher than freshly crushed material, with the fine fractions readily filling-in the available voids between the coarser particles. The overall effect on HPGR is that of a higher specific throughput and a possible lower specific energy consumption.  The bulk density and size distribution of the HPGR feed has an effect on the effective HPGR throughput. This is reflected in the two general formulae which are used in sizing HPGR: the “continuity formula” (Eq. Continuity formula: It can be noted from the continuity formulae that throughput effectively is a result of bulk density and flake thickness (gap opening). In closed circuit with product recycle, the tighter packing of the ore grains implies a higher mass throughput for equal circumstances. Depending on operating conditions (such as moisture), the particle bed may tend to show a higher compression strength, which adds to a larger operating gap and a further increase in specific throughput. Thus, specific throughput may be up to 25% higher than for an open circuit arrangement. At the same time, depending on conditions (press force and overall power input), the energy consumption may decrease as compared to an open circuit arrangement, by up to 15%. On the other hand, a closed circuit with classification tends to lead to a lighter packing of the ore grains, with more void spaces, and does tend to show a lower mass throughput for equal roll speed and operating pressure. As a result, the operating gap reduces, and the specific throughput tends to be lower than that of a product recycle arrangement. For similar conditions (press force and overall power input), and also due to the presence of more mid-size particles in the feed, the energy consumption generally is somewhat higher than the product recycle option, and closer to that of an open circuit arrangement. As observed in practice, a different performance in terms of specific energy consumption and specific throughput can be assumed when an HPGR is installed in product recirculation circuit as compared to a closed circuit with screening, with a higher specific throughput and a lower net specific energy consumption per tonne of HPGR feed. For a specific application, therefore, an evaluation of total circuit capacity and energy input would be required to select an optimum HPGR arrangement. HPGR’s can be installed in either an open circuit arrangement, or in closed circuit with classification (wet or dry screening), or in closed circuit with a (partial) product recycle. In open circuit grinding, HPGR provides for a high throughput and low energy operation in either a tertiary crushing or pre-grinding stage, with the facility to replace conventional 3rd and 4th crusher stages or rod milling, or pebble crushers in (semi-)autogenous circuits. In closed circuit operation with classification (screening), HPGR’s are very efficient in generating a defined product with high fines content. In closed circuit with product recycle, especially with a variable product split setting, HPGR is a versatile tool for generating a fine product with a somewhat coarser top size but a high reduction and fines ratio, without the need for classification. It allows processing of difficult to screen materials, and provides a means to process moist ores, without the necessity for wet screening and associated product thickening and water treatment. It thus provides a means to reduce the cost and effort from installing and maintenance of a screening section, and allows handling of HPGR discharge without the necessity of flake desagglomeration. A product recycle arrangement will generally result in a HPGR discharge product which has a “flatter” size distribution when compared to the open circuit HPGR product. This is a result of the recycling of a comparable large mass of fines or medium-sized particles to the HPGR feed. Where the 80% passing size would be coarser than that of a product from classification, the fines proportion (e.g. <125 HPGR specific throughput generally increases in closed circuit with product recycle, as a result of a denser feed and a wider operating gap, up to about 25% higher than an in an open circuit arrangement. At the same time, the specific energy consumption per tonne of HPGR feed may decrease as compared to an open circuit arrangement, by up to 15%. In selecting a profitable flow sheet for HPGR with ball milling, one of the considerations is to choose the effective cut size in screening, or the circulating load to be applied, to balance the energy input and thus equipment size in either HPGR and subsequent ball milling, and to optimize/minimize the overall energy input and capital cost in the grinding system. For HPGR grinding to achieve a fine product size, a higher circulating load would be required, and consequently a higher overall HPGR energy input would result. On the other hand, for ball milling to achieve a given product fineness, a finer the ball mill feed would lower the overall ball mill energy input. In combination, there will be a minimum in the combined energy input, depending on the selected HPGR product size. The combined energy input may tend to show a minimum, for a given plant throughput and specified ball mill product, depending on the cut size selected. HPGR generates a product which in many cases shows a reduced Bond ball mill work index from high compression. For a subsequent ball milling stage, the ball mills may relatively easily grind-away the top size fractions in the HPGR product. The reduced ball mill work index then does lead to an additional increase in overall productivity of a HPGR-ball mill circuit. In view of total circuit energy Input, the application of HPGR as pre-grinding stage does warrant a dedicated evaluation to select a classifier cut size or effective product recycling level. This will be dependant on, amongst others, the selected HPGR product size (ball mill feed size), and the grinding efficiencies of both HPGR and ball mill. In the circuit evaluation, requirements for product handling (dry or wet screening, wet product recycle) and energy input in associated equipment (classifiers, conveying, pumping) should also be taken into consideration.