The effect of the addition of Al on the high temperature deformation behavior of wrought Mg–4Zn–0.8Y alloy has been investigated. The addition of Al significantly improves the high temperature formability, i.e. increases elongation from 260% to 370% under a strain rate of 1×10−4
                     s−1 at 300°C. Strain rate sensitivity measured at different strain rates shows that the addition of Al induces the transition of high temperature deformation mechanism from dislocation creep mode to grain boundary sliding mode. Effect of alloying elements and microstructural evolution including the role of icosahedral-phase during deformation are discussed.Magnesium alloys have the great potential for high performance structural applications due to their excellent properties such as low density, high-specific strength, superior damping capacity, etc. All test materials for this study were prepared by induction melting high purity 99.9% Mg, 99.9% Zn, 99.95% Y and 99.9% Al under a dynamic Ar atmosphere, followed by pouring the melt into a rectangular steel mould of 60   The optical microstructures of the alloys hot-rolled at 400  In the present study, the high temperature properties were evaluated at the temperatures of 300 Microstructural evolutions after creep deformation are shown in In this study, ZW41–0.2Al alloy shows higher value of elongation to failure than that of ZW41 alloy, particularly exhibiting superplasticity at the stain rate of 1 Secondly, depletion of Y contents in α-Mg matrix may eliminate solute drag effect. Y is well known as an effective solid solution hardener. At elevated temperature, solute drag may make a contribution to the creep resistance In this study, the effect of Al on high temperature deformation behavior in ZW41 alloy has been investigated. The addition of Al in ZW41 alloy leads suitable microstructure for superplastic forming and increases elongation to failure from 260% to 370% at relatively low temperature of 300 The authors are grateful for the financial supports from the Fundamental Materials Technology Development Program, Korean Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Energy. Hyun Kyu Lim and Ju Youn Lee are grateful for the support from the Second Stage of Brain Korea 21 Project in 2007.