Fast pyrolysis of cassava rhizome was performed in a bench-scale fluidised-bed reactor unit incorporated with a cross-flow moving-bed granular filter. The objective of this research was to examine several process parameters including the granular size (425–1160μm) and mass flow rate (0–12g/min) as well as the number of the filtration stages (1–2 stages) on yields and properties of bio-oil. The results showed that the bio-oil yield decreased from 57.7wt.% to 42.0–49.2wt.% when increasing the filter media size, the mass flow rate and the filtration stage number. The effect of the process parameters on various properties of bio-oil is thoroughly discussed. In general, the bio-oil quality in terms of the solids content, ash content, initial viscosity, viscosity change and ageing rate could be enhanced by the hot vapour granular filtration. Therefore, bio-oil of high stability could be produced by the pyrolysis reactor configuration designed in this work.The current dependency of fossil fuel leads to the instability of the energy demand and supply. Thus, the quest for the alternative and renewable sources of the environmentally benign fuels is necessary. Such a source as biomass is deemed as a high potential answer. Biomass can be directly used by combustion or converted into liquid, solid and gas by thermochemical conversion process such as fast pyrolysis, which produces “bio-oil” as main product. The typical bio-oil has a heating value of approximately half of diesel fuel. Nevertheless, the well-known drawback of the fast pyrolysis bio-oil is related to its storage stability as its viscosity increases over time. The increase of the bio-oil viscosity is accelerated by the presence char fines and inorganics via polymerisation reactions, thereby increasing the molecular weight of the bio-oil ( The filtration of hot pyrolysis vapour can be performed either inside or outside the reactor. The filtration inside the reactor was aimed to reduce the vapour residence time compared to the outside-reactor filtration. In hot filtration outside the reactor, the ceramic baghouse filters were initially introduced in fast pyrolysis process by Another type of the hot filters previously tested in fast pyrolysis of biomass was cylindrical ceramic candle filter. They were used with fluidised bed reactors applying radiate pine ( Moreover, the use of a fixed bed of glass wool as a hot vapour filter was tested in fast pyrolysis of cassava rhizome, cassava stalk, rice straw and rice husk in a fluidised bed pyrolyser ( According to the above-mentioned research studies, there were several drawbacks of the hot filters such as char cake accumulation, abrasion of the filter, intolerance to high temperature and expensive filter material. As a consequence, to solve these problems, the hot vapour filter was developed to tolerate high temperature condition and to continuously remove the char cake. This type of the hot filter is called “moving bed granular filter”. Recently, ( Although the moving-bed granular filter showed high potential for removing solids in bio-oil, the research work on the effect of filtration process parameters on yield and detailed properties of bio-oil is still limited. Therefore, it is the purpose of this paper to elucidate the influence of main process parameters of the moving-bed granular filter such as the filter media size, mass flow rate and filtration stage number on product yields and properties of bio-oil derived from fast pyrolysis of cassava rhizome. The biomass feedstock employed in this work was cassava rhizome obtained from cassava plantations in the north–east of Thailand. It was ground by a knife milled and sieved by a Retsch AS200 sieve shaker according to ASTM E11. The chosen size range of the biomass sample was 225–425 The prepared biomass feedstock was subjected to proximate and ultimate analyses. The proximate analysis was carried out to determine the moisture, volatile matter, ash and fixed carbon contents. The moisture analysis was performed according to the ASTM E 871 by heating 3 The fast pyrolysis apparatus used in this work was a fluidised-bed reactor connected with a moving-bed granular filter. The capacity of the unit was 100–200 The biomass feeding part comprised of an AC motor and a hopper. The motor applied 220 The pyrolysis reactor was made of a 304 stainless steel pipe with an inside diameter of 42 The char separation unit included a cyclone and a granular filter. The cyclone temperature was kept constant at 420 The bio-oil collection unit was composed of a water cooled condenser, an electrostatic precipitator (ESP), two dry ice/acetone condensers and a cotton wool filter. The water-cooled condenser was a 304 stainless steel double-tube heat exchanger. The cooling water temperature was around 28–33 The experiments were performed under a constant pyrolysis temperature of 500 The water content of the bio-oil was analysed according to ASTM E203 by volumetric Karl Fischer titration (Mettler Toledo V20) with Merck Combi titrant 5 keto as the titration reagent and Merck Combi solvent keto as the titration solvent. The titration was performed at least in triplicate. The solids content to bio-oil was analysed according to ASTM D7579 ( The density of bio-oil was determined by a 10 The pH value of bio-oil was measured by a UB-10 Denver instrument pH meter. Prior to the analysis the pH meter was calibrated with buffer solutions of pH 4, 7 and 10. Approximately 10 The kinematic viscosity of bio-oil was measured according to ASTM D445. The opaque Cannon–Fenske viscometer (size 200) was used at a constant temperature of 40 The ash content of bio-oil was determined according to DIN EN 7 standard. Approximately 3 The alkali/alkaline earth metal content of bio-oil was measured by the center for Scientific and Technological Equipment, Suranaree University of Technology using atomic absorption spectrometers (Perkin Elmer Pinaacle 900F) and inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (Perkin Elmer Optima 8000). The surface of the filter granules before and after experiments was monitored by imaging technique using a scanning electronic microscope (JEOL JSM 5800 LV). The char fines captured by the granular filter were also determined for their particle size distribution using a laser particle size analyzer (MALVERN Mastersizer S) in comparison to those from the cyclone separator. All of these analyses were performed at the Center for Scientific and Technological Equipment, Suranaree University of Technology, Nakhon Ratchasima, Thailand. To investigate the effect of granular filter media size, fast pyrolysis of cassava rhizome was performed at 500 To elucidate the change of the char yield with the granules size, Based on the raw data, the efficiency of the granular filter was calculated. It was found that the smaller size of the granules led to the higher efficiency as the granular size of 425–600, 600–850 and 850–1160 The effect of filter media mass flow rate on pyrolysis product yield is demonstrated by To investigate further on bio-oil yield, The number of the granular filtration stages is expected to affect the yields of pyrolysis products, especially the bio-oil as well as the bio-oil properties. The increase of the filtration stage number means that the thickness of the filtration bed is increased. The results from two experimental runs, single and two stages, at the pyrolysis temperature of 500 Regarding the char and gas yields, the increase of the filtration stage number from one to two stages led to the increase of the char yield from 24.7 to 29.6  The effect of the filter media size on the water content of filtered bio-oil can also be observed from The granular filter mass flow rate influenced the filtered bio-oil water content in the way that the higher the mass flow rate, the lower the water content. In other words, the water content was decreased from 31.3 The effect of the filter stage number can also be noticed from the Run No. 2 and 6. It is obvious that the two-stage filter gave higher water content (29.8 The pH values of the bio-oil produced with different filter media sizes, mass flow rate and filter stage number were rather similar in the range of 3.11–3.59 and were in the range of typical bio-oil (pH 2.0–3.8) reported by The density of filtered and unfiltered bio-oils shown in The solids content of bio-oil is an important property that this work aimed to reduce by the exploitation of the moving-bed granular filter. Although the total solids content of the unfiltered bio-oil (1.70 The ash content of the unfiltered bio-oil in this work was 0.82 The viscosity of bio-oil is one of the very important properties that can determine its quality and applications. In general, the viscosity of bio-oil changes significantly over time. This is especially enhanced when it is stored at elevated temperature. The index for monitoring the changes of the bio-oil viscosity is known as stability. This stability can be calculated as the percentage of viscosity change or the viscosity changing rate, which is also referred to as ageing rate. After stored at 80 When considering the effect of filter media size, it was found that the viscosity of fresh bio-oils derived from 425–600 and 600–850 The mass flow rate of the granular filter media also affected the viscosity and stability of bio-oil. Minimum viscosity of fresh bio-oil (5.3 When comparing the viscosity and stability data for the single and two-stage filtration of which other variables were controlled, it can be observed that the two-stage filter gave lower fresh bio-oil viscosity. This is partly due to the higher water content and partly due to the lower molecular weight. Since the chance for secondary reactions is higher for the two-stage filtration, thermal cracking and dehydration of the pyrolysis vapour may occur, thus leading to the lower molecules and water, respectively. If considering only the viscosity change and the ageing rate of the bio-oils from the single and two-stage filtration, it can be deduced that the bio-oil produced from fast pyrolysis with the single stage filter was more stable. Four selected inorganic elements known to influence the bio-oil properties and applications were quantitatively analysed. These include sodium, calcium, potassium and silicon. The contents of these elements in the unfiltered and filtered (applying the granular particle size of 425–600 The surface of the granules or water gravels used as the filter media was monitored by scanning electronic micrographs and it can be noticed that the surface of the initial granules (before the experiment) was shiny with no char particulate on, whereas the granules after the experiment were fully coated with char fines. This was expected to occur by inertial impaction and interception mechanisms. It was found that the particle size distribution of char particles obtained from the cyclone separator was in the range of 5–1000 In fast pyrolysis of cassava rhizome, the total bio-oil yield was found to decrease from 57.7 Financial supports from the