Citizen engagement is one way of improving the governance of extractive resources and overcoming the resource curse. Academic research on Tanzania's extractive resource governance has shown that meaningful offline citizen engagement remains a troubling area mainly because of how it is framed by the government and the measures it takes to suppress organised community initiatives for engagement. Can government use of ICT promote citizen engagement? This paper asks one major question: how do governments deploy ICTs to create and/or constrain opportunities for active citizen engagement in extractives decision-making and governance processes? In answering this question, the paper examines how the Tanzanian government uses ICTs to engage with citizens in extractives decision-making and governance processes and whether this engagement really empowers citizens to influence resource governance decisions. The paper shows that much as the government uses ICT to inform the public about extractives development, it equally takes measures-political and legal- to ensure that meaningful citizen engagement does not evolve. This calls for a nuanced analysis of the potential role of ICT in promoting citizen engagement in governance processes.Governments across the world are increasingly contending with the pressure to open governance processes for public participation. There is a common understanding across the academic and non-academic sectors that participatory forms of governance such as citizen engagement can produce better democratic decisions, resolve conflicts, enhance public trust in government institutions, and foster collaboration between governments and the public in solving challenging governance and development challenges ( While the potential and real benefits of citizen engagement are well noted in the literature, a major area of contention continues to be the question of how citizen engagement can be practically achieved. Traditionally, citizen engagement has involved political representation, participation in regular elections, participation in local decision-making through established assemblies/meetings, citizen assemblies and juries, referendums, public opinion surveys, and so forth ( The benefits of ICTs in enhancing citizen engagement in decision-making and governance processes are notable in the literature. For instance, social media platforms have been shown to allow citizens, civic groups, and journalists to reach a vast audience at little or no cost, and to provide new forms of activism and mobilisation that can challenge repressive and authoritarian governments ( The first question stems from the fact that governments across the world are increasingly using ICT tools and platforms to foster governance and public participation processes. Existing research shows that e-governance and e-participation have become common descriptors of innovative public administration ( The second question builds on two main considerations. First, the increasing availability and use of ICT and ubiquitous accessibility and connectivity to the internet have transformed government-citizen interaction and engagement. ICTs ‘allow individuals to consume, create and distribute their own content without governmental control. They also provide opportunities for new forms of activism and mobilisation that can challenge repressive governments’ ( Second, existing research in Tanzania has shown that the Tanzania government has consistently deployed its coercive instruments and unleashed propaganda on citizens and communities who take initiatives to push for active and meaningful citizen engagement in extractive resources governance and decision-making processes ( To address these two questions, the paper argues that while the government has increasingly made use of ICT to inform the citizens on developments in the extractive sector, this has not translated into active and meaningful citizen engagement in the sector's governance processes. This is because the government has effectively taken both political and legal measures to intentionally constrain citizen engagement. This contradictory government behaviour can be understood as a progression of its conventional treatment of citizen and community engagement in extractives governance processes. Like its consistent suppression of offline grassroots initiatives for citizen engagement, the government has equally deployed the use of ICT not as a tool to empower citizens but to promote its own version of extractive governance while taking measures to limit how citizens use the same to critically engage with and challenge government's governance of the extractives sector. In presenting this argument, I first consider the key arguments in the literature on citizen engagement especially in relation to extractive resources governance. I then review literature on information and communication technologies and their role in enhancing citizen engagement in governance processes. This is then followed by a descriptive background on extractive resources governance in Tanzania. In section five, I describe the methodology of this paper. After this, I present and analyse evidence from Tanzania on linking ICT use to citizen engagement in extractive resource governance and on how the government uses ICTs to create and/or constrain opportunities for active citizen engagement in extractive decision-making and governance processes. Citizen engagement is an important aspect of participatory governance. Although very commonly talked about in scholarly and non-scholarly works, citizen engagement is a concept that defies universal definition. Arguably, citizen engagement is variously defined as a description of an engagement process, in terms of the outcomes of the engagement process, or as both the process and the resulting outcomes ( These confusions notwithstanding, citizen engagement is a term that is used to suggest an ongoing and active relationship between citizens and government ( Even though there is no conventional definition of citizen engagement, this paper subscribes to an understanding of citizen engagement as a continuous relationship and interaction between the citizens and government in extractive resources decision-making and governance processes. In keeping with the stated definition of citizen engagement, this paper critically looks into how the Tanzania government uses ICT to promote and/or constrain meaningful citizen engagement in extractive resources governance processes. By meaningful citizen engagement, the paper examines citizen engagement by going beyond simple and/or ‘lip service’ engagement to look at citizen engagement as one that really empowers the citizens not only to voice out their concerns but also to shape public policy choices in the extractives governance ( Literature identifies a number of criteria by which meaningful citizen engagement can be judged. These include: (1) the timing and continuity of engagement; (2) use of technology to increase opportunities for engagement and provide more direct avenues for citizens to hold their governments accountable; (3) inclusiveness and representativeness of engagement; (4) ensuring there is multiple engagement mechanisms; (5) there should be a two-way communication (feedback) i.e. an ongoing dialogue, with an exchange of ideas between citizens and their government; (6) transparency; (7) active community building/empowerment i.e. engagement should build knowledge capacity, trust, and power among citizens; and (8) accountability i.e. citizen engagement should be informed by and result in both citizen and government accountability ( Citizen engagement is associated with a broad range of benefits including the potential to deepen democracy by empowering the ordinary people to effectively participate in and influence policies which directly affect their lives ( In the management of natural resources such as minerals, oil and gas, citizen engagement is considered to be an important component of strategies to overcome the resource curse, resolve resource conflicts, legitimise resource extraction, and improve the governance of extractive resources by ensuring that resource extraction benefits are equally shared and expended sustainably ( Because of the benefits of citizen and public engagement in resources governance, various local, regional and international measures and initiatives for extractive resource governance have sought to institutionalise citizen and public engagement in resource governance as a key ingredient to achieving ‘good’ extractive resource governance. Initiatives such as, for instance, the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI), Publish What You Pay (PWYP), Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC), and the Africa Mining Vision (AMV) all make public participation in resource extraction activities and governance processes a necessary component of sustainable and inclusive resource governance ( Potential benefits notwithstanding, several studies have drawn attention to the potential and real pitfalls of citizen engagement. For instance, a study by On top of that, citizen engagement in extractive resources decision-making and governance processes depends greatly on how citizenship is framed, who qualifies to be a citizen and vice versa ( Importantly, another key question in the literature is how citizens can be brought in to participate in shaping governance and development decisions. Traditionally, governments have sought to engage citizens in decision-making processes through several mainstream ways including participation in periodic elections, representative participation in key decision-making organs, citizen juries, referendums, public meetings, citizen duties, conducting surveys, consultation, information sharing, and so forth ( In response to the challenges of engaging citizens through conventional approaches, a number of studies make a case for the adoption of ‘thin participation’ approaches which are fast, easy, convenient, viral and allow individuals to affiliate with a cause and/or give their opinions on a particular issue ( Information and communication technologies have arguably influenced every aspect of human's life. Understandably, ICTs play a crucial role in the social and economic transformations witnessed across the world ( One of the key impacts of increased adoption and use of ICT has been the transformation of how governments work, with open government or e-government becoming a common governance modality today. The Open Government Partnership (OGP) is one product of the use of ICT which has redefined how governments should work. Thus, it can be argued that the key thrust in increased adoption and use of ICT is to make governments and governance processes open, accountable and participatory. ICTs are known for their potential to make direct democracy possible because they create spaces and opportunities for citizens to express their voices as they remove barriers of communication commonly associated with traditional forms of governance ( It follows, therefore, that ICTs are considered to be a major tool through which continuous government-citizen engagement can happen. They are, therefore, a key tool for citizen participation in decision-making and governance processes. Several studies have examined the links between ICT use and public participation in governance processes. For instance, In China, research has shown that the increased use of ICTs has strengthened citizen engagement in environmental governance processes by unleashing a stronger public voice on environmental governance and sustainability issues ( In line with findings from India on the limits of ICT in promoting meaningful citizen engagement, a review paper by Although ICT is understandably a powerful tool for citizen engagement as the literature surveyed above indicates, there is a dearth of studies on the same in the governance of extractive resources. Existing studies mainly focus on ICT use in the management and governance of renewable resources such as water ( Tanzania is well endowed with several extractive resources including mineral and energy resources. For minerals, Tanzania is famously known for its gold sector which has placed the country among the top six producers of gold in Africa ( Despite the above achievements, in reality the greater expansion of the extractive activities in the past twenty or so years has not produced the much anticipated outcomes and its contribution to inclusive socio-economic development has remained minimal ( In terms of governance arrangements, the management of extractive resources is executed by several key institutions. In the mining sector, the key institutions include the Ministry of Minerals which is a central policy making organ and an overall extractive governance body; the Mining Commission which regulates and monitors the industry, issues mining licences, and so forth; and the State Mining Corporation (STAMICO), a state entreprise representing state investment interests in the sector as well as providing service to artisanal and small scale miners. Other key organs include the Geological Survey of Tanzania (GST) responsible for all geological activities other than prospecting, exploration and mining. In the energy sector, the key organs are the Ministry of Energy which functions in ways similar to ministry of minerals; and the Tanzania Petroleum Development Corporation (TPDC), a national oil company representing state commercial and investment interests in the oil and gas sector. Other key organs include the Energy and Water Utilities Regulatory Authority (EWURA) which regulates the petroleum mid- and downstream activities; and the Petroleum Upstream Regulatory Authority (PURA) which, among others, regulates the petroleum upstream activities, promotes local content, and maintains continued communication and dialogue with all stakeholders in the industry including the public. All these organs and agencies engage in some form of citizen engagement in their own capacity as they all have departments for community/public relations and development. They do that as part of their corporate social responsibility. However, a key organ responsible for promoting citizen engagement in governance of mineral and energy resources is the Tanzania Extractive Industries Initiative (TEITI) Committee as provided for in the TEITI Act 2015 and its regulations, and as detailed further below. Further, extractive resources in Tanzania are governed in accordance to several legislative and institutional instruments. These include the national mineral policy, 2009, the Mining Act 2010 (as revised in 2017), the Natural Wealth and Resources (Review and Renegotiation of Unconscionable Terms) Act 2017, the Natural Wealth and Resources (Permanent Sovereignty) Act 2017, the National Natural Gas Policy 2013, the National Energy Policy 2015, the Petroleum Act 2015, the Oil and Gas Revenue Management Act 2015, and the Tanzania Extractive Industries (Transparency and Accountability) Act 2015. There are also several regulations governing resource extraction and development in Tanzania. These include the Mining (Local Content) Regulations 2018 (as amended in 2019), the Mining (Mirerani Controlled Area) Regulations 2019, the Natural Wealth and Resources (Review and Renegotiation of Unconscionable Terms) Regulations 2020, the Petroleum (Local Content) Regulations 2017, and the Tanzania Extractive Industries (Transparency and Accountability) Regulations 2019. Together, these policies, laws and regulations define the governance contours for the resource extraction sector. They define the institutional and fiscal structure as well as the role and participation of various stakeholders ( Much of the provisions in the above policies, laws and regulations draw on a number of national and regional and global initiatives and/or forces to improve the governance of extractive resources. For instance, at the national level public and political pressure stemming from public dissatisfaction with liberalised resource governance as well as a vibrant opposition force meant that the government had to do something to address popular concerns ( These developments have been central to the provisioning of citizen and public participation in extractives governance in the existing laws and policies. For instance, the Tanzania Extractive Industries (Transparency and Accountability) Act 2015 charges the Tanzania Extractive Industries Committee to, among others, promote effective citizen participation and awareness of the extractive industry companies and its contribution to socio-economic development ( In practice, however, it appears that citizen engagement in extractives governance processes is framed in terms of economic participation i.e. participation in extractive value chains through employment, service provision to the sector, ownership of extractive company shares through a local capital market, and so forth ( There have further been measures, especially under President Magufuli's administration, to formalise the artisanal and small scale mining in order to promote broader participation of Tanzanians in the ASM sector and capture more revenues from the sector. Such measures as establishing mineral marketing centres throughout the country, mineral centres of excellence, building a wall around the Tanzanite mining area in Mirerani, and designating special areas for ASM are some of the measures taken during the past five years. In his parliamentary dissolution speech, President Magufuli describes these measures as transformational: Although well intentioned, these measures have been shown to be more beneficial to the state in terms of their orientation to extracting revenues from ASM than they do to address key ASM challenges and the sector's integration into the broader industrialisation agenda ( Further, while the extractive legislative framework provides for citizen engagement in resource extraction and governance processes, nothing has been done to revisit how resource ownership is defined. All policy and legal frameworks for the sector define extractive resources as national recourse belonging to all people of Tanzania and whose management should be done in such a way that benefits accrue to all ( Because of this, extractive resource governance has become controversial and confrontational especially when it comes to the interaction between large scale extractive projects whose decisions are centrally determined and the local communities where the projects have to be conducted. The several conflicts between large miners and artisanal and small scale miners, communities and large miners, as well as communities and government across the countries can understandably be linked to limited public participation and limited central-local government linkages in decision-making processes ( To determine how the Tanzania government fosters and/or constrains citizen engagement, the paper adopts a broad definition of ICT to include both conventional and new information and communication technologies. The conventional ICTs that the paper looks at include the print media, television, and radio. New information and communication technologies that this paper focused on include government agencies’ websites, social media platforms (Facebook and twitter) which the government use to communicate and/or engage with the public. By doing so, the paper builds on various studies which have examined how, for instance, social media use promotes citizen and public engagement in governance processes ( By examining how government uses new and conventional media to engage with citizens, the paper does not underestimate the elitist character of ICT use in Tanzania as elsewhere in the world. Indeed, using ICT to promote citizen engagement in extractives governance runs the risk of amplifying the voices of elites who have access to the internet and other ICT tools at the neglect of those who do not have access to such platforms. However, it should be noted that existing research has shown that the government has not been open to citizen engagement in extractives governance even when conventional face to face engagement strategies are used; that it has rather taken measures to suppress grassroots initiatives for engagement ( In order to determine how the Tanzania government uses ICT to promote and/or constrain citizen engagement, the paper draws on To determine what might lie behind the likes, comments and shares of government posts on social media, the paper adopted a qualitative content analysis method. Content analysis is a qualitative approach that provides tools to systematically analyse textual material ( In undertaking content analysis, the paper made use of an interpretivist approach. Interpretivist approach is a content analysis tool which interprets textual data by analysing language spoken by actors in the situation or in written form; acts and interactions including nonverbal behaviour); and physical objects used in these acts or in written language ( The conventional ICT media that the government has frequently used to engage with citizens on extractive resource governance issues include radio and television broadcasts, newspapers, magazines, and so forth. The government through its Tanzania Petroleum Development Corporation (TPDC), State Mining Corporation (STAMICO), the Mining Commission, the ministries of energy and minerals as well as other extractive agencies has constantly made use of newspapers, radio and televisions to inform the general public about the developments in the extractives sector. The way the government has used mainstream ICT media in the management of extractive resources has mainly been around two main issues: informing the public and spreading propaganda against alternative views in defence of government position. We examine these two issues in detail here to provide an analysis of how these have provided the government with opportunity to define and shape citizen engagement in its own terms. To begin with information provision, the government has made extensive use of mainstream media outlets to keep the general public informed about the developments in the extractive industries. There are several examples to show that the government makes extensive use of mainstream media for information dissemination. In 2013, for instance, the government started broadcasting a television programme called  In connection to information provision, it should be noted that the main aim of disseminating information was not to promote meaningful state-citizen engagement but to threaten and suppress dissident voices as well as spread propaganda against critical citizen voices. Thus, during and after the popular protests that took place in Mtwara from late 2012 to mid-2013, the government effectively used the mainstream media to castigate protestors and spread negative propaganda against them. For instance, in one of the In both two issues, that is, information provision and negative propaganda against critical voices, it is apparently clear that the government's intention in using ICTs has not been to promote robust government-citizen engagement but to defray potential threats to its extractive governance decisions. This is why most of information disseminated by the government through newspapers, radios and televisions has sought to promote and defend its policies and decisions and castigate all those pushing for alternative views. As we shall see subsequently, this is the reason for why the state had to devise measures to have a strong grip over the media. Further, that the government takes measures against radio stations and televisions that give airtime to critical voices is another indication that it is not open to using mainstream ICT media to promote active and meaningful citizen engagement in extractives governance processes. A good example of this comes, again, from Mtwara where the government used the police force to raid local radio stations and arrest radio programme hosts that had provided airtime for the people of Mtwara to openly discuss and challenge government decisions to pipe gas to Dar es Salaam ( More importantly, and in an attempt to ensure that there is control over the kind of information that is disseminated out there, the government decided to establish its own media outlets. Some notable examples of this include the establishment of the Ministry of Energy and Minerals News Bulletin (MEM Bulletin) in January 2014 ( Lastly, the government has also sought to control citizen engagement through mainstream media by organising capacity building seminars and workshops for media editors and journalists. For instance, the Tanzania Petroleum Development Corporation (TPDC), a national oil company, organised several seminars and workshops with journalists across the country after realising that they ‘were reporting incorrect information as they did not have an understanding of the sector’ ( Apart from taking advantage of mainstream ICT media, the government has increasingly adopted and made use of new electronic media to keep the citizens informed and/or spread propaganda against all those critical to its policies. Every government department now has a functional website, and most government agencies and departments have official accounts on various social media platforms (mostly on Facebook and Twitter). Some government agencies also have blogs. There have also been an increased uptake and use of YouTube by the government, especially the State House, to communicate with the general public. In the extractive industries sector, both the ministries of energy and minerals have functional websites ( On the surface, it appears the government has done a great job using ICT to keep the citizenry informed and promote government-citizen engagement in extractive resources governance and decision-making processes. Studies have shown that there cannot be citizen engagement, transparency and accountability in extractive resources governance without information provision ( Further, there is more information shared by the ministries and their agencies through social media platforms especially on Twitter and Facebook. All these would arguably point to a government that uses modern ICT tools to move closer to the people and engage with them in governance processes. However, it is one thing using new ICT tools to share information with citizens and another to foster active and empowering citizen engagement in governance processes. As some studies have shown, modern ICT tools such as social media platforms can indeed foster citizen engagement but this can potentially be subverted by the powerful and well-connected elites; thus, calling for the need to carefully look at who participates in and influences the network, who is excluded from it, and how to engage the affected people ( There is no doubt that modern information and communication technologies present greater opportunities for closer government-citizen engagement in governance and decision-making processes across the world ( On the positive side, it should be noted that meaningful citizen engagement in governance processes cannot happen without the fulfilment of the first basic step in Arnstein's ladder of citizen participation: information provision ( That said, it should be noted that information provision does not, in itself, constitute citizen engagement. Promoting active citizen engagement requires more than just the provision of information. It requires, for instance, putting in place and implementing an enabling policy framework that promotes freedom of speech and of press to make it possible for citizens to use the available information to demand for accountability. Arguably, studies have shown that Tanzania's subscription to transparency initiatives which include information provision has not translated into more accountable and improved extractive resources governance ( Most notably, the government has increased its digital presence while at the same time taking legislative measures to constrain the civic space which could have played a greater role in making use of information for greater citizen engagement. Measures to constrain the civic space have coincided with similar measures to make the extractive sector more transparent and accountable. For instance, towards the end of President Jakaya Kikwete's administration, a number of legal and policy reform measures in the extractive industries were taken. These included, for instance, the formulation of the national natural gas policy in 2013, the national energy policy in 2015 and the enactment of the petroleum, the oil and gas revenue management, and the Tanzania extractive industries (transparency and accountability) laws in 2015. Among others, these laws and policies sought to make extractive resources governance transparent, accountable, participatory and sustainable with a view of properly managing extractive revenues for inclusive socio-economic development. The background to all these was the greater political activism and public pressure on the government that can be traced back to mid-2000s ( As the threat to the ruling The extractive sector does not operate outside the broader political context. Taking an example of political rallies, these were very instrumental during the 2005-2010 period with the oppositional parties such as Although these regulations are not specific to the extractive sector, they nevertheless provide the broader context within which ICT platforms can be used to bolster citizen engagement. The open-ended nature of the regulations cited above suggest that the interpretation on what constitutes harm and threat to national security, peace and public order is left to law enforcing organs, thus leaving a loophole for state organs to use the same against citizens who may want to hold the government accountable with regards to its governance of extractive resources. Further, there has been increased securitisation and militarisation of the extractive sector since 2016. This has taken place in several ways including the building of a wall around the Mirerani Tanzanite mine and fitting security cameras around the wall; using military personnel to guard the wall; and appointing top military officers to head key extractive sector agencies such as STAMICO. All this coming in the wake of populist resource nationalism suggests that critical views about the sector may not be tolerated. By branding his policies on extractive resource governance as an economic war and dubbing all critical voices as unpatriotic and puppets of the imperialists ( As noted in section two above, active and meaningful citizen engagement thrives on continuous, two-way traffic communication and feedback between the government and citizens ( Moreover, it is not only the question of whether the government responds to issues raised by the citizens on its social media accounts, it is also about its readiness to continuously use modern ICT tools to provide information. While most agencies are doing their best to maintain their presence on the internet, some are lagging behind in terms of how they keep the public informed about their activities. For instance, STAMICO has inactive social media accounts. Its official Facebook page, That the government does not use ICT to promote citizen engagement in extractive resources governance can be explained in several ways. First, it is apparent that government intention in using the ICT is not to engage with, but to provide information to the citizens and the general public. This is understandably the reason why its official social media profiles are described in terms of information provision. For instance, the ministry of energy's official twitter page description reads as ‘Official Page-Ministry of Energy in Tanzania. This page will be useful in providing Second, the politics of Tanzania's resource extraction makes it harder for any meaningful citizen engagement to emerge from government use of ICT. The definition of extractive resources as national resources means that decisions about their governance and management can only be made by central government agencies without having to engage with the individual citizens online or offline ( This paper has examined Tanzania government's use of ICT to determine whether this promotes and/or hinders active citizen engagement in extractive resources governance. Drawing on Tanzania's extractive sector, the paper has shown that the Tanzania government has taken advantage of modern ICT to increasingly make its activities open. Both the two ministries of energy and minerals as well as all their agencies have active websites and social media accounts. They also continue to extensively use mainstream ICT media such as the television, radio, newspapers, print news bulletins and so forth. Further, the paper has shown that there is increasingly more information from the government that is shared online for people to access using ICT. These are commendable efforts especially given the fact that information provision is a basic ingredient of citizen engagement. Understandably, citizen engagement cannot happen without citizen's access to information. It should, however, be stated here that citizen engagement is more than just making information available online. Whereas the Tanzania government has commendably made use of ICT platforms to make extractive information available and accessible, it has equally taken measures to constrain how that information translates into higher level critical citizen engagement. On top of constraining laws and regulations, the broader political context within which extractive governance takes place is so restrictive that the only engagement that can happen is that which is pro-government. The declining civic space, the incarceration of critical voices and the suppression of freedom of speech and press means that no matter how the government proactively uses ICT, this can hardly catalyse meaningful citizen engagement. Further, the political economy of extractive resource development especially in relation to ownership and governance arrangements has effectively limited the usefulness of ICT in catalysing citizen engagement. More important, the paper has shown that even though the government makes information available on ICT platforms, it does not take further measures to encourage a two-way dialogue and engagement with citizens. Even when citizens engage with the information and seek government clarification, this is not usually met with a relevant response from the government. Findings from this paper add to existing body of knowledge which show that governments are increasingly moving to regulate ICT use in ways that constrain freedom of speech and press. The paper also provides more empirical evidence on government-citizen engagement by showing that governments may be open to information disclosure for the sake of disclosure but not for promoting higher level critical citizen engagement. Further, the use of ICT for citizen engagement cannot be taken to mean a change in how governments interact and engage with citizens in governance processes if their offline engagement is not pro-citizen engagement. The Tanzanian case shows that, just like it has aggressively suppressed offline citizen engagement initiatives, government's use of ICT to share information does not represent an opportunity for government to correct itself.