This article aims to give an overview of the analytical approaches to political economy of Central Asia. It argues that twenty years after transition paradigm we still find lingering separation between politics and economics that compartmentalizes studies of economic development, nation- and state-building into separate projects.
                        1
                     
                     
                        1
                        I am grateful to Peter Rutland, Philip Cerny and Frank Fischer for thought-provoking conversations that inspired me to write this article.
                      The analytical separation between economics and politics creates two crucial problems for scholars of development in Central Asia: the suspense of theorization of economy and lack of attention to the new practices of governing.
                  Two theories tried to solve the issue of separation. First is the theory of the “resource curse”, which argues for the inability of a raw material supplier to develop a healthy democratic system (Pomfret, 2006; Auty, 2006a, 2006b, 2006c). The second view, “varieties of capitalism” traces institutional and historical peculiarities as preconditions for a stable market-oriented democratic system (Lane, 2006; Luong, 2000). However, the first view is rather deterministic in relying on a single variable to prove the case; whereas, the second view is highly arbitrary by picking specific historical and cultural contexts that suit the case.
                  I argue that post-structuralist approaches and specifically, the framework of “governmentality” – a term coined by Michel Foucault, allows for more fruitful heuristic exercise. Governmentality as an analytical approach looks at the way the state positions itself in its society and determines the type of governing rationale it adopts. Particularly, it incorporates both discursive and structural-technological conditions of each state into analysis by augmenting the data before constructing the theory to argue what rationale drives government activities in the state. Governmentality speaks to both “resource curse” and the “varieties of capitalism” by enriching and complicating them while allowing identification of how rationales of governing evolve and change over time.The question of the relationship between economics and politics puzzled numerous scholars around the world. Modernization literature of the 1950s and 1960s shared, what Seymour Martin Lipset called ‘optimistic equation’, i.e., that economic development can lead to democratization ( This article argues that it is impossible to trace political implications of the regimes in Central Asia without incorporating economic aspects. It also claims that economic structures facilitate several political outcomes. First, reliance on mineral, as in the case of Kazakhstan, or cotton production, as in Uzbekistan forces states to deal with various The ‘Resource Curse’ (RC) literature explains political outcomes of the merger between businesses and bureaucracies, whereas ‘Varieties of Capitalism’ (VoC) literature illustrates mechanisms behind the second outcome of how economic incentives operate within political realm. Informed largely by the Schumpeterian perspective on the importance of fiscal sociology, two theories accept the assumption that state funded by the collection of taxes is fundamentally different in the ways governing is organized ( Foucault’s perspective allows one to adopt a coherent framework of analysis that would add to interest-based and history-based explanations enriching them with the understanding of economic regulation and power politics. After evaluating the impact of economic structure on the political process, this paper will focus on the rationale of governance – a certain body of knowledge that informs government’s attitude towards its subjects and resolution of social problems. At the same time the rationale of governance, or governmentality, points to how the state perceives itself in society, the role it chooses to play. Fundamentally, it approaches the study of political economy by looking at how the state perceives the utility of governing regulation ( Kazakhstan, on the other hand, sees regulation as a technocrat. In other words, government’s role is not to interfere into society, but instead to provide the right incentives to social actors so that the system remains stable. Such internal logic makes a profound difference with Uzbekistan. Instead of arguing from the moral perspective, Kazakhstani government perceives governing as science, a technique. Government claims to know how to run the system as a good manager. Such Some political theorists might object to the use of Foucault outside of his method, the archaeology of knowledge and outside of liberal democracies ( This article will, first, outline interest-based and historical-based perspectives in order to depict their ‘story of Central Asia’ and then point to major drawbacks in those stories. After that, I will propose a heuristic approach of governmentality. Although, it may not shed a new light on what we already know, nonetheless, it will help us to complicate current theories of development and democratization by seeing the scope of interdependence between economic and political realms. Political economy of Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan sets a challenge to the existing theories. On one hand, two Central Asian states claim to be developing market economies and democratic societies, on the other, they have been ruled by the same former Communist apparatchiks for the past 20 years with the strong personalist grip on power and state intervention in economic realm. In addition, they are and were predominantly resource-based economies. Two theories attempted to provide explanations for these regimes Varieties of Capitalism (VoC) literature and Resource Curse. VoC argued that two states have adopted different paths of transition in the beginning of the 1990s and they exist within the bounds of these decisions still ripping the benefits and limitations. Whereas Resource Curse claims that the differences are attributed to economic and political interests over mineral and agricultural rents. Although each paradigm has overlapping dimensions and academic works that utilize both, we can nonetheless discern the basic assumptions and propositions of each. In other words, this section will try to re-create an ‘ideal type’ of each paradigm in order to propose alternative scholarly practice. ‘Resource curse’ (RC) is a term that points to the danger of economic growth that is reversely correlated with mineral wealth in raw material exporting countries ( The assumptions that inform resource curse come from the formal economic model called Heckscher-Ohlin theorem. It argues that an economy will tend to be relatively effective at producing goods that are intensive in factors with which the country is relatively well endowed ( Dutch Disease creates the following political implications: first, by redistributing rents along the patronage or bureaucratic system both regimes prevent formation of opposition groups making people dependent on state regulation. Resource curse theorists argue that Uzbekistan’s agricultural rents are fundamentally different from the mineral rents of Kazakhstan. Uzbekistan’s cotton, its primary export commodity Oil and mineral commodity exports created high In addition, democracy in Kazakhstan is difficult to achieve because the state establishes patronage system of rent extraction that links government and businesses into a single political system, which is likely to nurture predatory government that distorts economy and prevents economic growth ( Although sources of rents are fundamentally different in Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan total rent as percentage of GDP in 2000 was high for both states: Kazakhstan 27.2% from oil and 1.5% from gas and Uzbekistan 17.8% from gas and 15.6% from oil ( VoC treats political economy as production regimes where firms’ behavior is determined by government regulation and overall institutional setting ( In this perspective political regime does not matter per se. The assumption is that authoritarian states can be productive if they act as developmental states (virtuous circle), but can become impediments if their interference into economy makes economic activities unprofitable whether due to high taxes and corrupt bureaucracies or due to the absence of law, order, contract enforcement and provision of public goods (vicious circle). The crucial question for the regime is its ability to limit and re-organize itself into an economic actor. VoC scholars believe that the goal of building capitalism could never be achieved based on the models and step-by-step approach. Instead, they argued that besides regular economic factors of production and endowments, local institutions play important role in the pace and quality of economic transition. VoC scholars define firms relationally, as ‘actors seeking to develop and exploit capacities for producing, developing and distributing goods and services profitably’ (    These arrangements reflect institutions - a set of rules, formal or informal, that actors generally follow ( Two Central Asian states make the case for the analysis of regulation especially interesting. Industrial relations in both states are characterized by the existence of large successful enterprises, which developed not because of the market mechanisms, but because of the close relations to State in a form of a patronage network. However, despite similar political set up, firms’ relations with the state differ in Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan because of the different transition patterns both governments adopted at the beginning of the 1990s. Uzbekistan adhered to the ‘gradual path’ of reforms retaining state control over majority of industries, whereas Kazakhstan embraced ‘shock therapy’ model of rapid transition to market economy. Kazakhstan’s ‘shock therapy’ model based on privatization, decentralization and liberalization allowed firms to establish clusters of industries via market incentives. Some firms invited foreign investors, others tapped into financial markets in order to develop domestically-oriented industries and services. Cash source determined two types of institutional arrangements in Kazakhstan’s capitalist system. First, firms that acquired Foreign Direct Investments were interested in maintaining their good standing with the government and therefore provided support through social projects, sale of shares to the government, and payment of taxes. In return, state invited foreign direct investments to develop large domestic enterprises by giving them preferential treatments, tax cuts and lax labor protection laws ( On the other hand, SMEs are mostly private. Only 1% of them are state-owned ( Kazakhstan’s economic system has no incentives for democratization. Large corporations with the presence of FDI are interested in the stability and preservations of their contracts and maintenance of status-quo. Nazarbaev’s regime serves the aspirations for stability and more or less respects of contracts. SMEs also support the regime because they have freedom to manoeuvre as long as they remain local and/or regional. Inability to develop large projects outside of government control created opposition movements staffed with successful businessmen appealing to the need for democracy with little public support. Under such conditions, VoC specialists see little chance for democracy in Kazakhstan ( Uzbekistan, a country where regime implemented ‘gradual’ state-led transition retaining centralized control over economy with welfare support of the majority of population. Currently, Uzbekistan spends 54% of the annual budget on social sphere (News Agency, January 2009). Firms, the major actors in VoC paradigm, have no incentives to develop market mechanisms and instead await regulation from the state. With the majority of population engaged in agriculture (close to 35%) ( In Uzbekistan financing is provided by the state ( Under these conditions, democracy becomes difficult to sustain since people are interested in stability of the state being largely dependent on its salaries and subsidies. Single leader who provides for the people represents a convenient choice for the overall population. Opposition movement in Uzbekistan is largely exiled or exists as a sporadic force against severely corrupt government officials ( VoC theory states that authoritarian regimes prevent establishment of free markets but set reasonably well with low level of labor protection and freedom for smaller businesses ( Both theories make illuminating conclusions about the nature of political and economic systems in Central Asia. They claim that: Political economy of Central Asia cannot be analyzed by pure economic modeling and a priori prescriptions because politics and economics are woven together not only in an ordinary interdependent fashion seen in most developed states, but represented by a highly structured personalist political regime that pursues economic liberalization in two different ways. Economic structure matters and determines political conditions in both states making these differences crucial for the explanatory paradigm. However, each paradigm has own limitations. RC story theorizes economy through an interest-based perspective but is inattentive to the new practices of governing. RC also does not explain how interests change how actors cooperate even under conflicting and incompatible interests. Whereas VoC story very much centers on the outcomes of the practices and regulation of each state, but does not theorize the economy behind these practices. In addition, both theories fail to examine the gap between regulation and its implementation in practice when the policies are aborted or altered. Governmentality promises to alleviate these difficulties without negating the value of both theories. At the beginning of the article I defined governmentality as an ethos aimed to rationalize reality in order to reach the Telos, and as an internal logic that guides government's regulation. To compare the type of problems important and worth government intervention that go beyond economic and political divide. To compare the methods and techniques that authorities use in order to solve these problems. Two discursive functions show the problems that the state considers important and also inform the techniques it uses to solve them: coordinative discourse calls state bodies and offices to share and pledge allegiance to the telos during practical implementation of policy. On the other hand, it has to be communicated to the public framed and justified in a continuous fashion. Division of the governmentality into coordinative and communicative functions allow for policy change in the particulars with Meta discourse or telos remaining the same. As a result, an all-intervening paternalist state will rely on the instruments of oppression, such as law and police force. Managerial state will use a set of positive and negative incentives to govern its population and will employ cost-benefit analysis to solve problems. Managerial rationale does not require eradication of problems per se, but aims only to avoid growth of problems that could challenge existing economic system. Paternalistic rationale is omnipresent and perceives all problems worth looking into regardless of their scope and fashion. As a result, democracy is difficult not only because of rents and policies of economic development, but also because of the technologies of power used in two states. Paternalistic rationale of Uzbekistan dresses political decisions in highly moral clothes. Kazakhstan's communicative discourse promotes notion of the political as an economic enterprise where government acts a manager in the existing system of exchange. However, the managerial position also alters the nature of the political away from contestation and struggle, because the government claims to possess technical expertise and, therefore, treats genuinely political issues as technical and specific (Rustemova, in print). Coordinative discourse forces state bodies to support individual freedom of self-enrichment within the structures and conditions set up by the state. Repression takes a form of penalties, fines, criminal proceedings against opposition members that challenge technocratic bureaucracy in Kazakhstan, because they portray themselves as more knowledgeable and savvy than the people in power. Authoritarianism is further entrenched through showing the success of governing rationales: how the problems posed were successfully solved by the techniques chosen. Kazakhstan's technocratic, self-limiting rationale calls for the goal-oriented programs with clear a priori set benchmarks. Its specific programs are written from the perspective of the cost-benefit analysis of a specific problem and manipulation of the positive and negative incentives. Therefore, progress is evaluated through the growth of abstract economic indicators like GDP, competitiveness rankings and trade turnover. Failure in managerial rationale is blamed on the lack of individual responsibility. In the paternalistic rationale progress is evaluated through the careful outline of the increasing individual well-being. Uzbekistan's paternalistic rationale perceives its role as an ultimate moral authority. Its primary tactics of governing towards progress are evaluated through the morally fair political campaigns with no clear benchmarks and only a posteriori report of the results. Instead of social problems, they pick social communities and tend to address all of their issues in a single annual political campaign. Failure is attributed to the specific government officials who are deemed immoral individuals undermining overall social progress. We notice two tactical differences of how progress and success of each rationale is portrayed and manifested through the prism of the political economy. Although governmentality discourse requires a separate research, it allows for multiple reforms with contradictory goals to co-exist under the auspices of managerial or paternalistic styles of governing. It fosters theorization of the economy as a constant shift and change of regulation followed by the supporting discursive practices. It does not mean that two styles of governmentality are mutually exclusive; on the contrary, they co-exist in two states. However, the differences are especially pronounced in economic development and political realms. Pure economic theories are incapable of analyzing economic growth and capitalist development together with political implications. Two theories provided an interesting perspective on how economic structures precluded democratizing incentives for the political regimes in Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan. I argued that Foucault's notion of ‘governmentality’ provides a coherent explanation of the entrenched authoritarianism in two Central Asian regimes. Echoing findings of the RC and VoC paradigms, economic structure created impediments for democracy in Central Asia. Kazakhstan that adopted ‘shock therapy’ path towards liberal market economy, perceives itself as a manager of the population. Its economic structure is based on resource extraction of rents that are redistributed through patronage networks. Authoritarian durability of the regime stems from the support of the large financial-industrial groups and ability to accrue wealth by the private actors unaffiliated with the state. In Uzbekistan, the situation is different. ‘Gradual’ way of reforms put Uzbek state into dominant paternalistic position. High concentration of enterprises in government's hands precludes development of SMEs and retains large portions of labor force dependent on state support. As a result, the regime in Uzbekistan functions as a redistribution mechanism providing salaries to the majority of population. In addition, persistence of rural population engaged in cotton production decreases uncertainty over revenues when the state provides subsidies and support regardless of international commodity prices and/or labor productivity. Under such conditions, democratization, i.e change of leadership, threatens the benefits of people within government hierarchies and those dependent on it. However, these views seemed incomplete without discursive practices that followed economic regulation. M. Foucault's idea of governmentality, the ethos with which government approaches regulation informs not only the way economic reforms communicated to the population, but also the way they are coordinated through the bureaucracy, which requires additional research. It also explains the nature of the political realm that government wants to achieve where democracy is restricted not only by the economic structure, but also by the discursive strategies that point to the economic success of the authoritarian regimes in exchange for authoritarian durability. This article claimed that the governmentality framework would not have been valid without economic background and examination of politics because in countries where economic development is the sole legitimating principle for both regimes, economy becomes more important but also highly politicized. The path to the economic liberalization is crucial not only for the authoritarian durability of the ruler, but also to the overall economic and political nature in both states.