Bioleaching of marmatite flotation concentrate by Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans and a moderately thermoacidophilic iron-oxidizing bacterial strain (MLY) was carried out in batch experiments. The effects of external addition of Fe2+ and the inoculum of the bacteria were studied. For A. ferrooxidans, the supplementary addition of Fe2+ as a source of Fe3+ to be generated by the bacteria was necessary in the starting of the bioleaching of marmatite. While for MLY, it was not necessary because the higher temperature improved the dissolution of marmatite in sulphuric acid, and thus acidic leaching happened before ferric ion leaching. Leaching rate was enhanced with the increased inoculum, however, this influence decreased at a higher level of inoculum. The evolution of the redox potential and the total concentration of iron in the bioleaching indicated that Eh was more important than the concentration of Fe3+ during the dissolution of the marmatite for both strains. Different affinities for the Fe2+ and S0 substrates led to different trends of leaching rate for the two bacteria.The interaction between bacteria and sulfide minerals is the key issue in the fundamental study of bioleaching. Since the discovery of bacterium in acidic mine drainage, diversified opinions about the mechanism in bioleaching of sulfides have been put forward. The term ‘direct bioleaching’ was introduced by Silverman and Ehrlich in 1964 to describe a hypothesized enzymatic reaction taking place between attached cells and the underlying mineral surface. The ‘indirect’ mechanism of sulfide oxidation involves non-specific oxidation of surface by Fe Although the bioleaching of zinc concentrates has been studied extensively ( As an environmentally benign technology with wide application, bioleaching is featured with low cost for recovering metals from low-grade ores. The most studied bacterium in bioleaching of sulfide ores is The marmatite flotation concentrate was obtained from a lead–zinc mine in Yunnan province of China. Chemical analysis of the sample revealed the composition of 40.61% Zn; 15.81% Fe; 2.63% Pb; 0.37% Cu; 0.14% Mg and 31.66% S. X-ray diffraction analysis showed the concentrate was mainly composed of marmatite and a small quantity of pyrite. The particle size was − The strains of To ensure that the iron in the original medium did not affect the results, cells were harvested in the stationary phase by filtration onto a Millipore filter (pore size 0.22 μm) and re-suspended in iron-free Leathen medium before leaching experiments started. The initial density of cells in the solution was approximately 1 Leaching experiments were carried out in 250 mL Erlenmeyer flasks containing 100 mL solution with 5% (w/v) pulp density on an orbital shaker at 160 min In the first part of the experiments, the effects of inoculum of the bacteria were studied. Sterile control was also run to determine the contribution from chemical leaching of zinc. In the second part of the experiments, different concentrations of Fe The concentration of dissolved zinc in leachate was determined by inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP). The concentrations of Fe Experimental results (data not shown) showed that it was difficult for  Elemental sulphur is the main intermediate of ferric ion attack. Some studies have demonstrated that if elemental sulphur was produced in bioleaching, for energetic reasons, the bacteria would prefer sulphur over ferrous ions ( According to chemometric analysis, complete oxidation of marmatite produces sulphuric acid and oxidation from Fe   When 5% MLY inoculum was added into the solution, the leached zinc was nearly the same as that leached in the sterile control experiment. But when 10% MLY inoculum was added, the leached zinc increased markedly. MLY cannot oxidize Fe  The SEM micrograph ( For The authors acknowledge the National Natural Science Foundation of China (50574081, 50404009), 973 Program (2004CB619203) and the National High Technology Research and Development Program of China (2007AA060904).