Controlling silica level in Bayer liquor is critical in order to prevent scaling or alumina quality issues. The conventional method of removing silicates from aluminate solutions requires the introduction of calcium oxide or calcium hydroxide. In this work, Friedel's salt (FS: 3CaO·A12O3·CaCl2·10H2O) is proved for the first time to remove up to 95% silica from sodium aluminate solution. FS is a mineral anion exchanger belonging to the layered double hydroxides (LDHs) which was prepared by adding calcium chloride to sodium aluminate over the temperature range of 50–90°C. It was characterized by XRD, SEM, Particle Size Analyzer and TG-DSC. FS prepared at 50°C has a relatively high desilication capacity, better than calcium oxide.
                  Experimental parameters affecting the desilication process, such as temperature, sodium aluminate liquor composition, initial silica concentration (4–10g/L) and FS dosage were investigated in detail and a comparison of desilication between FS and CaO was carried out. The desilication products (DSP) were mainly calcium aluminium silicates, identified by XRD to be Chabazite and Wadalite and the final chloride concentration in the sodium aluminate solution after anion exchange with FS was ∼0.015g/L. The rate of desilication by FS was first order with a rate constant 2.582×106
                     min−1. The apparent activation energy was estimated to be 57.7kJ mol−1 over the temperature range of 80–110°C.Bauxite is the major source of aluminium containing ore used in the production of alumina. Bauxite contains hydrated forms of alumina that occurs in several different structural forms, depending upon the number of molecules of water of hydration and the crystalline form. Most commercially useful deposits of bauxite include gibbsite, boehmite and diaspore ( Dissolution and re-precipitation of silica as sodalite-type desilication products (DSP), thereby consuming caustic soda; Re-precipitation of complex sodalite-type desilication products on plant surfaces, thereby causing scale build-up, which is quite severe for the low-grade diaspore bauxite ore during digestion ( Therefore, it is desirable to control desilication during digestion, especially when using diaspore bauxite containing high silica, which constitutes more than 70% of China's proved bauxite reserves. There are two methods of removing silicates from solutions. The first method consists of the precipitation of sodium aluminosilicate by increasing the temperature of the solution. This produces a decrease of silicate concentration in the solution, but it is still too high for many systems to be able to yield aluminium hydroxide of an appropriately high quality. Therefore it seems reasonable to convert silica into slightly soluble compounds, for example, calcium aluminosilicates. This can be achieved by introducing chemicals, such as calcium oxide or calcium hydroxide into the process. It was also reported that 4CaO·A1 The mechanism and kinetics of desilication have been widely described in the literature. The desilication kinetics with added Ca(OH) Friedel's salt (FS: 3CaO·A1 All chemical reagents used in the experiments were of analytical grade from the Chemical Co. of Beijing and were used without further purification. The water used in all experimental work was double distilled water (conductivity < The experimental apparatus used was a 1 Preparation experiments were conducted by pre-heating 0.5 The morphology and particle size of the as-synthesized samples were examined by a scanning electron microscopy (SEM, JEOL-JSM-6700F). Size distributions of particles were examined by a laser diffraction Particle Size Analyzer (LS-13-320). Thermal analysis data of the synthesized samples were examined using synthetical thermal analyzer (NetzSch STA 499). The aluminate solution was prepared by dissolving Al(OH) Desilication experiments were also conducted in the same tank reactor. Dry samples were added into a certain amount of silicate-containing sodium aluminate solution which was heated to a given temperature. Samples of 5 FS prepared at 50 Thermal analysis data is shown in As shown in  It was found that NaOH concentration had an important effect on the concentration of silica in liquor. As shown in Likewise, the extent and rate of desilication decreased with increasing Al The effect of the initial concentration of SiO  The structure of the DSP formed from FS was examined by XRD and found to contain mainly Chabazite (CaO·Al Initially, the chloride concentration increased gradually over 30 A comparison between FS and CaO indicated that FS has better desilication capacity and the reasons could be summarized as follows: With the addition of CaO, CaO on the surface reacted with Al(OH) For isothermal batch desilication in sodium aluminate solution, the kinetics may be quantified by a power law relationship of the form ( If the reaction order According to the data in The overall rate equation for the desilication reaction by FS may be written as: FS was successfully prepared from sodium aluminate solution using calcium chloride at 50 The desilication kinetics was found to be first order and the apparent activation energy was estimated to be 57.7 The support of the