Crystalline vaterite CaCO3 self-standing films composed of three-dimensional microstructures were synthesized by a simple gas diffuse method with the assistance of poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA). The microstructures with different morphology (sphere-like, rose-like, and pumpkin-like) were self-assembled by three-dimensional oriented attachment of faceted micro-platelets, and the films were all stable in air for more than one year. The concentrations of Ca2+ ions and PVA all played important roles in the formation of vaterite crystal phase. In addition, the introduction of salt (NaCl, NaNO3) would reduce the size of the micro-platelets significantly. A possible mechanism for the formation of the self-standing films is put forward.Calcium carbonate is one of the most extensively studied biominerals and is found to exist widely in living organisms such as sea shell, coral, and sea urchin spine. Natural mineralized tissues, including bones, teeth, or mollusk shells, are organic/inorganic composites tailored by specialized cells under mild conditions of pressure and temperature, and grown to fulfill a precise structural or biological function Calcium carbonate has three anhydrous crystalline phases: calcite, aragonite, and vaterite. Among these phases, vaterite is the least stable phase at atmospheric pressure and ambient temperature, and easily transforms into calcite in a chemistry laboratory. Although the amount of vaterite is far less than that of calcite and aragonite in organisms, it also plays a key role in biological life and health All chemicals were of analytical grade and used as received without further purification. The crystallization method involved the slow infusion of CO Powder X-ray diffraction patterns were performed using Rigaku X-ray diffractometer (XRD) with Cu-Kα radiation ( The influence of the Ca When the concentration of Ca  On further increasing the Ca A further increase of Ca The influence of Ca Control experiment without PVA was carried out with the Ca Further experiments, in which the amounts of PVA were varied and Ca Based on above discussion, several conclusions can be drawn as follows. Firstly, the introduction of PVA was indispensable for the formation of pure, close packed vaterite film, and the concentration of PVA must be high enough for the pure veterite. Secondly, the concentration of PVA made slightly effect on the assemble fashion of the micro-platelets. At lower PVA concentration, the micro-platelets tended to assemble into sphere-like microstructures. At higher PVA concentration, the microplates assembled into sub-microstructures with different shape at first and then into sphere-like or semisphere-like microstructures, and some of which were like pumpkins. Thirdly, the concentration of Ca Salt effect was also investigated preliminarily. The experimental process was conducted with conditions similar to those of the typical run (0.625 The Gibbs energy (Δ PVA is biocompatible and water-soluble polymer with abundant hydroxyl groups, sometimes it is considered as surfactant On the other hand, the concentration of Ca Self-standing films composed of biomimetic microstructures have been fabricated by using a simple gas-diffusion method assisted by PVA, and the microstructures self-assembled by highly oriented faceted vaterite CaCO This work was supported by 12th Five-Year Plan in science and technology of the Education Department of Jilin Province (2011-305) and