The purpose of this paper was to fabricate nanofibrous scaffolds containing ossein-hydroxyapatite complex (osteogenon) to mimic the native bone extracellular matrix. Polylactide (PLDL) and polycaprolactone (PCL) were used to prepare scaffolds using electrospinning. Unfortunately, both of these biodegradable polymers have poor cell recognition sites leading to poor cell affinity and adhesion, therefore, based on our previous experience, osteogenon-drug was used at the stage of fibers forming by electrospinning. We have compare the physicochemical parameters and mechanical properties of PLDL/osteo and PCL/osteo scaffolds as well as an osteogenon-drug influence on the microstructure of electrospun materials produced for potential application in bone tissue engineering. We have investigated the effect of the microstructure and the chemical composition of electrospun materials on adhesion, proliferation and morphology as well as on the process of differentiation of bone cells. The use of osteogenon improved mineralization, cell adhesion and the rate of cell differentiation.Composite fibrous scaffolds have been widely investigated for repair and regeneration of bone and cartilage tissues Electrospinning method has demonstrated to be the most cost-efficient process technique to mimic ECM with reliable results Osteogenon is a drug that affects bone mineralization. Contains the components required for the synthesis of bone. It has twofold effect on bone metabolism: inhibits osteoclasts and stimulates osteoblasts. Osteogenon is an ossein-hydroxyapatite complex (OHC) also containing osteocalcin and type I collagen, which has been applied in tablets for its analgesic effect and reduction of the time fracture consolidation in patients with secondary osteoporosis. Previous results suggested that OHC better stabilizes bone mass in postmenopausal women and in different conditions related to bone loss compared to calcium supplements In this work, we propose the fabrication and validation of biodegradable polymeric nanofibrous mats loaded with osteogenon for the parenteral application in bone regeneration. It is a promising low-cost alternative in terms of simplicity, price and efficiency. Electrospinning method was used to produce the samples. Two types of polymers were applied in this study: Morphologies of scaffolds were observed with scanning electron microscopy NOVA NANO SEM 200 (FEI EUROPE COMPANY) equipped with EDS. Before SEM examination, all the samples were coated with gold by RF sputtering. The fiber mean diameters were calculated by selecting 100 fibers randomly observed on SEM images. Scaffold pore size measurement was done using Image J software on several SEM images taken from each side of scaffold samples. Surface area of pores in each image was separated from the whole area of the picture and reported as an average value for each scaffold. The thickness of electrospun scaffolds was measured by the thickness gauge TILMET 73. The thickness test was performed on eight samples of each type of fibrous mats. The values of the average thickness and standard deviation were determined. To assess the mechanical properties tensile tests were performed using Zwick-Roell Z 2.5 testing machine at 10 The differential scanning calorimetry measurements (DSC) and the thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA) were performed on NETZSCH STA 449 F3, DSC 2010 TA INSTRUMENTS and SDT 2960 TA INSTRUMENTS, at a heating rate of 10 A Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectrophotometer (FTS Digilab 60 BioRad) was used to compare the chemical structure of osteogenon, PCL, PLDL and the PCL/osteo and PLDL/osteo composite scaffolds. Spectra were recorded using ATR technique, in the 400–4000 Mineralization process of PLDL/osteo and the PCL/osteo mats was performed in 1.5 Prior to cell culture studies the nanofibrous scaffolds were cut into disks (diameter 14 Normal human osteoblasts (NHOst, Lonza, USA) were cultured in OGM culture medium, supplemented with 10% FBS, ascorbic acid and 5% solution of gentamicin and amphotericin-B (OGM BulletKit, Lonza, USA) in an atmosphere of 5% CO In this work the electrospinning technique was chosen to fabricate two different kinds of fibrous scaffolds using the same electrospinning processing conditions. We attempted to fabricate polymeric scaffolds modified with commercially available drug – osteogenon. The microstructure and chemical composition of osteogenon- drug before grinding down process is shown in Tensile strength of nanofibrous mat is an important characteristic for being used as scaffold for tissue engineering, as it should possess adequate mechanical strength for growth of cellular functions. The tensile behavior of electrospun mat depends on the nature of polymer, diameter of the nanofiber and orientation of fibers in the mat Polycaprolactone is a semicrystalline polymer with a relative low molecular weight (80KDa) containing in its structure a regular, ordered segments of the molecular chains. During the heating of polycaprolactone a reduction in the degree of crystallinity only occurs due to the transition of crystalline phase into the liquid amorphous phase or melting When a scaffold is declared to be useful for bone repair applications, it usually needs to be bioactive. In this study, osteogenon drug was, therefore, incorporated into both PCL and PLDL fibrous scaffold and then subjected to the Cell adhesion to the surface is very important for many phenomena, such as immune response, healing and tissue integration with scaffold. Adherence, adhesion and spreading of cells belong to the first phase of the interactions that occur at the interface of cell/biomaterial. These processes affects the proliferation and differentiation of cells on the surface of fibrous scaffolds. The microscopic results of cells cultured on the produced materials are presented in ALP is a well-known marker of the osteogenic phenotype. ALP is a glycoprotein on the cell membrane that catalyzes the hydrolysis of phosphate esters at an alkaline pH and plays an important role in bone matrix mineralization process, it is an early indicator of immature osteoblast activity The main characteristic of functional, mature bone cells is their ability to deposit extracellular matrix that mineralizes Tissue engineering in osteoporosis may be necessary to treat fragility of bones associated with calcium deficiency. However the application of commonly used scaffolds made of polycaprolactone or polylactide seems to be insufficient. The lack of cell recognition sites, hydropholicity and osteogenic factors limit the applications of PCL or PLDL fibrous scaffolds in bone tissue engineering. In order to tackle these issues, osteogenon – commercially available drug – has been added during fiber formation by electrospinning. Our studies demonstrated that drugs can be incorporated into the fibrous PCL and PLDL scaffolds by electrospinning. The use of osteogenon improved bioactivity of the scaffold, its mineralization, cell adhesion and the rate of cell differentiation. This work was supported by the