Screens are an important production unit in crushing plants. The performance of the screen is essential to the performance of the crushing plant. In this paper a mechanistic model of a banana screen is described and a novel model for screen deck configuration is presented. The developed model can be used for optimization of a screen so that it has the best possible performance with respect to different feeding conditions, in order to obtain a desired separation. The simulation results were compared to full scale test data and the conclusions from this comparison is that the screen model needs further parameters to handle the necessary screen deck configuration. An initial static model was derived to explain how the screen deck configuration will affect the screen efficiency. The modification of the screen deck parameters resulted in a better correlation both regarding size distribution and predicted capacity.mass flow from one element mass flow upwards between layers mass flow downwards between layers mass flow through the screen deck passage parameter (–) acceleration standard acceleration due to gravity aperture diameter (m) particle diameter (m) angle of incline (deg) throw (m) frequency (Hz) bed thickness layer Screens are commonly used in both aggregate and mining industry with the purpose to separate and classify different products. The design of the screen varies depending on application and the setting of the screen may vary during its life time. It is often the case that settings of a screen need to be adjust, e.g. change aperture size or shape. Traditionally empirical studies can give some guidance how to change settings but in most cases there will be a risk of ending up with time consuming testing. In order to minimize this risk and to better reach an optimal setting mathematical model can be used. There are a wide range of screen models and it reaches from pure experimental models to fully mechanistic models. This paper continues the modelling work from The original version of the screen has shown to be quite slow to be suitable for optimization, the reason for this is that the model originally was programmed to demonstrate the performance of the model and had a very high resolution in the representation of the particle size. The discrete incremental size was originally 0.01 There is however a need to investigate what parameters in a screen that will influence the performance of the screen. The aim with this paper is to present a novel way of determining how screen media properties can be modelled. And put into context of larger existing mechanistic models. The flow of material on the screen deck is modelled by introducing small discrete zones, see Every zone The major changes in the model are that only two layers are used, this increases the calculation speed. One aim of this model is to use in simulation and optimization software’s, it is therefore crucial to minimize the calculation speed. As seen in In a comparison between a screen with only one angle of incline in this paper referred to as a reference screen (with constant angle of incline set to 15 It is a common fact that the banana screen increases the passage rate of fine fractions and the screening model makes it possible to simulate the behavior in a certain screen. The down side with an increase in passage of material is that the local wear on the screen cloth increases. In a macroscopic perspective this model provides a good understanding of the fundamental functions in a real operating screen in the sense that the model can simulate the degree of separation along the screen deck depending on how the screen is configured and the screen is fed. In this paper we have divided the experimental parts in two sections and included a modelling section following these parts. The reason for doing this is that the initial screen model used in this experiment was originally design for aggregate production where screens with fixed incline and steel screen media is used. The modelling of a banana screen with rubber or polyurethane media stretches the boundaries for the original model and therefore the initial experiment aims to show how the original model performs without changing any empirical parameters. The result from that experiment in combination from earlier research showed the need for additional modelling and the final experiment shows the impact of the updated model. Full scale validation with survey data from Anglo Gold Ashanti’s mine Sunrise Dam have been carried out. A survey was performed at Sunrise Dam at the coarse crushing section and at the mill section in March 2014. The screen in the coarse section is a Schenck SLD-3676 Double Deck Banana Screen. In The input parameters for the example simulation demonstrated in this report are shown in In the first evaluation of the screen model the simulated product had a lower top size for all simulated products. The reason for this discrepancy is that the model has a strict definition of aperture size which means that if the aperture is set to e.g. 40 With the aid of efficiency curves the performance of both screen and model can be evaluated. The aim with this comparison is partially to see how well the actual screen configuration can achieve a desired product distribution and it also gives an indication how well the model can predict this hence be useful for configure screens from a design perspective. In As stated earlier the banana screen had a deck configuration that was somewhat different from the initial validated screen model. The original screen model was validated for screens with steel decks and quadratic apertures. So the model need to be adapted and developed further to handle other types of screen decks. For the full scale tests conducted on the banana screen the screen deck configuration is shown in A better fit was achieved by increasing the theoretical aperture size of the deck by 30% compared to previous configuration, see In order to understand how the geometry of the screen deck affects the screening a performance an initial analysis of the geometry need to done since it is not likely that the assumed value of 1.3 for the correction factor will always be true. In the previous chapters it was concluded that the original model was limited to fully predict the outcome when the screen deck configuration changed dramatically. In order to improve the model in the future an additional model has been derived that more adequately can describe how the screen deck geometry will affect the screen performance. In In the work by By analyzing the geometry of the screen deck a relationship can be established that describes how the open area will depend on the given parameters in the geometry. In the general case the open area is calculated in Eq. The estimate of In order to evaluate Eq. In The contributions have been a more precise flow model for screens in general and for banana screens in particular. A good fit was established with a theoretical aperture size from rectangular slot apertures, enabling a larger top size of the material that falls through the deck. The first attempt on validating the screen model against survey data showed fairly good correlation with measured data; however the screen model has no parameter for handling the shape of the aperture hole which suggests further investigation on possible model improvements. The original representation of the aperture size has been successfully updated so that the aperture geometry for arbitrary rectangular geometries can be modelled. The result from the initial evaluation and the additional screen deck model presented in the paper raises question on what phenomenon there are that affects the mass flow through the screen, Future work will focus on setting up a DEM simulation that will use the model parameters defined in chapter 6. The advantage of DEM is that the mechanistic approach will increase the resolution of the screen model and will also in a controlled manner simulate a range of conditions that might take time to setup in a real experiment in a laboratory. The authors would like to thank