Dissolved air flotation (DAF) was investigated in batch experiments as a treatment for semi-aerobic landfill leachate. This research was performed in three phases and focused on removing colour, COD, and turbidity. The first phase focused on saturator efficiency. The second phase evaluated leachate treatment using DAF alone, while the third phase consisted of coagulation with alum (Al2(SO4)3) followed by DAF. Flow rate and pressure were the two main operating parameters in the first phase, and the highest saturator efficiency (73%) was at a flow rate of 6L/min and a pressure of 400kPa. With the same saturator operating parameters, the removal of COD (36%), colour (33%), and turbidity (32%) was fairly low in the second phase. In the third phase, a jar test indicated that pH and alum dosage were optimum at 7g/L and 9.5g/L, respectively. Operating parameters evaluated in the DAF system included coagulant dosage, injection time, and retention time. The best removal in the DAF system was obtained with a 4min injection time, a 20min retention time, and a 2.3g/L alum dose, resulting in 70%, 79%, and 42% removal for colour, COD, and turbidity, respectively.Landfilling is a preferred management strategy for municipal solid waste disposal because of lower operation and maintenance cost compared to other alternatives The principle use of dissolved air flotation (DAF) is to separate suspended particles from liquids by bringing the particles to the surface of the liquid Most of the research performed using DAF has focused on oily wastewater The present study gives an idea in order to apply this method as a large-scale application in the landfill area. To date, no study has been reported in the literature on the application of DAF for leachate treatment. The present work investigates the application of DAF in leachate treatment with and without alum coagulation. In addition, bubble volume concentration and efficiency of the unpacked saturator at different pressures and flow rates were also evaluated. A bench scale DAF unit was used for the experiments in this study ( Leachate samples for the experiment were taken from the Pulau Burung municipal solid waste landfill site (PBLS) in Penang, Malaysia, 10 The characteristics of leachate were analyzed before and after DAF process. The COD was determined based on the Method 5220 D (closed reflux, colourimetric method). Colours were reported as true colour (filtered using 0.45 The experimental studies consisted of three phases and the operating parameters for each phase are shown in During the second phase, leachate treatment using DAF alone was evaluated as follows: (i) leachate was introduced into the flotation cell, (ii) tap water was supersaturated with air from the compressor at the desired pressure in the saturator, and (iii) the supersaturated water/air from saturator was injected through a nozzle into the flotation cell. Retention time (RT) was recorded before each sample was collected from the sampling points. For the third phase of the study, alum dosages at corresponding pH values were determined using a jar test (Jar Tester Model VELT Scientifica, JLT6). The third phase was performed as follows: (i) the pH of the raw leachate was adjusted to the value determined in the jar test, (ii) 4 The removals of the studied parameters were calculated based on the following formula: The sludge volumes that were produced were measured using the following expression This formula was used in order to indicate the percentage of sludge that was produced at the studied coagulant concentration. The determination of this value was done during the preliminary study using jar test. Several parameters were determined to characterize the raw leachate ( The saturator used in this study was an unpacked saturator, which requires less maintenance and has a longer lifespan than packed saturators Application of DAF process in wastewater treatment shows that the removal efficiency increases with increasing saturation pressure Four different combinations of saturator pressure (400 In each of these four treatments, samples from three sampling points were analyzed. Based on this statistical analysis, for each treatment, the In contrast, significant differences ( Alum was chosen as the coagulant for the third and final stage of the study because it is widely used in water and wastewater treatment. Optimization of this parameter was carried out using jar test. The alum concentration was varied from 2 9.5 Coagulation followed by treatment with the DAF system was evaluated after the coagulant dose and optimum pH were determined with the jar test. For alum pre-treatment followed by DAF, the leachate was first placed into the flotation cell and then coagulated with alum (9.5 In order to improve turbidity removal, the alum dose was further reduced to 2.3 Therefore the last phase of this study proves that the coagulation process enhanced the removal of the studied parameters, as observed by Zouboulis and Avranas This investigation focused on the feasibility of treating landfill leachate with DAF. The saturator efficiency (73%) was highest when the saturator was operated at 400 The authors acknowledge the Universiti Sains Malaysia and Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovations Malaysia for the Science Fund Grant (grant no: 6013309). Thanks are due to the Majlis Perbandaran Seberang Perai, Penang and the contractor Idaman Bersih Sdn. Bhd., Penang for their cooperation during the study.