The methanogenic degradation of N, N-dimethylformamide (DMF) was investigated using anaerobic digested sludge (ADS), aerobic activated sludge (AAS) and co-cultured sludge (CCS), respectively. Both the metabolic pathway and the corresponding microorganisms which function in the methanogenic degradation of DMF were elucidated. DMF was unable to be degraded anaerobically by ADS due to the lack of DMF-hydrolyzing bacteria. DMF can be effectively degraded by AAS, however, no methane was recovered under the aerobic condition. The co-culture of DMF-hydrolyzing bacteria and methanogens in the CCS allowed for both hydrolysis of DMF and methane production to proceed successfully under the anaerobic condition, realizing the complete conversion from DMF to methane. However, a niche overlap due to the competition for the intermediates lowered the abundance of DMF-hydrolyzing bacteria. The introduction of nitrate, timely replenishment of AAS, micro-aeration and co-digestion were likely to maintain a high abundance of DMF-hydrolyzing bacteria to ensure an effective hydrolysis.Due to its excellent miscibility, To effectively treat DMF-containing wastewater in large quantities and at low cost, biodegradation is usually considered an appropriate solution. As the metabolic pathways of DMF under the aerobic condition were comprehensively elucidated many years ago ( In this study, the aim was to cultivate the anaerobic DMF-degrading consortium from the normal anaerobic digested sludge (ADS), aerobic activated sludge (AAS) and anaerobic co-cultured sludge (CCS). Microbial samples were taken from each process during the cultivation period for the purpose of the following: (1) to elucidate the metabolic pathways and the corresponding prokaryotes which play roles in the degradation of DMF under different conditions; (2) to investigate the evolution direction of the prokaryotic community and the cooperation/competition relationship between functional bacteria and archaea in the anaerobic DMF-degrading consortium. This study also provides detailed biological directions and suggestions for the application of the anaerobic treatment of DMF-containing wastewater from ecological and phylogenic angles. There were four groups of experiments conducted in this study, and a total of 14 samples of sludge were taken for the microbial analysis. The procedure of the experiments were briefly listed in Group-A was a long-term continuous operation conducted by a submerged anaerobic membrane bioreactor (SAnMBR) in order to cultivate the DMF-degrading anaerobic digested sludge (ADS). The SAnMBR has an operational volume of 7 L. Synthetic industrial wastewater containing approximately 300–1000 mg L The purpose of Group-B was to cultivate the DMF-degrading aerobic activated sludge (AAS) by a one-stage continuous aeration reactor. A reactor with an operational volume of 10 L was inoculated with normal ADS. Synthetic industrial wastewater containing approximately 1000–2000 mg L Group-C was a long-term batch experiment whose inoculum was artificially mixed by the same volume as the cultivated AAS (same as Ae-36) and the seed ADS (same as An-0), and this co-cultured sludge (CCS) had a VSS concentration of 17.42 g L Group-D was a comparative group which was conducted in parallel to the long-term batch experiment of Group-C under the same culturing condition for 62 days. However, the seed sludge was also inoculated with the original ADS (An-0) as the blank control of the co-cultured sludge (Cc-0). Only one sample (marked Bc-62) was taken in the end of the batch experiment, that is, on the same day as Cc-62. The evolutionary relationship of all 14 samples is shown in DNA was extracted with the ISOIL for Beads Beating kit (Nippon gene, Japan), then the concentration was measured by NanoDrop 2000 (Nanodrop Inc., USA) and diluted to 10 ng μL Raw data were filtered to remove short and poor-quality sequences, and de-multiplexing was carried out with split_libraries_fastq.py in QIIME (version 1.8.0). The operational taxonomic units (OTUs) were generated on the basis of 97% similarity, then Chimeras were removed with ChimeraSlayer. Singleton OTUs were removed and sequences were randomly selected to unify the sequence number of each sample to 40,000 as the standard number. The principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) was conducted with the weighted calculation method. The linear discriminant effect size (LEfSe) analysis was proceeded online on the Galaxy website. The COD concentration was measured by a spectrophotometer (DR5000, HACH, USA) using the standard spectrophotometric methods. Biogas production and the temperature of the reactors were recorded by a wet gas meter (Sinagawa, Japan). Biogas production of the batch experiment was measured by glass injectors of various volumes ranging from 5 mL to 50 mL. The gas components of the biogas including N The performance of DMF degradation and the sampling dates in the four groups are all illustrated in After the filtering process, a total of 40,000 high-quality sequences were reserved from each sample for further analysis. It should be noted that, with the exception of Ae-36 (4.96), all the samples showed a relatively high Shannon diversity index from 7.22 to 5.74: the results for Ae-36 were due to the aerobic consortium after being cultivated by aeration, which was quite different from that of the other samples. As shown in The overall proportions of prokaryotes are shown in In Group-A and Group-D, because both the SAnMBR and serum vials were solely inoculated with the normal ADS, the microbial community structure barely changed from the seed inoculum sample An-0 to An-120 even after the 120-day anaerobic cultivation (also no significant change from An-0 to Bk-62). The result indicated that inoculating with ADS alone was not sufficient to degrade DMF anaerobically, which also accorded with the performance of the SAnMBR and blank control batch: the biogas production was extremely low, and the concentration of DMF remained basically unchanged. Therefore, only the CCS was capable of degrading DMF to methane under the anaerobic condition. Based on 97% similarity, a total of 3860 OTUs were generated from the final 513,296 high-quality bacterial reads. In which, a total of 335 genera affiliated to 47 phyla were identified referring to the GreenGenes database. It should be noted that significant variations of the bacterial community were observed in the samples of Group-B and Group-C. For the aerobic cultivation in Group-B, whose results are shown in On the level of genus, as listed in All archaea identified in this study all belong to the phylum In the CCS samples, the abundance of the genus The PCoA was conducted with the 14 samples in this study in order to investigate the evolution direction of the microbial community, and the results are shown in The LEfSe analysis was conducted on the basis of the top 30 OTUs, which represent 80% of the total sequence from each sample, and these OTUs were clustered and aligned according to their phylogenetic levels. The cladogram of LEfSe is shown in Based on the results of PCoA and LEfSe, it is proposed that with CCS, the mixture of AAS and ADS, the thorough methanogenic degradation of DMF can be realized under the anaerobic condition. This is because the AAS offer some facultatively anaerobic DMF-degrading bacteria which produce DMFase to hydrolyze DMF, and the ADS contains abundant methylotrophic and hydrogenotrophic methane-producing archaea which could directly utilize DMA and HCOOH (equivalent to H According to the description in previous studies, under the aerobic condition, DMF initially hydrolyzes to DMA by the enzyme DMFase, and then DMA further degrades to MMA with NADPH due to the aerobic respiration and releases energy for the growth of cells ( As mentioned, 6 genera of facultatively anaerobic bacterial genera including As can be seen in By co-culturing AAS and ADS, the effective methanogenic degradation of DMF was effectively realized using CCS. Because large quantities of AAS were easily cultured with the continuous aeration, it is reasonable to suggest that CCS can be used as the seed inoculum to establish a quick start-up for the anaerobic treatment of DMF-containing wastewater. It seems, however, that the slow growth rate and tiny proportion of those DMF-hydrolyzing bacteria under the anaerobic condition was not likely to be capable of handling a high loading rate of DMF for the long-term operation. Therefore, appropriate solutions for the enhancement of the growth rate or maintaining a high relative abundance of the DMF-hydrolyzing bacteria should be considered. The results from the four groups of experiments have been considered to formulate the following ideas and suggestions: (1) because these facultatively anaerobic DMF-hydrolyzing bacteria are also known as denitrifying bacteria ( Due to the lack of DMF-hydrolyzing bacteria, anaerobic digested sludge is unable to degrade DMF effectively. The co-cultured consortium containing DMF-hydrolyzing bacteria and methylotrophic/hydrogenotropic archaea allow for the methanogenic degradation of DMF. It is feasible that this co-cultured consortium could be applied in the anaerobic treatment of DMF-containing wastewater. However, those DMF-hydrolyzing bacteria also feed on some of the intermediate products of DMF, such as HCOOH and MMA. Outcompeted by archaea, DMF-hydrolyzing bacteria eventually resulted in the low abundance. It is considered that a sufficient abundance of DMF-hydrolyzing bacteria is the key to realize a thorough methanogenic degradation of DMF. This work was supported by Japan Society for the Promotion of Science ( Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: