The initial particle size distributions (PSDs) and cyclic loading effects for the confined comminution tests are studied by using discrete element method (DEM). Three typical PSDs, i.e. the uniform, bimodal and fractal, respectively, are used to explore the general correlations from microscopic quantities to macroscopic quantities during the loading-unloading-reloading procedure. For the initial bimodal packing, it cannot easily generate an ultimate fractal packing. And for the initial uniform and fractal packings, the ultimate fractal dimension of PSD would gradually increase during the reloading procedure. Moreover, the coordination distribution of particles (CNP) is insensitive with the initial PSDs and cyclic loadings. Furthermore, the fractal analysis of the network of force chains is also studied by the box method to evaluate the fractal features of force chains from the general, strong and weak perspectives. Additionally, a new descriptor for interpreting the relationship between the force chains and the composed particles (C
                     
                        FC
                     ) is proposed to evaluate the packing geometrical topologies and force chains. It can be used to evaluate the inter-particle structure feature of the granular assemblies. It is interesting to find that C
                     
                        FC
                      is gradually increased with the increasing loading stress, and reaches a peak value in the unloading stage for the same stress state and decreases with the increasing number intensity of force chains.It is known that grain crushability can considerably influence the engineering behavior of coarse grained soils when the effective stresses acting on soils is high enough to fracture grains. The significance of an understanding of granular materials for grains from elastic to crushable under the monotonic or cyclic loading condition has become increasingly important. Many factors influence grain crushing, such as microscopic contact properties, initial relative density, state of effective stress and effective stress paths, and a number of breakage indexes have been proposed to quantify the degree of relative crushing [ This article presents DEM results of the grain crushing procedure within the comminution tests, with the focuses on the effects of initial PSDs and repetitive loadings. The approach to model the broken grain in this work is the adoption of small particles to replace the crushed mother particle when it beyond the failure criterion [ The DEM simulations were performed to investigate the comminution feature of granular assemblies. Three samples with the specified initial gradings, i.e. uniform, bimodal and fractal, are selected. The methodology for the grading selection is similar as the experimental study on capturing the ultimate breakage feature of carbonate sand by Miao and Airey [ As shown in In this work, the three samples are primarily servo-controlled to achieve the target consolidated state ( From   DEM provides detailed quantities of individual grains, which helps ones to explore the mechanism of the macroscopic phenomena. The growth of the crushing mass ratio, which is determined by the ratio between the mass of broken mother particles and global mass during the loading and reloading processes for the three gradings as shown in The fractal dimension of PSD can be determined by the number and particle size, which is proposed by Turcotte [ This part can be summarized as the fractal analysis of the network of force chains [ The intensity of the force chains on a log-log scale for the three graded packings can be seen in  In this work, A new index for interpreting the relationship between the force chains and the composed particles ( This paper presents investigations on the effects of initial PSDs in the comminution test during repetitive loadings. A few conclusions are summarized as follow. The initial compressibility and expansibility can be influenced by the initial PSD. The evaluation of PSD is mainly governed by the initial PSD as well. Additionally, the variations of In addition to particle arrangement, the particle crushing mass ratio can directly influence the compressibility of the packing. Compared with the ultimate fractal graded feature for initial uniform and fractal packings, a knee point would emerge for the bimodal packing at the ultimate state. The fractal dimension of force chains for the crushable granular assemblages during the reloading procedure is always higher than that in the initial loading procedure. The intensity of the force chains also shows a clear fractal feature. The fractal dimension is also increased during the reloading procedure. Additionally, the fractal dimension of the uniform packing at the ultimate state is higher than the bimodal and fractal packings. The CNP is confirmed which is sensitive to the initial PSDs and loading path. The proposed index This research was financially supported by the Seed Grant of