In the present study, the feasibility of sulfonated brown coal, a hydrophilic macromolecular mixture, to be applied as a depressant in the flotation separation of scheelite and calcite was delved into by micro-flotation experiments. Besides, its depression mechanism was studied by Zeta potential measurement, FTIR spectra and contact angle measurement. As suggested from the results of pure mineral and binary mixed minerals flotation tests, scheelite and calcite could be effectively separated in the case of slurry pH of 6 ∼ 12, sulfonated brown coal dosage of 7 mg/L and sodium oleate dosage of 50 mg/L. Sulfonated brown coal showed high effectiveness in selectively inhibiting calcite. As revealed from the results of Zeta potential measurement, FTIR spectra and contact angle measurement, the adsorbing effect of sulfonated brown coal on the calcite surface was larger than on the scheelite. When sulfonated brown coal was being adsorbed, the sodium oleate adsorbing process was decelerated in calcite; as a result, the hydrophilicity and the floatability of calcite were enhanced and deteriorated, respectively. However, sulfonated brown coal was basically not adsorbed on the scheelite surface, which slightly restricted the adsorption of sodium oleate on scheelite surface. Sulfonated brown coal could act as an alternative depressant for separating scheelite and calcite flotation.Tungsten is the transition metal exhibiting the maximal melting point, as well as prominent chemical stability, electrical conductivity and thermal conductivity [ Scheelite often occurs in skarn deposits. The formation of skarn deposits is closely related to the intermediate-acid granitoids. The related strata are mainly carbonate rocks in the Devonian - carboniferous system, limestone or calcareous rocks in the Permian and Cambrian - Ordovician system in the fold basement [ Oleic acid and sodium oleate are the most commonly used collectors of scheelite. These reagents can combined with calcium ions to form calcium carboxylate [Ca(OL) Sulfonated brown coal (SBC) is a derivative of brown coal humic acid fabricated from brown coal under conditions (e.g., sulfonating agent and appropriate temperatures). It is sold as a brown-black powder, and it is commonly adopted as a cheap and efficient viscosity-reducing agent for high-temperature resistant freshwater drilling fluids, fluid loss control agent, as well as mud treatment agent [ In this paper, the application of the novel depressant SBC in flotation-based separation process of scheelite and calcite was elucidated. With sodium oleate (NaOL) as a collector, the separation impact of SBC was delved into by micro-flotation experiments. The mechanism of action of SBC was revealed by zeta potential measurement, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) measurement and contact angle measurement. The results of the present study are critical to up-regulate the separation efficiency of calcium-containing minerals and help design a novel depressant scheme to separate scheelite and calcite through flotation. The pure mineral samples of scheelite and calcite employed in the experiments were collected from Guangdong, China. The bulk samples broken down to small pieces with the particle size of −2 mm with a hammer, part of which exhibiting large purity was taken out manually. Subsequently, high purity samples taken by hand were ground by porcelain-lined roller mill with a certain proportion of ceramic balls in the laboratory. The ground products were sieved, and the parts of -74 μm + 37 μm were homogenized to perform the micro-flotation test. The portion of -37 μm was further ground in an agate mortar for chemical analysis, X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD, S0902240, Rigaku, Tokyo, Japan), FTIR analysis, Zeta potential measurements. The methods for compositional determination of scheelite and calcite are “ammonium tungstate burning weight method” and “EDTA titration method”, respectively. The chemical analysis results and XRD analysis results of scheelite and calcite are shown in The collector NaOL was provided by Tianjin Kermil Chemical Reagents Development Centre, Tianjin, China. The depressant SBC was provided by Luoyang Zhenbei industry and trade co. LTD, Henan, China. Sodium hydroxide (NaOH) and hydrochloric acid (HCl) acted as slurry pH regulators to perform micro-flotation test. The deionized water with a resistivity over 18.0 MΩ×cm was employed here. The micro-flotation tests were conducted in an XFG laboratory flotation machine with 40 mL cell (Jilin Exploration Machinery Plant, Changchun, China). According to the pure mineral experiment, 2.0 g mineral mixed with 35 mL deionized water was added to the plexiglass flotation cell while being stirred at 1600 r/min. After the solution was stirred for 1 min, the pH regulator, depressant and collector were added to the slurry in sequence in accordance with the requirements. The stirring period of respective flotation reagent in the slurry was 3 min, while the flotation time was 3 min as well. The concentrate and tailing achieved through the micro-flotation test were separately collected, filtered, dried and then weighed for the recovery calculation. To ensure accuracy, the respective test was repeated at least three times. The average value is given in the flotation results. The standard deviation for the respective test was obtained, as expressed by error bars. According to the mixed binary mineral micro-flotation test, the concentrate and tailing were filtered, dried, weighed, and analyzed in sequence. The scheelite recovery was obtained following the distribution ratio of CaWO Zeta potential measurement was conducted with the DELSA-440SX type ZETA potential analyzer (Malvern Instruments Ltd, United Kingdom). The specific steps included: first, 20 mg of the pure samples (−2 μm) was dispersed in 40 mL 1 × 10 Infrared spectroscopy primarily analyzed the compositions and structures of material molecules under the absorbing processes of a range of wavelengths of infrared light using sample materials. The infrared spectra of samples were obtained in transmission mode through Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR, IRAffinity-1, Shimadzu Corporation, Kyoto, Japan). The infrared spectrum of the reagent and mineral was measured by KBr diffuse reflection method. The preparing approach of the infrared spectrum test sample included: first, the researchers dispersed 50 mg of the pure sample in 100 mL deionized water; subsequently, the researchers regulated the pH of the slurry, and meantime the appropriate concentration flotation reagent was introduced while being thoroughly stirred for 35 min with a magnetic stirrer. The dosage of flotation chemicals was ascertained in accordance with the results of the micro-flotation experiment. After the complete efforts of mineral and the reagent were exerted, the supernatant was centrifuged, and the precipitation was cleaned 3 times by deionized water with identical pH. The samples were dried at a constant temperature (45 °C) in a vacuum oven to achieve infrared detection. The measurement was performed by video contact angle detector (JY-82C, Chengde Dingsheng testing equipment co. LTD, China) for characterizing the variations of mineral surface wettability before and after the effects of flotation reagents. The polished mineral samples were immersed in the corresponding flotation reagent solutions for 5 min and subsequently took out and dried with N  The impact of NaOL dosage on the flotation recovery of scheelite and calcite is shown in The impact of SBC dosage on the floatability of scheelite and calcite is illustrated in The impact of slurry pH on the flotation recovery of scheelite and calcite under the presence and absence of depressant SBC is illustrated in According to the results of pure mineral flotation, the slurry pH of mixed minerals flotation separation experiment was set to 9.0 ± 0.1, and the dosage of NaOL was 50 mg/L. The impact of SBC dosage on flotation separation of mixed minerals was investigated. The results are given in As the dosage of SBC increased, the grade of scheelite continued to increase, the recovery of scheelite decreased slowly, while the grade and recovery of calcite decreased drastically. When the dosage of SBC was 7 mg/L, the grades of scheelite and calcite in the concentrate reached 67.02 % and 32.94 %, respectively, and the recovery of scheelite and calcite was 83.27 % and 13.30 %, respectively. The scheelite and calcite were effectively separated through flotation in the slurry with pH = 9 ± 0.1, SBC dosage of 7 mg/L and NaOL dosage of 50 mg/L. The charge of the mineral surface was primarily caused by the interaction between the ions on the surface of the mineral and the polar water molecules, thereby causing dissolution, dissociation or adsorption of ions in the solution. The variations in the electrical properties of the mineral surface directly impacted the floatability of the mineral. Therefore, the diversifications in adsorption of the flotation reagent on the mineral surface can be analyzed using the Zeta potential measurement. The Zeta potentials of scheelite and calcite under a series of flotation reagent schemes are presented in As shown in The FTIR analysis was conducted to investigate the adsorption mechanism of flotation reagents on mineral surfaces. The FTIR spectra of flotation reagents and minerals before and after being treated with a range of reagent schemes are presented in In the FITR spectrum of SBC presented in FTIR spectra of scheelite before and after the treatment of different reagent schemes are presented in FTIR spectra of calcite before and after the treating processes of a range of reagent schemes are presented in After the treatment by NaOL alone, new peaks emerged at 2923.56 cm Based on the best conditions for flotation separation, the wettability of scheelite and calcite before and after treatment was analyzed, as presented in After the treatment with SBC, the scheelite and calcite surface exhibited enhanced hydrophilicity, and their contact angles down-regulated. After the continuous treatment with NaOL, the hydrophobicity of the scheelite surface increased significantly, from 43.79 ± 0.16° to 92.85 ± 0.71°, and its contact angle slightly differed from the contact angle under treatment with NaOL alone. Nevertheless, the contact angle of the calcite surface varied from 39.81 ± 0.73–43.93 ± 0.37° with a slight up-regulation. The result revealed that the adsorption of SBC on calcite surface promoted the hydrophilicity of calcite and decelerated the adsorption of NaOL on the calcite surface, so the floatability of calcite remained poor. The adsorption of SBC on scheelite surface slightly impacted the subsequent adsorption of NaOL, and the hydrophobicity and floatability of scheelite were promoted. The results complied with the conclusions obtained by FTIR spectroscopic analysis. The identifiable ions on scheelite surface are WO SBC exhibited superior selective depression effect on the calcite. According to the micro-flotation results of pure mineral and binary mixed minerals, scheelite and calcite can be separated by employing SBC as a depressant and NaOL as a collector. The preferred separation conditions were as follows: the slurry pH range of 6–12, SBC dosage of 7 mg/L, NaOL dosage of 50 mg/L. The interaction mechanism of SBC was investigated by Zeta potential measurement, FTIR spectra and contact angle measurement. As suggested from the results of the Zeta potential measurement, the adsorbed SBC on the calcite surface was greater in amount than that of scheelite. As revealed from the results of FTIR spectra and contact angle measurement, SBC pre-adsorbed on calcite surface in the form of chemical chelation, thereby decelerating the further adsorption of NaOL on calcite surface. However, SBC had little effect on the adsorption of NaOL on scheelite surface. The introduction of SBC promoted the difference in floatability of scheelite and calcite and separated the two minerals.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to express their gratitude to