Single-phase hexagonal Zircaloy 2 was subjected to near plane strain deformation. The deformed structure had two types of grains: (i) deforming and (ii) non-deforming. Typically grains of the second type were larger and remained nearly equiaxed even after 50% deformation. They also had low grain average misorientation and were estimated to be elastically harder. Residual stress developments were mostly concentrated in the near basal orientations – orientations approximately corresponding to the non-deforming grains. Real heterogeneous deformation, where different grains/phases of the microstructure have remarkably different strains, has been reported Zircaloy 2, the chemical composition of which is given in Fully recrystallized single-phase Zircaloy 2, with nearly equiaxed grains (see  Equiaxed type (ii) grains were observed, albeit to a lesser extent, even after 50% reduction and in all cross-sections (see As shown in As shown in To expand the picture of heterogeneous deformation further, residual stress values were measured for different goniometer angles and for the respective poles of (0 Heterogeneous deformation of polycrystalline metallic materials is a subject of considerable applied and academic interest. An exhaustive range of the published literature Deformed Zircaloy 2, the material used in the present study, clearly has two types of grains: deforming and non-deforming. This classification, though simplified in approach, is based on refinement in size. The classification can also be extended to changes in grain shape or aspect ratio and to developments in grain average misorientation (see The deformed microstructures could easily be distinguished as deforming and non-deforming grains. Non-deforming grains were of larger size and with insignificant grain average misorientation. Even after 50% reduction in thickness, they remained nearly equiaxed. Residual stress developments were largely concentrated on the near basal orientations, the approximate band of orientations corresponding to the non-deforming grains. Support from BRNS (Board of Research on Nuclear Science) and from DST (Department of Science and Technology) is acknowledged. The authors thank Mr. Ravi of BARC (Bhabha Atomic Research Center) for his help.