Stress-controlled swelling tests are normally conducted in the laboratory to characterize the evolution of coal permeability under the influence of gas sorption. Typically reductions in permeability are observed from gas-sorption-induced swelling even where effective stresses remain constant. This behavior remains enigmatic as the permeability of the porous coal is determined by the effective stress only. When these observations were interpreted, a matchstick or cubic coal model was assumed. Under this assumption, matrix swelling would not affect coal permeability because of the complete separation between matrix blocks caused by through-going fractures. This is why current coal permeability models have little success in explaining this inconsistency. It is generally believed that the reason for the failure is the inconsistency between the experimental conditions and the model assumptions. However, in this paper, it is considered that the reason may be the internal actions between coal fractures and matrixes have not been taken into consideration. In this study, a model capable of replicating this apparently anomalous behavior is developed. We consider the interactions of the fractured coal mass where cleats do not create a full separation between adjacent matrix blocks but where solid rock bridges are present. We accommodate the role of swelling strains both over contact bridges that hold cleat faces apart but also over the non-contacting span between these bridges. The effects of swelling act competitively over these two components: increasing porosity and permeability due to swelling of the bridging contacts but reducing porosity and permeability due to the swelling of the intervening free-faces. Under these conditions, a new permeability model is formulated. The new model is the key cross link that couples the multiphysics of coal–gas interactions. The formulation and incorporation of this permeability model into the multiphysics simulation of coal–gas interactions are presented in this paper.Knowledge of how gas sorption-induced changes in effective stresses affect the permeability of coal is crucially important not only to operations involving the production of natural gas from coalbeds, but also to the design and operation of projects to sequester greenhouse gases in coalbeds ( Changes in permeability of coal cores confined under isotropic stresses show that desorption of an adsorbing gas, such as methane, accompany matrix shrinkage ( More recently measurements of carbon dioxide permeability on an induced longitudinal fracture in coal have explored the impact of confining stress ( Other laboratory experiments have measured the change of coal permeability as a function of pore pressure and injected-gas composition at constant effective stress ( More recently, a set of experiments have been carried out by Based on experimental observations, a variety of models have been formulated to quantify the evolution of permeability during coal swelling/shrinkage. When experimental results from these tests are interpreted, a matchstick or cubic coal model is typically assumed with matrix block completely separated from each other in a stacked structure. Under this assumption, matrix swelling without any change in effective stress should not affect coal permeability because of the complete separation between matrix blocks caused by through-going fractures ( It is generally believed that permeability values for the coal matrix are typically several orders of magnitude smaller than fracture permeability values ( In this study, it is assumed that both fracture compartments between coal bridges and coal matrix contribute to the resultant coal permeability. It is linked through the elastic reduction ratio and to be verified through the comparisons with experimental data and other widely used permeability models, like The following introduces a concept of fracture-matrix interaction to address the dichotomy that under stress controlled conditions, coal permeability is shown to reduce with an increase in sorbing gas pressure rather than remain constant. In this study, it is assumed that coal matrix blocks are connected to each other by coal-matrix bridges, as illustrated in For coal matrix permeability, because free expansion of coal matrix swelling/ shrinkage does not change coal matrix permeability, as shown in For general porous media system, the following two assumptions are considered: (1) the coal matrix system is a homogeneous, isotropic and elastic continuum, and the system is isothermal; and (2) strains are infinitesimal. The gas sorption-induced strain From Eq. Considering a porous medium containing solid volume of We assume that the sorption-induced strain for the coal is the same as for the pore space. Without the gas sorption effect, the volumetric variation of the porous medium satisfies the Betti-Maxwell reciprocal theorem, Using the definition of porosity, the following expressions can be deduced as Solving Eqs. Rearranging the above equation gives Because generally (Δ From Eq. It is clear that there is a relationship between porosity, permeability and grain-size distribution of porous medium. Therefore, the permeability for coal matrix system can be given as For fracture system, the aperture determines that permeability value, as shown in For fracture system, the aperture closure induced by the total effective stress change can be calculated by Simplifying this equation, gives Because The change in fracture opening can be defined as ( Then the fracture permeability can be expressed as The resultant change in coal permeability is a combined outcome of the reduction in fracture opening due to coal matrix swelling and effective stress change, as defined in Eq. Substituting Eqs. In order to explain this model, the typical curves for different magnitudes of the elastic reduction ratio, The overall approach is illustrated in The mechanical properties of a discontinuous medium containing orthogonal fractures and anisotropic response can be represented by the properties of an equivalent continuous medium ( The coal is a homogeneous, isotropic and elastic continuum, and the system is isothermal. Strains are infinitesimal. Gas contained within the pores is ideal, and its viscosity is constant under isothermal conditions. Gas flow through the coal medium is assumed to be viscous flow obeying Darcy's law. According to the first assumption (a), the strain–displacement relation is expressed as Combining Eqs. For a system containing a single gas phase the sorption-induced volumetric strain The mass balance equation for a single component gas is defined as According to the real gas law, the gas density is proportional to the pore gas pressure and can be described as From Eq. From Eq. Combining Eqs. Substituting Eq. By combining Eqs. When flow analysis is conducted, the total effective strain can be partitioned from the equivalent medium between coal matrix and fracture systems. Only the partitioned strain for both systems contributes to the permeability change. The total effective strain is the difference between the total strain, as determined by the constrained boundary conditions, and the free swelling strain. Therefore, the boundary conditions also control the evolution of coal permeability. The proposed permeability model is used to match the experimental data under stress controlled conditions ( Based on the permeability model of Eq. The comparisons of permeability ratio and pore pressure evolutions between this developed permeability model and Shi-Durucan model are shown in The impact of The impact of A new permeability model has been developed to characterize the evolution of coal permeability under conditions of controlled stress, and implemented into a finite element model to quantify the multiphysics of coal–gas interactions. This may be applied both to represent laboratory data and field scale prototypes. Through model evaluations, the following conclusions can be drawn. The new permeability model can be applied to explain the results from stress-controlled swelling tests. Stress-controlled swelling tests are normally conducted in the laboratory to characterize the evolution of coal permeability under the influence of gas sorption. When experimental results from these tests were interpreted, a matchstick or cubic coal model was assumed. Under this assumption, matrix swelling would not affect coal permeability because of the complete separation between matrix blocks caused by through-going fractures. However, this is inconsistent with laboratory observations that show significant effects of matrix swelling on coal permeability under constant confining stress conditions. Current coal permeability models have little success in explaining this inconsistency. It is generally believed that the reason for these failures is the inconsistency between the experimental conditions and the model assumptions. However the model presented here suggests that swelling of fracture faces may accommodate this failure and replicate a reduction in permeability, even under conditions of constant effective stress. Results of the 3D simulation example show the importance of the consistency between assumptions of a coal permeability model and boundary conditions of a simulation model. Because the proposed coal permeability model in this study can be applied under a variety of stress conditions, it is best suitable to cases where coal deformation is rigorously considered. This work was supported by the