In flotation, frothers provide two main functions: control of pulp hydrodynamic properties and control of froth properties. In this paper dual-frother systems (blends) are investigated to determine combinations which provide independence over these two functions. Using a column on an air–water system, Sauter mean bubble diameter (D
                     32) and gas holdup (Eg
                     ) were measured as the hydrodynamic properties and water superficial overflow rate (J
                     wO) as the froth property. Blends of Alcohols with Polypropylene Glycols (PPGs) and Polyethylene Glycols (PEGs) were tested. Pre-mixed frother blends did not provide independence. The second approach was to use Alcohols as base and PPGs and PEGs as additives. Candidate blends were eliminated for a variety of reasons: with 1-Hexanol/TetraEG, J
                     wO converged to roughly the same level as TetraEG concentration was increased; with 1-Butanol/PPG, D
                     32 increased upon addition of PPG. The search was eventually successful: 1-Butanol/PEG blends gave independent control provided PEG had four or more EO groups. The increase in D
                     32 noted with 1-Butanol/PPG blends was traced to partitioning of 1-Butanol to the froth which reduced 1-Butanol concentration below the critical coalescence concentration.In flotation, a frother has two main functions: to provide target hydrodynamic properties in the pulp and the target properties of the froth ( The frothers most commonly used in flotation are compounds containing nonpolar, hydrophobic groups (e.g. alkyl groups) and polar, hydrophilic groups (e.g. oxygen and hydroxyl groups). The most widely used commercial frothers are Aliphatic Alcohols and Polyglycols ( It has been recognized that a single frother generally cannot float the broad particle size distribution typical of a flotation feed ( There is no accepted technique for evaluation of mixed frothers and selection relies on empirical testing. Attempts to provide guidelines are mostly based on interpretation of flotation plant surveys ( Characterization should capture both the hydrodynamic and froth properties ( Froth properties can be measured in various ways, for example by equilibrium froth height and water overflow rate. In our experience froth volume is not always stable making determination of froth height unreliable ( Prior work on dual frothers has focussed on blends of Alcohol and Polyglycols. One study mixed frothers on the basis of their relative CCC and concluded that the Polyglycol dominated ( The purpose of this paper is to characterize dual Alcohol/Polyglycol frother systems by measuring bubble size, gas holdup and water overflow rate with the objective of determining blends that achieve independent control over hydrodynamic and froth properties. A bubble column, 350 All testing was performed in the two-phase, air–water system. Frother was weighed and mixed (stirred at least 15 The start-up procedure was to set the air rate, allow froth to form then alter pump speed to bring the level to the 5 To help interpret results in some cases frother concentration was determined by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). The HPLC analysis was carried out using a Hypersil ODS column (series number: 93108-8, particle size 5 The frothers ( Two modes of blend were employed: pre-mixed and base/additive. The pre-mixed frothers were 1-Hexanol or 1-Butanol with Polyethylene Glycol (PEG) or Polypropylene Glycol (PPG). The mixtures were made up to a certain mole ratio of Alcohol to EO or PO by adding the required amount of PEG or PPG ( In this mode one frother is kept at constant concentration (the “base”) while changing the concentration of the other (the “additive”). The ambition was to use Alcohols as base to control (maintain) bubble size, while Polyglycol additives were to manipulate froth overflow rate. Replicate tests were conducted for the base/additive frother system 80 The reliability and validity of the bubble size measurement and frother concentration analysis are reported in  The trend in bubble size shows the expected decrease with increasing concentration corresponding to the increase in gas holdup. But the effect of mole ratio is not as expected: decreasing the ratio increased bubble size which does not correlate with its effect on increasing gas holdup. A similar observation was made with pre-mixed 1-Butanol/Polypropylene Glycol (not shown). Polyglycols can have a greater impact on slowing bubble rise than Alcohols (  As noted in  This example approaches independence: 1-Hexanol controls  The bubble size results prompted the frother analysis to determine partitioning between solution and froth. Trials with 1-Butanol/TPG frother system ( From The addition of PEGs produced no overflow up to 3 Ethylene Oxide (EO) groups (i.e., parameter  The 1-Butanol/Polyethylene Glycol system was explored by further increasing the number of EO. As noted in In flotation, frothers have two main functions: aiding control over hydrodynamic properties of the pulp zone (e.g. bubble size and gas holdup) and aiding control over froth properties (e.g. water overflow rate). To optimize performance, it can be argued, requires independent control of the zone properties. This is difficult to achieve with a single frother since the properties of both zones are concentration-dependent. Hence the pursuit in this paper of dual-frother systems, aiming to find a blend where one component controlled pulp hydrodynamics while the second controlled froth properties. Motivation for this approach came from an observation by Commercial frothers derive principally from Alcohols and the wide variety of Polyglycols. Alcohols are known to reduce bubble size but exhibit poor froth building capability (at least in the absence of floatable particles, as is the situation here). Combinations of Alcohols would not seem suited to our task, therefore, and were not considered. Polyglycols show a wide range of froth stabilizing properties as well as being able to control hydrodynamic properties. Combinations of Polyglycols could be candidates but blends of Alcohols and Polyglycols were deemed most likely to meet the target of independent control. Most research literature on blends is limited to Alcohol/Polyglycol which supports this being the starting point. Next was the choice of properties to characterize the blends. For froth properties water overflow rate was chosen as in our experience it is more reliable than measures such as froth height ( Bubble size and gas holdup were monitored to track hydrodynamic properties. Gas holdup usually shows an inverse response to bubble size, increasing as bubble size decreases and vice versa. The reason is that bubble rise velocity is dependent on bubble size; as bubbles reduce in size (at least <ca. 2 Less researched, there is also evidence of a relationship between gas holdup and water overflow rate. For given conditions, predominantly froth depth, a linear dependence has been reported ( Two modes of blend were examined, pre-mixed and base/additive. The pre-mixed style is commonly how blends are introduced in flotation plants ( A surprise was that the simple notion of Alcohol as base to control bubble size (i.e., maintain constant) with Polyglycol as additive to manipulate overflow rate proved not simple at all. In one case this was because of undesirable effects on the overflow rate (1-Hexanol/Tetraethylene glycol, The search for independence was eventually successful using blends of 1-Butanol (base) and Polyethylene Glycols (additives) with four or more EO groups ( The aim of this work was to establish a dual-frother system that provided independent control over the froth property water overflow rate ( With 1-Hexanol/TetraEG, With 1-Butanol/DPG and 1-Butanol/TPG, With 1-Butanol/PEG, independent control was demonstrated provided PEG had four or more Ethylene Oxide groups. The authors would like to thank Xinyu (Roger) Ren for his assistance in the column test work. The authors acknowledge financial support through the Chair in Mineral Processing sponsored by Vale, Teck, Barrick Gold, Xstrata Process Support, Shell Canada, SGS Lakefield, COREM and Flottec, and through the Amira International P9O project, both under the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) Collaborative Research and Development (CRD) program.