Multipurpose α-MnO2 nanorods were synthesized by facile hydrothermal method. The synthesized α-MnO2 nanorods were characterized by PXRD, UV-vis, SEM, EDX, TEM and SAED pattern to confirm their purity and morphology. These α-MnO2 nanorods were employed as a low cost counter electrode in dye sensitized solar cell (DSSC) and sensor for the detection of nitroaromatic compounds. DSSC device using α-MnO2 nanorods as counter electrode exhibited excellent power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 4.1% with 0.75V (Voc) and 0.38 (FF). Furthermore, active surface area of the glassy carbon electrode (GCE) was modified by α-MnO2 nanorods (GCE/α-MnO2
                     ) which showed a rapid sensitivity towards p-nitrotoluene (p-NT), 2, 4-dinitrotoluene (DNT) and 2, 4, 6-trinitrophenol (TNP) with distinct cathodic peaks. The GCE/α-MnO2
                      exhibited the limit of detection (LOD) of 144nM, 133nM, 100nM and a high sensitivity of 17.6μAμM−1cm−2, 22.6μAμM−1cm−2, 54.82μAμM−1
                     cm−2 for p-NT, DNT and TNP, respectively.In present scenario some major challenges which need immediate attention are energy crisis, environmental pollution and security threats On the other hand, the presence of trace amount of nitroaromatics compounds which are responsible for high oxidation rate may lead to severe environmental, health and safety intimidations Manganese dioxide (MnO Herein, we report  All the chemicals and reagents were purchased from Solaronix, Sigma and Alfa Aesar which were used without further any purification. The powder X-ray diffraction patterns (PXRD) were recorded on a Rigaku, Japan, RINT 2500 V x-ray diffractometer with Cu Kα irradiation (λ Potassium permanganate (KMnO 100 The glassy carbon electrode (GCE) was polished with alumina slurry and sonicated for 20 The phase purity and crystallinity of the synthesized The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) is widely used to investigate the electrochemical behavior of the counter electrodes. Fig. S2(A) showed the Nyquist plots for the fabricated counter electrodes with equivalent circuit presented in inset of Fig. S2(A). The obtained data from the EIS has been summarized in Table S1. The electrocatalytic performance of the counter electrode in triiodide solution could be explained by charge transfer resistance (Rct). The counter electrode with Pt showed excellent electrocatalytic activity with an Rct value of 11.47(Ω) whereas the counter electrode with Additionally, CV curve for Pt counter electrode was also examined to compare the electrocatalytic performance of the The photocurrent-voltage ( Moreover, the performance of the The incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) of the fabricated devices with Pt and Herein, we report involvement of hydrothermally grown To validate these results obtained by CV and DPV, a linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) was introduced to investigate the performance of the Four freshly prepared For any sensor selectivity is very important tool therefore, the selectivity of The  The sensitivity and performances of the There exist several reports on the detection of nitroaromatic compounds by employing various methods such as photoluminescence, coulometry and chromatography etc From To summarize, we report facile synthetic route for preparation of K. A. would like to thanks to University Grant Commission (UGC) New Delhi, India for providing fellowship (RGNF-D). S.M.M. thanks SERB-DST (Project No. EMR/2016/001113), New Delhi, India for financial support. We sincerely acknowledge Sophisticated Instrumentation Centre (SIC), IIT Indore for providing the characterization facility. We thank the Advanced Imaging Center, IIT Kanpur for providing TEM facility. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: Other related figures (Figs. S1-S12) and Tables (Tables S1,S2) are present in supporting information.