Real time dynamic simulation provides a powerful tool to control the mineral processing plants with the minimum cost. In this study, the dynamic simulation was carried out for the thickener at coal washing plant. Therefore, the parameters of the phenomenological model for the sedimentation and thickening were determined at different conditions. Dynamic simulation was carried out for each condition and the effect of feed flow rate variations on solid volume fraction of the thickener underflow and bed height was investigated. For all conditions, it was observed that when feed flow rate increases, the solid volume fraction of discharge and bed height increase. It was also observed that, in the case of the flocculated suspension, the maximum solid volume fraction of the thickener underflow decreases and the bed height increases with pH reduction, for two size fractions. Also, the maximum solid volume fraction of the thickener underflow for d80
                     =275μm is higher than that of d80
                     =125μm and the height of compression zone for d80
                     =125μm is higher than that of d80
                     =275μm at the certain pH and flocculant dosages.Over the past few decades, on-line analysis techniques have been developed and applied in the mineral and energy industries for the measurement of mineral processing variables. This has led to increase the throughput and product quality while reducing the processing costs and minimizing emissions ( Therefore, advanced control techniques can be used for controlling the mineral processing plants. Real time dynamic simulation provides a powerful tool to control the mineral processing plants with the minimum cost. Many simulation techniques exist for simulation in the mineral processing industry. However, most of the simulation packages are based on steady state condition. Such simulation packages cannot simulate the dynamic behavior and interactions of processing units within a circuit. Such dynamic variations and interactions can cause major problems for process control and optimization. Dynamic simulation is a powerful tool in many industries such as aerospace, military, automotive and steel making. Today, dynamic simulation is used for plant design, optimization and control of the plant. Dynamic simulation is used for the circuit response to changes in feed properties and operating unit. This method is an inexpensive and effective method for the investigation of a circuit or optimization process ( The settling of flocculated suspensions is a subject that has attracted the attention of many authors but most of these works have empirical nature. Until 1998, some researchers tried to present the models for design of thickener but these models are empirical.       It was observed that many works have been done in the field of sedimentation and thickening process but few researches have been done in the field of dynamic simulation of thickener. The purpose of this research is to simulate of an industrial thickener using phenomenological model. There are several parameters that affect the thickener performance. In this paper, we have investigated the effect of particle size, pH, flocculant dosage and feed flow rate variations on the thickening performance at different times for the tailing thickener of the coal washing plant.  Where, φ is the solid volume fraction, z is the vertical coordinate (Height), ∆ q(t) Where, Q In Equation. In Equation. Where σ Where parameters σ The boundary conditions at z Where, Q As mentioned before, Equation. Where: Incorporating the approximated boundary conditions given in Equations. To ensure the convergence of the resulting scheme, the following stability criterion must be satisfied: The representative sample was obtained from the thickener feed (flotation tailing) at the Tabas coal washing plant in south Khorasan province of Iran. Chemical and mineralogical analyses were performed by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectrometry and X-ray diffraction (XRD). According to these results, the main minerals of the sample are: Aluminum Silicate Hydroxide (Kaolinite), Silicon Oxide (Quartz), Potassium Aluminum Iron Silicate Hydroxide Hydrate (Illite) and Aluminum Silicate Hydroxide (Montmorillonite). Sieve analysis for this sample was done and these results were obtained: (d To investigate the effect of particle size on the sedimentation and thickening process, the sample was ground. The sieve analysis was also done for this sample and these results were obtained: (d In this study, an anionic flocculant with a trade name of Magnafloc 919 from Ciba Specialty Chemicals Company was used for the experimental tests. Its particle size is 98% Experimental methods for the measurement of gel point, effective solid stress and batch flux density function have completely been explained in our previous papers ( For numerical simulation using equations (7–12), the results of gel point and effective solid stress measurement at different conditions (pH, flocculant dosage and particle size) are required. These results have completely been presented and discussed in our previous paper ( The summary of gel point measurement results is as follows: The gel point decreases with pH reduction in certain flocculant desage value for two size fractions The gel point increases with increasing flocculant dosage in the certain pH value for two size fractions. The gel point decreases with size reduction at the certain pH and flocculant dosage values.  The summary of gel point measurement results is as follows: The parameter σ The parameter n increases with the increase of the gel point (reducing of effective solid stress). Therefore, parameter n for d Batch flux density function is obtained using the batch settling curve and equation (13) ( Where v Where the For each tangent, f Using the batch settling curve, the equation of batch flux density as a function of solid volume fraction was obtained for different conditions. It can be seen from In order to the dynamic simulation of the industrial thickener, effective solid stress function, batch flux density function and gel point were determined for different conditions and other parameters were obtained from the thickener at the Tabas coal washing plant. The parameters, which were used for simulation, are shown in For each condition (size fraction, flocculant dosage and pH), volumetric discharge rate (Q   To investigate the effect of particle size on the sedimentation and thickening process, the effect of feed flow rate variations on tailing thickener behavior for d It can be seen from Also, it was observed that for the condition that the solid volume fraction of the thickener underflow is higher and midline height is lower, the time to reach the steady state condition is higher. For example, for d The results indicate that the efficiency of the solid–liquid separation in the ideal continuous thickener is dependent on the feed conditions. From practical aspects, it is possible to achieve the maximum thickener performance using selection the optimum amount of the pH value, flocculant dosage and feed flow rate in mineral processing plants. In this study, the effect of pH, flocculant dosage and feed flow rate on the thickening performance at a coal washing plant was investigated and the following conclusions were obtained: For all conditions, it was observed that when feed flow rate increases, the solid volume fraction of discharge and bed height increase. It was observed that, in the case of flocculated suspension, the maximum solid volume fraction of the thickener underflow decreases and bed height increases with pH reduction, for two size fractions. Also, the maximum solid volume fraction of the thickener underflow for d It was observed that for the condition that the solid volume fraction of the thickener underflow is higher and midline height is lower, the time to reach the steady state condition is higher. From practical aspects, it is possible to achieve the maximum thickener performance using selection the optimum amount of the pH values, flocculant dosage and feed flow rate in mineral processing plants.