The aim of this analysis has been to evaluate the efficacy of retrograde nailing in the treatment of distal femur and femoral shaft fractures.
                  Articles were extracted from the Pubmed database and the retrieved reports were included in the study only if pre-specified eligibility criteria were fulfiled.
                  Moreover, a constructed questionnaire was administered, aimed at assessing the quality of the outcomes.
                  Twenty-four articles were eligible for the final analysis, reviewing a total of 914 patients (mean age of 48.8 years) who sustained 963 distal and diaphyseal femoral fractures.
                  The overall mortality rate was 5.3%. The incidence of infection was 1.1% and for septic arthritis of the knee was 0.18%.
                  In patients with distal femoral fractures, the mean time to union and rate to union were 3.4 months and 96.9%, respectively. The mean range of knee motion was 104.6°. The rates of knee pain, malunion and re-operations were 16.5, 5.2 and 17%, respectively.
                  Patients with femoral shaft fractures had a mean time to union 3.2 months, whilst the rate of union was 94.2%. The mean range of knee motion was 127.6°. The rates of knee pain, malunion and re-operations were 24.5, 7.4 and 17.7%, respectively.
                  We concluded that retrograde intramedullary nailing appears to be a reliable treatment option, mainly for distal femoral fractures. However, in the management of diaphyseal fractures, retrograde intramedullary nailing is associated with high rates of knee pain and lower rates of fracture union.Intramedullary nailing has been suggested as the treatment of choice for most fractures of the femur. Although antegrade intramedullary nailing of supracondylar fractures of the femur has been described by Leung et al., Retrograde intramedullary nailing, via the intercondylar notch, has been developed in order to provide solutions to the above difficulties of treatment of distal and diaphyseal femoral fractures. The retrograde technique does not require traction and can also be applied in fractures with intra-articular extension. There has been no recent, critical evaluation of the retrograde nailing technique to allow assessment of its appropriateness in the expanded indications used or of its effectiveness in stabilising femoral fractures. This study, therefore, has been designed to extract data, relating to retrograde femoral nailing, from eligible published studies in order to accurately assess its role and efficacy in the treatment of distal and diaphyseal femoral shaft fractures. Most meta-analyses in the literature are focused on randomised, blind and controlled trials, in order to reduce bias and conflicting results. However, in acute orthopaedic trauma patients, it is difficult to perform randomised and controlled trials due to individual circumstances relating to trauma severity and life threatening conditions. In the present study, the authors have analysed the available published trials on the use of retrograde nailing for femoral fractures. In order to reduce the incidence of bias and confounding results, the study design defined specific methodological procedures. The authors searched for articles in English literature, published between January 1990 and May 2004, using the Pubmed search engine. The key words used were: retrograde nail, femur, femoral fracture, supracondylar fractures, distal femur fractures. The reports were declared eligible and were promoted for further critical analysis on satisfaction of the following criteria: The intervention was a retrograde nailing for the treatment of shaft and distal femur fractures. The population consisted of ambulatory patients, who sustained a diaphyseal or distal, femoral fracture, either as an isolated injury or as part of polytrauma. The study did not deal exclusively with the effect of retrograde nailing in patients suffering from malignancy, paraplegia, metabolic bone diseases or periprosthetic fractures. The study was not an isolated case report. At least 20 patients were included in the study. Two authors reviewed the articles. Both were blinded with regard to the names of authors, institutions and journals. Because of the variation in the quality of individual published studies, we used a quality scoring system designed to evaluate the outcomes of interest, in such a way that any given outcome be representative of a given quality. The scoring system was developed on the basis of the answered questions below: Were the inclusion–exclusion criteria defined? Was the number of withdrawals or drop-outs, known? Was the follow-up pre-specified? Were the outcomes of interest clearly described in the study? Did the study include pertinent characteristics that might affect the outcome of interest? For example, in the case of infection, was this complication addressed by information relative to: the type of fracture, whether the fracture was open or closed, the type of surgical approach, the use of antibiotic prophylaxis or whether the reduction was open or closed? A clear affirmative answer in each of the above questions scored 2 points, an affirmative answer, but not providing all the anticipated information scored 1 point and no information at all earned 0 points. The highest score was 10 points and studies with less than 5 points were excluded. We reviewed eligible articles and extracted all relevant information regarding the demographic characteristics, mortality, infection rate, time to union, range of motion of the knee and knee pain. Additionally, we extracted data related to acute bone grafting, incidence of malunion and non-union, and the number of re-operated patients. For each outcome measured, the available studies, the corresponding number of patients and the quality of the studies were documented. Associations between qualitative variables were examined using the Chi-square or Fisher's exact tests, as appropriate. The odds ratio and its 95% confidence interval were calculated as a measure of the effect size. The repeatability between two independent raters was assessed using the Bland–Altman method, along with regression and correlation techniques. The weighted means of continuous parameters of interest were compared across groups using a two-tailed independent samples Seventy-five studies were retrieved and 25 of them met the eligibility criteria for further evaluation. The mechanism of injury was high energy trauma (HET) in 58.5%, and multiple trauma was present in 55% of the patients. HET included motor vehicle accidents, motorcycle accidents and crush injuries, whereas low energy trauma (LET) is exemplified by a simple fall to the ground. Fourteen studies Nine studies A group with a combination of distal and femoral shaft fractures in 23 patients with 25 fractures was included in one study. Data for fracture classification were available from 13 studies reporting on 419 distal femoral fractures. Data regarding femoral shaft fracture comminution were extracted from five studies reviewing 236 fractures. Mortality data were extracted from 15 studies The incidence of thrombo-embolic phenomena was also investigated. Only six articles included data on this topic, One septic knee, two infected delayed unions and three superficial infections were noted after the treatment of 573 fractures in 547 reviewed patients (mean age of 48.7 Seventeen studies reported data related to union time, The union rate for the retrograde technique, regardless of the location of the fracture was 96.5% (range 87–100%). There were no statistically significant differences in the association between rates of union, Reaming has been considered to be an additional stimulus for union The majority of authors reported results regarding the range of flexion of the knee. The phrases “full range of motion” and “no restriction in range of motion” were assigned to a range of flexion of 135°. The mean range of motion of the knee in the patients with femoral shaft fracture was 127.6 Data concerning differences in range of flexion between type-A and type-C fractures were extracted from six studies ( Fifty patients (16.5%) with distal femoral fractures complained of knee pain during the follow-up period and the origin of the pain was unknown in 14 of them. However, 24 patients experienced pain due to distal screw prominence or impingement of the iliotibial band, nine due to secondary nail protrusion in the articular surface and five due to the development of post-traumatic osteoarthritis. The mean age of the patients was 62.9 Patients with femoral shaft fractures had a mean age of 30.7 Eleven studies, reporting on 331 reviewed fractures, provided data on immediate bone grafting during the initial procedure. Varus or valgus, deformity greater than 5° and posterior or anterior (recurvatum), angulation greater than 10°, were present in 5.2% of the distal femur fractures and in 7.4% of the reviewed femoral shaft fractures ( One hundred and fifty-four patients, out of 766, were re-operated for various complications (20%). The main indications for re-operations were screw related problems in 52 patients, nail revision in 25 and nail removal in 15 patients. Fifty re-operations were performed in order to promote union (nail revision, bone grafting, dynamization) ( The statistical analysis did not reveal any significant associations between malunion ( The mean value of the quality of the studies was 6.4 points. There was very good repeatability between the two reviewers. The correlation coefficient was Fracture of the femoral shaft is mainly the result of high energy trauma. Data extracted from six studies included 257 patients with 304 fractures Interventions are accompanied both by benefits, such as uneventful healing, and by complications, with death being the ultimate of the spectrum. In the present analysis, the 3-month mortality rate was 5.3% after the treatment of distal and femoral shaft fractures, using retrograde nailing. Patients with distal femoral fractures had a greater, although not statistically significant, mortality rate, compared with patients with femoral shaft fractures. A possible explanation could be that the mean age of the patients with distal femoral fractures was 63.1 Instrumentation of the femoral canal is well known to be associated with intravasation of fat and phenomena of fat embolisation. The risk of local infection in terms of septic arthritis of the knee has been a topic of concern, especially in the presence of an open fracture proximally, where the nail could act as a conduit for bacterial transmission In the present analysis, one septic knee occurred in a patient 9 months after treatment. The time to union in distal femoral fractures was 3.4 months and this accords with reports from studies using lateral screw and plate fixation devices ( The rate of union achieved in patients after retrograde nailing of femoral shaft fractures was 94.9%, which is lower than the rate for distal femoral fractures (96.9%), and the rate reported for both antegrade nailing (98%) and conventional plating (97.3%), although not significantly so ( The impact of reaming on the rate of fracture healing was also investigated. In this study, a statistically significant reduction in the time to union was revealed after the reaming technique. Similarly, several authors have reported an accelerated healing time after intramedullary reaming prior to nail insertion. A mean range of functional knee motion of 104.6° was achieved in patients with distal femur fractures, which is comparable with the results of other studies using conventional techniques ( Knee pain was a common symptom reported by most authors. Considering the results of three studies Bone grafting was performed at a rate similar to conventional plating series ( Retrograde nailing seems, in experienced hands, to control the alignment of simple or complex, distal femoral fractures better than conventional plates, only 5.2% of the fractures presenting with malunion ( The large, although statistically insignificant, number of re-operations, under general or local, anaesthesia, following retrograde femoral nailing may be secondary to two factors. Firstly, the bone quality in cases of distal femoral fractures was suboptimal, as reflected by the mean age of the patients (58.18 years) and the large proportion of patients with type-A fractures (67%). Secondly, due to retrograde nail configuration, the stabilisation of the fractures requires the placement of the locking screws in a very distal location, with poor soft tissue covering, resulting in prominence of the screws and irritation. In this study, a systematic review of the literature was performed in order to assess the value of retrograde nailing in the treatment of distal and diaphyseal femoral fractures. It appears that the indications for the use of retrograde nailing as reported by several authors include multiple fractures or polytrauma, floating knee injuries, ipsilateral pelvic or acetabular fractures, ipsilateral total knee arthroplasty, ipsilateral hip arthroplasty or osteosynthesis, obese patients, and Müller-AO type-A and type-C fractures. Retrograde femoral intramedullary nailing seems to be a safe option for the stabilisation of fractures, regardless of the location of the fracture (distal or shaft). However, retrograde intramedullary nailing does not seem to be superior to antegrade insertion for the diaphyseal fracture configurations, as higher rates of non-union and knee pain were found. In addition the high re-operation rate for both distal and diaphyseal fractures is of concern and better selection of patients should be undertaken. We conclude that retrograde femoral nailing is an effective method in the treatment of distal femoral fractures and an alternative option in the treatment of femoral diaphyseal fractures, but only after careful selection of patients, in order to minimise the problems reported above.