The global buckling resistance of welded high strength steel box section members subject to combined compression and bending was investigated through a numerical modelling programme. Finite element models were developed with the capability to accurately replicate the experimental results of the box section members under combined compression and bending. Extensive parametric studies were carried out to examine the global buckling behaviour of welded high strength steel box section members with a wide range of dimensions and member slenderness and steel grades of S460, S690 and S960 and subject to varying combinations of compression and bending. The effects of residual stresses and ultimate tensile strength-to-yield strength ratio on the global buckling behaviour of those members were investigated. The applicability of existing design rules to welded high strength steel box section members subject to combined compression and bending was evaluated using the results from parametric studies and the available experimental results in literature. The European, American and Australian standards provide conservative strength predictions for the structures. More accurate and safe strength predictions can be obtained based on European standard using the suggested column curves for the members while the design methods in Australian and American standards are safely applicable to the members.High strength steel (HSS) with yield strength over 460 MPa has been increasingly applied in structural applications such as roof trusses and bridges [ Nie and the co-workers [ Therefore, in this study, the global buckling behaviour of welded HSS box section members with steel grades of S460, S690 and S960 and subject to combined compression and bending was investigated numerically. FE models were developed and validated using the experimental results of welded HSS box members under combined compression and bending. Subsequently, extensive parametric studies were performed. The applicability of design rules in European, American and Australian standards for the members under combined compression and bending was evaluated using the results of parametric studies conducted in this study and experiments reported in literature. A numerical investigation into the global buckling resistance of welded HSS box section members subject to combined compression and bending was carried out using the non-linear finite element analysis package ABAQUS [ The four-noded S4R shell element with reduced integration was applied to simulate the behaviour of welded HSS box section members. The mesh size of plate thickness was selected for box section members to obtain accurate estimations of the structural performance. The stress-strain relationship of HSS was simulated using multi-linear stress-strain models. The model adopted for S460 steel is presented in Residual stresses exist in the welded box section members with steel grades of S460, S690 and S960 due to the welding fabrication. Residual stress models for these members were provided by Shi et al. [ The boundary conditions were defined in the FE models to simulate the pin-supported conditions applied to the members in experiments [ Initial geometric imperfections in the welded HSS box section members can influence the structural performance of the members [ The FE models were validated through comparing the FE results with the experimental results of welded HSS box section members subject to combined compression and bending. The comparison of ultimate loads (P Having the FE models validated, parametric studies were carried out on the welded S460, S690 and S960 steel box section members with a wide range of cross-sectional dimensions and member slenderness values and subject to various combinations of compression and bending. Effects of residual stresses and material tensile-to-yield strength ratio on the global buckling behaviour of these members subject to combined compression and bending were evaluated. These parameters and their values are presented in The residual stress pattern and magnitudes estimated using the models from Shi et al. [ The effect of residual stresses was investigated based on the B168∗12 section members with varying member slenderness values and subject to combined compression and bending. The residual stresses in welded HSS box section members are in equilibrium and their distribution across the box cross-sections is approximately symmetric [ The effect of tensile-to-yield strength (f For welded S460 box section members with the lowest slenderness value of 0.3, the P The applicability of existing design rules in European, American and Australian standards to the welded box section members with steel grades from S460 to S960 and subject to combined compression and bending was evaluated. The results of ultimate loads (P European code EN1993-1-1 [ The P The AISC 360 standard [ The results from the parametric studies and experiments reported in literature for the welded HSS S460, S690 and S960 box section members are compared with the strength predictions based on Eqs. In AS4100 Australian standard [ The ratios of ultimate loads from parametric studies presented in Reliability analysis was also conducted to examine the reliability of the aforementioned design methods for welded HSS box section members according to EN1990 standard [ The reliability analysis for the design method in AISC 360 was also conducted in accordance with the specifications given by the standard. The load combination of 1.2 × dead load + 1.6 × live load and the dead-to-live load ratio of 1/3 were adopted for the analysis. A systematic numerical investigation into the global buckling resistance of welded HSS box section members subject to combined compression and bending was conducted. FE models were developed and validated to be capable of accurately replicating the results of experiments on the members in steel grades between S460 and S960 and subject to combined compression and bending. Subsequent parametric studies were carried out, covering a wide range of cross-sectional and member slenderness and various combinations of compression and bending for the welded S460, S690 and S960 box section members. Effect of residual stresses was investigated and the decreasing effect on the ultimate loads of the members was found to reduce with increasing eccentricity ratio. Besides, the decreasing effect of residual stresses was also observed to be larger for members with member slenderness values between 0.7 and 1.1. Effect of tensile-to-yield strength (f The applicability of design methods in European, American and Australian standards to welded box section members with steel grades of S460, S690 and S960 and subject to combined compression and bending was also assessed using the parametric studies results in this study and experimental results reported in literature. Based on these design methods, the ultimate loads of the members were underestimated by about 3–14%. The accuracy of strength predictions based on suggested column curves from Ban and Shi [ The authors are grateful for the support from the Chinese National Engineering Research Centre for Steel Construction (Hong Kong Branch) at The