Surface roughness of solid affects its interactions with gas bubbles in water. Here, we investigate the effect of surface nano-scaled (random) roughness, quantified with the root-mean-square (RMS) roughness from about 3 to 260 nm, on the adhesive strength of air bubble with natural hydrophilic hematite and pyrite surfaces using a microelectronic balance-camera system. The recorded values include bubble-mineral adhesion forces, water contact angles, and bubble base diameters during stages of air bubble attachment and spreading, maximum adhesion, and detachment. The results confirm weakening of adhesive forces for air bubble with hydrophilic surfaces of increasing nano-scale roughness. The study reveals a linear dependency between adhesion force and RMS roughness. The adhesion force was also found to be in a linear correlation with contact angle and its sine function, providing evidence for the surface tension force dominance in adhesion of bubble to hydrophilic surface with nano-scaled surface roughness characteristics of random nature.Interactions of gas bubbles with solid surfaces play a pivotal role in many industrial applications. For example, through the use of froth flotation, gas bubbles have been used for decades in a selective separation and purification of particulates including processing of mineral ores [ Mainly through fundamental research on froth flotation of minerals, it is now well documented that interactions between gas bubbles and solids are governed by chemical and physical characteristics of interacting surfaces, combined with composition and physical properties of liquid surrounding gas and solid phases [ Here, two hydrophilic natural specimens, hematite (Fe Natural high-quality hematite and pyrite lumps were manually selected from Anshan ore mined in Liaoning Province, China. The hematite (Fe A diamond cut-off saw (SY The mineral surfaces were imaged under the MFP-3D Origin + atomic force microscope (Asylum Research, Oxford Instruments, USA) using the tapping mode and the ACT cantilevers (length 125 μm, width 35 μm, thickness 4.5 μm) with a silicon tip (radius < 10 nm, height 14–16 nm) obtained from Applied NanoStructures (Mountain View, CA, USA). At least three different locations were randomly selected for imaging 10 × 10 μm areas. The root mean square ( The correlations for experimental forces and contact angles versus surface roughness plotted and presented in further part of this contribution are limited to root mean square roughness ( A high-sensitivity microelectronic mechanical balance (DCAT 21, Dataphysics, Germany), equipped with a charge-coupled device (CCD) camera was used in measurements of adhesion forces between air bubbles and sample surfaces, and recording the bubble-mineral interaction events [ A mineral sample was placed in a transparent rectangular cell which was filled with deionized (DI) water. A ∼3 μL volume air bubble was then produced using a pipette and placed in a platinum/iridium ring with the internal and external diameter of 2.06 and 2.42 mm, respectively, connected to the microbalance. The net force of this balance system was zeroed before force measurements. In this study, the mineral sample was raised up under a given velocity of 0.03 mm/s toward the air bubble, and then the velocity was reduced to 0.01 mm/s when the sample surface contacted the air bubble. The sample moved upward to the compression distance (0.1 mm) pre-given by the system, after which, the sample was retracted at a constant velocity of 0.01 mm/s until a detachment of the air bubble from the sample surface. The interactive force with respect to the surface position was recorded automatically. The examples of 3D morphologies of hematite and pyrite surfaces are shown in To prepare nearly smooth mineral surfaces, fine polishing with powder (after coarse polishing) was required. The final root-mean-square roughness of minerals varied between about Low values for skewness (  The (bubble) spreading force (  As shown in The adhesive strength at separation (pull-off) point decreases with increasing The water contact angle value measured at the point of pull-off force refers to the advancing contact angle ( The submicroscopic mineral surface roughness with the The Wenzel equation or its modern modification clearly shows that the water contact angle decreases with increasing roughness factor ( The spreading, maximum adhesion, and pull-off forces for both hematite and pyrite are replotted on the same graphs in The adhesion force between the droplet and a smooth solid surface, In case of an air bubble on a rough surface, Eq. Eq. There is no clear correlation between the spreading force and receding contact angle because the spreading force values were too small to separate them from the baseline and noise when the contact angles were below 20° for both hematite and pyrite ( Both the surface tension force ( As shown in As discussed earlier, the Wenzel Eq.   The contortion of the contact line at the point of maximum adhesion force can be represented by the The   The linear match (dashed line) between Although only two hydrophilic natural minerals were selected and used in this study, the general correlations recorded and conclusions drawn should apply to all hydrophilic specimens of different surface chemistry that have similar both nano-roughness characteristics and affinity to water in term of most stable contact angle (∼10−70°). This study provides guidelines for engineering hydrophilic surfaces with nano-scale roughness characteristics needed for a control over adhesion of gas bubbles to such surfaces, and benefiting microfluidic and microanalytical systems design. The measurements of adhesion forces for air bubbles were carried out in pure water and therefore, the results do not apply directly to flotation systems unless reagent-free flotation techniques are explored. In flotation of minerals, including pyrite and hematite, additional surface-active reagents such as collectors and frothers are necessary that reduce surface tension of water. Unfortunately, surface-active regents cannot be used in our experimental set-up because their addition would cause weakening of the ring holder-bubble interactions and causing premature detachment of bubble from the ring. Therefore, application of this microbalance to adhesion force measurements in aqueous solutions of surface-active reagents requires design of different bubble holder, which is beyond the scope of this contribution. The spreading, maximum adhesion, and pull-off forces were measured for air bubbles in contact with hydrophilic hematite and pyrite surfaces immersed in water using a sensitive microbalance. Surfaces of minerals were engineered to have the range of nano-scaled (random) surface roughness defined by the root-mean-square (RMS) roughness between 3 and 260 nm. The following specific conclusions result from this research: In qualitative agreement with the Wenzel model, increasing submicroscopic (random) roughness of both hydrophilic specimens enhances the strength of interactions with water making its displacement with air bubble more difficult. The bubble-mineral adhesion force decreased from about 170 to 40–50 μN when RMS increased from 3−4 to 250−260 nm. However, experimental data failed to predict the most stable contact angles on nano-scaled rough surface when using the original Wenzel equation. The surface tension force is the dominant contributor to the maximum adhesion force between bubble and nano-scaled rough surface of hydrophilic minerals of hematite and pyrite. A linear dependence between both maximum adhesion and pull-off forces and RMS values was found for both hydrophilic minerals, which could simplify any future designing of nano-scaled roughness of hydrophilic surfaces interacting with gas bubbles in water. Also, a linear correlation between the maximum adhesion force and most stable contact angle (and its sines function) is reported, indicating that surface tension force dominates bubble adhesive interaction with nano-rough hydrophilic surfaces. The results indicate that the AFM analysis of nano-scaled rough surfaces underestimates the true surface area and calculated roughness factor needed for the Wenzel model. For example, analysis of this factor based on experimental contact angle values and adhesion forces suggest this parameter to be between 1.4 and 2.2 for hydrophilic surfaces with RMS from 3 to 260 nm instead of 1.0–1.2 as AFM analysis indicates.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by the