The Mathews method The shape factor, The induced stress As an empirical method, the stability graph presents some limitations. The most significant ones are Modifications of the Stewart and Trueman Mawdesley et al. In this paper, statistical analysis is used to evaluate the performance and significance of the factors The first modification of the stability graph method was proposed by Potvin In addition, Potvin considered the failure mode in the analysis. The failure mode can be represented by the form of gravity fall, sliding or slabbing. Recently, Bewick and Kaiser Mitri et al. The new rock stress factor, The extended stability database The extended database has been compiled from different mines around the world. Then, some subjectivity in the definition of the stability classes has to be recognized. However, the complete database is considered for this study as it represents the most representative collection of case histories to date. The contingency matrix is used to test the performance of a classifier by comparing the prediction outcomes of the model to known values. For a two-class prediction problem, there are four possible situations. Based on the matrix, the following metrics are defined: The For a perfect classifier, To evaluate the performance of the adjustment factors, an optimization procedure has been developed based on the contingency matrix and performance metrics analysis. The stability boundaries are represented by the following general form The proposed optimization procedure is defined by the following three steps. First, three scenarios of analysis are defined to distinguish the positive and negative values of the predicted outcome. The scenario 1 considers that the positive value correspond to the stable cases, while the negative value correspond to the failure+major failure cases. The scenario 2 considers the failure cases as positive value, and the stable+major failure cases as negative value. The scenario 3 considers the major failure cases as positive value, and the stable+failure cases as negative value. Next, for each scenario the The following rock stress factors are considered for the performance evaluation of the stability boundaries ( The following joint orientation factors are considered for the performance evaluation of the stability boundaries ( The following gravity factors are considered for the performance evaluation of the stability boundaries ( Different combinations of the adjustment factors are defined ( To evaluate the influence of the adjustment factors on stope design, the maximum admissible shape factor The admissible length per face In order to evaluate a relationship between the maximum admissible shape factor per face and the final geometry of the stope, the admissible length of the stope Then, the admissible shape factor The variation of the admissible length of the stope, The average percentage of variation of the admissible length,  From From  The results from In this section, the impact on the determined parameters (  To further evaluate the influence of the factor  This analysis enables to identify local improvements in the definition of the A factor which are used to guide the definition of a new rock stress factor in The same analysis is realized considering the joint orientation factor  Finally, the influence of the factor Following the results of the analysis performed in The performance of the new rock stress factor is tested using the optimization procedure. The results are presented in  In this section, the implications for underground mine design of using the proposed rock stress factor are evaluated. For this purpose 1000 synthetic cases of open stopes are defined. The transversal dimensions and the site conditions for each stope are considered to follow uniform probability distributions between an upper and lower limits ( The lower and upper values of For the evaluation, two different rock stress factor are considered: the original factor, Finally, the average of the admissible shape factor   The objective of the study presented in this paper is to evaluate the performance and significance of the adjustment factors used in the stability graph method. Several adjustment factors are considered, based on a literature review and to the authors knowledge. The performance of theses factors is evaluated using a contingency matrix and a performance metrics analysis. For each case of the considered adjustment factors, the performance metric is maximized to define the most representative boundary of stability. The results and conclusions obtained using the proposed optimization procedure based directly on performance metrics analysis are similar to the ones reported in the literature using a logistic regression approach. Concerning the performance of the adjustment factors, the study highlights that there is no statistical evidence that the use of a modified factor of adjustment Based on the statistical analysis performed in this study, a new rock stress factor In despite of these results, the reader has to note that the stability graph method and the proposed rock stress factor It has to be accepted that the empirical data is subjected to subjectivity and non-accurate measurements. However, several statistical analysis of the stability database have been performed To improve the definition of the adjustment factors and the predictive capabilities of the stability graph method, it is recommended to develop a standardized database. A standardized database is defined here as a combination of cases histories from multiple sources that has been collected, processed and analyzed with a standardized procedure. Moreover, the sustainable growth of mining requires a review and standardization of the design methods. With this objective, an integrated technological platform MineRoc® The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of the