Gouging abrasion occurs in many processes in comminution where large and hard abrasives such as rocks/ores are handled with high contact or impact stresses. In the past decade or so, the National Research Council Canada has systematically investigated the gouging abrasion performance of a wide range of materials per the ASTM G81 standard testing method using a jaw crusher. Materials evaluated include carbon and low alloy steels, high alloy tool steels, austenitic manganese steel, white cast irons, austempered ductile irons, chromium carbide and tungsten carbide overlays. In this paper, the main test results are summarized and the key properties/characteristics that are conducive to enhancing materials’ gouging abrasion resistance are discussed.Gouging abrasion is “a severe form of abrasive wear in which the force between an abrading body and the wearing surface is sufficiently large that a macroscopic gouge, groove, deep scratch, or indentation can be produced in a single contact” ( In the past decade or so, the Mining Wear and Corrosion research team at the National Research Council Canada (NRC) has conducted several campaigns to assess the gouging abrasion resistance of a wide range of potential materials for various industrial clients per the ASTM The main objective of this paper is to review and analyze the gouging abrasion test results obtained so far and to identify key properties/characteristics that are conducive to enhancing materials’ gouging abrasion resistance. The materials selected for evaluation in this program included carbon and low alloy steels, high alloy tool steels, austenitic manganese steel, white cast irons, austempered ductile irons, chromium carbide and tungsten carbide overlays. As stipulated in the ASTM Pre-crushed morainal rock with a size around 20 mm was used as the jaw crusher feed. The compositions of the rock varied over the different campaigns. One example of the rock composition analysis is as follows (wt.%): 44.2% volcanic, 20.7% metamorphic, 18.8% granitic and 16.3% of other rock types. The hardness of the rock was measured using a microhardness tester. Several crushed rocks were mounted in epoxy resin as the samples for the hardness measurement. After curing, the mounted rocks were successively ground/polished by 240, 400, 600, 1000 grit SiC abrasive papers. The hardness values of the polished rocks were measured using a Vickers diamond indenter at normal load of 100 g. The measured hardness values were in the range of 420–689 HV (kgf/mm The dimensions of the test and reference plates are shown in All test surfaces were ground to provide a flat consistent finish, to remove any decarburized layers in the steels and/or also to remove any surface zones in the tungsten carbide overlays that could have suffered sinking of high-density carbide particles in the weld pool during deposition. Hardness tests were carried out on all ground test surfaces. In all the tests, quenched and tempered 100 steel, which conforms to the ASTM A 514 Grade B structural steel standard, has been used as the reference plate material. Its hardness is in the range of 230–273 HB. The test plate materials evaluated in the program along with brief descriptions are listed in The test and reference plates were cleaned and weighed before being installed in the crusher frames. The minimum jaw opening was set at 3.2 mm (0.125 in.) and a total of 908 kg (2000 lb) of prescreened rock was crushed. The minimum opening was reset to 3.2 mm (0.125 in.) after crushing every 227 kg (500 lb) of rock. The test plates were then recleaned and weighed and the mass loss (accuracy of 0.1 g) was recorded. A non-dimensional wear factor, For some of the steels and white iron castings, wear factors were determined after crushing only 455 kg of rock. This was justified through the tests where plates were weighed at four 227 kg intervals up to the ASTM Sections of tested plates were cut for scanning electron microscopy from the regions of highest gouging abrasion attack. These were located approximately 25 mm from the bottom edges of stationary plates. Significant scratching had occurred to the soft reference steel ( One very noticeable characteristic in the jaw crusher gouging abrasion test was that stationary plates suffered much greater attack than movable plates. The ratio of volume losses between the stationary and movable reference plates, The wear factors of tested materials are summarized in Generally speaking, the chromium white iron based materials showed the best gouging abrasion resistance (the lowest wear factors) among the various material classes. The next group of most gouging abrasion resistant materials is tool steels. Despite the large variations of compositions and microstructures, most of the tested tool steels showed similar wear factors. For the tungsten carbide (WC) based PTAW deposits, the performance was disappointing. These overlays had also exhibited low hardness values for their nominal compositions ( The variation of wear factors as a function of material hardness (before testing) is shown in There is a transitional hardness range. At hardness levels below this transitional range, wear factor decreased approximately linearly with the increase in material hardness. At hardness levels above the transitional range, the material hardness showed little effect on the gouging abrasion resistance. The transitional hardness range is very close to the mean value of the hardness of the morainal rock used as the abrasive in the testing, 525 HV. The transitional/critical hardness can be explained by invoking the relationship in As has been noticed in the last section ( In abrasive wear, when the penetration depths of abrasive particles are smaller than the sizes of the hard reinforcement particles (harder than the abrasives) in the microstructure, the hard reinforcement particles can effectively resist the attacks of the abrasive particles and protect the matrix from cutting or ploughing. This is usually the case for WC-based overlays under low stress abrasion conditions, where these materials outperform most of the other types of materials because the relatively large WC particles are hard and bond very well with the matrix. On the other hand, when the penetration depths of abrasive particles are larger than the sizes of the hard reinforcement particles, the reinforcement particles in the microstructure are either cut or ploughed away by the abrasive particles, as is schematically shown in To estimate the penetration depth into a test plate by the crushing rocks in the gouging abrasion test, we measured the loads required to crush the morainal rocks used in the test. The measurement set-up is schematically shown in A similar argument can be applied to explain the small variations in gouging abrasion resistance for the various tool steels, although the chemical compositions are drastically different. Some of the tool steels are strengthened by martensitic transformation (quench and temper), while the others contain different volume fractions of various types of carbides. The particle sizes of reinforcement phases in tool steels are generally very small in diameter, i.e. smaller than 5 μm. In the gouging abrasion test, the penetration depths of abrasives are much larger than the sizes of the reinforcement particles. These hard reinforcement particles could not effectively resist the attacks from the rocks. The contribution of the hard reinforcement particles is mainly to increase the bulk hardness of the tool steels, which is the major parameter in determining their gouging abrasion resistance. In Studies on the hardness of mineral ores ( From Based on our gouging abrasion testing data obtained so far, the following general observations and conclusions can be made: Two groups of materials showed the best gouging abrasion resistance Chromium white cast irons and weld chromium white iron overlays with near eutectic carbon content High alloy/tool steels. In the gouging abrasion test using morainal rock as abrasive, there is a critical material hardness with a value of approximately HV 525 For materials having bulk hardness lower than the critical hardness, increasing the material hardness leads to considerably improved gouging abrasion resistance. For materials having bulk hardness higher than the critical hardness, their gouging abrasion resistance is significantly improved. For these materials, a further increase in gouging abrasion resistance is achieved by improved toughness. To significantly increase gouging abrasion resistance of a material by utilizing work hardening, the work hardened surface should be harder than the abrasive. In gouging abrasion, because the sizes of the reinforcement particles or reinforcement phases in wear-resistant materials are generally smaller than the penetration depths of the abrasive particles (originally smaller or fractured into smaller particles under the very high contact load), the main role of reinforcement particles is to increase the bulk hardness of the materials. When selecting material to resist gouging abrasion in a specific application, if the rock to be handled has a hardness significantly different from that of the morainal rock, the actual rock or a substitute rock having similar hardness, instead of the morainal rock, should be used as the rock material in the gouging abrasion test. The authors would like to express their thanks to the industrial members of the