Synthetic materials allow easy processing and modification for bone defect repairing with a good immunological compatibility and minimal risks of infections and donor site morbidity. But compared with an autologous bone graft, these artificial scaffolds still have limitations in terms of the osteogenic capacity and mechanical properties including excellent strength and toughness of super-light natural bone. In this study, we aimed to construct a bone scaffold with both a biomimetic multi-level hierarchical structure and similar constituents of a natural bone using HA/collagen composite nanofibers. The electrospinning technique and rolling method were used for bottom-up synthesis of this artificial system from nano-level to micro-level and then to macro-level. MicroCT scanning and scanning electron microscopy confirmed successful preparation of the bone scaffold composed of fully assembled microscopic fibers. The mechanical properties of the mineralized scaffolds were double reinforced by a large number of newborn HA nano particles and the chemical bonds. The bonds were formed between HA and collagen within and between the layers of the scaffold's matrix membrane. The scaffold showed an excellent biocompatibility profile. These suggest the scaffold potential for use in bone tissue engineering.Repairing a large bone defect often requires the use of implants, which can be an autologous bone graft, an allogeneic bone graft, or an artificial one [ In the field of biomimetic bone implant materials, calcium phosphate ceramics such as hydroxyapatite (HA) are widely used for constructing artificial bone scaffolds due to their similarity in inorganic composition to a human bone [ The properties of human bone are determined by complex composition, macroscopic structure and precise microstructure. Human bone is composed of nanoscale apatite, collagen and other trace elements, and its microstructure is characterized by bone Haversian motifs, the super microstructure units is composed of mineralized collagen fibers [ In spite of these advancements, the microstructure, composition and properties of the currently artificial materials are far from ideal when compared to the human bone. In this study, we aimed to develop a new bone substitute similar to natural bone in both composition and microstructure using aligned HA/collagen composite nanofibers, which were hierarchically assembled in a bottom-up fashion to simulate the natural human bone structure at the nano-, micro- and macro-level. The mimic multi-level hierarchical artificial bone scaffold rarely reported. Finally, it is desired that the bone scaffold can show excellent mechanical properties and biocompatibility which make it an ideal biomimetic implant for tissue engineering. The sol-gel solution was prepared by dissolving 1.18 g polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) (molecular weight of 1.3 × 10 The HA/collagen nanofiber membrane was soaked in 10× simulated body fluid (SBF, prepared according to the protocols described by Tas et al. [ To construct the multi-level hierarchical HA/collagen composite implant with biomimetic bone Haversian motif, the fibers were first aligned in parallel by electrospinning technique, and the aforementioned composite fiber membrane composed of nanoscale raw HA and collagen were rolled (parallel to the fibers axial) to form the biomimetic bone motifs (500 μm in diameter), which contained 3 bottom-up hierarchical levels: raw materials of HA and collagen (nanoscale), HA/collagen fibers (nanoscale), and composite fiber membrane (microscale). The motifs (the 4th, or the microscale, level of the bone) were paralleled in its axial direction to construct bone Haversian system (5 mm in diameter, macroscale) as the bone scaffolds, which mimicked the hierarchical structure of the natural bone [ The constructed bone scaffold was scanned with micro-computed tomography (microCT) (Siemens Inveon 3125). The resultant datasets were evaluated for the micro-architectural parameters in an Inveon research workplace including the scaffold volume (SV), material volume (MV) of the scaffold, pore size, and the distribution and specific surface area (SS/SV). The porosity analyzed with Inveon research workplace was derived using Eq. The cross-sectional and three-dimensional morphology of the scaffold was observed with microCT. To analyze the fine microscopic structure of the bone scaffold, the transverse and longitudinal sections of the bone scaffolds were magnified step-by-step. To characterize the longitudinal section morphology and microstructure, the motif of the scaffold was torn apart, immersed it in liquid nitrogen for 15 min. According to the standard specimen size range for compression test recommended by Keaveny et al. [ The bone scaffolds were cut into small pieces (6 mm in diameter) and irradiated with short-wavelength UV-light for 30 min, sterilized with 70% ethanol overnight, and washed with phosphate buffer saline (PBS) for 3 times. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) were cultured at 37 °C in Dulbecco's modified Eagle medium (DMEM; Gibco, USA)) supplemented with 10% (V/V) fetal bovine serum (FBS) in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO After 72 h of incubation, the scaffolds were removed and washed twice with cold PBS; the cells adhering to the scaffolds were fixed by immersing the scaffolds in PBS containing 2.5% (V/V) glutaraldehyde for 10 min followed by washing with PBS for 3 times. The scaffolds were carefully placed on glass slides, air dried, stained with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole, dihydrochloride (DAPI), and observed with laser scanning confocal microscope (Carl Zeiss, Jena, Germany) [ For CCK8 assay, the scaffold samples were leached (ISO 10993-12:2012, Biological Evaluation of Medical Devices) with DMEM containing 10% FBS for three days before the experiment. The leach solutions were blended every day and stored at 4 °C until use. The cells were seeded in triplicate in 96-well plates (100 μL per well) at a plating density of 1 × 10 The toxicity of the scaffold material was classified into 5 grades according to RGR: no toxicity (a RGR above 100), grade 1 toxicity (a RGR between 99 and 75), grade 2 toxicity (a RGR between 74 and 50), grade 3 toxicity (a RGR between 49 and 25), grade 4 toxicity (a RGR between 25 and 1), grade 5 toxicity (a RGR less than 0) [ The morphology of the aligned HA/PVP nanofiber membrane was shown in The process of the biomimetic scaffold construction is illustrated in  Microstructural observation with SEM of the composite HA/collagen implant on the transverse section ( SEM of the longitudinal section of the scaffold revealed the parallel alignment of the nanofibers and the biomimetic bone structure at the nanoscale and micro- and macroscopic levels ( As shown in In addition, collagen is rich in amide groups, which can form chemical bond with HA [ According to the available reports, when compared to the mechanical properties of the scaffolds reported, the scaffold simulating multi-level hierarchical bone structure, its initial compression strength is 3 MPa, better than that of mimic honeycomb structure bone scaffold (1.62 MPa) [ We used SEM and CCK-8 assay to assess the biocompatibility of the scaffold by observing MSC growth on the scaffold implant. After culture for 3 days on the implant, numerous MSCs were attached to the composite membranes ( We also observed the growth of MSCs seeded onto the implant using confocal microscopy. After 3 days of incubation, a large number of cells with blue nuclei were observed with a regular distribution over the HA/collagen nanofibers ( The results of CCK-8 assay showed that higher absorbance of the HA/collagen nanofibers implant at different time intervals (24, 48 and 72 h) was shown ( In spite of the many advantages, we found that the composite HA/collagen nanofiber scaffold had still insufficient compressive property after biomineralization compared with the natural bone (the axial compressive strength and young modulus of human compact bone are 131–224 MPa and 17–20 GPa, respectively [ Technically, small micropore and micro-size motifs are not easy to construct, and converting the orientation of the fiber matrix composing the micron motifs is more difficult. The bioinspired control of structure and function is recognized as a promising strategy to enhance bone scaffold performance. Ultimately, these will be achieved by technical advancement in the future. We used bottom-up biomimetic bone structure synthesis from the nanoscale to the micro- and macroscopic levels to construct HA/collagen composite scaffold with a biomimetic bone Haversian microstructure. The mechanical properties of the mineralized scaffolds were improved by the double strengthening, one is a large number of newborn nano-particles HA strengthening, HA particles distributed on the scaffold microstructure; the other is the new chemical bonds strengthening, these bonds between HA and collagen generated within and between the nanofibrous matrix membrane of the scaffold. In addition, the scaffold maintains the fibrillar structures, large specific surface area and through pores suitable for bone tissue engineering, which are beneficial to cell growth, proliferation and material metabolism. Thus, we believe that this biomimetic bone scaffold can provide a promising application for bone tissue engineering. Tierong Bian performed data analyses and wrote the manuscript. Kang Zhao and Yufei Tang contributed to conception of the study. Qingnan Meng, Hua Jiao and Jing Luo contributed to analysis. This work was supported by The raw and processed data required to reproduce these findings cannot be shared at this time due to technical limitations related to file size for CT data sets. Data is available upon request.