The attrition of spherical particles in a periodic cell under shear straining is analysed by distinct element method (DEM). The damage mechanisms of surface wear and fragmentation are under consideration. The side crushing strength (SCS) of single particles is used as the criterion for fragmentation. For surface damage, the abrasive wear by the formation of lateral cracks during shearing is calculated using a model of chipping for the semi-brittle failure mode. The contributions to attrition by surface wear and particle fragmentation are therefore decoupled and quantified. The simulation results are then compared with the experimental data reported previously.
                  The contribution of fragmentation to the overall attrition is found to be dominant over the full range of strains tested in this work in agreement with the experimental data. The extent of attrition predicted by the simulations compares generally well with the experimental data except at the lowest normal stress and at high shear strains. For the former, the reason for the poor agreement is unclear. For the latter, the difference is attributed to the presence of fragments and debris as they affect the contact force distribution and this feature has not been simulated. The parametric sensitivity analyses indicate that the simulation results are sensitive to particle properties such as Young's modulus and the coefficient of friction. Therefore, careful material characterisation is necessary in order to get reliable predictions. The effect of the shear strain rate on particle breakage has also been examined by simulation. The results indicate that the rate of attrition is not sensitive to strain rates normally used for shear cell tests, i.e., of order of 
                        1
                        
                        
                           
                              s
                           
                           
                              -
                              1
                           
                        
                     .The shear cell test is widely used for measuring the attrition rate as well as the mechanical properties of bulk particulate solids ( Computer simulations of attrition in a shear cell was first conducted by  The SCS of single particles is used as the criterion for fragmentation. For surface damage processes, the abrasive wear by the formation of lateral cracks during shearing is calculated using a semi-brittle failure model proposed by The computer simulation of assemblies of contiguous solid particles was pioneered by Due to the limitations of the current computer speeds, it is necessary to introduce periodic boundaries, forming a segment of the annular shear cell. The methods of periodic cell and normal stress control of the rough particle walls, which effectively represent the saw-toothed grooved rings in an annular shear cell, are similar to those used by For the details of the computer code structure and implementations of theoretical contact interaction laws, reference is made to At any time The time step used for the simulations is related to the speed of the Rayleigh surface wave propagation. The time step must be sufficiently small to ensure realistic force transmission rates in the assembly and to prevent numerical instability. Consider one single particle surrounding by a number of neighbouring particles in a packed assembly. There is a time during which the acting force is transmitted from one contact point to another point along the particle surface. The criterion to set up a time step in the computer simulation of granular medium using the DEM is that the time step for calculating the incremental forces and displacements is less than the time it takes for the wave to transverse the minimum size particle in the assembly. Since the speed of Rayleigh surface wave is dependent on the material properties such as shear modulus and density, the time step therefore varies with different particle materials. For an assembly consisting of different material type particles, the critical time step should be the smallest among those determined for different material properties. For the catalyst particle assembly with an average particle radius of 1.0 Damping mechanisms, global and contact damping, are incorporated into the computer code in order to dissipate kinetic energy of the particulate system. Global damping is only used in the process of preparation of the shear cell assembly in order for the assembly to quickly reach a quasi-static equilibrium state. Contact damping is introduced to account for the energy losses through elastic wave propagation and possible plastic deformation, while particles are interacting with each other during shearing. The algorithm adopted for calculating damping coefficients in this study is the same as that of A sample consisting of 700 primary particles was prepared for the computer simulation of the shear cell tests as shown in A servomechanism is used to maintain the normal component of the resultant force constant on the rough particle planes. The servo-control continuously adjusts the velocity of the upper boundary plane along the The procedures of sample preparation are briefly described in the following. Within a given cuboid, primary particles are randomly generated. The assembly is then compacted by applying strain rates in the The particle properties used for simulation are reported by It is well recognised that the attrition in bulk particulate solids, undergoing compression and shear deformation, results from two simultaneous processes of surface damage and body fragmentation ( The depth of the lateral cracks, The ‘strength’ of particles, subjected to compression between two platens, is defined as the load at which a crack propagates through the body of the particle. This is indicated by a sudden drop of the load on the load versus displacement diagram. It causes the particle to split into several fragments; thus the strength is referred to as the SCS. A strength distribution is always observed even for particles with a narrow size distribution because of the presence of flaws and other non-homogeneities. In a bulk granular assembly, a particle has normally more than two opposing contacts and is under multi-force compression. According to the recent work of Computer simulations reported here have been carried out for normal stresses of 50, 100 and 200 The results of the simulations for the normal stress of 100 The contact force distributions within the shear cell are shown in   The strength distribution of the crushed particles during the process of shearing is shown in The effect of normal stress on attrition has also been examined in the simulation studies. Using the same shear strain rate and material properties,  To investigate the effect of material properties on attrition in a shear cell, a distinct advantage of computer simulation over the traditional experimental measurements is that it can change one material property by any magnitude while keeping other properties constant. The effect of friction on particle attrition is shown in Incorporating the measured material properties and damage mechanisms into the computer code TRUBAL, a reasonably good agreement has been achieved between the experimental data and computer predictions of attrition in a shear cell at low strains, where the extent of breakage is low. Except for the normal stress of 50 Using computer simulation, the contributions of fragmentation and surface wear can be separated and the role of each process in attrition can therefore be examined. For various shear strain levels, Computer simulations of attrition of spherical catalyst carrier particles in a shear cell have been carried out in order to obtain a fundamental insight into the process of attrition of bulk particulate solids. Contributions of two damage mechanisms of surface wear and fragmentation to attrition have been separated and it has been shown that for the particle properties simulated here the fragmentation process plays a more dominant role on attrition in the shear cell, in agreement with the experimental observations. For high normal stresses and low shear strains, there is a reasonably good agreement between the simulation results and experimental data. The agreement is poor for other situations and further work is necessary to diagnose the problem. Ignoring the effect of the fragments and debris in the simulations is an obvious contributory factor. The simulation results also suggest that the extent of breakdown is not sensitive to the strain rates normally used for shear cell tests. The parametric sensitivity analyses indicate that the particle properties such as Young's modulus and coefficient of friction have major effects on the attrition.  The work described in this paper was supported by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) of Great Britain under the Process Engineering Programme, for which the authors are grateful.