An integrated experimental study and thermodynamic modelling approach has been used in the investigation of the distribution of As between slag and matte in equilibrium with tridymite in the Cu-Fe-O-S-Si system. The experimental technique involves high-temperature equilibration in sealed quartz ampoule, rapid quenching, and direct measurements of phase compositions using microanalysis techniques. Electron Probe X-ray Microanalysis (EPMA) was used to measure major and minor element concentrations in the matte, slag, and solid phases. The experimentally-determined distribution coefficient of As between slag and matte was found to decrease with decreasing P(SO2) from log L = 0.5 at P(SO2) = 25 kPa to approximately log L = −4.0 at lowest P(SO2), corresponding to metal saturation. Thermodynamic model parameters describing As distribution have been derived based on the present and previous data on the slag/matte, slag/metal, and slag/matte/metal equilibria. The thermodynamic model can be used for the evaluation of distribution of As between phases in the high-temperature pyrometallurgical production and refining of copper.Recent trend shows that the feed for high-temperature pyrometallurgical production of copper is becoming more complex and contains gangue minerals with hazardous elements, such as As. Controlled partitioning of As between slag and matte is one of important factors in industrial copper operations. Knowledge of the distribution of As between phases is essential to optimize smelter performance. The present study is focused on the experimental measurement of the distribution of As between liquid slag and liquid matte. The present and previous experimental data is used for complete thermodynamic modelling of the distribution of As between slag/metal, slag/matte and slag/matte/metal in the Cu-Fe-O-S-Si system. Quantitatively, the distribution of minor elements between the phases is often Johnson et al. Yazawa et al. Roghani et al Henao et al. Accuna and Sherrington Measurements of arsenic distribution between slag and matte from industrial furnaces were carried out by several researchers The summary of available data is given in Research methodology used in this study is similar to the one recently described by the authors The integrated approach used in the present study involves the combination of experimental and thermodynamic modelling studies performed in parallel. A preliminary thermodynamic database first developed from existing literature data is then used to critically evaluate these data, to identify areas of importance for experimental research and to assist in the detailed planning of further individual experiments. The present integrated research program incorporates the experiments on the multi-component systems in the ranges of composition, partial pressures of oxygen and sulfur dioxide that are important to the industrial process conditions. However, the data outside of usual operations is also produced and used in the thermodynamic modelling to reliable thermochemical prediction. The thermodynamic modelling may require a number of cycles of experimental measurement and parameter optimization from binary and ternary to the multi-component systems and back, in order to reach an agreement with the extensive dataset in the low-order and multi-component areas. More detailed description of the database development process and examples of the integrated experimental and thermodynamic modelling approach can be found elsewhere High temperature equilibration, rapid quenching and direct measurement of the compositions of the condensed equilibrated phases using microanalysis techniques was applied to study the complex, multi-component slag/matte/solid equilibria. This technique is based on the general approach developed by the authors and reported in earlier publications The high temperature equilibration of synthetic oxide/sulfide/metal mixtures in the present study was carried out in a sealed quartz ampoule in a vertical tube furnace at T = 1200 °C (1473 K). The Cu in matte and the Fe/SiO Concentrations of components in the phases were measured by an electron probe X-ray microanalyzer (EPMA), JEOL JXA 8200L (trademark of Japan Electron Optics Ltd., Tokyo). The EPMA measurements were set at an acceleration voltage of 15 keV and a probe current of 15 nA. The Duncumb-Philibert ZAF correction procedure supplied with the JEOL JXA 8200L probe was applied. Reference materials from Charles M. Taylor, Stanford, CA were used as standards. The proportions of different oxidation states elements were not measured, and all elemental concentrations were recalculated to selected oxidation states to unambiguously report the compositions of the phases for presentation purposes. Accurate EPMA measurement of As concentrations in the slag and matte phases was ensured by: (i) Setting correct As background positions to avoid possible peak interference with other elements; and (ii) Prolong background measurements to improve the As detection limit of EPMA. The matte phase on quenching was found to contain copper-rich veins, and some of the slag phase was found to contain copper-rich particles. Both types of features had submicron size and formed during the quenching of the samples. Thus, rather than using spot mode with resolution of about 1 μm, the average compositions of the matte and slag phases were determined using EPMA line analysis approach using defocused beam with a spot size of 10 and 50 μm depending on the available area of analysis in the samples. The increase of the EPMA probe diameter was found to reduce the uncertainty and did not change the accuracy of the phase composition measurements, as demonstrated in a previous study The thermodynamic database was developed through the thermodynamic “optimization” of the system. In this approach, all available thermodynamic and phase equilibrium data for the system are critically evaluated simultaneously to obtain one set of model equations for the Gibbs energies of all phases as functions of temperature and composition. From these equations, the thermodynamic properties and the phase diagrams can be back-calculated. Thermodynamic property data, such as activity data, can aid in the evaluation of the phase diagram, and phase diagram measurements can be used to deduce thermodynamic properties Selection of appropriate thermodynamic models for all phases in a system is important. Recent publication by Shishin et al. Complete thermodynamic assessment of the Cu-Fe-O-S-Si system and all subsystems was recently presented The experimental data from the present study together with the information available from literature have been used to introduce arsenic in the thermodynamic models of slag and matte/metal phases. The resulting database is compatible with the FactSage 7.2 thermodynamic package The example of back-scattered electron image of the sample from the closed-system equilibration of the slag/matte/tridymite in the Cu-Fe-O-S-Si system at 1200 °C (1473 K) is provided in The measured phase compositions from the slag/matte/tridymite equilibria experiments are summarized in The oxygen partial pressure and distribution of elements between matte and slag as a function of Cu in matte from the gas/slag/matte/tridymite equilibria in the Cu-Fe-O-S-Si-As system at T = 1200 °C (1473 K) are plotted in The experimental distribution ratios of As between slag and matte in equilibrium with tridymite in the Cu-Fe-O-S-Si system at T = 1200 °C (1473 K) as a function of Cu in matte are provided in Thermodynamic model parameters for the Cu-Fe-O-S-Si system without As were presented in earlier publications In the present study, As For a given temperature, Reaction Thus, the slope of the curve log Existing Matte/metal solution The parameters of the thermodynamic models of the present study were optimized to simultaneously describe the distribution coefficients for three types of experimental data in the Cu-Fe-O-S-Si-(As) system: slag/matte at high For the matte/metal phase, the properties of liquid As and Cu-As parameters were recently assessed by Shishin and Jak Within the slag solution model, the Gibbs energies of the end-members As Accurate information on the distribution of As between slag and matte phases have been obtained in the present study. The uncertainties due to entrained matte droplets in the slag phase or slag inclusions in the matte phase in the measurement have been eliminated by the use of the microanalysis techniques ( The distribution of major elements between phases in the system was not significantly influenced by the presence of low concentrations of As. The experimentally-determined distribution ratios of As between slag and matte decreases with decreasing sulfur dioxide partial pressure. The thermodynamic model parameters describes this trend. At the slag/matte/tridymite equilibria and high At Cu in matte below 75 wt% and the slag/matte/copper equilibria, the predicted distribution coefficients of As between slag and matte ( With major factor influencing the distribution of arsenic within the Cu-Fe-O-S-S-(As) system established, it is now possible to investigate the effect of Al The distribution of As between phases in the Cu-Fe-O-S-Si system have been experimentally studied in the slag/matte/solid equilibria combined with thermodynamic modelling work in the slag/metal/solid, slag/matte/solid, and slag/matte/copper/solid equilibria. The new data together with the thermodynamic parameters can be used to evaluate the As distribution during the pyrometallurgical production of copper. The present study is a part of a larger integrated experimental and thermodynamic modelling research program to revise the thermo-chemistry of complex copper-containing, multicomponent, multiphase systems. The authors would like to thank the