The recovery of niobium and tantalum from a low-grade niobium–tantalum ore by using highly concentrated caustic potash as an alternative to hydrofluoric acid has been investigated. Experiments on the leaching behavior of niobium and tantalum, as well as other associated impurities, such as titanium, iron, manganese, silicon, and aluminum were carried out. The effect of various parameters including leaching temperature, KOH concentration, leaching time, alkali-to-ore mass ratio and particle size on the agitation leaching was examined. When finely ground ore (−61 μm) reacted with KOH solution (84 wt.%) in a mass ratio of alkali-to-ore of 7:1 at 300 °C for 60 min, almost complete extraction of both niobium and tantalum was achieved while the extraction of titanium was 85% and the extraction of other impurities in the ore was less than 35%.The commercial value of niobium and tantalum in the metallurgical, nuclear and electronic industries, etc., makes their recovery desirable in relatively concentrated form. According to the reports of the Tantalum–Niobium International Study Centre (TIC), the total production of tantalum from raw materials exceeded 5 million tonnes Ta The chemical study of niobium and tantalum elements shows that the decomposition of their ore involves a large number of procedures. Among them, alkali fusion ( Recently, a new process was proposed for the leaching of niobium and tantalum from a low-grade niobium–tantalum ore by the Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing. Based on the principles of cleaner production, the new process can serve as an alternative to the traditional HF process. In the new process, the ore is decomposed in a fluid medium of concentrated KOH solution under atmospheric pressure, and results in faster kinetics compared to leaching with HF. As a result, the decomposition of niobium–tantalum ore is greatly improved. The reactions of niobium–tantalum ore with KOH solution are as follows ( Reaction (2) can be expressed as follows: The soluble K The technique of leaching niobium and tantalum from a low-grade niobium–tantalum ore by highly concentrated caustic potash solution is under development, and there is a general lack of information. The present work mainly focuses on the leaching behaviour of niobium, tantalum and other associated impurities in the low-grade niobium–tantalum ore, such as titanium, iron, manganese, silicon, and aluminium. The operation parameters examined include leaching temperature, KOH concentration, leaching time, alkali-to-ore mass ratio and particle size. All the chemical reagents employed were of analytical grade and deionized water was used in the corresponding procedures during the experiments. The niobium–tantalum ore sample used was supplied by the Ningxia Orient Tantalum Industry Co., Ltd, Ningxia, P. R. China. The result of X-ray diffraction analysis of the ore sample (XRD, using Phillips PW223/30) is shown in The batch reactor used in this work was a 400 mL SUS316 stainless steel canister equipped with a thermometer, a mechanical stirrer and a reflux condenser. The reactor was heated by an oil bath, whose temperature was thermostatically controlled by an electrical bar, with a precision of ± All the experiments were conducted in batches. For each run, 150 g solid KOH was first charged into the reactor, and deionized water was added to the required amount. Then the system was heated to the required leaching temperature under the condition of continuous stirring. When the temperature reached the pre-set value and remained stable, a certain amount of niobium–tantalum ore sample was added to the reactor. The mixture of all the reactants was intensively stirred under atmospheric pressure. At the appropriate time intervals during a run, approximately 1 g samples of the reaction mixture were taken out, quenched, weighed up, and then dissolved into 50 mL deionised water and filtered. After that, the filtrate was diluted to 100 mL. Finally, the liquid sample was analysed by ICP spectrometry to determine the contents of niobium and tantalum, as well as titanium, iron, manganese, silicon and aluminium. Both raw ore and partially leached ore were examined under the scanning electron microscope with EDAX facility (JEOL, Japan).  The experimental results obtained under different KOH concentrations are shown in  The experimental results of leaching tests under different alkali-to-ore mass ratio are shown in The experimental results of leaching tests under different mean particle size of the ore are shown in Leaching of a low-grade niobium–tantalum ore by a highly concentrated caustic potash solution was found to be an effective way for the dissolution of niobium and tantalum. The optimum leaching conditions were obtained by mixing the finely ground ore (− Financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 50234040 is gratefully acknowledged.