The Macraes gold mine, in southern New Zealand, was developed in a low grade mesothermal deposit. A pressure–oxidation plant was commissioned in 1999 to oxidize pyrite and arsenopyrite in the ore and release gold from within the sulphide grains. Pressure–oxidation discharges include anhydrite, jarosite, and amorphous Fe arsenates with molar Fe/As of 2–7 and up to 0.5 mol% S. Discharge waters contain dissolved Fe(II). There were profound chemical changes within the mine tailings system over the transition to pressure–oxidation. Dissolved sulphate of tailing waters increased to ca. 4000 mg/l, and the waters rapidly became saturated with respect to gypsum. Gypsum was precipitated in many parts of the water pathways at the plant and an estimated 1–4 tonnes of gypsum/day was precipitated in the tailings of the dam structure. The pH of tailings lowered from >8 to 6 with pressure–oxidation, but then evolved towards 8 again. The observed pH was a result of two opposing chemical processes: acidification due to oxidation of dissolved Fe(II) and dissolution of calcite. Calcite forms ca. 5 wt.% of tailings and is sufficiently abundant to dominate the chemistry of tailings. Dissolved arsenic in waters of tailings decreased from >10 to <<1 ppm after pressure–oxidation began, because the amorphous Fe arsenates are less soluble than arsenopyrite. Adsorption of dissolved As onto Fe(III) oxyhydroxides is effective in the tailings system, and strongly limits As discharge. Any As discharge will move through the tailings of the dam system at <30 mm/year.Modern gold mines discharge voluminous tailings that formed as an essential part of the process of extracting small amounts of gold from large volumes of rock, typically <10 g Au/tonne of rock. Tailings are generally impounded behind large dams, and when mining ceases, these impoundments are capped, re-vegetated, and left as permanent features on the landscape Pressure–oxidation technology has been developing over the past 10 years and this technology is becoming widely used in mineral processing. The principal reason for using this technology is to increase the proportion of gold extracted from the ore, in ores that are otherwise refractory. The oxidation process decomposes sulphides which commonly contain submicroscopic and/or solid solution gold, and this gold then becomes accessible to cyanide solutions. Pressure–oxidation has profound effects on the mineralogy of the ore, and therefore the mineralogy of the material discharged into tailing impoundments. Consequently, the chemical processes occurring in impoundments containing tailings from pressure–oxidation plants are very different from those occurring in traditional sulphide-bearing tailings. This study describes the chemical changes which occurred in a mine tailing impoundment during a transition from traditional carbon-in-pulp cyanidation (CIL) to pressure–oxidation treatment coupled with cyanidation. Changes to water chemistry in the tailings over this transition are examined in the context of changes to ore and tailings mineralogy. From these observations, attempts are made to predict future changes within the tailings, for at least the short and medium term. The principal issues are acid generation, acid neutralisation, and arsenic mobility, and these are addressed in detail in the paper. The Macraes mine extracts gold from a schist-hosted mesothermal gold vein deposit in southern New Zealand The pressure–oxidation system centres on the autoclave, a large vessel in which the ore sulphide concentrate is oxidized at 225 °C under pressure with high-oxygen atmosphere. Sulphide oxidation results in acidification, which is partially neutralised with limestone added with the ore feed. Mineral precipitates, or scales, are left on the walls of the autoclave and slurry pipelines downstream of the autoclave. These minerals, identified by X-ray diffraction (XRD), give some indication of the nature of the chemical system at each step. Principal scale and discharge minerals are listed at various key points in the plant system in When the pressure–oxidation discharge material has passed through the cyanidation (CIL) tanks, it is mixed with tailings from the flotation stage before being discharged to the tailings impoundment. Flotation tailings consist almost entirely of schist host rock (predominantly quartz, albite, muscovite, chlorite, and calcite). The mixed tailing impoundment depicted in A wide variety of minerals forms as scale up to 5 cm thick on the walls of the autoclave, with individual crystals up to 10 mm long. The crystalline material has been identified by XRD, and amorphous material partially characterized by electron microprobe. The mineral suite is dominated by anhydrite, Fe(II) sulphates, quartz, jarosite, alunite, hematite, and amorphous arsenates Solid discharge material from the autoclave was collected as CIL tailings before these are mixed with the flotation tailings. The autoclave discharge material is a fine-grained brown powder when dried. XRD analysis of the material shows that the powder is dominated by anhydrite and muscovite, and no other identifiable minerals can be discerned from the XRD spectrum because of the dominance of these two minerals. About 1 g of effluent powder was mounted in epoxy resin and polished for examination by microprobe. Based on microprobe chemistry and knowledge of the autoclave system (above; The Fe arsenate makes up about 20% of the discharge material, and should be discernable in XRD spectra if it is crystalline. Since it is not apparent in the XRD spectra, it is assumed to be amorphous. This amorphous Fe arsenate forms angular equant grains that range in size from 10 μm to less than 1 μm across. Smaller grains are locally clustered into larger composite particles, forming irregular masses. Some such masses coat other particles such as anhydrite and muscovite. Anhydrite grains are also generally irregular, and form most of the background mass of material. However, numerous fully or partly formed anhydrite crystals also occur. Some crystals amalgamate into star-shaped clusters, while elsewhere, anhydrite coats muscovite and Fe arsenate grains. There are two distinct types of Fe arsenate: one which has little sulphur, and one which has significant sulphur content. Semiquantitative microprobe analyses show a wide range in both molar Fe/As ratio (2–7) and in sulphur content (0.04 to 0.5 mol% S). None of the Fe arsenate discharged from the autoclave is scorodite (FeAsO Additional minerals that have been identified by microprobe in the fine grained discharge material are muscovite, quartz, chlorite, and feldspar, all of which were in the ore feed. The calcite which appears in the discharge material (above) may be from the ore feed or from the limestone added separately Slurry from the CIL plant, containing the brown pressure–oxidation discharge material, was discharged into the mixed tailings impoundment with the flotation tailings Decant water composition was monitored regularly as part of the dam monitoring programme, and this provides an important indicator of chemical changes throughout the processing system. Chemical variations with time from early 1998 to early 2001 are examined in this study through change to pressure–oxidation in mid-1999. Chemical analyses were conducted by Chemsearch (University of Otago Chemistry Department), an internationally accredited laboratory. Techniques and detection limits are outlined by Graphical summaries of chemical changes with time over the transition to pressure–oxidation are shown in Dissolved sodium in the decant water has been variable since 1998 Decant water iron content was generally low and consistent before pressure–oxidation Decant pond water (pH=6) sampled in November 1999 and kept in a plastic bottle for 3 months was noted to have pH of 3.6 when remeasured. The water was clear when sampled, but was brown in colour when re-examined in March 2000. In order to replicate these phenomena and to determine if the phenomena were peculiar to initiation of pressure–oxidation only, an additional sample of decant pond water was taken in April 2000. The sample was kept in a dark room at 18–20 °C, and the pH was measured at irregular intervals over the subsequent 6 weeks The pH of the decant water showed a steady but nonlinear decrease over the experimental time, from an initial value of 6.1 to 3.8. The rate of pH change accelerated after about 1 month and then slowed once the pH near 4 was reached Tailings in the mixed tailing impoundment are essentially fan and lake sediments deposited downstream of discharge points which are rotated around the dam perimeter. The tailings are sandy with a substantial silt and mud component, and dewater rapidly to leave a firm open-textured sediment with about 50% pore space occupied by water (porosity determined by weight loss on drying; Four holes were dug with spades in the tailings in April 2000, on a beach about 50 m from the edge of the decant pond, in tailings which were firm enough to support the weight of a person. The deepest hole was just over 1 m below surface, and digging stopped at this depth because water filled the base of the hole. The hole depths permitted sampling of tailings ca. 2 months old (estimated from normal deposition rates), and did not penetrate back to the onset of pressure–oxidation. Samples of water-saturated soft layers were taken, where present, for extraction of pore water by centrifuge. The mineralogical makeup of the different sedimentary layers is essentially the same; they differ only in grain size. The tailings are dominated by quartz, feldspar, muscovite, and chlorite, the principal constituents of the schist host rock. In addition, clean monominerallic calcite detrital grains form about 5% of the tailings; this may be excess limestone from plant. This calcite is petrographically different from most schist calcite, which is predominantly finer grained and intergrown with other minerals. Autoclave discharge material is difficult to identify in the tailings, but it appears to occur as scattered yellow brown composite grains with a smudgy appearance. These grains mainly consist of anhydrite, but smudgy brown opaque portions of some grains with elevated As (semiquantitative microprobe examination) are probably amorphous Fe arsenate. These grains have sharp margins and show no signs of in situ alteration. Some anhydrite/Fe arsenate composite grains have overgrowths of prismatic gypsum crystal clusters. The gypsum could be formed by precipitation from solution, or mineralogical transformation from anhydrite; textural observations are ambiguous. Opaque minerals (incident light microscopy) in the tailings are pyrite, arsenopyrite, and rutile. These form <<1% of the tailings and occur as scattered individual grains and as inclusions in silicates. The sulphides show no sign of alteration before or after deposition, and are assumed to be from the flotation tailing portion of the circuit In situ pore water pH was measured wherever sediment was sufficiently wet to permit reproducible measurements. In situ pH in the tailings ranged from 6.5 to 7.5, with most values near pH 7. Variation of up to 0.5 pH unit occurs between samples in close proximity (within 10 cm). Pore waters extracted from samples by centrifuge were analysed for arsenic and copper, the metals most likely to be mobile in the tailings The mixed tailing dam is a very large structure approximately 1 km across and nearly 100 m high. It consists of disaggregated schist waste rock from the various excavations in the Macraes area. The upstream facing is relatively clay-rich and less permeable than the main dam structure, and includes permeable quartz gravel zones which form chimney drains to channel water to the base of the dam All dam waters are ultimately captured at a schist bedrock depression, Sump B, at the toe of the dam, from where they are recycled back to the processing plant Dissolved sulphate concentrations in Sump B waters have remained approximately constant at 1000–1500 mg/l throughout the transition to pressure–oxidation Dissolved sulphate is the most prominent species from tailings which reaches Sump B and the amount of dissolved sulphate increased slowly but steadily from the time the mine opened in 1989 Saturation index is the ratio of products of the concentrations (activities) of dissolved species divided by the solubility product The saturation index for gypsum in decant waters before pressure–oxidation was consistently near 1 The constancy of calcium and sulphate concentrations at Sump B Pipes transmitting pressure–oxidation discharge from the plant to the decant pond become scaled with gypsum (CaSO Sump B Ca and sulphate concentrations changed little over the transition to pressure–oxidation, whereas in the decant pond, these components rose steadily A similar calculation can be made using differences in Ca concentrations between decant pond and chimney drains. The calcium results for October 1999 are identical to the same calculation using sulphate. However at later dates, the correspondence is much poorer with the Ca calculation giving consistently lower estimates of gypsum precipitation mass than the sulphate calculation. The differences between decant water Ca and chimney drain Ca are smaller than sulphate difference for these waters. This discrepancy may be due to dissolution of calcite by chimney drain waters as they pass through the tailings into the dam structure Fe(II) is not stable in oxygenated surface waters in contact with the atmosphere, and it oxidizes to Fe(III). At near-neutral pH, the oxidation reaction releases 2 mol of hydrogen ions for each mole of iron oxidized Despite the predicted low of pH near 2 for decant pond water, the rate of pH drop as measured in the laboratory slowed at pH of 3.9 Once oxygen has diffused to Fe(II) ions, the rate of oxidation affects the rate of generation of hydrogen ions and subsequent pH drop. This reaction rate is determinable from the empirical rate law for the oxidation reaction Tailings were discharged at pH near 6, and this rapidly evolved to 6.5 within 1 day. All tailings examined in sampling holes had pH>6.5, including the youngest (shallowest) layers which have pH near 7 only a few days after deposition. Calcite is a common mineral in the tailings, as a significant component of the schist and as material added in the feed to neutralise acidity in the plant (above; The rise in pH immediately on deposition caused the pore waters to trend towards calcite equilibrium. Calcite dissolution reactions and rates near calcite equilibrium are slower and more complex than in lower pH solutions The tailings contain arsenic in two forms: solid Fe arsenate from the autoclave and dissolved As. The total solid As content of the tailings is <1%. The dissolved arsenic content of tailings water in the decant pond, and in pore waters in contact with the As-bearing sediments, is very low (<1 mg/l; The dissolved arsenic content of tailing waters from pressure–oxidation is distinctly lower than that prevailing before pressure–oxidation. The initially high As was due to oxidation and dissolution of arsenopyrite in the processing plant Experimental work on the solubility of Fe arsenates has shown that solubility is affected by the Fe/As ratio, the amount of sulphur in the structure, and the pH of the solution Adsorption of As from discharge waters occurred onto perpetually regenerating Fe(III) oxyhydroxide at Sump B, keeping dissolved As very low in discharge waters, which take about 12 days to follow the ca. 1 km flow path through the dam, or ca. 80 m/day Pressure–oxidation technology imposed on arsenopyrite- and pyrite-bearing gold ore results in substantial changes in mineralogy of mine processing plant discharge material. The principle new minerals are anhydrite, jarosite, and amorphous Fe arsenates. The change from traditional cyanidation to pressure–oxidation at the Macraes Mine resulted in major chemical changes in the mine tailings system, as summarised in This study was financed by the New Zealand Foundation for Research, Science and Technology, with additional support from GRD Macraes. The work would not have been possible without the enthusiasm and logistical support of GRD Macraes personnel at the Macraes site, particularly D. Wilson, Q. Johnston, M. Cadzow, S. LaBrooy, and A. Marin. Technical assistance from D. Chappell and B. Grant facilitated field and laboratory work.