Acetone–methanol, methyl acetate–methanol and methanol–chloroform binary extractive single column distillation systems were simulated with the HYSYS software platform, to investigate the effects of solvent feed entry stages, solvent split stream feed and solvent condition on the separation. Water was used in all of the simulations as the solvent. The simulations supported data and findings from experimental column studies of the same systems.
                  A rigorous simulation of the acetone–methanol system including a secondary stripping column and recycle loop was established to simulate an industrially relevant situation. This simulation enabled an economic evaluation of the process to be made. It was found for feed mixtures containing 25, 50 and 75mol% methanol, the optimum reflux ratios were found to be 3.5, 3.5 and 4.2, respectively. As a consequence one column design could separate binary feed of varying composition between 25 and 75% methanol. The optimum number of ideal stages for the primary column for an equimolar binary feed was determined to be 73. When maintaining a constant solvent flow, the distance between the split feed entry stages had no effect on the economic potential (EP) of the system.Azeotropes are complex, non-ideal mixtures that occur when the components of the mixture have low relative volatilities. The components of these mixtures are very difficult and hence expensive to separate. They can be separated effectively by means of extractive distillation As the relative volatility of the mixture is raised; the light key can be collected from the top of the distillation column and the mixture of heavy key and solvent retrieved from the column bottom product for subsequent separation. Extractive distillation has found a vast array of diverse applications from the separation of organic compounds in cigarette smoke However, there are few publications on the computer simulation of extractive distillation and in some the software used is now outdated acetone–methanol and water; methyl acetate–methanol and water; methanol–chloroform and water. This particular study showed that by increasing the distance between the column process feed and the extractive solvent feed lead to a 35–40% reduction in consumption of the solvent. It was also shown that splitting the solvent feed into two streams into the column lead to a further 25–30% reduction in solvent consumption. These results were confirmed via a HYSYS simulation. Similar work The study within this paper is closely related to the experimental studies of the three aforementioned binary component extractive distillation systems The Van Laar fluid package was used previously The previous study The effect of the entry stages of the solvent feed on the separation was then investigated utilising these three established simulations. To do this the binary feed position was maintained at tray 2, whilst the solvent feed stages was varied from stages 3 to 8 (see The three single column simulations were then adapted whilst keeping all other parameters constant to simulate equal-split feed extractive distillation, in order to investigate its effect on the top product composition of each component system. This investigation consisted of the independent variation of two parameters: the gap between the two solvent entry streams of equal flowrate and the entry stage at which the upper split solvent feed stream entered the column. This study provided an optimum entry stage and solvent split distance for each of the three component systems under study. The results of both investigations are given in It has been shown The three initial eight stages HYSYS simulations were thus used to vary the feed temperature and similarly solvent temperature. In order to perform an economic analysis, simulations producing products of commercially useful concentrations were required and a second column was needed to separate the bottom product from the first column, producing high concentrations of both methanol and water. Low impurity water is needed for the recycle, so as not to adversely affect the performance of the primary column. The second column for this system was initially set up using the short-cut column design facility to obtain an initial estimate for the number of trays required and the reflux ratio needed in the column. The column was then established with the rigorous column facility and converged successfully. The number of trays and the feed position in the column were then adjusted to enable the column to produce an industrially useful top product of 99.9% methanol and a bottom product containing less than 0.001% water. Thirty-four ideal trays were found to be the optimum, with the feed entering at the 18th stage from the bottom, using a reflux ratio of 3.86. A similar process was carried out in the first column to increase the concentration of the acetone to 99%. A very small amount of solvent make up was required to maintain a The minimum economic potential (EP) was used as the optimisation parameter, using In this optimisation A limitation of the economic optimisation research is that very small variations in product composition affect the overall revenue produced and hence the final economic potential of that particular case. Hence if this HYSYS simulation were to be used to improve an existing column or group of columns via a retrofit, careful analysis would be required before hand to ascertain or estimate the agreement of the simulation with actual plant data. Several simplifying assumptions were made when establishing the economic analysis of the HYSYS simulation. It was assumed that within the two reboilers all heating energy was provided from the condensing of steam alone, the effects of sensible heating were considered negligible. This appeared plausible enough to provide heat duty data from which to obtain a capital investment estimate. In addition a heat loss model was not assigned to any of the process vessels or equipment; this again seemed a reasonable assumption considering the level of accuracy used throughout during the fixed cost estimation. The simulation was subsequently used in order to evaluate the economic effect of varying the reflux ratio of the primary column. The secondary column was operated under constant reflux ratio. The number of trays in each column was kept constant. The economic potential relationship ( These are very close indeed and suggest that any binary feed from within the range 25 to 75% acetone–methanol could be separated within the same plant, with little loss in economic potential as a consequence, and hence no requirement for plant modifications to process a different feed composition. An economic study of the number of primary column ideal stages depended on the grade of acetone produced by the primary column. The number of trays was varied between 20, where commercially worthless acetone was produced and 76, where high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) grade acetone was produced. As the secondary column was not being altered the resultant methanol composition produced was constant, HPLC grade. The optimum number of stages is shown in It was found that the optimum solvent feed stage, based on purity of top product, was stage 25, with the binary feed entering at stage 5. Hence with the optimum number of trays at 73, described above, there is a gap of 48 stages between the solvent feed and top column stage. This confirms the previous findings of This study did not account for variations of Further simulations with equal-split solvent feed showed a negligible effect on the overall economic performance. Any reduction in capital cost due to one or two fewer trays would be offset by having more input streams. This study describes the simulation of three binary extractive distillation columns using the HYSYS computer software. The use of a particular fluid package (the Wilson package) enabled the successful simulation of the acetone–methanol, methyl acetate–methanol and methanol–chloroform separations. These simulations enabled the effect of the position of the solvent feed stream, split feed stream of solvent and the temperature of the solvent to be investigated. For the single column, single solvent feed cases, it was found that the concentration of the more volatile component in the top product decreased with increasing solvent feed position for all three systems in agreement with previous studies For the split stream solvent feed cases, the concentration of methanol in the top product decreased with increased split feed distance, i.e. proximity of solvent feed to top tray. It was shown for both the single and split feed cases that a large gap was required between the solvent feed entry stage and the top of the column, to minimise the amount of solvent in the top product. A realistic recycle simulation with a secondary stripping column was successfully established for the acetone–methanol case. An economic analysis was subsequently performed indicating that one column design could optimally separate binary feed of varying composition between 25 and 75% methanol. In addition it was found that previous work