This review summarises the formation of aerated flocs or aeroflocs and describes their use in solid/liquid or liquid/oil/water separations during flocculation–flotation wastewater treatment. Here, the key future flocculation devices, techniques and trends are reviewed. Knowledge regarding the formation of aeroflocs and their current applications will be used for future applications and lead to the development of compact and high-throughput devices for rapid flocculation–flotation separations.Flocculation–flotation processes have been widely used in water and wastewater treatment (urban and industrial), mineral processing, papermaking and hydrometallurgical treatments. Overall, the objective is to efficiently use solid/liquid, liquid/solid/oil or oil/water separations in various technical applications, which include the following: fine ore processing by selective flocculation; oily agglomeration of coal and gold particles; thickening of flotation concentrates; removing precipitated pollutant ions, suspended particles, organic matter, emulsified oils or residual organics reagents; separating precipitates from “neutralised” acid mine drainages; and thickening, filtration, settling and flotation in effluent treatment ( Rapid (aerated) floc–flotation is of great importance in effluent treatment with or without water reuse. In addition, the application of floc–flotation in mineral processing may be possible, especially in mineral separation by selective flocculation at the solid/liquid stage ( In this context, various important research studies have demonstrated significant improvements in the flocculation–flotation processes. These improvements were mainly from the generation of aerated flocs (also namely, aeroflocs), which are the central subjects of this short review. Aerated flocs are structures composed of flocculated particles, polymers and air bubbles. These flocs (with trapped and attached bubbles) become light and rapidly rise (high-rate flotation) ( The terms “aerated flocs” and “aeroflocs” come from an analogy to the aggregates generated in mineral processing flotation that are called aeroflocs (a cluster of mineralised bubbles) ( Herein, this work summarises the basic principles and applications of aeroflocs in water and wastewater treatment. Moreover, it is believed that rapid floc formation may create opportunities for additional applications and scientific studies. In the 2000s a number of articles ( a large size, an up-rising rate significantly higher than independent bubbles of gas (air), a high shear resistance during turbulent conditions, and a low moisture content. However, although these studies provided useful information, additional investigation is needed. In this context, According to some authors, the generation of the aerated floc structures might occur “in situ” after injection of air under pressure and turbulence. In addition, further investigation showed that aeroflocs may form after injection of air or air-saturated water during the flocculation stage. In the first case, air bubbles are formed by introduction of air in a suspension at a high shearing rate by using flow constrictors as orifices and needle valves, venturi or static mixers. In this case, a wide size distribution of air bubbles is generated and the air bubble size range depends on the air/water interfacial tension. Conversely, when the air-saturated water is depressurised in needle valves or orifice plates, consistent 30–70 Thus, aeroflocs are formed by either form of injection and the following mechanisms are held responsible for their generation. Polymer precipitation at the air/liquid interface would occur in the presence of excess air. In this case, a fraction of macromolecules would precipitate by entrapping bubbles within the polymeric structure. Thus, the precipitation of a polymer may explain the observation of flocs with high shear strength. Elongated feature of the flocs can result from the uncoiling of polymeric chains. This process results from salting out at the water/air interface (under a high shear rate). In these conditions, the repulsive hydrophobic forces between the polymer and the liquid phase are reduced by the presence of the hydrophobic phase (air). Consequently, fewer molecule interstices are available to be filled by water, which results in flocs that have higher solids content. Coalescence of fine bubbles inside and on the surface of the flocs may occur. In this case, the entrapped bubbles coalesce and the resulting large bubbles rise at a high speed. Bubble-particle collisions and attachment and detachment phenomena that are similar to what happens during the flotation of mineral ores also may occur. Heterogeneous precipitation of pressurised gas may occur at the internal and external surfaces of the flocs. In this case, the precipitation of the dissolved gas that results in bubbles is known as “cavitation” or the formation of gas wells in a continuous liquid phase. The first stage of cavitation is the generation of the gas nuclei, also referred to as bubble nucleation or dissolved gas precipitation. Bubble nucleation, which occurs in the homogeneous phase (liquid) or on the solid surfaces (heterogeneous phase) may also occur. The cavitation process is enhanced in the presence of dust or mineral particles. These particles may act as nuclei for the bubbles that arise from small amounts of non-dissolved air in the particle pores. Moreover, the internal roughness of the containers may enhance the cavitation phenomenon (this process has been modelled by several researchers). The interactions between air bubbles and polymeric macromolecules (flocculants) have recently been revealed by The upcoming and efficient techniques and the patents and technologies associated with aerated flocs have been discussed by several authors ( Some of these techniques and applications have been developed in our research group, and a few are summarised as follows. The FGR consists of an innovative helical mixing reactor for rapid aggregation followed by a solid–liquid separation. In this device, the flocculant is dispersed by the slurry flow through the helical tubes, which permits the occurrence of both polymer adsorption and flocculation within seconds. Additional details are described in the trademarked Flocs Generator Reactor (FGR) patent ( The mixing regime has been characterised as a plug flow with small dispersion, which has ideal hydrodynamic conditions for the reagent and the growth of flocs. However, FGR may be employed as a hydraulic flocculator or as rapid flocculation–flotation machine if microbubbles are injected ( A schematic of aeroflocs generation in the FGR by introduction of air microbubbles is shown in Recently, several applications of the FGR have been reported, which include tap (potable) water clarification, treated wastewater reuse and acid mining drainage (AMD) treatment ( In potable water clarification studies, This process yielded treated water with reduced turbidity (approximately 87%), which enabled the formation of flocs. The authors believed that the HR-DAF has a great potential for tap (potable) water clarification at high hydraulic loading capacities, shorter residence times (especially in the flocculation stage) and a smaller foot print. In addition, this technique has been successful applied to the treatment of coal acid mining drainage (AMD) in Southern Brazil. Herein, some authors ( Therefore, these results showed that both flotation and lamellar settling (LS) had similar efficiencies (at pH 9) for the removal of flocs containing heavy metals (>90%). However, both units were compact and took advantage of the rapid flocculation in the FGR, which allowed for quality water treatment. In fact, the treated water was nearly free of heavy metal ions, had a low BOD (biological oxygen demand), low TOC (total organic content), a low solids content and could be easily reused for irrigation, industrial processes or wash water (among others, streets, vehicles, dust control). The FF reactor is a special design (zigzag or static mixer type) for generating light flocs (aerated flocs) that are formed in the presence of polymers, air bubbles (injected air), high shearing force and a high head loss (or velocity gradient) ( Applications of the FF technique include the separation of oil from oil-in-water emulsions, flocculation–flotation of suspended (dispersed) solids and water treatment and reuse form washing vehicles. The resulting flocs were rapidly formed inside the flocculator and in the flotation separator. The resulting large and low density flocs floated within seconds. The extra air exited the flotation device through a special water seal in the top (avoiding flow turbulence). These results showed an excellent removal of oil, turbidity and suspended solids with chemical oxygen demands of 91%, 85%, 88% and 54%, respectively. The authors concluded that the process efficiency was, in all cases, a function of the trilogy, head loss, type (and concentration) of flocculant and air flow rate. In addition they believed in its potential for treating large volumes of oily effluents. Another important application of the FF technique is in the flocculation–flotation of suspended (dispersed) mineral solids. Another application of the FF technique (the patented version) is the treatment and reuse (back to the washing process) of water from washing vehicles (mainly car, buses), which contains oils, residual solids, greases and surfactants (soaps). Aerated flocs have also been formed in a Flocculation-Column Flotation technique (FCF). This system consists of a hydraulic flocculant disperser (zigzag) coupled to a FGR (for generating the aerated flocs which feed the flotation column), where flocs and air bubbles (generated by a centrifugal three phases cavitation pump) are contacted and separated by flotation. Because of the low residence time, the rig has a high hydraulic-loading capacity (>13 To achieve high quality treatment of water, full-scale car wash wastewater treatment and recycling using the FCF technique coupled to a sand filtration and final chlorination systems were reported by A similar system was used by In this case, the FCF system produced clear, high quality water (low turbidity and high colour reduction) for a high hydraulic reuse load. With regard to water reuse, the FCF treated water is suitable for washing busses. The aerated flocs were formed rapidly (10 Other techniques, such as ASH flotation (Air Sparged Hydrocyclone), BAF flotation (Bubble Accelerated Flotation), ultraflocculation and microflotation have also been reported ( The micro-flotation is characterised by the use of extremely small bubbles (diameter 5–50 It has been hypothesised that both turbulent microflotation and ultra-flocculation ( Moreover, by controlling the amount of microbubbles the selection of suitable reagents and their dosage points in the stream permitted an effective attachment of the particles to microbubbles. Thus, large foam aggregates with high buoyancy are generated at the channel outlet, which leads to an easy separation of the aggregates from the liquid.  The ASH flotation (Air Sparged Hydrocyclone) and BAF (Bubble Accelerated Flotation) techniques have been reported that describe the rapid formation of flocs ( The ASH technique couples a porous cylindrical membrane with the design features of a hydrocyclone. In this system, gas is introduced through the membrane while wastewater is pumped through the hydrocyclone. Because the bubbles are sheared off the wall of the porous membrane (due to the high velocity and centrifugal forces inside the hydrocyclone) they are dispersed into very small bubbles that resemble those generated in DAF operations. Thus, the flocs float within seconds after leaving the downcomer cylinder and are removed by forcing through an overflow (vortex finder). The BAF technique is similar to the ASH technique. For the BAF technique, the bubble/particle/polymer aggregates are formed in a bubble chamber ( According to the authors, these technologies are particularly efficient for the removal of free and emulsified fats, oils, and grease (FOG). The BAF system has also been used to remove totally hydrophilic particles such as zeolites or quartz. In addition, the BAF system has a short response time (seconds) to changes in the solution chemistry (contrary to hours in clarifiers or DAF). Conversely, A full knowledge of aerated flocs or aeroflocs generation for different purposes and systems will further improve the techniques and technologies described above. The presence of rapid flocs in all of these investigations demonstrated that it is important to search for optimal conditions that favour the formation of aerated flocs. Accordingly, a full understanding of the mechanisms involved in the generation of these structures is needed. Recently, This finding led to new investigations regarding the interactions between polymers and bubbles and to the improvement of these mechanisms in a continuous system for generating aerated flocs assisted by polymer-coated microbubbles. These findings were based on the images shown in In addition to the existing data that indicated that interactions between polymers and air bubbles occurred, this work considered the occurrence of van der Waals and hydrophobic forces between the air bubbles and the hydrophobic moieties present in the polymeric chain backbones. The hydrophobicity of the polyacrylamides has been previously described ( The rapid formation of aerated flocs is potentially useful in several operations, which include mining, metallurgical and physico-chemical separation. For example, the effective removal of adsorbed pollutants onto carrier flocs (not explored yet); the solid–liquid separation of slimes that are difficult-to-flocculate (clays) and sometimes pose settling problems in ore tailing thickeners and separation of organic and hydrometallurgical solvents (emulsified); and the rapid separation by flotation of rich protein bearing dispersions. Moreover, the aerated flocs may be employed to improve oil enhanced production in the reuse of water in thickener overflows and the treatment of water for reuse in filtered mining pulps (flotation concentrates, for example). The formation of aerated flocs (or aeroflocs) has been observed in several research studies, patents and technologies that promote and facilitate solid–liquid separation operations by flocculation–flotation. The mechanisms of aerated floc formation involve many phenomena that occur simultaneously, including the following: polymer precipitation at the air/liquid interface; uncoiling of the polymeric chains; bubbles, nucleation and/or coalescence inside and onto the surface of flocs; bubble-particle collisions, attachments and detachments; heterogeneous precipitation of the pressurised gas; and the interactions of air bubbles with polymeric macromolecules (flocculants). Techniques and technologies for the formation of these aerated flocs have been described that show their high throughput. Future wastewater treatment trends emphasise the importance of understanding and using new phenomena (namely polymer-coated microbubbles or “flocculant bubbles”) to improve rapid solid/liquid separation by advanced flocculation–flotation processes. The authors acknowledge the Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul and all of the institutions supporting this research in Brazil. In addition, the authors thank their colleagues from the Laboratório de Tecnologia Mineral e Ambiental (LTM-UFRGS- 33