The in situ state of stress is one of the key rock mechanics factors related to the safety and stability of underground excavations for civil and mining engineering purposes. However, measurement and interpretation of stress have their difficulties. In particular, practical and objective tools have not been developed to judge transient strain behaviour during overcoring. The work described in this paper was set up by the nuclear waste management companies Posiva Oy (Finland) and Svensk Kärnbränslehantering AB (Sweden) to improve the quality of interpretation of overcoring stress measurement results. Thus, the primary product of the project is a quality control capability for overcoring stress measurement data. For this purpose, a computer program was developed which can simulate the transient strains and stresses during the overcoring process for any in situ stress and coring load conditions. The solution is based on superposition of elastic stresses and the basic idea can be applied for different overcoring probes with minor modifications and recalculation of stress tensors. The measured strains can be compared to the calculated ones to check whether the measured transient behaviour accords with the interpreted in situ state of stress. If not, the in situ state of stress can be calculated based on any transient or final strain values. The transient stresses can also be compared to a strength envelope of intact rock and thereby the core damage potential can be estimated.When designing an underground excavation at great depth, i.e. for high stress conditions, it is important to have reliable knowledge of the: magnitude and orientation of the in situ state of stress; strength and critical stress states of intact rock; pre- and post-failure deformation behaviour of rock; and rock mass quality. In practice, only vertical boreholes can be used if the target area is deep below the ground surface. The three-dimensional stress tensor can be measured at one measurement point using the overcoring method (Borre Probe, CSIRO-HI cell, CSIR-cell, modified CSIR-cell, ANZI-cell, conical-cell or spherical-cell) or interpreted for larger volumes by reopening of existing fractures (HTPF) With increasing depth and rock stress–strength ratio, the core sample for laboratory testing can be damaged but far more difficult and vulnerable is the measuring of the in situ state of stress discontinuity closes stress cell, unrecognized anisotropy of rock heterogeneity of rock, stress or strain induced damage of pilot hole wall or core, unacceptable behaviour of glue, glue–rock or glue–cell contact change in temperature other technical problems of various kinds. This study was set up by Posiva Oy (Finland) and Svensk Kärnbränslehantering AB SKB (Sweden) in order to enhance the quality of overcoring stress measurement interpretation methods. Both companies, who are responsible for management of spent nuclear fuel, have a need to define the in situ state of stress at around 400–500 The initial idea was to interpret the situ state of stress based on early strains, when the core damage potential is low The precalculation of secondary stresses presumes that the overcoring geometry and Poisson's ratio are known. Similar superposition solutions have been previously used in core damage studies by Li and Hakala The rosettes are installed 160 With the developed code, a sensitivity study for selected overcoring cases was undertaken and two in situ stress measurement cases from the Äspö Hard Rock Laboratory site in Sweden were analysed. The reported work includes an extensive list of factors to be considered in overcoring measurements In pilot hole probe methods, normally nine or 12 strain gauges with different orientations on the pilot hole wall are monitored when the stresses on the borehole wall are released by overcoring, The calculation of the in situ stress requires at least six independent final strain readings and the elastic parameters of the rock. For isotropic rock, we need two elastic parameters: conventionally, Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio; but, for transversely isotropic rock, we need five parameters: conventionally, two Young's moduli, two Poisson's ratios and a shear modulus. The elastic parameter values for isotropic rock are defined by biaxial testing of the overcored rock cylinder but, for transverse isotropy or orthotropy, at least three uniaxial or indirect tensile test specimens at different tested anisotropy angles are needed The success of measurement is defined by the continuity and stability of strain gauge readings during the overcoring and linearity during the biaxial testing. The judgement of continuity and stability is subjective. The loading and unloading cycle in the biaxial cell provides information on linear elasticity and the comparison of different axial, circumferential and inclined strain gauge readings provides information on the degree of anisotropy or heterogeneity. Based on the ISRM 1987 suggestions and complemented by experiences of the authors, a successful overcoring in situ stress measurement in hard crystalline rock conditions requires that the phases shown in It must be remembered that the measured in situ stress is a point tensor quantity and the defined values have uncertainties related to geological factors, the accuracy of each measurement method and data analyses. Therefore, it is important to understand and control all known error sources. Based on Amadei and Stephansson In order to control the quality of overcoring data, a computer program was developed. It can simulate the transient strains and stresses during the overcoring process for any in situ stress and coring load conditions. The program assumes CHILE rock conditions (continuous, homogeneous, isotropic and linearly elastic). The developed program can be used: for a strain check, i.e. comparing the measured strains with the computed ones, to identify erroneous strain gauges and estimate the amount of error for individual strain gauges, or unexplained strains for all strain gauges, to estimate core damage potential by comparing elastic principal stresses at the pilot hole wall to the strength of the rock, and to estimate the in situ state of stress based on the early strains readings by using an inverse solution. For secondary stresses at the vicinity of the hole bottom, no analytical solutions exist. Therefore, numerical simulation was the only choice for this work. Normally, a 3-D numerical calculation with an adequate number of coring steps will take one to two days with a 1 As input data for the transient strain curve calculation, the following are needed: Orientation of borehole (trend and plunge). Position and orientation of strain gauges (angular location on pilot hole perimeter and dip related to borehole axis). The in situ state of stress, usually given in the form of principal stress Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio from the biaxial test on overcored core. Optionally, drilling loads: axial stress (PA), shear stress (PS) at drill bit–rock interface and drilling fluid pressure (PW) on the drill and pilot hole walls. Similarly as for the in situ stress measurement, the code is based on CHILE conditions. For CHILE conditions, the secondary stress state The developed code is a Microsoft Excel workbook. The programming is done with Visual Basic for Application macros. The workbook code includes a quick guide and a more detailed manual. The session is started by reading in precalculated stress tensors and is continued by inputting case data and measured strain data. Then the inputted transient strains corresponding to the given in situ state of stress can be calculated and compared to measured ones. The comparison can be made in the form of absolute transient values, transient differences or transient unexplained strains. The stress path for maximum compression, deviatoric stress and tension in the strain gauge area can be studied and compared to the strength of the intact rock. The strength plot includes user-defined envelopes for peak strength, crack damage strength, crack initiation strength and Finally, the in situ state of stress can be calculated from early strains using an inverse method. In the inverse solution, the unwanted strain gauges can be rejected from the solution. Any input value can be changed and the calculations repeated without again reading the stress tensors. The visibility of resulting and measured data can be controlled, calculated values can be copied to other applications, and resulting figures can be copied or plotted. The maximum error of the code includes the accuracy of the stress tensor calculation, error caused by strain gauge location interpolation and error caused by Poisson's ratio interplolation/extrapolation. The maximum error was studied with one real set of measurement data and with 10 The sensitivity study conducted is not all inclusive, but aimed at understanding the effect of certain factors on the transient strains and interpreting the in situ state of stress. Three different types of sensitivity studies were completed. A real in situ stress measurement from borehole KK0045G01, distance 34.77 The first study in which the loading conditions and material parameter values were slightly varied showed the following: Young's modulus is an important parameter having close to a 100% proportional effect on the stress magnitudes. The effect of Poisson's ratio is moderate for all strains and interpreted stress; the effect is 20–60% for the principal stress magnitude and a few degrees in orientation. 10° uncertainty in strain gauge orientation can produce, at a maximum, 20% error in strain values. The rotation of the whole gauge system produces an equal error in the principal stress orientations. 10% change in the major principal stress requires 5–10% general change in strains. 10 The drill bit shear stress has a minor effect on transient strains. Drill bit loads do not have an affect on the final strains. 1 For the studied factors, there is no general trend that the effect is higher and lower for transient stresses than for final stresses, except in the case of drilling loads—which do not affect the final strain. The second study with heterogeneous or anisotropic rock or modified pilot hole geometry showed the following: ±35% random deviation of elastic parameters, 2 2 If 96 The developed code has the capability to solve for the in situ state of stress based on any measured transient (early strains) or final strains. Based on exact calculated strain values and corresponding coring advance, the inverse solution is exact. In the real case, there is always some error relating to measurement of coring advance, drilling loads and measuring accuracy. The sensitivity study was undertaken for coring advance only. It is based on calculated strain values for the previously used reference Äspö case. Three coring advances of 60, 15 and 5 The selected cases are from the Äspö Hard Rock Laboratory (HRL) where the Swedish Nuclear and Fuel Waste Mangement Co (SKB) has tested the reliability of different in situ stress methods under controlled conditions. The HRL is located below an island close to the coast of south-east Sweden ( The case data was from borehole KK0045G01. Two sequential measurements were studied: Level 2:2 (34.77 Studying the transient strain data from both measurements the following points are noted. The 4.5°C temperature increases in both cases. The time-dependent behaviour of most extended strain gauges (34.77 Sudden large changes after overcoring (not reported, but probably caused by core break). Definition of calculation values basically from the position where the drill bit is 5–6 For the original stress calculation, judgement in selecting selected strain values has been used (34.77 The temperature seems to have minor effect on the readings of the Borre probe, because the effect is not manifested on all tangential nor inclined strain gauges. The most strained strain gauges suffer probably from debonding because no time-dependent behaviour is shown on the less strained strain gauges. The definition of strain values for stress calculation are reasonable because in the ideal case (simulation) the strain readings are relatively stable when coring has passed the gauge position by 5 In the studied cases, there has been large changes in the strain readings between the end of overcoring and the beginning of biaxial testing ( In both biaxial measurements, slight hysteresis is seen, but no permanent deformation ( Normally, the calculation of elastic parameters is based on the unloading portion of the biaxial test, which is closer to the unloading process during overcoring. In the calculation, different stress ranges or averaging methods can be used ( there is a significant differences in the deformation parameter values for the different rosettes; in both measurements, the highest difference is caused by tangential gauge number 5 in rosette 2; there is an indication of anisotropy, but the response of gauge 5 is not clear; the calculation method can have a 5–10% effect on Young's modulus value, and hence on the interpreted in situ stress magnitudes also; generally, the SwedPowers method gives a lower modulus and Poisson's ratio and it does not assume linear elastic behaviour; and the pressure range used for calculation has minor effect. Based on the analytical closed-form solution for the in situ state of stress, it is possible to back calculate the axial, tangential and 45° inclined strains on the pilot hole wall, i.e. the used strains without fixing the angular position. Further, to compare the measured and back calculated strains, the measured values are superimposed on the pilot hole strain plot ( The result of the closed-form solution indicates the following: The absolute and relative differences and the amount of unexplained strains are quite small in both cases and the correlation between the measured and back calculated strains is almost perfect. The degree of anisotropy or heterogeneity of the rock is probably not strong because the calculated and measured strains are close to each other. The defined Poisson's ratio value is reasonable or the effect of Poisson's ratio is minor. The accuracy of the tangential strain for rosettes 2 and 3 at level 34.77 The orientation of the stress field is well known, although the magnitudes can vary in a range of defined Young's modulus values. In both measurements, Young's modulus is about 64 Based on the two measurements and the elastic parameters defined by SwedPower, the magnitude of Comparing the measured and calculated transient strains, the following conclusions can be made ( The majority of strain gauges exhibit trends close to the simulated response. A relatively long interval (min 2 It seems that measured coring advance is about 2 Because of uncertainty in the coring advance, it would be extremely hard to implement stress interpretation based on early strains. The final simulated strain values are close to the measured strain values around +50 In both cases, there is a high potential for core damage ( For both cases, the inverse solution with two different elastic parameter values ( The inverse solution gives principal stresses within –1.9 to 1.5 The study of the two Äspö KK0045G01 cases showed that these two sets of measurements can be considered relatively successful and fulfill the assumptions of continuous, homogenous, isotropic and linearly elastic rock. Major uncertainty concerns the time-dependent behaviour of most of the strained strain gauges, changes in strain readings between core removal and biaxial testing, and the deviation of gauge 5 in the biaxial test. Based on the two measurements and the elastic parameters defined by SwedPower, the magnitude of Technically the developed code fulfilled all the objectives. It can be used to interpret the in situ state of stress of a CHILE rock based on early strains, compare measured transient strains to the calculated ones, and estimate the core damage potential based on the elastic stresses in the strain gauge regions. The code is quick enough to be a practical tool and it can be used as one of the main components in an overall quality control procedure for overseeing overcoring measurements and their data reduction. The basic idea can be applied also to other overcoring probes—with minor modifications and recalculation of stress tensors. Based on the case studies, the interpretation of the in situ state of stress from early strains is difficult because the solution is very sensitive to the measured strains and coring advance. The heterogeneity of so-called homogeneus rock, changes in rock temperature, and accuracy in defining the coring advance can ruin the interpretation. On the other hand, the comparison of measured strains to the calculated ones, finding unreliable strain responses, estimation of core damage potential and using the inverse solution for final strains worked well. The estimation of core damage potential of course requires laboratory test results on intact rock strength. The work showed clearly that good quality in situ overcoring stress measurement involves an understanding of all the affecting factors and the quality of preparation, measuring and interpretation work. Key matters are: knowledge of the local geology, i.e. is the rock continuous, homogeneous, isotropic and linearly elastic, both at the strain gauge and pilot hole scales; selection, stability and control of the glue; temperature control during and after overcoring, depending on the probe used, even a 1°C change in core temperature can have a clear effect on the resulting in situ state of stress; measurement of coring advance, depending on the device the interval should be close to 5 interpretation of biaxial test results; and strain monitoring from probe installation to after the biaxial test to identify possible sources of unexpected response. The current version of the developed code cannot take account of thermal effects and anisotropy. With minor development and calculation of new tensor files, it is possible to simulate thermal strains with reasonable accuracy by interpolating the effects of flush water temperature, drill bit contact temperature, overcoring speed and thermal properties of the rock. The capability to include transverse isotropy and free orientation can also be developed. The authors thank Heikki Hinkkanen from Posiva Oy and Rolf Christianson from Svensk Kärnbränslehantering AB for funding the study and Jonny Sjöberg from SwedPower AB and Erik Johansson from Saanio & Riekkola Oy for their contributions.