A route to produce nano-Fe2O3 by reduction of ferrous sulfate with coke to was proposed to improve the utilization of waste residues from TiO2 production. The effects of thermodynamic factors on the reaction were analyzed via Factsage 6.0 software, which showed that SO2 and O2 atmospheres have a significant inhibition effect on the decomposition of ferrous sulfate. Then, the optimal reaction condition (heating at 600 °C for 40 min with ferrous sulfate to coke ratio of 4:8) was obtained by single-factor and orthogonal experiments. Under the optimal reaction condition, the average desulfurization rate was found to reach 99.92%. Moreover, scanning electron microscopy images showed that the products were nanopowders with a porous structure and particle sizes between 40 and 70 nm. Finally, the non-isothermal decomposition kinetic parameters and mechanism of the reaction were determined. Two reaction stages, which were named “random nucleation and then growth” and “symmetric cylindrical diffusion (3D),” were determined. Using the Coats–Redfern, Flynn–Wall Ozawa (FWO), and Kissinger–Akahira–Sunose (KAS) methods, the apparent activation energy and pre-factor of the first reaction stage were determined to be 291.10 kJ mol−1 and 1.41 × 1016 s−1, while those of the second reaction stage were determined to be 285.94 kJ mol−1 and 3.27 × 1014 s−1. The most probable mechanism functions of the two stages were also determined. This process can make use of ferrous sulfate not only highly valuable, but also to improve the recycling of sulfur and iron resources after the production of white titanium.In recent years, nanosized iron oxide (α-Fe Many researchers have used industrial by-products as raw materials to reduce the production cost of α-Fe In this study, coke was used instead of pyrite as a reductant to react with ferrous sulfate. The aim was to synthesize a nano-spherical α-Fe For the synthesis of α-Fe Various ratios of ferrous sulfate to coke (n The desulfurization rate (ϕ) of the system is calculated as follows: The experimental equipment is shown in In this study, after theoretical analysis of the solid-solid reaction between ferrous sulfate and coke by thermodynamic calculation, the effects of single factor and multilevel orthogonal design were integrated to determine the impact of experiment factors on the core reaction. Moreover, the non-isothermal decomposition kinetic parameters and mechanism of the reaction were determined. A phase diagram, ternary equilibrium compositions, and Gibbs free energy of the reactions between FeSO The solid-solid reaction between ferrous sulfate and coke is the core reaction of the whole process. To understand the thermodynamic change in the atmosphere of N According to the above phase diagram, there are many possible reactions in the system, as shown below. From The SO According to the thermodynamic analysis results, the temperature and molar ratio of coke to ferrous sulfate are the two most important factors in the main reaction (2). According to the phase diagram, the lowest FeSO    In the actual production, factors do not act alone but interact with each other. Hence, orthogonal experiments were carried out to analyze the interaction of temperature (A), time (B), and molar ratios of coke and ferrous sulfate (C) on the desulfurization rate of FeSO As shown in Three verification experiments at 600 °C during 40 min with n In this work, the experiment condition is: a sulfate to coke ratio of 4:8; a temperature range of 30–800 °C; a nitrogen flow rate of 30 mL min As it can be seen from the above figure, while the heating rate increases, the curve shifts toward the high-temperature end. The weight loss in the first stage, which involves the dehydration of ferrous sulfate, occurs at approximately 227 °C; the second stage involves the formation of intermediate products by the transformation of ferrous sulfate; the third stage of weight loss mainly involves the decomposition of intermediates and ferrous sulfate. It can be seen that the sample’s weight loss during the reaction is approximately 51%. This agrees well with the theoretical result of the sample’s weight loss rate of 52%, and this agreement indicates that the reaction was complete. To analyze the gas product in more detail, TG-FTIR spectroscopy was used to analyze the gas composition changes. As it is shown in For the kinetics study, the kinetic parameters and the reaction mechanism were considered using mathematical methods. In particular, the non-isothermal decomposition kinetics method was chosen ( In the non-isothermal process, the heating rate ( Three methods, namely the Coats–Redfern (Eq. Coats–Redfern method, KAS method, FWO method, The value of E was obtained via the FWO method using different values of  Then, using the KAS (Eq. In the second stage, the variation in E with α decreases. This shows that the reaction becomes stable, and the interference of side reactions is very small. The kinetic process of the second stage is also the main kinetic step for the decomposition of ferrous sulfate. As it is shown in The values of E in the first and second stages, denoted by E After substituting the values of E The values of E In the solid–solid reaction system, the rate of matter transfer is so slow that the nucleation of the product becomes a control step of the reaction. In general, the reaction process controlled by crystal nucleation can be divided into the nucleation, growth, and decline phases. At the first stage, as it is described in In the second stage, the 3D diffusion and cylindrical symmetry models are identified through the above calculation analysis. The microstructure of products held at temperatures of 550 and 650 °C for 60 min is shown in A new process of ferrous sulfate reduction with coke for producing nano-Fe  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research was performed with the support of the Key The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at