Advances in a process based on simple and environmentally compatible operations, aimed to the treatment and recycling of spent lithium-ion batteries, are reported in this paper. This process is safe, economic, and recovers as much of the battery materials as possible. It operates mainly in a selective dissolution in dilute acid, a chemical treatment of the filtrate and a thermal treatment of the solid residue. The validity of the process and its reproducibility have been evaluated at each step of the separation. This method involves very simple equipment and can be scaled-up for commercial production. Based on the projected quantities of lithium ion batteries available for recycling in the next few years, there is a significant market opportunity for a successful technology.The growth of energy demand for portable equipments greatly increases batteries consumption and, consequently, increases the produced metal-containing hazardous waste. The storage capacities of special waste dump sites are limited, and the disposal costs are very high. Moreover, the French law regarding collection and elimination or recycling of cells and storage batteries has been reinforced since January 2001 and it must be applied to all the types of batteries. So, recycling of the major components of spent cells appears to be a beneficial way to prevent environmental pollution and raw material consumption, while meeting the new legal requirements Lithium primary cells have been introduced to the market for about 25 years, while lithium secondary batteries—or storage batteries—have less than 10 years of commercial development Li-containing batteries are extensively used as electrochemical power sources in modern-life equipments: cellular phones, computers, camcorders or in medical implants or accessories like cardiac pacemakers. High-power lithium batteries are devoted to military applications, aerospace and electric vehicles. Due to their high energy density, high cell voltage, long storage life, low self-discharge rate and large temperature range, lithium batteries are often preferred to conventional systems with aqueous electrolytes. The increase of the waste flux generated and the growth of environmental awareness have conduced to the development of programs to recycle spent batteries The process proposed in this paper operates through a selective dissolution in dilute acid and selective precipitation of metals as hydroxide compounds from the filtrate; our method decomposes into two steps: at first, the treatment of standardized solutions and then the treatment of commercial cells. The selected material is composed of cylindrical cells (A), button cells (B) and a lot of various cells (C) from different suppliers, as a representative sample of the real waste material. First, lithium cells from both the A and B samples are opened; the separated parts are submitted to qualitative analysis by scanning electron microscopy associated with EDX probe (JEOL JSM 840 A, 0.2–20 In cylindrical cells (A), the anode and the cathode are separated by an insulator film. The cathode is supported on a metal grid. The electrodes and the separator are rolled up together to a spiral wound configuration and inserted in a metallic casing insulated with plastic joints. At the top and the bottom of the cell are the metallic current collectors. In the “button” models (B), the separator is inserted between the anode and the cathode and stacked as a “sandwich” in a metallic envelope. Insulation of the casing from electrodes is ensured by plastic joints. In some configurations, the cathode is supported on a metal grid. The metal components of each battery (envelope, cathode, grid) were identified by electron scanning microscopy associated with EDX probe. The EDX diagrams for the different parts of the cells are reported in After dissolution of the opened battery in an acid media, the metal part is selectively precipitated in its stable hydroxide form as a function of the pH, according to its solubility product. To test the separation process, we prepared standardized solutions containing some of the preliminary identified cell metals. Starting from metal nitrates, three standard solutions were prepared (see The metal hydroxides are obtained when sodium hydroxide solution (10 The operating conditions and separation results are reported in The selective precipitation separation process was applied on spent Li ion batteries, after preliminary dissolution in acidic medium. The choice of the acid is reported hereafter. We have experimented various separation techniques and retained a treatment in an acidic medium directly followed by a series of metal selective precipitations as a function of pH. This choice of hydrometallurgical treatment does not involve organic solvents, taking into account the environmental aspect. First, a commercial, cylindrical spent battery (ref A) is opened to increase the contact area with solvent and is then immersed in 200 Dissolution in hydrochloric acid, even for very small concentrations (typically 0.1 To prevent manganese dissolution, the HCl concentration is to be reduced but involves a too long dissolution time, not suitable for an industrial process. So, we have carried out tests with nitric acid under the same conditions but concentration varying from 0.5 to 5 In this study, we have made the choice, during the first stage, to separate the whole content of lithium and manganese from other metals with a nitric acid concentration of 2 A representative sample (ref C) of the “material” heterogeneity to treat is prepared by mixing fifteen spent batteries of different mark and composition. They are opened like previously but during the cutting we noticed a strong heating, caused by the internal short-circuit of the cell. On a large scale, refrigeration during this operation is strongly advisable (with liquid nitrogen for instance), in order to prevent safety hazard due to flames and explosions. The opened cells were submitted to the previous treatment protocol as indicated in Spent batteries and especially spent lithium batteries are explicitly mentioned on regulations of waste management. For few years, recycling processes begin to appear in some countries, but improvement in this field is still to be done taking into account safe and environmentally compatible operations. There are two major problems with the development of an efficient valorization process: the heterogeneity of the waste and the non-reproducibility of the material to treat. It is, thus, necessary to consider a very rigorous sorting what appears not easily feasible in the near future. Another possibility is the development of very flexible industrial processes. Our work is located in this second framework. Our aim was to recover all the valuables contained in the waste, in the form of compounds ready to be used in industrial applications. We have tackled the problem by two different ways. First, we have studied standardized solutions (typically Li–Co–Mn) constituted by a mixture of alkaline and transition metals of a well-known composition, in order to define the selective precipitations. Then, on the basis of the achieved results, we considered the chemical treatment of a batch of spent lithium batteries consisting in a representative mixture of commercial cells. Consequently, we propose a process which allows to achieve a good recovery of the battery components and to separate the “metal families” (alkaline metals, pure manganese oxides, metallurgical alloy (Fe, Cr, Ni, Co)) and even combustion gases for an energetic valorization. Characterizations of the recovered metals were performed by quantitative means available in the laboratory (ionic chromatography, atomic absorption spectroscopy). The valorization process proposes to recover the insoluble plastics, the transition metals, a solution of alkaline ions (Na According to the projected numbers of cells available for recycling, and the value of a cell content, there is a significant market opportunity for recycling lithium ion cells and batteries. The economic and environmental interests related to the valorization of this type of waste are really significant, which justifies search and improvements in this field.