The use of thin-film copper indium gallium (di)selenide (CIGS) and cadmium-telluride (CdTe) in solar technologies has grown rapidly in recent years, leading to an increased demand for gallium, indium, and tellurium. In the coming years, recycling these elements from end-of-life photovoltaic (PV) modules may be an important part of their overall supply, but little is known about the economic feasibility and the potential quantities available. This article investigates the future role of PV recycling in supplying gallium, indium, and tellurium. The authors evaluate both the quantities available from recycling over the next century and the associated costs for recycling modules and reusing each element in PV manufacturing. The findings indicate that, in terms of technical potential, there may be significant quantities of each element available from recycling CIGS and CdTe modules. The estimated cost of recovering each element from end-of-life PV modules and reusing it in PV manufacturing is higher than current raw mineral costs; however, learning and economies of scale may reduce the reported early estimates of recycling costs. These findings help improve the understanding of recycling's role in enabling higher levels of CIGS and CdTe module production.Although thin-film photovoltaic (PV) technologies cadmium-telluride (CdTe) and copper indium gallium (di)selenide (CIGS) comprise only about 10% of the current PV market These technologies, however, require the use of the elements gallium (Ga), indium (In), selenium (Se), and tellurium (Te)—each of which has a relatively fragile supply. Lokanc et al. Due to these factors, the supply of each mineral from end-of-life products—commonly referred to as supply from “old scrap”—could be important in meeting total demand and enabling wider adoption of these thin-film PV technologies. While recycling is not expected to contribute much to total mineral supply for many years, understanding the potential for recycling is critical to evaluating the long-term constraints on CdTe and CIGS module deployment and has received recent attention in the literature on mineral availability for thin films  This section reviews existing literature and divides it into two types. The first type discusses the quantity of CdTe or CIGS modules that can be produced from recycling end-of-life modules, within the context of overall availability, and includes Fthenakis Fthenakis Hourai et al. Fthenakis et al. The present analysis contributes to the current literature in three respects. One is that, to our knowledge, this is the first study that evaluates potential CIGS deployment from both gallium and indium available in end-of-life modules. Second, whereas previously published literature has estimated recycling cost or profitability, this article estimates both the recycling and reuse costs of each element and how these costs evolve over time. Finally, whereas prior literature focused on either the quantity of PV deployed or the recycling cost, this research estimates both quantity of deployment and element cost, to provide a more thorough assessment of potential PV deployment from end-of-life modules. This section discusses the model and model inputs used in this analysis. The model has two main outputs. The first is the amount of annual PV production technically feasible from old scrap mineral supply (e.g., the gigawatts of CdTe modules that can be deployed with tellurium available from recycled modules). The second is the cost of recovering an element from end-of-life modules and reusing it in PV manufacturing. This is measured in U.S. dollars-per-watt peak (direct current), and herein is referred to as the recycled mineral's contribution to PV manufacturing cost. The following sections discuss how these two outputs are calculated within the model. Photovoltaic production or deployment measured in gigawatts peak (GWp) from old scrap supply in year    Old scrap supply in year Total use or consumption in year In a similar manner,     Eq. Module power rating increases and layer thickness decreases are assumed to progress at the rates specified in  Currently, the PV sector's share of total gallium and indium consumption is quite small—only 17% and 8%—and its share of tellurium consumption is much greater at about 40%  The mineral recovery efficiencies show the percentage of each mineral present in ores or in copper anode slime that can be recovered and refined. These estimates are based on the recovery efficiencies for current processes used to extract and refine each mineral. Gallium recovery from bauxite ores ranges from 28% to 67% according to our bottom-up assessment of potential gallium recovery during alumina production (See Currently, only 2% of the gallium contained in bauxite ores is actually recovered, tellurium recovery from anode slimes is about 35% (see This section outlines the existing processes for recycling PV modules, and examines the estimated costs of recycling PV modules and reusing the recovered gallium, indium, or tellurium in either CIGS or CdTe module manufacturing. The recycling process discussed in this analysis thus considers the steps in collecting end-of-life modules; recycling modules to separate the semiconductor material and glass; recovering the gallium, indium, or tellurium metal; and reusing the recovered metals in PV manufacturing. For many years there has been academic interest in PV recycling from CIGS and CdTe modules The largest producer of CdTe modules, First Solar, began a pre-funded recycling program in 2005 and has made public some information on its recycling process. The recycled mineral's contribution to PV manufacturing cost is calculated using Eq.       The values for    The recycling cost per watt Eq.  The recycling cost for CdTe modules is estimated based on information provided in First Solar's annual filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). In 2005, First Solar started a program to pre-fund end-of-life module recycling by setting aside and investing an amount equal to the expected present value of future recycling costs. Over time, this investment grows to cover the cost of recycling modules at the end of their useful lives. For example, in 2009 First Solar recognized an expense of $52.4 million for future recycling costs attributable to sales of PV modules during 2009. First Solar is estimated to have sold 1067  This section discusses the results from the model and provides a simple sensitivity analysis. As previously mentioned, the two main outputs are the amount of technically potential PV production from old scrap supply and each mineral's contribution to PV manufacturing cost; both are presented in the next three figures. The cost measured in U.S. dollars per watt deployed is on the vertical axis and the size of each bubble represents the amount of PV production that could result from old scrap supply. Results from the three cases, Reference, Low Cost/High Production, and High Cost/Low Production are shown in gray, black, and white with a black border, respectively.  The movement of cost over time deserves some mention, in particular the decline and rise in cost in the High Cost/Low Production Case. In this model, changes in material intensity are what drive the change in cost over time. The direct effect of lower material intensity is that less tellurium is required per watt deployed, which bring down the tellurium cost per watt. There is an indirect effect of lower material intensity because less tellurium is present per watt of CdTe modules recycled at the end of its useful life. This reduced concentration of tellurium increases recycling cost (in terms of $/W recycled) because for each watt recycled, less tellurium is recovered. These two effects of declining material intensity influence cost for all three cases, as shown in As with tellurium in CdTe modules, there is a wide range of potential production and indium costs in CIGS module manufacturing (  These figures do not include PV production from primary mineral supply, which this model assumes to be a significant source of the gallium, indium, and tellurium used in CIGS and CdTe modules.  The technically feasible levels of annual CIGS module production based on gallium availability ( These results show a wide range of technically possible CIGS and CdTe module deployment (ignoring economics, so the maximum possible) and gallium, indium, and tellurium costs. This is a direct result of the uncertainty in the parameters of the present model. To understand which factors drive the variation in installed capacity from old scrap supply among the three minerals, this article provides some simple sensitivity analysis in As shown for all three elements, the variation in PV's share of total mineral consumption in the market and the mineral recovery efficiency in recycling have the greatest impact on installed capacity levels in 2100. A 10% decrease in market share from the Reference Case levels reduces technically feasible installed capacity from old scrap supply in 2100 by 20% in the case of gallium in CIGS modules, 21% in the case of indium in CIGS modules, and 22% in the case of tellurium in CdTe modules. Adjustments to maximum module efficiency, mineral recovery efficiency, initial mineral availability and minimum layer thickness have moderate impacts that are all about similar across all three minerals. Changes in module life and production growth of the main product have the least impact on technically feasible installed capacity in the year 2100, except for gallium, for which a 10% change in bauxite production growth generates the second most significant effect.  This analysis evaluates the technical potential of CIGS and CdTe module deployment from old scrap mineral supplies of gallium, indium, and tellurium, in terms of both the quantities of CdTe and CIGS modules produced, and the cost of recovery and reuse in PV manufacturing. In terms of quantities, relatively high levels of CdTe and CIGS module deployment (on the order of more than 100 In terms of costs, recovering each element from end-of-life PV modules and reusing in PV manufacturing is expected to cost more than current raw mineral costs. These results should be viewed with some caution, however, due to the uncertainty about future recycling cost and because this analysis does not take into account economies of scale or learning economies that could help reduce recycling costs over time. Future work can help provide better estimates of PV recycling costs. Increased PV deployment occurred fairly recently, so there is little current PV recycling and, thus, little information regarding recycling costs. Interest in PV recycling has grown in recent years, as PV modules came under the scope of the European Union WEEE directive in 2014, requiring manufacturers to plan for end-of-life recycling. As better information on PV recycling becomes available, improved estimates of PV recycling costs and mineral recovery efficiency can be used to refine model assumptions and to better understand the role of recycling in enabling future production of CIGS and CdTe modules. This appendix provides additional details on the estimates for primary supply of gallium, indium, and tellurium. In particular, it presents the estimates for gallium content of bauxite production in 2012, tellurium content of copper anode slimes produced in 2012, potential gallium recovery efficiency from bauxite ores, and potential tellurium recovery efficiency from copper anode slimes. The vast majority of refined gallium produced comes from bauxite. Nearly all tellurium produced is recovered from copper anode slimes produced during the refining of copper anode into copper cathode. To estimate the potential recovery efficiency for gallium from bauxite ores, a bottom-up analysis of the gallium supply chain is used to calculate the technical recovery efficiency at each stage and determine an estimate for the overall recovery efficiency. The “bauxite ore” stage represents the amount of gallium contained in bauxite. Watts et al. In the “Bayer liquor” stage, gallium is present in this solution and the opportunity exists for alumina refiners to divert a portion of the circulating Bayer liquor to a gallium-recovery circuit. The portion of Bayer liquor that is diverted depends on several factors, including the gallium-recovery capacity and the operational needs of the Bayer process. Alumina refining is primary focus, therefore it likely that only a small amount of Bayer liquor will be diverted to a gallium-recovery circuit, so as to not disrupt alumina refining operations. Watts et al. Lastly, in the Bayer liquor feedstock stage, the percent of the Bayer liquor feedstock that is recovered as crude gallium metal depends upon the recovery processes being used. Watts et al. assume a recovery efficiency of 75% in stage, but Zhao et al. note that efficiency can reach 96%. This analysis uses a range of 75% to 96% to allow for a variety of potential recovery efficiencies. 