To investigate the effect of initial microstructure on the evolution of flow stress curves during plastic deformation, cylindrical specimens of two types of AZ31 Mg alloy with different grain size distributions were compressed in the rolling (RD) and normal directions (ND) at 300°C. For specimens with a compression axis parallel to the RD, an AZ31 Mg alloy that had an inhomogeneous and coarse distribution of grain size exhibited more distinct twin-dominated plastic deformation and sigmoidal shape of the flow stress curve at higher strain rates. The AZ31 alloy having larger grain size showed more favorable for twin-dominated deformation at a given temperature and strain rate. The specimen deformed at a higher strain rate only exhibits twin-dominated deformation and has a large area fraction of grains deformed by propagation of twin bands (TB) through its parent grains (PG).To understand the texture evolution in Mg alloys during plastic deformation, many studies have been conducted at various levels of strain, temperature and strain rate In the present work, the first objective was to investigate the effect of initial grain size distribution on shape of flow stress curves of polycrystalline Mg–3Al–1Zn (AZ31) alloys by changing the loading direction and strain rates at a fixed temperature. The second objective was to clarify the influence of deformation twinning on the strain-hardening behavior, by characterizing the microstructure of AZ31 alloys at various strain magnitude and strain rates using electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD). Two hot-rolled AZ31 alloys exhibiting different initial grain size distributions and nearly identical initial textures were used for this study. Cylindrical specimens with a diameter of 10 The microtexture of the cutting planes was examined using EBSD installed in a field emission scanning electron microscope. Automated EBSD scans were performed in the stage-control mode with TSL data acquisition software. Each microtexture was examined by scanning an area of 0.64 and 2.25  The true strain versus true stress curves for the CGM and FGM alloys are shown in  The distinct four stages in the strain-hardening rates were observed only in CA//RD specimens at a strain rate of 0.1 All specimens revealed a peak stress followed by continuous loss of strength. Peak stress seemed to be dependent on initial microstructure, as well as on strain rate. Specimens also had different peak strains determined from the true strain corresponding to the peak stress. The influence of strain rate on peak stress and peak strain is shown in It was also observed that the influence of strain rate on the peak strain was strongly dependent on loading direction. The CA//RD specimens exhibited a strong dependency of strain rate compared with the CA//ND specimens. The dependence seemed closely related to microstructure evolution during uniaxial compression. In the previous paper Section To compare the twin volume fraction in both alloys, volume fractions of PG and TB were identified using twin-analysis technique implemented using the TSL software. Many attempts have been made to understand the effect of various experimental conditions on the evolution of deformation twins in Mg alloys  Uniaxial compression tests were conducted for the two types of AZ31 alloy, which had different grain size distributions. Strain-hardening behavior during uniaxial compression was strongly dependent on initial microstructure, strain rate and loading direction. For the specimen (CA//RD) with a compression axis parallel to the RD, the AZ31 Mg alloy, which was inhomogeneous with a coarse distribution of grain size, exhibited more distinct twin-dominated plastic deformation and sigmoidal shape of the flow curve at higher strain rates. The strain-hardening curve of the twin-dominated plastic deformation consisted of four stages as follows: (I) elastic–plastic transition; (II) low or conventional rate of strain-hardening; (III) increasing rate of strain-hardening; and (IV) decreasing rate of strain-hardening. However, as the strain rate decreased, the strain-hardening rates could be divided into only two stages (I and II). Moreover, strain-hardening rate curves were similar in shape to those of specimens (CA//ND) with a compression axis parallel to the ND. The influence of strain rate on peak stress was independent of initial microstructure and loading direction. However, the peak strain of CA//RD specimens was highly dependent on strain rate compared with CA//ND specimens. The AZ31 alloy, which had larger grain size, was more favorable for twin-dominated deformation at a given temperature and strain rate. The specimen deformed at a strain rate of 0.1 This work was supported by a Korea Research Foundation grant funded by the Korean Government (MOEHRD) (KRF-2006-331-D00711) and by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF) grant funded by the Korea government (MOST) (R01-2007-000-10015-0).