The current work has been carried out on a pneumatically fed impact pulveriser. A recent build of the proposed device, and early experiments have shown promising size reduction ratios and energy savings in comparison with conventional milling techniques.
                  A number of experiments have shown the points of greatest wear to be on the blades of the rotor and on the walls of the outlet duct. Experimental work was carried out on a single-phase airflow, and a two-phase air–talc mixture. Numerical simulations were performed using the proprietary CFD code FLUENT. Flow predictions of the single and two-phase systems indicated highly turbulent flows and simulations followed the trends indicated by flow visualisation. The authors propose a breakage model for particles.drag coefficient mean particle diameter in Rosin–Rammler equation 80% passing mesh size of feed in Bond law particle diameter 80% passing mesh size of product in Bond law normal coefficient of restitution tangential coefficient of restitution kinetic energy specific energy drag force gravitational force turbulence kinetic energy Mach number particle mass turbulent Mach number spread parameter of Rosin–Rammler equation pressure hydraulics radius swirl ratio temperature flow velocity particle velocity control volume bond work index dilatation dissipation term, for high-Mach number flows speed of sound incidence angle of particle path and the wall surface, in radians turbulence dissipation rate dynamic viscosity second coefficient of viscosity stress tensor density viscous stress tensor angular velocity mean rate-of-rotation tensor The work presented in this paper introduces a developmental method of comminution; this is an impact crusher/grinder that pulverises lumps of up to at least 50 The energy required to reduce 50 However, the interaction between the machine and processed material is not established. Therefore, the current work attempts for first time to achieve the mathematical/numerical modelling of this type of comminution. The main objectives of this work have been to identify the flow structure, the forces acting on solid particles, the main mechanism of breakage and possible scale-up rules for the machine. The proprietary FLUENT CFD code has been used, to predict the structures of single-phase and two-phase flows, and to provide input for a particle breakage model. The fundamentals of operation and the numerical model are discussed in the next sections. The apparatus consists principally of a high-speed motor attached to a 610 When the throughput rate is high, the big lumps, after collision with the impeller walls tend to move against the flow. It is then very likely that they hit with other particles coming from the opposite direction. This causes further size reduction, and a change in particle paths. Downstream of the apparatus a cyclone collects the particles, where the larger particles are separated and collected at the bottom of the cyclone. The lighter particles exit the cyclone and are trapped in fabric bag filters. The filters are regularly pulsed with compressed air, and the filter cake is collected in metal bins. This way, the final size distribution includes a coarse and a fine product. (The coarse product can be fed back to the machine.) A number of experiments have shown that the assembly reduces lumps of minerals up to 50 Owing to the complexity of the physical process, computational methods are needed to solve the flow field within the domain, and investigate turbomachinery characteristics for the shape of the impeller vanes. Additionally, two-phase flow can also be solved in terms of particle tracking. An attempt to predict the breakage mechanism of the particulate phase has been made with the same CFD code. The numerical methods and the development of the grid and the breakage model for the two-phase flow are explained in detail in the later sections. For the two-phase gas–solid flow system measurements of pressure and temperature were conducted at the inlet and outlet. Further measurements within the apparatus were difficult to conduct as the extreme air velocities could harm the experimental equipment available. To give some checks on the predictions from the two-phase flow model, a KODAK EM High-Speed Video Camera was used, set at 500 frames per second for capturing single particles of five up to 50 The model is based around a three-dimensional CAD representation of the machine. The computational domain almost matches the physical domain. In terms of flow structure, the highly turbulent flow within the physical domain necessitates high complexity in three-dimensional models. Its prediction is a state-of-art problem that needs advanced modelling functions, and a certain amount of experimental data at the boundaries. Although the standard The consistency of the computational grid was tested in three different studies. The number of cells for each case was 114 For the numerical solver the Implicit Coupled solver was used. The coupled set of governing equations is discretised in time. In the steady case, the coupled solver uses the time marching until a steady-state solution is reached, (Fluent manual refers to “Time marching for steady-state flow, The temporal discretisation of the coupled equations is accomplished by an implicit scheme, where an Euler implicit discretisation in time of the governing equations is combined with a Newton-type linearisation of the fluxes to produce the linearised system in delta form. First, the continuity, the momentum and the energy equations were solved simultaneously and then the equations of turbulence. All the equations were discretised and solved with a second order upwind scheme resulting in second order accuracy. Next step was to check for convergence of the set of equations. For the time stepping solution a Courant number of five led to convergence. As the velocity of the gas flow is very high, i.e., above 200 Based on the Newtonian fluid assumption a general deformation law derived by The The energy equation is given in its general form as follows: The physics of the flow structure is turbulent as many vortices are created within the conical section due to the impeller rotation. The swirl number of the flow which is defined as the ratio of the axial flux of angular momentum to the axial flux of the axial momentum is given by The three-dimensional computational domain was constructed from a collection of tetrahedral, triangular prisms, and hexahedral cells. The numerical model consisted of 304 The sub-domains were later merged to produce the final computational domain. The first two sub-domains were meshed with unstructured hexahedral elements, applying the Cooper scheme, which mirrors surface meshes in a three-dimensional volume block. The mesh at the near-wall area was dense to capture eddies and secondary flows in the conical section. In the impeller sub-domain, where the geometry was complex ( At the interfaces between sub-domains, prisms were generated from the existing quadrilateral surface mesh. In sub-domain Pressure-inlet and pressure-outlet boundary conditions were applied to the inlet and outlet. Static and total pressure, total temperature and velocity direction, as well the turbulence intensity and the hydraulic diameter, were the necessary inputs. The zone of the impeller was selected to rotate at 5555 For the fluid zone of the impeller the rotating reference frame (RRF) technique was chosen. Here the walls of the machine were considered as rotating, at speed In a two-phase flow problem there are two approaches available in the literature, the Euler–Lagrangian, and the Euler–Euler. In the former, the gas phase is treated as a continuum by solving the time-averaged Navier–Stokes equations. The secondary phase is solved by tracking a large number of particles, bubbles or droplets through the calculated flow field. Depending on the mass-loading ratio, the two phases can be coupled so as to exchange momentum, mass and energy. The criterion for a coupled two-phase flow solution is a value of the mass loading larger than 0.2. Even though the mass loading can be higher than unity, however, this approach is limited to a low volume fraction of the secondary phase, 10% at maximum. The approach can be useful for processes such as in pneumatic conveying. In the Euler–Euler approach the different phases are treated mathematically as interpenetrating continua. Since the volume of a phase cannot be occupied by the other phases, the concept of phase volume fraction is introduced. The volume fractions are assumed to be continuous functions of space and time; their sum is equal to one. A set of conservation equations for each phase is, with similar structure. These equations are closed by providing constitutive relations that are obtained from empirical information or in the case of granular flows, by the application of kinetic theory. The current work utilized the former approach for simulating particle motion in a dilute two-phase flow, including particle-wall collisions. The particle trajectories were calculated by solving the momentum equations in the three-dimensional Cartesian system: The The drag coefficient The rotational inertia of particles, body forces due to the rotation frame of the impeller and due to the pressure gradient of the airflow are not considered. Also, Brownian forces are ignored; this is reasonable for particle sizes greater than 1 The simulated throughput rate of the dispersed phase was 1.0 The particle size varies from 38 to 30 The mean diameter (  The proposed particle-wall impact model, is a simple breakage model, and tends to predict the main breakage mechanism of the particles, as well as areas, where wear is likely to occur. It should be noted that the rotor blades do wear; in some experiments the mineral has made large holes in them. The mass loadings here have varied from 0.833 For reasons of simplicity, the particle shape is treaded as spherical. Based on the product size distribution, the measured flow velocities within the domain, and snapshots from high-speed video, the main mechanism of breakage is thought to be impact rather than attrition, compression or shear. Whilst tiny levels of attrition might occur between the outlet and the sampling point downstream of the cyclone, the measured particle size distribution is thought to represent the outlet material adequately. For the numerical particle tracking 12 injection groups were initialised at the inlet boundary face from different location points. Each group was visualised with 30 particle streams that is 30 equal size intervals of the feed size distribution. For the modelling of the turbulent dispersion of the dilute dispersed phase, each particle trajectory was calculated 30 times to include the fluctuations of the turbulent flow field on a particle path. That results in 900 particle tracks for each injection group. Every injection has a total mass flow of 0.0833 For fine grinding the high velocities between the particles and the grinding medium are necessary. Herein, it is assumed that when a particle collides with a wall at a high velocity, the kinetic energy is completely converted into fracture energy: Results for single-phase and two-phase simulations are presented here. Air velocities and temperatures were measured at several locations within the machine; data extracted near the inlet and the outlet are reported here. At the inlet the sample points were located 44 The pressure probes were connected to piezoelectric sensors. Temperatures were measured with thermocouples attached to 6 The predicted flow field is presented in  Similarly, The Mach number contours in Measured and computed pressures are in fair agreement ( In general, the modified two-equation Both camera observations and CFD predictions showed that in the inlet duct, particles tended to move almost in a straight line, until their collision with the impeller. Therefore, by capturing the predicted particle velocity, size and the time at the plane in front of the impeller (that is just before they collide) a relationship between size and velocity of impact was obtained. Assuming a particle velocity of 1.0 Similarly, the specific and the kinetic/fracture energy are shown in The calculation of the number of impacts on all wall surfaces in the machine yielded the diagram in Another mechanism is attrition, which is likely to occur at high throughput rates, and at the downstream of the device duct towards the cyclone. From Thus, having a solid mass flow rate of 1.0 This is a calculated characteristic value for the current material used, based on predicted values of numerical modelling. Further comparison with energy measurements of the apparatus might be difficult due to the complex geometry. As a first approach to the breakage mechanism the results are in agreement with physical observations, and justify the assumptions made as far as the numerical modelling is concerned. The modelling of irregular shape particles and the inter-particle collisions are important parameters for considerations for a complete breakage model. Moreover, a large number of trajectories will produce better visualisation of the physical phenomenon. An extra parameter to the modelling will be the diameter distributions derived from the drop weight test. A new method of comminution was presented. Preliminary work has shown size reductions of up to 300:1 in fractions of a second, in a single pass. The identification of the flow structure and an understanding of the breakage mechanism are presented in the current paper using the CFD code FLUENT. A modified two-equation The primary author would like to acknowledge the financial support from Rio-Tinto and the European Commission framework 4 R&D Programme with acronym ‘REFILL’. The presented material provided from Rio-Tinto Technology (UK) and experimental work was carried out at Casella CRE Energy Ltd., Cheltenham. The work presented herein is part of the proposed thesis of the first author, and part of it has been presented in two European projects