A 1-dimensional solution flow and mineral leaching model was developed to simulate data from leach columns and to demonstrate a dual porosity approach whereby an ore bed is divided into mobile (advective) flow and stagnant (diffusional control) regimes. Hydrodynamic properties were modelled with Richard's and van Genuchten's equations, and hydrodynamic column tests were performed to measure the parameters needed to solve these equations. The solute balance was performed using the standard advection-dispersion equation used in soil dispersion models. However, the term describing the desorption of solute (copper) from the solid into the liquid phase was replaced with a shrinking core reaction model rate term.
                  The model shows that the proportion of the ore bed governed by diffusion increases as the diameter and height of the bed increase. The hydrodynamic properties therefore appear to have a significant effect on the copper extraction profiles and, if so, this could provide an explanation as to why large scale heaps leach slower than columns. The mass transfer coefficients for solute transfer between the mobile and stagnant regimes were of a similar order of magnitude as reported in tracer studies in literature.concentration of solute (kg/m concentration of acid in bulk (g/L) concentrations of solute in the mobile and immobile regions (kg/m particle diameter (mm) dispersion coefficient of mobile phase (m incremental mass of acid reacted per unit volume (kg/m incremental mass of copper species reacted per unit volume (kg/m incremental overall conversion of species in ore bed incremental conversion of species in size fraction i mass fraction of species dissolved (conversion) fraction of sorption sites in contact with the mobile phase (kg/kg) hydraulic pressure head (cm) hydraulic conductivity (cm/s) mineral rate constant (mm/(g/L)/h) copper rate constant (mm/(g/L)/h) gangue rate constant (mm/(g/L)/h) mineral rate constant (mm/(g/L)/h) mineral rate constant (mm/(g/L)/h rate constant (mm/(g/L)/h) saturated hydraulic conductivity (cm/s) empirical constant (1/cm) empirical constants mass of copper species in contact with the immobile phase per unit volume (kg/m initial mass of copper species in the ore bed per unit volume (kg/m mass of copper species in contact with the mobile phase per unit volume (kg/m number of size fractions Peclet number linear velocity in downwards direction (cm/s) volumetric fluid flux density in mobile phase (m/s) Reynolds number relative degree of saturation sorbed concentration of species (kg/kg) sorbed concentrations in contact with the mobile and immobile regions (kg/kg) linear velocity (m/s) mass fraction of copper in each size fraction (g/g) length of ore bed in downwards direction (cm) mass transfer rate term for solutes between the mobile and immobile regions (kg/m moisture content (m moisture content in immobile phase (m moisture content in mobile phase (m residual moisture content (m saturation moisture content (m dynamic viscosity (kg/m/s) bulk density (kg/m suction pressure (cm) mass transfer coefficient for solutes between the mobile and immobile phases (1/s) A heap leach pad under irrigation is governed by various sub-processes ranging from bulk transport of solution and reagents by advection, inter-particle diffusion in stagnant clusters, intra-particle diffusion in reaction pores and chemical reaction at the mineral surface ( The heterogeneity of hydrodynamic conditions in an ore bed has been reported (e.g. A number of models describing both advective and diffusional control are summarised in    The particle size distribution is represented by a single topological exponent ϕ, where F is the mineral conversion, k(T) is a temperature-dependent rate constant and f(C) is a function of the solution composition. Whereas scale-up from columns to larger diameter columns or heaps may be represented by an increase in the diffusional path length in the above models, a more appropriate representation will be a dual porosity model with an increase in the proportion of the ore bed governed by diffusion. In order to demonstrate this effect, a dual porosity model similar to the soil dispersion model was developed. However, the intrinsic reaction rate was described by a shrinking core reaction model solved over a number of size fractions, rather than the linear desorption expression used previously. Experimental testing was performed to measure the hydraulic conductivity and pore pressure relationships needed to solve Richard's equation and to validate the flow properties in the ore bed. The model was applied to the leaching of a copper oxide ore, where the intrinsic reaction rate is easier to model and the hydrodynamic effects on the overall copper leach kinetics can be better illustrated. Whereas copper oxide orebodies are becoming depleted in traditional heap leach regions such as Chile, new African projects often entail the processing of copper oxide ores with high clay content. Therefore, an understanding of the physical and hydraulic properties which govern the flow of solution through the ore bed is important. The model will be extended to include the leaching of mineral sulphides at a later stage. The continuity equation for conservation of solution in a control volume can be expressed by Richard's equation for dual porosity, where q (cm/s) is the linear velocity, θ The immobile moisture in the ore bed is essentially filled up during agglomeration, and any further moisture increase during irrigation can therefore be assumed to be mobile moisture, hence The hydraulic conductivity and the pore pressure relationships can be described by van Genuchten's Eqs. The solute transport in soil dispersion models is described by the advection-dispersion equation, adapted for dual porosity in Eqs. Furthermore, the overall moisture content is divided into mobile and immobile regions as indicated by the equation: The advection-dispersion equation is now modified by replacing the sorption term with a term representing the change in the mass of copper species, where M The axial dispersion coefficient (D The conversion of copper species by the shrinking core reaction model is represented by Eq. The concentrations of copper and acid in the ore bed are solved incrementally from the above equations, in accordance with the mass balance illustrated in Column leach tests were performed on a copper oxide ore sample, crushed to 80% passing 12 Hydrodynamic column tests were performed in 150 The hydraulic conductivity and pore pressure relationships measured for a copper ore at uniform bulk density in the hydrodynamic column tests are presented in Solid head and residue particle size distributions and copper grades of a column leach test is summarised in The ore head sample contained 4.9% malachite, 0.8% chrysocolla, 0.4% pseudo-malachite and 0.1% chalcocite. Copper deportments were 81.9% from malachite, 7.5% from chrysocolla, 7% from pseudo-malachite and 2.3% from chalcocite. Major reactive isosilicate gangue minerals were amphibole (1.1%) and pyroxene (0.1%), whereas reactive phyllo-silicates were mica (biotite or muscovite; 18.4%), chlorite (5.4%) and feldspar (4.3%). Other gangue minerals present were quartz (50.8%), goethite (6.2%), kaolinite (4%) and talc (0.5%). Non-carbonate acid consumers ( Gangue minerals were grouped together as a single species since it was not possible to calculate extents of reaction of individual gangue minerals from the experimental data (this would require “sacrificial” columns with mineralogy at various times in the leach cycle). The percentage total reactive gangue mineral in the head sample and the ratio of acid to gangue mineral reacted was made a variable and the reaction was assumed to take place according to the shrinking core reaction model. A summary of model parameters is provided in Since the contribution from chalcocite to the total copper content is small, and refractory copper sulphide minerals are expected to remain insoluble, the current model did not consider such minerals. However, this will be a focus of subsequent development. The solution chemistry was limited to copper and acid, as minerals were acid-soluble and therefore the effect of iron concentrations are limited. Acid generation and consumption from iron precipitation and oxidation was ignored as columns were not aerated. Iron precipitation occurred primarily during the first 40 The moisture content ( The irrigation and drainage flowrates predicted by the model are plotted with the leach column data ( Separate conversions of copper are calculated for mobile and immobile zones, respectively ( The acid consumption profile takes into account an initial curing acid addition. It is assumed that 100% of acid reacts during curing. From the experimental data, all of the 5  As indicated in Boundary conditions for θ are provided in As indicated in The concentration of solute and acid in the immobile phase was also assumed to be uniform in a unit block of volume and time to avoid additional complexity. The solute mass transfer coefficients were also kept constant when scaling from the 1 From A 1-dimensional model closely predicts the copper extraction and acid consumption profiles in a 160 The author therefore contends that an understanding of the ratio of the ore bed governed by diffusion versus advection is essential in scaling up heap leach data. Hence it is necessary to quantify the change in the dual porosity ratio with increase in column diameter. Such a model will be the focus of further test work, and may be performed with tracer tests and hydrodynamic column tests at various column diameters. The author wishes to thank Societé d'Exploitation de Kipoi for permission to publish the experimental data. Amado Guzman is acknowledged for his geomechanical experimental procedures, equipment and assistance with model development. The useful suggestions by Petrus Basson and Petrus van Staden are also acknowledged. This paper is published with the permission of Mintek.