Silicalite-1 films grown on gold surfaces seeded with colloidal crystals with a size of 60, 165 and 320 nm were investigated by reflection–absorption infrared spectroscopy, scanning electron microscopy and X-ray diffraction in order to follow up the formation of nano-scale defects and to determine the optimal synthesis conditions for preparation of silicalite-1 films with a low concentration of defects. Using 60-nm-sized colloidal crystals, the seeding method was capable of producing silicalite-1 films with low concentrations of defects and with thicknesses ranging from 100 to 300 nm, which are predominantly oriented with the a-axis perpendicular to the surface. Hydrothermal treatment times of the 60-nm-seeded surfaces longer than 36 h as well as the seeding with 165 or 320 nm colloidal crystals substantially enhanced the formation of defects in the films.Molecular sieve films are of great interest for use in various industrial applications as they possess effective catalytic and molecule-size selective adsorption properties. A number of methods for preparation of continuous films on different types of supports have been developed. Generally, these methods can be separated into three main groups: (i) direct crystallisation of molecular sieve films on the support [ The objective of the present study was to investigate further, the structure and the formation of defects in the silicalite-1 films. The thickness, the orientation and the degree of disorder of films grown for various crystallisation times on gold surfaces seeded with colloidal crystals of different size were evaluated. Gold (1 It has been previously shown that silicalite-1 films obtained from the same seed sol for the same crystallisation time on γ-MPT- and on NaSH-modified surfaces, respectively, are identical within the experimental accuracy with respect to their thicknesses, XRD patterns and infrared spectra S(60| S(165| S(320| The average size of the colloidal crystals in the silicalite-1 sols was measured by dynamic light scattering using a Brookhaven Instruments ZetaPlus. The as-synthesised samples were characterised by SEM, XRD and RAIR spectroscopy. Top- and side-view SEM images of the samples studied were recorded using a Philips XL 30 scanning electron microscope equipped with a LaB The sample morphology was investigated from the SEM micrographs. Top-view SEM images of gold surfaces seeded with colloidal crystals of different size are shown in According to the XRD data, all the three series show the same tendency of changing the predominant crystallographic orientation perpendicular to the surface during the hydrothermal treatment. In The relative amount of silicalite-1 with RAIR spectra of samples from the three series are shown in The dislocations and the related line defects possess their own dipole moments and their interactions with the other atoms contribute to the total energy of the lattice, thus affecting the atom vibrations In RAIR spectroscopy, the linear absorption, Using this peak, one can estimate the relative degree of coverage of the seeded gold surfaces before hydrothermal treatment. As The linear absorption, In order to check whether the nutrient impoverishment of the synthesis solution influences the formation of defects, we prepared a silicalite-1 film on a gold surface seeded with 60 nm colloidal crystals using a 36-h hydrothermal treatment and renewing the synthesis solution each for 12 h. According to the SEM, XRD and RAIR data the film obtained in such a way, S(60|3 The existence of dislocations and related defects in the structure of as-synthesised films enhances the risk of crack formation in a subsequent calcination step as the heating increases the mobility of the dislocations, thus facilitating their accumulation near the grain boundaries and inciting the generation of cracks. The absence of nano-scale defects, cracks and pinholes is usually desired for membrane preparation. However, the fingering surface structure will not affect the utilisation of molecular sieve films in piezoelectric sensor devices unfavourably, because at a low concentration, the vapour sorption is accomplished by micropores rather than by mesopores and nanocavities. Besides, for catalytic coatings, it may be advantageous to have a certain number of defects as they may facilitate the intra-film diffusion. The method for the growth of molecular sieve films by seeding the support surface is capable of synthesising ultra-thin silicalite-1 films with low concentrations of defects, which are predominantly oriented with the The financial support from the Swedish Research Council for Engineering Sciences (TFR) is gratefully acknowledged. B. Mihailova would like to thank the Wenner–Gren Center Foundation for a scholarship.