Aluminium composite materials are beneficial in most engineering applications, most notably, because of their lightweight to strength ratio amongst many others. This study reports the reinforcement of aluminium alloy 8011 with cow horn and corncob in varying weight percentages of 5wt%, 10wt%, 15wt% and 20wt%. This study adopted the Stir casting method based on availability and cost-effectiveness as the cheapest method amongst others. The developed composite materials were in eight different samples alongside one control sample of the aluminium alloy base material. The samples used for this experimental study were tested for tensile strength, hardness and microstructural analysis. The outcome of the study shows that the sample with 20wt% of cow horn reinforcement gave the best-improved properties in terms of yield strength, ultimate tensile strength (UTS) and hardness with percentage improvement of 57%, 52.6% and 54.4% respectively. Hardness was also improved with 52.6% over the control sample with the 15wt% cow horn reinforced sample. Cow horn of 10wt% reinforcement improved the material by 61%. The results shown have justified the relevant effect of agro-waste materials in composite development.Aluminium is the most preferred material in any engineering application when light-weight to strength ratio becomes an essential matrix for consideration. Owing to high strength, robust thermal conductivity, ductility and natural abundance of aluminium and it's various alloys, it is progressively used in several automobile, construction and cooking utensil manufacturing industries [ Aluminium matrix composite is now gaining more recognition in the network of research findings and research application because of its improved strength, optimized mechanical, electrical, thermal and corrosion resistance properties. This significant improvement is as a result of the addition of reinforcement particulate which could be ceramic or agro-waste in a granular form of application [ In recent time, several research inputs have gone into metal matrix composite for improved and optimized properties as a result of their gradually increasing usage. The bank of literature has given some very relevant and vital findings to corroborate the significance of this study further. B Also, characterization of the mechanical properties and the microstructure of SiC and Al An experimental investigation by Wessley et al., [ In an experimental study by Fayomi et al., [ Another experimental investigation was done by Reddy et al., [ A concise investigation was done by Aryshenskii et al., [ Aluminium alloy 8011 is getting more relevance over time owing to its novelty in terms of dynamic properties. Researchers are gradually beginning to harness its potentials via various experimental studies in a bid to develop an improved material with the AA8011 base metal alloy. However, this study majorly points towards improving the mechanical properties of the base material by reinforcing it with agricultural waste. The parent material used for this experiment is aluminium 8011 which was obtained from the Aluminium Rolling Mill (ARM), Ota, Nigeria. The aluminium samples were acquired in billet shapes. The particulates used for the reinforcement were corncob and cow horn. The corncob was obtained from Covenant University farms in chunks. The cow horn was obtained from an abattoir in Lagos. Aluminium samples used for this study was 8000 series specifically AA8011 with precise elemental composition, as shown in The as-received corncob was in chunk form. It was crushed in a hammer mill as the first size-reduction step. Since the corncob had been reduced to smaller granules, further particle size reduction was done using a burr mill. The crushed corncob sample was sieved using a sieve of 75 nano micron to get the powdery form of the sample that was needed for the research work. Cow horn for this experiment was obtained from an abattoir. It was then dried under direct sunlight to reduce the moisture content. After the cow horn was fully dried, it was crushed using a bone crusher with a big mesh to reduce the granules of the sample. The mesh size of the bone crusher was reduced till the desired form of the sample was obtained. The cow horn was not burnt like the usual procedure [ From Stir casting method of forming metals is a process that utilizes mechanical stirrer to uniformly mix the reinforcement that is poured into the matrix material, as shown in ( Upon the completion of the casting process, the ingot, which is the as received cast from the newly developed composite was carefully machined. The machining was done with the aid of a lathe machine as the samples were machined into universal tensile samples according to its schematic representation as shown in The investigation was done using a TQ SM1000 Universal Testing Machine that has two different hubs that are located at the top and bottom of the test space within the machine. Once the initial force was applied, the sample was observed to have gradually gained percentage elongation. Then, the sample began to deform till it finally got broken at a point mostly close to the middle of the sample. The Ultimate Tensile Strength was determined by subtracting the initial force from the peak force. This was conducted in the Civil Engineering department of Covenant University Ota, Nigeria, using a TQ SM1000 Universal Testing Machine that has a 10mm diameter steel ball indenter. The circular shape sample is placed such that it aligns to the steel ball indenter. The steel ball is dropped on the sample, and the speed of dropping is controlled by a lever that works on the principle of hydraulics. Once the ball rests on the sample, you count for fifteen [ BHN = Brinell hardness number F = Load in kg D = Steel Ball Diameter in mm d = depression diameter on specimen The scanning electron microscope of TESCAN VEGA3 model made in Czech republic equipped with oxford instrument for EDS was used to study morphology and compositional characteristics of a sample. The samples were well polished, and the etchant used was Keller's reaction. The electron beam was focused on the surface of the specimen by an objective lens followed by the generation of signals from the specimen. The generated signals were acquired by the detector and processed to form an image or spectrum on the screen. The energy dispersive spectrometer affixed to the microscope allows detection and identification of the elemental composition of the specimen. The narrower probing beams both at low and high electron energy provided by the field emission cathode in the electron gun of the microscope improves spatial resolution and minimizes sample charging and damage. One of the tests carried out to examine the mechanical properties of the samples was a tensile test. This was done and explicitly categorized into three segments of relevance such as ultimate tensile strength, yield strength and elongation. The parametric values of the experiment are discussed below. There is a significant impact that porosity has on the mechanical properties of the cast material which covers for tensile stress, elongation, yield strength and hardness as discussed in this study. Porosity represents the cavity or void areas developed during the casting process to final solidification. It is a stress raising agent that reduces the available materials that could bear or carry the applied load during active use or testing. The behavior of the 10wt% of corncob presented in the graph in (Figures The ultimate tensile strength result shown in The effect of the various particulate in aluminium alloy composite development on the yield strength of the materials depicts a clear improvement in the mechanical property of the AA8011 base material for this experiment [ In this experimental study, the elongation test was carried out in a bid to determine the level of elongation of various aluminium composite that was developed. The elongation that was measured for each specimen under the same experimental condition gave a point of reference for the ductility of the various materials. According to Wessley et al., [ From Hardness is a property of a material that defines the materials ability to give resistance to a press-in effect or a scratch of an object on the material. The result is measured in Brinell Hardness Number (BHN), which connotes the expression of the amount of pressure load on the press point per unit area. It is observed that almost all the reinforcements in varying percentages gave an appreciable value of the hardness number with respect to the control sample, as shown in   From Figures Upon the completion of this study, twelve different samples were developed using cow horn and corncob in varying percentages as the reinforcement particulates for the developed composites. The experiment covered a range of tests which includes tensile strength, hardness, morphological and compositional analysis of all the samples in a bid to improve the mechanical properties of the base metal alloy (AA8011). The characterization of the samples shows that the alloy was significantly improved. Sample of 20wt % cow horn reinforcement particulate gave the best ultimate tensile strength and yield strength during the experiment with a percentage improvement of 54.4% and 57% respectively. The elongation behavior of the samples under the same experimental condition was peculiar for 10wt % of cow horn reinforcement with 61% improvement over the control sample. Babaremu K. O.: Performed the experiments; Wrote the paper. Joseph O. O.: Conceived and designed the experiments. Akinlabi E. T.: Contributed reagents, materials, analysis tools or data. Jen T. C., Oladijo O. P.: Analyzed and interpreted the data. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. Data will be made available on request. The authors declare no conflict of interest. No additional information is available for this paper. The Covenant University sponmanagement is well acknowledged for open access publication funding.