A reduced dimension dynamic model subject to random disturbances for a semiautogenous grinding (SAG) circuit is developed that is able to handle changes in the characteristics of the new feed ore. This dynamic model, which is adjusted using data from a large mineral processing plant, has been developed with the objective of being useful for design and testing of fault identification and detection (FDI) systems, soft-sensors, automatic control systems, etc. The reduced dimension is a requirement in order to be able to obtain in a reasonable time statistical results to evaluate such systems. In this paper this SAG circuit dynamic model is used to test a method for detecting changes and identifying the grindability of the ore being processed by the SAG circuit. The method used — based on the variance of the continuous wavelet transform of measured circuit variables — incorporates improvements of a previous method. Results show that a step change of new feed ore is detected in about 30 to 80 min depending on the grindability change. This result may be considered to be adequate when taking into account that the response time for the mill hold-up to attain a new equilibrium value after the ensuing transient is of about 3 h. Identification of grindability in stationary operation gives near 100% of correct classification under the analysed conditions. The sensitivity of the FDI method to changes in circuit characteristics is also assessed and acceptable results are obtained.The principal aim of this work is to develop a method for on-line detection and identification of grindability of the ore being processed by a SAG mill. To test this procedure a SAG circuit model is developed which is able to handle changes in the characteristics of the fresh feed ore. The purpose of the model of the SAG mill circuit developed here is that it should behave like a real circuit from a qualitative point of view, and that from a quantitative point of view it should be within what might be expected of such circuits. Therefore the model must reproduce the main features of actual SAG mills in general, so that it may be used for designing and testing identification and detection systems for faults and operating conditions, automatic control systems, test soft-sensor designs, etc. The model developed here is of reduced dimension (i.e., five) in order to be able to obtain in reasonable time statistical results to evaluate such systems. The resulting systems may then be expected to be successfully tuned to a particular SAG mill or SAG circuit by adjusting their parameters, since the principal characteristics of these mills have been implicitly taken into account due to the involvement of the mill model in their design. Such special dynamic model is not intended for mill design nor layout designs. The quality of automatic control performance achievable in a closed circuit grinding operation is determined to a large extent by the ability to measure circuit variables and identify disturbances. Ore grindability is often one of the most important disturbances in grinding operations but, unfortunately, the possibility of measuring grindability on-line has seemed too remote, so the possibility of taking opportune corrective actions has been thwarted. An estimation or measurement of ore grindability is also required for an optimal operation of mining facilities. A modern approach to grinding operations in the mining industry considers mining and mineral processing operations in a holistic manner, as in the Mine to Mill methods ( Fault detection and identification (FDI) methods will be used here to detect and identify the grindability of the ore, considering that different grindabilities produce different operating conditions which, although not considered fault situations, give rise to different characteristics of measured variables, some of which may serve to estimate the grindability of the ore in the mill. The variance of the continuous wavelet transform ( Following the general objective stated above a SAG mill circuit dynamic model has been adjusted using data collected from a large mineral processing plant in Chile, in order to produce results approaching those which would be obtained for actual mills. In order to test the developed method, the SAG mill circuit dynamic model has to be able to handle changes in the feed ore characteristics. The SAG circuit consists of a SAG mill and a screen as shown in the schematic diagram of An improvement with respect to the previous model ( Let the feed ore flow consist of two ore types A and B having different grindabilities indexes Let Then, if grindabilities of the incoming ore may be represented by mixing a hard ore (e.g., of type A) and a soft ore (type B), this enlarged model may deal with feed ores whose grindabilities change with time in any manner by making The equations governing the evolution of the masses In Eqs. The mill feed flows for each size The return flows of ore types A and B rejected by the screen are Shared variables in these equations for ores type A and B are the total ore feed flow Let the total hold-up of the mill, including water hold-up Ore grindability is represented by a grindability index The particle size distribution of the feed ore is represented by four different vectors This mill dynamic model is of the state/state-output class, resulting from the dynamic mass and water balances. The main components of the state vector are the ore masses of types A and B at the different sizes. Hence, given an initial state and the model inputs, a solution may be obtained. But, since the model in non-linear, an analytical solution is not practical, and simulation has been used. The variables assumed to be measured are: The disturbances considered are: The manipulated variables of the simulator are the feed flow The screen performance is represented by rejection coefficients The rejected ore flows The mill model was adjusted using the following nominal values for the SAG mil operation: mass of lumps The SAG circuit model was used to build the SAG circuit simulator using SIMULINK from MATLAB. The simulator includes an option of PID automatic control of the total mill hold-up With the hold-up control off, and the water ratio control set at 0.63, the grindability index of the feed ore undergoes a large abrupt change from With the automatic control of hold-up From the results obtained, e.g., The purpose here is to detect and identify ore grindability index Grindability detection is sensing that the grindability of the feed ore has changed. Such would be the case illustrated by Identification, on the other hand, refers here to estimating the grindability index which the ore will reach or has reached in stationary conditions, e.g., as in time interval [8, 16] in Important performance characteristics here are: (i) percentage of hits (correct identification) and of misses (miss-identification, including failure to identify), and (ii) insensitivity in the identification of a given parameter such as Fault Identification and Detection (FDI) methods ( The Feature Based FDI method is used here. Examples of features extracted from measured variables are, mean values, variances, auto correlation functions, cross correlation functions, etc., either of the variables themselves or of transformations performed on the variables such as Fourier transform or series, and continuous or discrete wavelet transforms. In the present SAG circuit case the feature used is the continuous wavelet transform (CWT) variance of measured variables ( The operations in this method comprise two stages: (i) feature extraction and (ii) feature processing. Let When the variables exhibit a stochastic nature, as in this case (e.g., see The sample template The feature used in the method originally developed by It turns out that if For a single measurement It may be shown that this sample template is an unbiased estimator of the characteristic template In the case of the SAG circuit, three basic operating conditions corresponding to three grindability indexes  For the case of measured variable The problem of identifying the operating point of the plant is then to determine for which Following the good results reported by Further template processing includes (i) discretisation of scales Results have been obtained by programming both the SAG circuit model and the grindability detection and identification method using MATLAB and Simulink. For each known value of the three grindability indexes  In this case identification was done for cases when the actual grindability index had the supposedly unknown values of 0.94, 1.00 and 1.06. One hundred repetitions of the experiment were performed — using data collected from the SAG circuit model of The benefit of adding the mean value of the measured variables to the variances and sample variances may be seen in Good results were achieved in the identification of grindability within a range using concatenation when the circuit was operating with ore having a grindability index In an ideal case the identification method should be insensitive to changes of circuit parameters when they change from the set of nominal parameters with which the templates were determined. However, it may be expected that there will exist some sensitivity, but it should be relatively small. In order to test such sensitivity, several tests were run where a set of selected parameters whose values have been randomly chosen in each test. These parameters are  The behaviour of the dynamic model of reduced dimension developed here has shown to be good from a qualitative point of view, since its response is similar to that of actual SAG mill circuit. Concatenation of the characteristic templates, as well as of the sample templates, has resulted in important improvements in the identification of the grindability index, as compared with the cases in which templates for only a single measurement are used. The detection and identification method considering the mean value of the measured variables, in addition to the variance of their continuous wavelet transform, has produced a considerable improvement in the identification of the ore grindability in all cases. For example, even with the help of concatenation, the correct identification percentages of normal ore type are 35% when only CWT variances are used, and 20% if only mean values of the measured variables are used. However, if both are taken into account this percentage increases to 100%. The method was found to be reasonably insensitive to variations of some selected parameters, as expected due to the design. Detection of a step change of grindability of the incoming ore has been found to take from somewhat more than 30 min to a maximum of 78 min for an extreme ore change. The estimation of the grindability index may serve for a supervisory control (or an experienced operator) acting mainly on the fresh ore feed set point, to drive the circuit to desired operating points. Such action may be improved using measurement or estimation of other variables, e.g., feed size, ball loading. It should be clear that the method developed here may be used not only for detecting and identifying other operating conditions in a SAG circuit, but for fault detection and identification in other plants of the minerals industry as well as in other industries. Research leading to this paper has received funding from Project FONDECYT 1020741, and from the Departments of Mining and of Electrical Engineering of the University of Chile.