Details of the research and development work carried out in India using SX for the treatment of the leach/waste solutions and effluents containing base metals are reviewed, focusing on solutions obtained from low-grade or complex ores, secondary resources or industrial wastes. Commercially available organic extractants, such as hydroxyl-oximes, hydroxyl-quinoline, tertiary amines, substituted phosphoric acid and other phosphate based extractants, have been used for the recovery of metals from acidic, alkaline and mixed sulfate–chloride solutions containing copper, nickel, cobalt, zinc and associated metals. The applicability of commercially available tailor-made extractants is described for the purification and enrichment of the metal contents of lean and complex solutions in an Indian context. Research efforts for the separation and recovery of valuable metals by SX are also highlighted. Treatment of solutions for producing metals by crystallization or electrowinning is described.Solvent extraction (SX) is an important tool for the processing of lean, complex and secondary resources of non-ferrous metals due to its versatile applicability in metal separation, purification, enrichment and analysis. The process is used on commercial scale for the extraction and separation of copper, nickel, cobalt, zinc, tungsten, vanadium, gallium, uranium and rare earths from the leach solutions, industrial waste streams and effluents. With the development of improved SX equipment design and materials of construction and newer organic extractants, it is possible to recover metals as value-added products from solutions in presence of complexing anionic species. Usually, commercially available reagents such as LIX 84, LIX 621, LIX 87QN, ACORGA, di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (DEHPA), Cyanex 272, Alamine 336, tri-n-butyl phosphate (TBP) and PC 88A, which may be termed anionic, cationic, solvating or mixed reagents are employed for the recovery of different non-ferrous metals. The first non-nuclear application of SX was reported for the production of copper from dilute acidic solutions in the presence of iron using the substituted hydroxy-oxime, LIX 64N ( Furthermore, SX has found extensive applications in different plants for the extraction and separation of cobalt and nickel from chloride, ammoniacal and sulfate solutions. As cobalt forms anionic chloro-complexes (CoCl Since sulfuric acid is the predominant medium for hydrometallurgical metal extraction, SX processes for the separation of Ni–Co from dilute sulphuric acid solutions is often reported. Cation-exchange type reagents such as DEHPA, PC88A (2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester), Cyanex 272 (bis (2,4,4-trimethyl-pentyl) phosphinic acid), Cyanex 301 (di-isooctyl-dithiophosphinic acid) or Versatic-10 (R Besides the above commercial applications of SX processes, a number of research and review papers are appearing in the open literature for the extraction and separation of different metals from complex leach solutions and industrial effluents ( In the present paper, new trends and prospects for the application of SX processes in the Indian context are highlighted for the recovery of base metals from lean and complex ores, including un-exploited materials and industrial wastes. In India, an SX process is used on a commercial scale in nuclear and rare earth industries ( Only a few plants were set up in the country utilising SX processes for the production of base metals from different low-grade ores and secondary materials or wastes. These plants are of small capacities (less than 2 In the case of brass ash or similar raw materials, the raffinate contained copper, which was recovered in a second SX circuit using LIX 984 as the extractant. Copper and zinc metals were produced as cathodes by EW. The iron extracted in the DEHPA was stripped with 6 The first commercial cobalt refining plant in India to produce cobalt cathodes was set up by Nicomet Industries Ltd (NICCO), Cuncolim, Goa. This cobalt refinery was commissioned in April 1997 (capacity 180 Two more cobalt refineries based on SX processes ( In addition to this production, cobalt metal powder is recovered from cemented carbide scrap by Sandvik Asia Ltd at a pilot plant in Pune. Spent catalysts from plants producing terephthalic acid are reprocessed by more than a dozen small cobalt chemical processors in un-organised sectors. Another cobalt-containing waste product, known as beta-cake, is generated during the production of zinc at Hindustan Zinc Ltd, Udaipur ( Two copper SX-EW plants have also been set up — one near Chennai and another near Hyderabad. They produce about 2–3 The success of SX plants depends on the proper economical design of the equipment. Usually, different designs of the mixer settler are employed, depending upon the volumes and flow-rates used, for efficient operation of the process so that minimum loss of organic and low crud formation takes place. In India, the expertise is available in different industries to fabricate the equipment and supply to various SX industries producing metals such as uranium, rare earth and base metals. The details are available on internet ( Metal separation, enrichment and recovery by SX for the treatment of acidic and ammoniacal solutions obtained from the leaching of lean grade and unexploited ores and wastes have been extensively studied in India, mainly at the National Metallurgical Laboratory (NML) (Jamshedpur), the Institute of Minerals and Materials Technology (IMMT — formerly the Regional Research Laboratory (RRL) (Bhubaneswar)), the National Institute of Inter-disciplinary Science and Technology (NIIST — formerly RRL (Trivandrum)), Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC) (Mumbai), Hindustan Zinc Ltd. (HZL) (Udaipur) and Nuclear Fuel Complex (NFC) (Hyderabad). The effluents generated from the process industries also contain heavy and toxic metallic ions along with anion complexing ions. The presence of these ions creates pollution and the treatment of such solutions by conventional methods is not very effective in meeting the strict environmental regulations on heavy metal concentrations. In order to treat such effluents, SX is considered an alternate approach, which has the ability to recover or recycle the metallic constituents. A brief account of these developments is discussed in the following sections. Ammoniacal solutions have often been employed in the hydrometallurgical extraction of base metals because iron and manganese are rejected to the residue. The solutions free from such impurities can be readily processed for metal separation by SX. The investigation of SX processes has involved the recovery of valuable constituents from leach solutions obtained in the treatment of low grade ores or wastes, such as poly-metallic sea nodules, chromite ore overburden, lateritic nickel ore, sulfide concentrates and super-alloy scrap as discussed below. At NML, extensive studies have been carried out on the extraction and separation of copper, nickel and cobalt from ammonia–ammonium carbonate leach solutions obtained from the processing of poly-metallic sea nodules ( With the phasing out of LIX 64N and marketing of the superior reagent, LIX 84 (5-nonyl 2-hydroxyacetophenoneoxime) for copper extraction by Cognis, the process was modified, while utilizing this reagent. The simplified flowsheet adopted for the metal separation by SX-EW is shown in In this process, both copper and nickel were co-extracted from the ammoniacal carbonate leach liquor (containing (g/L), 2.40 Cu, 2.41 Ni, 0.163 Co, 0.008 Mn, 0.002 Fe, 70 NH The purification of NiPS was achieved by copper removal with 5% LIX 84 in kerosene. The copper level dropped to 0.005 About the same time, Indian Ocean Manganese Nodules developed at IMMT-Bhubaneswar a process for the extraction and separation of copper, nickel and cobalt from a ammoniacal ammonium sulfate leach solution (1.72 Ammonia–ammonium carbonate solutions containing nickel and cobalt have been obtained from the leaching of low grade lateritic nickel ore from the Sukhinda Valley as well as from the leaching of chromite ore overburden. The leach solutions were processed using LIX 84 ( A sulfide concentrate containing copper, nickel and iron is generated in small quantities at Uranium Corporation of India Ltd (UCIL), Jaduguda. In order to utilise such materials, ammonia–ammonium sulfate leaching was used, followed by SX with LIX 84. A process of co-extraction and selective stripping was used for the separation of metals from a leach liquor containing 13.8 Ammonia–ammonium sulfate leach solutions containing copper and zinc were also generated during pressure leaching of a complex sulfide concentrate at Ambamata, Gujarat ( Further studies on the effect of ammonium salts on the extraction of zinc showed a decrease in extraction with increasing pH ( Nickel obtained from the leaching of a super-alloy scrap (25.5 The extraction and separation of different metals such as copper, nickel, cobalt and zinc by SX have also been studied for the processing of sulfate leach solutions of various low grade materials or wastes, such as brass ash, converter slag and complex sulfide ores using different organic extractants (   Recently, The bleed solutions generated in copper smelters and from the SX-EW processing of poly-metallic sea nodules contain high concentrations of acid along with copper and nickel. With a view to developing an efficient process avoiding evaporation and crystallisation for metal recovery, an SX-based approach was investigated at NML. Sulfuric acid was extracted by 25% Alamine 336 (tri-iso-octylamine) and 10% isodecanol in kerosene ( An alternate approach for the treatment of copper bleed solutions from a copper smelter was developed to recover the high value products such as copper and nickel powders. The process consists of partial de-copperisation of the bleed stream followed by crystallisation of a mixed salt of copper and nickel sulfate. The mixed salt is leached, purified with respect to iron and then copper and nickel were separated using LIX 84 ( The separation and recovery of copper and zinc from the leach solution of a complex sulfide concentrate were studied using SX at NML ( Further studies were carried out to compare the performance of LIX 84 with LIX 64 Similarly, A SX process for the extraction of zinc from the sulfate leach liquor of a rayon plant sludge was developed at NML using thio-phosphinic extractants ( At NML, DEHPA has been employed for the extraction and separation of cobalt and zinc from the sulfate leach solution of a cobalt cake obtained in the processing of sea nodules ( The application of phosphoric acid–based extractants has been studied for the extraction of zinc in the presence of manganese from sulfate solutions ( Further studies on the extraction of manganese(II) and zinc(II) from sulfate solution using sodium salts of Cyanex 272 showed an increase in separation factor of zinc over manganese with decreasing equilibrium pH, which decreased with a rise in NaCl, NaSCN and Na The alkyl phosphorous acid–based extractants, although they extract both cobalt and nickel, exhibit selectivity for cobalt over nickel and other metals ( Recently, The extraction behaviour of Co(II) and Ni from sulfate solutions with bis (2-ethylhexyl) phosphinic acid (PIA-8) in toluene has been studied by Electrolytic cobalt was produced from a solution containing nickel and other metallic impurities employing SX-EW ( At BARC, Process parameters were optimised by   SX has also been employed for the recovery and recycle of metals from chloride solutions. Selective extraction of cobalt from acidic chloride leach solutions of Sukinda lateritic nickel ores was achieved using TBP ( A SX process for the separation and recovery of pure Co(II), Ni(II) and Cu(II) from the hydrochloric acid leaching of poly-metallic sea nodules has been described by More recently, During the processing of sulfide ores or secondaries in chloride media, leach solutions containing mixed sulfate and chloride ions are often generated. A leach liquor containing 24.8 Based on the foregoing discussion on the application of SX for base metals in India, the following conclusions can be drawn. Firstly, SX processes are employed in India on a commercial scale to separate and recover base metals such as copper, nickel, cobalt and zinc from secondary resources or waste materials from different industries. These plants are normally of smaller size and produce electrolytic grade metals or metal salts using organic extractants such as DEHPA, LIX 984, LIX 984N PC 88A and Alamine 336. Secondly, various R&D studies are currently underway to develop processes for the extraction and separation of metals from acidic, alkaline (including ammoniacal) and mixed sulfate–chloride leach liquors generated in the treatment of complex or lean ores or industrial wastes which have not been exploited to date. Some of the processes have been tested on pilot scale in continuous mode while recycling the reagents and salts in the system. Large pilot-scale developments that are worth mentioning are the separation and recovery of copper, nickel and cobalt from an ammoniacal carbonate leach liquor (NH Finally, several organic extractants are reported for the selective extraction and separation of metals and the potential exists for further exploitation of SX-based processes. Development of newer organic extractants, mixed extractants and synergists may be more selective for the recovery of specific metals from the acidic or alkaline leach solutions in the presence of complexing agents. The authors are thankful to the Director, National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur (Council of Scientific & Industrial Research, New Delhi) for kind permission to publish this paper.