The extraction chemistry of zinc in ammoniacal solutions is very complicated. In this work, the extraction behaviors of zinc, H2O and NH3 in the organic phase have been investigated. The coordination structures of zinc species in both aqueous phase and organic phase have been examined by use of X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectroscopy. The geometric configuration of zinc species in ammoniacal solution has been resolved from XANES spectra by principal component analysis and linear combination fitting. The results reveal that the formation of zinc ammine complexes can greatly depress the zinc extraction. It was interesting to find that the decrease trend of extraction efficiency can be attributed to the structural transform of zinc species in ammoniacal solution from octahedral configuration to tetrahedral configuration. The latter increases the stability of zinc species and decreasing their extraction reactivity. The fitting results of EXAFS data indicate that ammonia and water molecules can coordinate directly in the first shell of zinc extracts, thus decreasing the hydrophobicity of zinc extracts and inhibiting their distribution. This detailed structure information affords insights into extraction mechanism of zinc(II) in ammoniacal solution and is crucial to design ligands for separation of metal ions.The recovery and separation of zinc from ammoniacal solutions via solvent extraction is a key process in hydrometallurgy and wastewater treatment The extraction chemistry of zinc(II) in ammoniacal solutions has proven to be extremely complex There have been several theoretical investigations on the zinc ammine complexes in solution In this work, the coordination behaviors of ammonia and water with zinc extracts in the organic phase was determined by extraction equilibrium. The coordination structures of zinc species in both aqueous phase and organic phase were characterized by use of X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectroscopy. The extraction mechanism of zinc(II) in ammoniacal solution has been elucidated in view of the structural aspects of zinc species. The extractant, 4-ethyl-1-phenyl-1,3-octadione (denoted as HA), was synthesized according to the procedure in our previous work In a 60 Aliquots of 40 The water content in the organic phase was measured by Karl-Fischer volumetric titration using a Mettler-Toledo V30 automatic titrator. The ammonia content in the organic phase was determined by standard Kjeldahl’s method after twice stripped with 2 The coordination structure of zinc species in the ammoniacal solutions of varied pH and the corresponding zinc extracts in the organic phase were measured by X-ray absorption spectroscopy. The zinc extracts were prepared by solvent extraction using the organic phase of 0.8 Zn K-edge X-ray absorption spectra were collected at the U7C beamline of National Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory (NSRL), China. The storage ring of NSRL was run at 0.8 The data processing and analysis were performed with the IFEFFIT package The pH dependence of zinc extraction is shown in In addition, it is interesting to find that the difference between initial pH (pH Because the coordination sites of zinc(II) cannot be saturated by two HA ligands, water and ammonia molecules could further coordinate with the zinc extracts in the organic phase The slope of the fitting straight line reflects the mean coordination number of water and ammonia in the zinc extracts. As shown in XANES spectra, reflecting the coordination geometry and the oxidation state of the target atoms, can be used as a “fingerprint” to provide qualitative structural information of an unknown sample However, the XANES spectra of the aqueous phase exhibit obvious difference at different pH, including their sharpness, position and intensity. Two distinct features can be observed in the XANES spectra. On one hand, an intense white line peak (W, 1s Because there are several zinc species in the ammoniacal solution, i.e., Zn However, based on the adduct nature of spectra, the principal factors of X-ray absorption spectra can be decomposed by PCA Meanwhile, least combination fitting (LCF) was performed for the XANES spectra using the spectra at pH 5.10 and 8.60 as possible end-members to obtain the quantitative information of principal components in each sample. As shown in The EXAFS spectra of zinc species in the ammoniacal solutions at pH 5.10 and 8.60 can be reasonably fitted using octahedral Zn(H The Since EXAFS spectra are the statistically weighted average of all species in the organic phase, i.e., ZnA Although Rao et al. Solvent extraction of zinc(II) in ammoniacal solution is very sensitive to the aqueous pH. In particular, the extraction efficiency sharply decrease at pH This research was financially supported by the National Basic Research Program of China (No. 2007CB613601), National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51134007), Science & Technology Plan Project in Hunan Province (No. 2011FJ6005) and Hunan Provincial Innovation Foundation for Postgraduate (No. CX2010B112). Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 