Sulfur (S) deficiency in soils is increasingly recognized in agricultural systems. The quantification of S mineralization/immobilization processes after incorporation of organic materials into soils is a key factor to predict the availability of S to growing plants. However, immobilization and mineralization occur simultaneously making the quantification of the magnitude of each process difficult. We used the inverse isotope (35SO4) dilution technique to quantify immobilization and mineralization fluxes after incorporation of two organic residues with contrasting C/S ratio's (cabbage or wheat straw) into a sandy soil in planted and unplanted soils (pot trial with ryegrass and incubation). The soil was labeled with 35SO4 and incubated for 63 days prior to the application of residues. The specific activity (SA) of soil-extractable SO4 did not change significantly in the control soil during the subsequent experimental period despite significant net mineralization, illustrating that labile-S in soil was homogenously labeled. Application of residues decreased the SAs during the incubation due to the dilution with unlabeled-S from the residues. A three-compartment dynamic model was fitted to the SA data predicting that gross mineralization of residue-S was almost complete over 43 days incubation although this release was not matched by the increase in soil SO4 due to immobilization reactions. Soil-extractable SO4 was significantly increased in the cabbage-treated soil while the reverse was true in the wheat straw amended soil in which the S-immobilization was almost twice the gross mineralization of residue-S. The SA of S in ryegrass were maximally 15% lower than in corresponding soil extracts suggesting that residue mineralization was similar in planted and unplanted soils. The inverse isotope dilution method offers potential for screening S release of different residues; however the details of the dynamics of soil-S isotopes show that the individual fluxes are not constant during the incubation.Sulfur (S) deficiency occurs in agricultural systems both in temperate and tropical soils as a result of reduced S inputs from atmospheric deposition and from S-containing fertilizers ( The objectives of this study are to apply the inverse isotope dilution to quantify gross mineralization, net mineralization and immobilization of S in soil. Two residues with contrasting C/S ratio were used and compared in planted and unplanted soil. The planted soils were included because the SA measured in plants may reveal if S mineralization is affected by plant growth. An agricultural sandy soil from Bocholt, Belgium, was used in this study. The soil was collected from the top 0–20 Soil was moistened to 88% of FC and pre-incubated at 20 The experiment was conducted at the same time as the incubation experiment using the same Subsamples of unplanted soil were taken from each pot immediately after mixing soil with treatments (=Day 0) and at Day 1, 3, 7, 15, 23, 35 and 43 during the incubation. At each sampling time, two soil samples equivalent to 10 Plant samples were digested with concentrated HNO For each soil extract or plant digest, a 1 Conceptually, we discriminate three fluxes:  The SA of the SO The plant available S ( Based on a similar concept, the total available pool in soil (E-value, mg Extractable SO About 60% of the soil The three compartment model yielded predicted immobilization rates with standard errors smaller than 15% and the predicted SAs fit the observations ( Ryegrass dry matter was increased by addition of cabbage both at the 20- and 40-day harvests compared to the control ( The plant available S ( The stability of the SA of available S in the control treatment reveals that the 63 days pre-incubation of labeled soil was sufficient to stabilize the SA of available S, which is a prerequisite for the use of this inverse dilution isotope method. By meeting this assumption, the quantification of the S fluxes could be performed. The immediate increase of extractable SO Net mineralization was positive throughout the incubation in cabbage-treated soil indicating the ability of the residue to be used as a S source. The amount of S added to soil in wheat straw treatment, was low (1.6 The The A striking observation was that SAs in the cabbage-treated soil marginally changed during 0 and 15 days despite the considerable net release of SO It was possible to quantify the S mineralization and immobilization from plant residues based on a mathematical model using the inverse isotope dilution. Incorporation of plant residues with high or low in S content induced both S mineralization and immobilization. However, S immobilization in the low-S content wheat straw treatment was higher than mineralization resulting in negative net mineralization and in low-S content in ryegrass grown on the soil amended with the residue. Conversely, the incorporation of high-S containing cabbage residue into soil supplied sufficient S for the microbial population while replenishing the SO Financial support was provided by the Instituut voor de Aanmoediging van innovatie door Wetenschap en Technologie in Vlanderen (IWT) and by the Scholar Rescue Fund of the International Institute of Education (IIE) through a grant to the first author. The basis of the three-compartment model is described in The general solution of Eq. The SA is the ratio of