In this study, a novel and integrated hydrometallurgical process for the production of zinc powder from electric arc furnace (EAF) dust in alkaline medium is reported. The dust is firstly hydrolysed in water, and then fused in caustic soda at 350°C for 1h, followed by leaching in alkaline solution in which both zinc and lead are effectively extracted. Zinc powder is then produced by electrowinning from the leach solution after the lead is selectively removed by precipitation using sodium sulphide as precipitant. The EAF dust tested contained 25% Zn, 1.8% Pb and 33% Fe. It was found that 38% of zinc and 68% of lead could be extracted from the dust when leached directly in caustic soda solution. Leaching of zinc increased to 80% when dust was directly fused with caustic soda followed by alkaline leaching. However, the leaching further increased to 95% when the dust was hydrolysed first with water before fusion. Zinc powder with a purity of 99.95% was then produced by electrowinning from the lead depleted solution. Stainless electrodes were used as both anode and cathode.The metal industry is one of the large size industries of world-wide, including iron and steel foundries and mills, as well as brass and bronze foundries So far most of these wastes are disposed in the industrial landfills. Since dusts and fumes have been classified as hazardous, conventional landfills should be modified in order to meet the need of environmental constraints required for hazardous materials. Another treatment method for dusts is by dissolution in mineral acids. However, the composition of the dusts is very complex, which may include oxides of Zn, Pb, Al, Fe, Cu, Si, Cd, Mn, Mg, etc. When the wastes are digested in strong mineral acids such as hot hydrochloric acid, nitric acid and sulphuric acid, most of Zn, Pb, Al, Cu, and also Fe, etc. will be dissolved. In general, sulphuric acid is used, if zinc is recovered as electrolytic metal zinc in the later part of process Considering that only oxides of Zn, Pb, and Al, and limited cases, Cr and Cu can be dissolved effectively in strong NaOH solution (the solubility of Cu and Cr oxides in alkaline solution are much lower than those of Zn, Pb and Al, especially when these oxides co-exist in wastes), it should be of great significance to use the alkaline processes to leach Zn, Pb selectively from the wastes and zinc oxides ores. In the 1970s, Amax Co. operated a pilot plant in New Jersey, USA, based on caustic leaching and purification of alkaline solutions by depletion of lead with zinc dust followed by electrowinning. This development was eventually abandoned due to a combination of technical and economic problems. A similar plant, based on direct caustic leaching was later built in France, but this also has been abandoned The objective of this study is to explore the technical and economic possibilities of increasing the leaching efficiencies of both zinc and lead from dusts in alkaline medium by using two-stage process, i.e. fusing with caustic soda and then leaching. The experimental results on laboratory-scale studies were reported in this paper. All the chemicals used were of analytical grade, unless indicated otherwise. The sample of 5 5 A given ratio of dusts and water was stored in glass bottles, and mixed by an orbital shaker for a given time (15 To an alumina crucible added 1.5 To a given volume of leach solutions containing zinc and lead and other metal ions added a given quantity of sodium sulphide crystal or solution, mixed, stood by for hours, analysed the supernatant by ICP, calculated the precipitation and separation efficiencies. Stainless steel electrodes were used as both anode and cathode. The obtained zinc metal powder could easily be removed from the electrode by scrapping with simple tools and was washed thoroughly with water and then with ethanol. Finally, it was dried at 50°C, weighed and analysed. The toxicity leaching test was conducted according to the USEPA standard Leaching of zinc and lead from dusts in alkaline solutions is a function of leaching time, concentrations of alkaline solutions, phase ratios, and leaching temperature. The experimental results are shown in Leaching of zinc and lead increases with the increase of initial NaOH concentration up to 5 Sufficient volume of 5 There was little improvement to be observed when the leaching of dust was conducted at higher temperature. All the experiments in this study were carried out at room temperature (25°C). Obviously, around 36% of zinc and 65% of lead can be leached from dust by direct leaching in NaOH solution at the optimum conditions. Poor extraction of zinc from dust by direct alkaline leaching could be originated from the presence of zinc ferrites in the dust Destruction of zinc ferrites structure in a medium of NaOH depends on fusing temperature, weight ratios of NaOH/dust, and structure of ferrites. The experimental results are shown in Effect of fusing time on the extraction of zinc from dust is shown in In addition, at least 24 Weight ratios of dust to solid NaOH in the fused product also influences the leaching efficiency ( Hence, the leaching efficiencies of zinc increase to around 65% while those of lead decrease to around 30%, when the dusts are fused with solid NaOH at the fusing point of NaOH (318°C) for 1 In order to improve the leaching rate of zinc, several methods for preliminary treatment of dust were tested. It was found that the leaching of zinc increased greatly when the dust was contacted with water or dilute alkaline solution before fusing with caustic soda, as shown in A water/dust weight ratio of 1:1with a hydrolysis time of at least 4 Most important steps affecting the extraction of zinc from dust are hydrolysis and fusion. Dust is formed in high temperature and its morphology may change when it is contacted with water. Such structure change facilitates the attack of NaOH to zinc ferrites and release of zinc. Fusion of zinc ferrites with NaOH further destroys the structure and makes the zinc in zinc ferrites extractable. From A NaOH/dust weight ratio of at least 1:1 ( NaF and Na When 400 Moreover, together with Zn and Pb, Al, Cu and Cr(III) may also be dissolved in strong alkaline solution, while Fe, Cd, Ca, Mg, remain in the leaching residue ( The solubility of Cr(III) and Cu are found to be negligible in the presence of zinc and lead. Meanwhile, the solubility of lead in alkaline solution is also depressed greatly in the presence of zinc, especially when the content of zinc is relatively high. As a result, the extraction percentages and concentration in leach solution of lead become relatively low, as the zinc content in dust is much higher than that of lead, and the concentration of zinc in the leaching solution is thus much higher than that of lead. In addition, the extraction of lead is also somewhat related to the treatment approaches by which the metals are leached. Lead (70–75%) in the dust can be extracted when the direct leaching process is used ( From The extraction of Al from dust is about 65–75% regardless of the extraction approaches used. The typical concentration of Al in leach solution is around 1–1.5 In hydrometallurgy of zinc with sulphuric acid as leaching agent, the presence of Cd always exerts a lot of problems in the subsequent purification and electrolysis steps for leach solutions. However, the Cd concentration in alkaline leach solution is found to be negligible (<0.01 After zinc was extracted as completely as possible, the leaching residue was washed with 5% NaOH solution and then with water, followed by drying the cake at 110°C. Lead should be removed from leaching solution before zinc is electrowon. Several methods can be used for lead removal from acidic solution. However, the methods available for selective separation of lead from zinc in alkaline solution are limited. Our previous experiments show that addition of zinc powder leads only to partial removal of lead (20%) in alkaline solution. In this study, sodium sulphide was used as precipitant and the experimental results are shown in Much work has been done on the electrolysis of zinc from alkaline solution. It has been shown that electrolysis of zinc from alkaline media is cost-effective The zinc metal deposited on the cathode was grey with a slightly bright metallic lustre. It can be removed easily from the cathode by scraping the metal by simple tools such as glass rod and small stainless knife. The wetting of fused product by both water and alkaline solution was found to be very slow. In order to accelerate the wetting and dispersing of fused products in NaOH solution, the hot fused matter can be inserted into NaOH solution after it was taken out of the furnace. It cannot be pulped completely in a quench, and should be heated for a while or just stood by for hours to days depending on the scale of the fused matter. In another test, the original and hydrolysed dust were directly leached at 121°C in a pressurised steam cylinder. The extraction of zinc was found to be very low, with an extraction of 38% from dust and 36% from the hydrolysed dust. Hence it is impossible to decompose the stable ferrite structure by pressure leaching. Electrowinning of zinc from alkaline and acidic solutions was compared and found that the quality of zinc powder from alkaline solution is much more stable than that from acidic solution. Perhaps heavier corrosion of containers in alkaline medium might occur. According to our research, however, it is not a problem. Cheap and commercial availability of Cr steel is an excellent material for both containers and electrodes used in alkaline medium. The content of Si in dust was estimated to be in 1–5% range. Part of silica may fuse with caustic soda and dissolve in solution, which will consume some NaOH. Sodium silicate cannot be removed in the whole process and may accumulate. Hence, sodium silicate should be separated during alkaline solution is recycled. The Cd in the leaching residues is a major heavy metal that considerably increases the treatment costs. Cd content in the original dust is very low, and may be disposed of more easily when the dust is treated by alkaline fusion and leaching. One concern is the cost-effectiveness of this process. This depends on the zinc price in world market. It may be reasonable to compare the process developed in this study with hydrometallurgical process of zinc using sulphide ores ( The dust tested contained 25% zinc and 1.8% lead, and 90 and 80% of zinc and lead can be extracted from dust by using hydrolysis-fusing-leaching process. Hence, 200 The cost used for fusion depends on the form of energy. It may be quite high by using electricity, and relatively low by coal. In addition, the NaOH used for fusion is dissolved in leaching solution, and should be recovered as solid state after lead separation and electrowinning. A lot of energy will be consumed for evaporation in this step. The exact data may be estimated from a pilot test. It is roughly estimated that around 500–600 US$ will be needed for production of 1 Chemical reactions in the fusion and leaching processes may be summarised as follows. It is proposed according to the following data based on 1000 The consumption (loss) of NaOH in the fusion and leaching processes is 163 Leaching of ZnO Leaching of PbO This reaction will be taken place at ambient temperature. Fusion Leaching of fused products Overall reactions in the fusion and leaching processes For zinc ferrites alone That is the molar ratio of NaOH needed to the zinc ferrites reacted should be 2:1. Nevertheless, the estimated value is 2.5 as mentioned above. Some NaOH may be consumed in the formation of sodium silicates and iron hydroxides. It is sure that 163 Chemical reactions taking place in the sulphide precipitation processes are also proposed. The molar ratios of Pb/S in the lead sulphides is around 1.5. Therefore the components of the sulphides may be very complex. The following reactions may be proposed. Various methods for extraction of zinc from an EAF dust were tested. Zinc (95%) can be leached when dust was hydrolysed in water and then fused with caustic soda at 350°C, compared with 65% of zinc leached when dust was fused directly without previous hydrolysis. Only 38% of zinc can be leached by direct contact the dust with caustic soda solution. In saturation leach solutions, zinc, lead, and Al concentrations can reach 50, 3, and 1.2