Many empirical models have been used widely for designing hydrocyclones in industry. These empirical models consist of a set of design equations. Most of the design equations are based on the correlations obtained experimentally, using dimensionless similarity numbers. These equations have their limitations due to the specific systems used for model development. Therefore, in many cases, they cannot be used with confidence to predict the design of an individual separator, or the overall plant configuration that is required to meet different user requirements. A modified version of the existing design equations presented by previous researchers was developed. The design equations, describing four fundamental parameters: pressure drop, flow recovery to underflow, corrected cut size and classification function, were modified by fitting with set of experimental data to obtain the system-specific constant parameters. These modified design equations were then called, the fine-tuned design equations. Four sets of fine-tuned design equations describing all the fundamental parameters were constructed and used to predict the separation performance of many hydrocyclone operational systems at the Dow Chemical Company, Texas, USA. The performance of these equations is evaluated, and the limitations of their use are discussed, thus providing useful insights into hydrocyclone design.Hydrocyclones are one type of the industrial centrifugal separators and have been used for more than 50 years. Due to the simple design, low capital cost, easy of operation and low maintenance, hydrocyclone has become an important equipment for solid–liquid separation. Although a number of works have been done to study the behaviour of the flow within hydrocyclones their separation phenomena are still not fully understood. The selection and design of hydrocyclone are still empirical and experience based. There is a need to have a reliable hydrocyclone model that allows design engineers to predict the performance of hydrocyclones and make the proper selections. The existing hydrocyclone simulation methods are based on experimental data, theoretical model or a combination of both. These models consist of a set of design equations, which have their limitations due to the specific systems used for model development. In principle, it is possible to select a combination of design equations and parameters to fit a particular set of hydrocyclone data. However, the challenge is that these equations usually cannot be readily used for other hydrocyclone systems. The purpose of this work is to investigate the applications of existing hydrocyclone design equations for predicting the performance of industrial hydrocyclones. Design equations are modified by using some experimental data to obtain the system specific constant parameters. Then these tailored design equations are used to predict separation results for a wide range of hydrocyclone geometries, and operating parameters for different materials. The design of a hydrocyclone operational condition and the prediction of its performance can be made by using a group of design equations. Each of these design equations describes the fundamental parameters, which are used in calculating the performance of a hydrocyclone. These parameters are pressure drop, flow recovery to underflow, corrected cut size and classification function. Other information, like particle size distribution, solids concentration, flow to overflow and overall material balances, can be derived from these parameters. The known flow properties are considered as the input parameters and the unknown flow properties, which are determined by solving a group of design equations, are considered as the output parameters. A diagram for hydrocyclone design procedure is shown in The selectivity function equation represents the relationship between the selectivity and classification function considers only the action of the separation forces may be expressed as: However, In this work, the selectivity function from Eq. However, as the design equations are based on the experimental observation of hydrocyclone performance and consist of the statistical correlation of numerous data, cautious use of these equations is required. The verification of design equations was made with experimental data collected from a series of pilot tests and production plant at the Dow Chemical Company, Freeport, Texas. Three different hydrocyclones, 76-mm and 136-mm hydrocyclones from Krebs Engineers, and a 50-mm hydrocyclone from Richard Mozley Ltd. were used. The verification data is divided into several types of hydrocyclone operations according to different types of feed material and hydrocyclone geometry. The parameters of vortex finder and apex size of the hydrocyclones, pressure drop, concentration and particle distribution of feed slurry are varied in order to study their effect on modelling the hydrocyclone performance. The geometrical hydrocyclone parameters and properties of the materials involved are shown in In the pilot test, the feed pressure was recorded with both of the outlets open to the atmosphere, but in the production plant, the pressure drop across the cyclone feed and overflow were recorded. The volume flow rates of feed, overflow and underflow were measured. Samples of feed, overflow and underflow were collected for measuring solid concentrations and particle size distributions. To achieve repeatability, multiple samples were taken and averaged values used. A sub-sample of each stream was size-analysed using a laser diffraction method. The results for particles below approximately 1 μm were generally unreliable according to the limitation induced by the sensitivity of the laser diffraction instrument. The correct sample analyses were key to success for design equation validations. The materials involved in these seven groups all behave differently, some contain large crystals and some have very fine particles. One system was even temperature sensitive. Therefore, the sample analyses were quite tedious and required different techniques for different systems. The majority of the time in this work was spent in ensuring the good data quality. More details about the experimental procedure and the statistical treatment can be found in The existing design equations for design parameters presented by previous authors are used in this study and are shown in It can be seen that not all of the previous authors provide the design equations for all fundamental parameters. Therefore, a combination of design equations is used in order to complete the calculation of hydrocyclone performance. As discussed earlier, the flow recovery to underflow is an important parameter in practical operations for material balance. It indicates the relationship between the feed, overflow and underflow streams and is required for the calculation of the underflow and overflow concentration. The prediction of hydrocyclone performance depends on the accuracy of this parameter evaluation. Therefore, the evaluation of the design equations of this parameter is first carried out as described in the next section. The design equations used to calculate the flow recovery to underflow presented by The first step was to use the equations to predict the flow recovery to underflow with their default values of the key parameters. The results from these predictions are shown in Since the direct application of design equations is not reliable, some experimental data have been used to determine the key parameters for the design equations. The diagram of the procedure for determining the modified key parameters of the These “fine-tuned” design equations with the modified key parameters are then used to predict the flow recovery to underflow of similar systems. These results are shown in It is also obvious that if more data are used to tune the design equation, the better the prediction for the flow recovery to underflow in the same data group. The design equation presented by Moder and Dahlstrom (using three parameters) gives the best overall predictions compared to the equations of Yoshika and Hotta, Abbott, Tarjan (using two parameters) and the more complicated equations of Flintoff et al. and Nageswararao (using only one parameter). In this study, four sets of design equations for predicting hydrocyclone performance are formed. They are a combination of a design equation for fundamental parameters as shown in The fine-tuned design equations are created by fitting the original design equations with some experimental data to obtain the system specific constant parameters or modified key parameters. From here, these fine-tuned design equations are used, with the modified key parameters, to predict separation results for a wide range of hydrocyclone geometries, operating parameters and different materials. The modelling of the hydrocyclone selectivity curve in this study does not take into account the fish-hook effect. The study of this effect can be found in The direct application of design equations does not offer reliable predictions of hydrocyclone performance ( The predictions of the set of fine-tuned design equations are investigated in different hydrocyclone operations. These are placed in two main categories. The first category contains the predictions of the sets of fine-tuned design equations in the same group of material. Systems of lime in water and test dust in water are investigated. The second category contains the predictions of the sets of fine-tuned design equations in a group of the same hydrocyclone geometry, which consists of two hydrocyclone designs, one from Krebs Engineers and the other from Richard Mozley Ltd. To express how well each set of design equations predicts the separation performance of a hydrocyclone, a grading system of “1–4” is used. An example of this grading system is shown in A grade of “4” is given to a set of design equations which shows very good predictions of 0–10% difference between predicted and measured results. A grade of “3” is given to a set of design equations which shows good predictions of 10–20% difference between predicted and measured results. A grade of “2” is given to a set of design equations which shows acceptable predictions for some applications of 20–30% difference between predicted and measured results. A grade of “1” is given to a set of design equations which shows unacceptable predictions of more than 30% difference between predicted and measured results. In order not to confuse the readers with the vast amount of data involved in this study, symbols of / and × are used in the set of design equation performance comparison tables ( This section evaluates the performance of the sets of fine-tuned design equations for the same material, with different hydrocyclones under various operating conditions. This group includes the lime in water system and test dust in water system. In this group, the sets of the fine-tuned design equations were conducted by fitting the design equations to the experimental data of lime/water Run L18, and then by using these fine-tuned design equations to predict the performance of hydrocyclone operations in Runs L3, L8, L14 and L16. A comparison between the sets of the fine-tuned design equations in predicting the performance of hydrocyclone operations under different conditions of the lime in water system is shown in In the test dust in water system, the studies of the performance of the sets of fine-tuned design equations are divided into two groups. In the first group, the sets of the fine-tuned design equations are conducted by fitting the design equations to the experimental data of test dust/water Run TD1, and then using these fine-tuned design equations to predict the performance of hydrocyclone operations for Runs TD2 to TD12. In the second group, the sets of the fine-tuned design equations were conducted by fitting the design equations to the experimental data of the test dust/water Run TD5, and then using them to predict the performance of hydrocyclone operations for Runs TD6 to TD12. In the test dust and water system, all sets of design equations give poor predictions if the hydrocyclone dimensions are different. Considering cases with the same hydrocyclone dimension, the predictions of fine-tuned design equations for each flow are examined with differences in vortex finder and apex diameters, feed concentration and pressure drop. It is found that the pressure does not affect the predictions of all sets of equations both in the lime and water system. All sets of equations give very good predictions on the system, which is different only in pressure drop. Only Set B gives good prediction in the cases with different apex sizes, while the other sets give poor predictions. However, in the case of little difference in the ratio between the vortex finder and apex diameters, Set C can give acceptable predictions. In the cases with different vortex finder sizes, all sets of fine-tune design equations give poor predictions. The concentration of the feed slurry is also an important parameter. Set D can give very good flow predictions. Sets A and C can give good predictions, while Set B gives poor predictions. The results from tests using two different materials show that all sets of fine-tuned design equations do very well if only the pressure drop is changed. The predictions of the sets of fine-tuned design equations (except Set B) were also good when the feed concentration was also changed. On the other hand, if the hydrocyclone dimensions are different, the fine-tuned design equations give very poor performances. The Set B design equations are better only when the apex size is changed. For the predictions of the sets of the fine-tuned design equations in the group with the same hydrocyclone geometries, but with different materials and operating conditions, two hydrocyclones, those of Krebs Engineers, and Richard Mozley Ltd., were employed. In this group, the sets of the fine-tuned design equations have been carried out by fitting the design equations to the experimental data of the test dust/water Run TD1, and then by using these equations to predict the performance of hydrocyclone operations with glass beads/water in Runs GB1 and GB2. A comparison between the sets of the fine-tuned design equations in predicting the performance of this type of hydrocyclone for different materials is shown in In this group, the experimental data of lime/water Run L3 have been used to conduct the sets of the fine-tuned design equations, and then used to predict the performance of hydrocyclone operations for test dust/water Run TD11. In this part of study, design equations are fitted (tuned) with a set of measured data. These design equations are then used to predict the performance of the same hydrocyclone but running with a different material. According to the data investigated, as shown in  To achieve a comprehensive hydrocyclone design, the calculations of pressure drop, flow recovery to underflow, corrected cut size and classification function parameters are needed. Due to the complex nature of two-phase flow and particulate systems, it is difficult to develop a single set of design equations that can describe all systems well. In this work, how well the design equations give the predictions of hydrocyclone performance on different data sets and different conditions was studied by fitting the design equations with experimental data to obtain the system specific constant parameters. Then these fine-tuned design equations were used to predict separation results for a wide range of hydrocyclone geometries, operating parameters or different materials. The reliability of the design equations to predict a certain system can be improved by using more operating data to help fit the design equations. However, the application of these fine-tuned design equations to different systems is still limited and unreliable. The data indicate that the design equations are reliable if only the pressure drop or feed concentration is changed. Other parameters, especially the hydrocyclone dimensions, can seriously affect model predictions. From this study, an understanding of the limitations of the fine-tuned design equations in predicting hydrocyclone performance provides some useful insights in the hydrocyclone design. The authors would like to acknowledge Frank Parma for valuable suggestions regarding the measurement of the particle-size measurement.         