Introduction
                  An exposition is presented of different techniques and philosophies provided through time for corticotomy procedures from its origin or first listing in 1892 to the present or last modification in 2012.
               
                  Method
                  Bibliographic search was undertaken on the subject of corticotomy in order to document modifications experienced by their surgical technique and offer evidence which might allow to make decisions based on scientific evidence.
               
                  Results
                  Presentation of a series of tables where all techniques are recorded, including authors and years of description or proposal.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Mechanism behind corticotomy procedures can be summarized as the induction of bone metabolism through decortication executed around teeth that are going to be moved to increase bone replacement, this improves and accelerates orthodontic tooth movement.The present article purports the aim of providing the reader with a historical perspective of corticotomy procedures, as well as exposing the evolution of different techniques and philosophies presented through time for this procedure, from its first recording in 1892 until its latest modification in 2012. Corticotomy consists in a surgical maneuver where a cut or perforation is undertaken in the cortical portion of the bone. It can be achieved with cutting hand instruments such a high or low speed rotary instruments as well as with electrical hand-pieces, under constant and abundant irrigation. This procedure enables osteoblast and osteoclast activation thus facilitating tooth movement with favorable bone response. The target of this procedure is to pass cortical bone and touch medullar bone in order to stimulate bone replacement, thus providing easier orthodontic treatment. Corticotomy is characterized by a three to four times decrease of time in orthodontics treatments, additionally decreasing root resorption and achieving greater stability when compared to conventional orthodontic treatment. Among advantages achieved with this surgical procedure we can count the following: decrease of treatment time, Disadvantages of this procedure are the following: the fact that just like any surgical procedure, it might elicit pain and inflammation, it is not suitable for all patients, patient selection will depend on their systemic and oral circumstances to determine whether they are candidates for this procedure or not. In order to be able to achieve this procedure, there is a series of indicators such as having a 10 Contraindications for a corticotomy procedure are the following: absence of medullar bone to provide suitable vascularization, L.C. Bryan in 1892 was the first to report use of corticotomy as an adjuvant for malocclusion correction procedures. He reported cases of American Dental Society at a later date, in 1893, Cunningham presented the possibility of immediate correction for irregularly placed teeth. In 1959 Heinrich Köle introduced the description of a corticotomy technique associated to orthodontic treatment to accelerate dental movement under the theory of bone block movements. This surgical technique consisted on raising a muco-periosteal flap (from a vestibular and lingual/ palatal direction), and conduct osteotomies in inter-radicular and supra-apical sites. Cuts should measure 10 The advantage of this technique was that it provided faster tooth movement in shorter time (approximately 6 to 12 weeks). This procedure was recommended for separation of single or grouped teeth, it was used to achieve distally-oriented movements after an extraction A new technique called Disadvantages of this technique were its invasive nature, Limitations for this technique were the sort of removable devices used at the time which were insufficient to provide required forces after were insufficient to provide required forces after corticotomies procedures; said forces were the key factor to achieve treatment success.  In 1978, Generson modified Köle's technique by replacing supra-apical osteotomy for supra-apical corticotomy;   In 2001, Wilcko reported two cases of corticotomy treated patients assessed through computerized tomography. In that study he proposed that speed of dental movement is due to local and transitory demineralization and re-mineralization in the alveolar bone which was compatible with regional acelerated phenomenon (RAP). This phenomenon was first described by the orthopedist H Frost in 1983, he showed that the design of the corticotomy was not responsible for accelerated dental movement, since this movement was caused by the degree of metabolic alteration. Wilcko's AOO technique required palatal and vestibular approach with de-corticalization, using rotary systems and orthodontic appliances. Although yielding suitable results, this technique is considered invasive. The most important advantages of the AOO technique are the decrease of dental movement limits as well as avoidance of extractions. The Wilcko brothers modified their AOO technique by incorporating bone graft to the aforementioned «osseous activity» in order to increase alveolar bone. This technique was renamed «periodontally accelerated osteogenic orthodontics» (PAOO), the comprehensive procedure was recorded as Wilckodontics This technique, proposed in 2001 by the orthodontist and periodontist Wilcko brothers is executed in three surgical phases.    Advantages of this technique are the following: excellent visibility to execute procedure, possibility of achieving corticotomies with electrical scalpel or burr, Germec published an article in 2006 where he presented his modified corticotomy technique. This technique significantly reduced surgical procedure time; it is a mono-cortical technique eliciting no negative effect in periodontal tissues, preserving as well pulp vitality of treated teeth. One week before undertaking surgery, it is recommended to stabilize upper and lower arches with 0.016″ x 0.022″ stainless steel arches. The main indication to use this technique is in patients with difficult lingual or palatal surgical access. Its greatest advantage lies in elimination of palatal or lingual flaps, as well as cuts in the cortical bone at the site; this results in surgical time decrease and thus greater comfort and lesser stress for the patient. Infiltrative local anesthesia is used in this surgical technique; a mucoperiosteal flap is raised from a vestibular direction, under dental apexes. Vertical cuts must be achieved with a low speed, 0.5 In 2007, Vercelloti and Podesta proposed a vestibular approach corticotomy procedure executed with electrical hand-piece. This technique was called monocortical technique for dental dislocation and periodontal ligament distraction (MTDLD). It was initially developed through dental pressure which caused periodontal compression, where there was rapid root (dislocation) and bone cortical unit movement without eliciting periodontal ligament compression or bone resorption (MTD), after this follows a rapid distraction of the periodontal ligament (LD) to culminate in an osteogenic healing process. This technique arose due to a desire to maximize dental movement speed, preventing thus periodontal tissue damage. Since cuts are executed with an electrical scalpel, which due to mitochondrial activation and cell reproductive capacity offers the advantage of causing minimum morbidity, rapid tissue regeneration and minimal damage are elicited.4 Stages for this technique are similar to those described by the Wilcko brothers, but with the difference of being conducted in a mono-cortical manner, and with an alveolar crest modification where «Y» shaped cuts are performed in order to preserve the alveolar crest. During surgery, 0.5 Alveolar increases are undertaken in selected cases where vestibular cortical bone thickness increase is required; this increase is achieved with autologous bone harvesting in the shape of chips from alveolar bone apical zone or through a 0.21-1 It is recommended to initiate force application from one to seven days after surgery completion, keeping activation rhythm every two weeks. It is advisable to examine the patient every week so as to avoid appearance of interferences which could block dental movement. This technique is recommended for over-erupted teeth and to faster achieve retained canine exposition. Advantages of this technique are that it is minimally invasive and less traumatic, and the fact of performing «Y» shaped incisions preserves the alveolar crest. In 2009 Dibart published a trans-mucosal corticotomy technique called piezocision. It is considered less invasive than the others while providing the same results. It decreases orthodontic treatment time in patients with reduced or intact periodontium, and achieves better results with less aggressive procedures. In this surgical technique, vertical mini-incisions are performed with a number 15 scalpel micro-blade in vestibular inter-radicular spaces located from the base of the papilla, after this, trans-mucosal corticotomies are performed through previously executed incisions, at a 2 to 3 The advantage of this technique is that it is minimally traumatic, therefore post-surgical presence of pain, inflammation and ecchymosis is infrequent, since no full-thickness flap was previously raised In 2010, Oliveira published an article where he described a combination of alveolar corticotomy with a modified maxillary splint with nickel-titanium spring. The aim of this technique was to intrude over-erupted molars Oliveira reported that in one patient, 4 In the surgical technique, a full-thickness flap is raised from a vestibular, palatal or lingual approach, on the area where dental movement is to be conducted. After this, vertical corticotomies are performed with a round 701 burr in inter-radicular spaces 2 Once the aforementioned is completed, the flap is repositioned and sutured, placed on a modified acrylic splint, and leaving uncovered the occlusal aspect of the molar to be intruded. Seven days later orthodontic forces are applied, and after this, forces are applied every 14 days until desired intrusion is achieved Advantages of this technique are the following: it facilitates difficult orthodontic movements, allows for significant transversal and anterior-posterior dental expansion, corrects moderate to severe skeletal malocclusions, and provides clinical results twice or three times faster when compared to conventional orthodontic treatment. This technique was published in 2012. It can be considered the most conservative technique when compared with others; it decreases trauma to periodontal tissues during trans-surgical periods and post-operative discomfort, as well as surgical time since it can be accomplished in about 26 This technique was first described in 2010. Computed tomography (Cone-Beam) will be needed in order to consider a patient as a possible candidate. Criteria to take into account are the following: Teeth to be moved and anchorage teeth, periodontal circumstances, root position and morphology as well as width of cortical bone. Advantages of this technique are: decrease of surgical time, periodontium preservation, since it is not required to raise a muco-periosteal flap, patient's easy acceptance of the technique, maximum decrease of post-surgery inflammation since the technique is performed only in the upper or lower anterior section. In order to execute this technique, a 5-10 After this, an electrical micro-saw is introduced into the created tunnel and vertical corticotomies are executed from a vestibular approach following the length of the root, without touching the alveolar crest With the help of an endoscope through 1.9 If resistance is met by the micro-saw, it means that it was placed on root surfaces, therefore, direction of cuts must be changed. Computerized tomography is used to assess corticotomy depth. Lastly, incisions are uninterruptedly sutured with 5-0 polyglactine This technique is presented as the most conservative. Small incisions are performed with the piezoelectrico in the cortical bone. Number of incisions will depend on amount and placement of teeth in the quadrant to be treated. Light afforded by the endoscope and wider image are important advantages as well as achieving better control in root position. When compared to conventional orthodontic treatments, it can be said that corticotomy is a technique through which dental movements can be achieved or facilitated; orthodontic treatment time can decrease and stability at treatment completion can be increased. History shows us how techniques have been evolving, evidence compels us to discard initial thoughts which considered that accelerated dental movement or results were consequence of the displacement of bone blocks. Presently, clinical and histological fi ndings indicate that corticotomy design is not responsible for dental movement, it rather potentiates dental movement as a result of the bone de-mineralization/re-mineralization physiological process; RAP is a local and transitory response to remodeling and is followed by post-surgical healing of cortical bone when facing a physical stimulus. As a consequence, latest techniques have proven to be conservative and biocompatible with periodontal tissues, along with orthodontics forces of lesser intensity. Mechanisms found behind corticotomy procedures can be summarized as bone metabolism induction through decortications, performed around the teeth which are going to be moved to increase bone replacement, this will improve and accelerate orthodontic dental movement. It might be said that corticotomy mechanisms and effects have been documented in recently conducted histological studies, nevertheless, further studies conducted in human beings are required in order to confirm findings. Clinically, evidence is mainly based on case reports, therefore more research on proposed surgical protocols is needed so as to determine which are the most efficient. It is also necessary to determine relationship with minimum trauma amount necessary to originate clinically signifi cant RAP.