Metallic zinc production from sulfide zinc ore is comprised by the stages of ore concentration, roasting, leaching, liquor purification, electrolysis and melting. During the leaching stage with sulfuric acid, other metals present in the ore in addition to zinc are also leached. The sulfuric liquor obtained in the leaching step is purified through impurities cementation. This step produces a residue with a high content of zinc, cadmium and copper, in addition to lead, cobalt and nickel. This paper describes the study of selective dissolution of zinc and cadmium present in the residue, followed by the segregation of those metals by cementation. The actual sulfuric solution, depleted from the electrolysis stage of metallic zinc production, was used as leaching agent. Once the leaching process variables were optimized, a liquor containing 141g/L Zn, 53g/L Cd, 0.002g/L Cu, 0.01g/L Co and 0.003g/L Ni was obtained from a residue containing 30wt.% Zn, 26wt.% Cd, 7wt.% Cu, 0.35wt.% Co and 0.32wt.% Ni. The residue mass reduction exceeded 80wt.%. Cementation studies investigated the influence of temperature, reaction time, zinc concentration in feeding solution, pH of feeding solution and metallic zinc excess. After that such variables were optimized, more than 99.9% of cadmium present in liquor was recovered in the form of metallic cadmium with 97wt.% purity. A filtrate (ZnSO4 solution) containing 150g/L Zn and 0.005g/L Cd capable of feeding the electrolysis zinc stage was also obtained.In general, metallic zinc production from sulfide zinc concentrate, especially sphalerite, comprises of roast–leach–electrowinning stages. At the leaching stage, other metals present in the ustulate, in addition to zinc, are also leached. Metallic zinc production by electrolysis requires an electrolyte free from those contaminants. In this way, prior to feeding the electrolysis stage, the sulfuric liquor undergoes a purification step to remove the contaminants. At the liquor purification stage, which typically occurs by cementation technique, a residue containing a high quantity of Zn, Cd, Cu, in addition to other metals like Pb, Ni, Co is produced. Solid residues from hydrometallurgical zinc industry processing present zinc, cadmium and copper content close to 30%, 20% and 5%, respectively. Most of these residues remain stored waiting for extraction techniques that are technologically and economically feasible. Such high metal contents turn these deposits into valuable metal sources which are known as secondary sources. According to Electrochemical cementation process consists of the spontaneous reduction of a metallic ion solution in the presence of a more electropositive metal ( The overall reaction of cadmium cementation by metallic zinc powder is represented by the following equation: Residue leaching studies were carried out with the sulfuric solution depleted from the electrolysis stage of metallic zinc production. At that stage, the influence of depleted solution concentration, leaching time and solid percentage were investigated. Cementation studies investigated the influence of the following process variables: temperature, cementation time, zinc concentration in feeding solution, pH of feeding solution and metallic zinc excess. Leaching studies were carried out in batches with no temperature control and with a humid residue sample. The initial leaching temperature reached values close to 60 The chemical characterization of the residue and depleted solution were carried out through qualitative analysis by X-ray fluorescence, while the quantitative analyses were performed by atomic absorption spectrophotometry and gravimetry technique ( At this stage, the influence of solid content, leaching solution concentration and reaction time on the residue leaching stage were investigated. Solid percentage study ranged from 10 to 30 Leaching experiments of that residue using the diluted depleted solution indicated the impossibility of selective zinc dissolution. For the depleted solution 50% diluted in H Studies with leaching times ranging between 0.5 and 3 The best residue leaching conditions were accomplished by an actual electrolytic depleted solution as leaching agent, 15 Experiments of cadmium cementation were carried out with the sulfuric liquor obtained at the leaching stage. The liquor characterization is shown in Temperature effects were investigated within the interval of 22–50 The liquor pH was investigated from pH 0.5 to 2.5. At pH values higher than 1.5 all Cd Experiments with reaction time variation indicated that 2 The study about the influence of metallic zinc powder excess on cadmium cementation was carried out in the range of 0% (stoichiometric) to 20%. For 5% metallic zinc excess, Cd After investigating the effects of process variables, the conditions established for cadmium cementation from the sulfuric liquor studied were: zinc concentration in liquor of approximately 120 The developed process to recover zinc and cadmium from cements of the process of electrolytic metallic zinc production is schematically shown in Studies indicated the technical feasibility of recovering zinc and cadmium from waste of 1st purification of electrolytic solution in metallic zinc production process using dynamic leaching and cementation techniques. At the leaching stage, residue mass was reduced by more than 80%. A sulfuric liquor containing 141 In the cementation stage, cadmium recovery exceeded 99.9%. A zinc sulfate solution with 150