Many existing models of granule coalescence assume that the two granules have successfully coalesced provided that they stick during their initial impact. However, although non-rebound is a necessary condition for coalescence, it is not sufficient. It is also required that the bond formed between the two granules be strong enough to resist being broken by subsequent impacts within the granulator. A theoretical framework is proposed in which both the rate of bond strengthening and the distribution of impact separation forces are included in order to calculate the probability that the collided dumbbell will survive and hence permanently coalesce. This work highlights the need for further research into the mechanisms and the rate at which a granule dumbbell becomes moulded into a single larger granule, and also the distribution of impact forces inside a granulator.Granulation is the process of agglomerating particles together into larger, semi-permanent aggregates by spraying a liquid binder onto the particles as they are agitated in a tumbling drum, fluidised bed, high shear mixer or similar device ( In spite of its economic importance and over 40 years of research, it is still impossible to predict the granulation behaviour of a new formulation from only a knowledge of its fundamental properties. Neither is it known how to vary a formulation in order to obtain a desired change in product properties. This necessitates expensive and extensive laboratory and pilot-scale testing of all new materials ( One step towards a better understanding of granule growth behaviour is being able to predict the likelihood of granules coalescing when they collide. There are many coalescence models available in the literature which include a variety of formulation and process parameters such as the mechanical properties of the granules, the properties of the liquid binder, the granule collision velocity and the separation forces imposed on the granules after they have collided. These models fall into two classes ( Class I models cover a range of different conditions. However, this coalescence criteria is physically unreasonable for most granulation applications because it neglects the effect of subsequent collisions. Two granules which stick initially may be so weakly held together that they would quickly break apart again. It is also physically unreasonable to assume that coalescence is controlled by the initial collision energy when in many applications the granules are constrained in contact with one another for significant lengths of time, as would occur in the rising section of a tumbling drum or in the quiescent zones of a fluidised bed. In these cases, there is no clear single collision event. Instead all the granules are constantly in contact with several others. Hence, although non-rebound is a Class II coalescence models consider whether the bonds formed are strong enough to survive the first major subsequent separation event. In all existing class II models, only the first major separation event is considered, the magnitude of which is usually approximated by some global average value. If the particle dumbbell survives this event, then it is considered to be permanently bound. However, in many granulators the separation events may have a wide range of magnitudes and may be distributed randomly in time. Therefore it is inappropriate to model coalescence by assuming a mean separation forces which occurs at regular intervals. For instance, in most high shear mixers there is a large main impeller which rotates at moderate speeds, and a small high-speed chopper. Hence there will be a bimodal distribution of impact velocities. Granule dumbbells which pass through the chopper zone soon after they first stuck together would be broken apart. However, those which spend a period of time in the less severely agitated tumbling mass may strengthen enough to survive passing through the chopper zone. Similarly, in a pan granulator, there is often a near stationary eye of larger granules on top of a fast tumbling sheet of fines, which would give a range of impact velocities which was also strongly size dependent. In these cases, the probability of survival will depend on the history of impacts which the granule dumbbell experiences and the rate at which the bond between them strengthens as they are kneaded together by low-level impacts. This paper develops a general coalescence model which includes both the distribution of impact forces inside the granulator and the rate of bond strengthening. The It may be assumed that the bond holding the granule pair together has some initial strength, denoted This bond will then slowly strengthen as the granule pair is kneaded together by subsequent low-velocity impacts. There are no experimental measurements of the rate at which the bond deforms and strengthens. However, as a first approximation, it will be assumed that this strengthening process proceeds in a similar way to granule consolidation. The granule dumbbell will tumble around and be exposed to a certain frequency of collisions, The frequency distribution of impacts, For illustrative purposes, let us consider a linear distribution of impact forces as shown in Note that Substituting It is worthwhile to compare this analysis with the results that would be obtained from a class II coalescence model. In this case, it is necessary to determine some “average” critical separation event, The average time between these separation events is Δ   The results presented in The functional forms of In deriving this model, it has been assumed that bond strengthening is a continuous process and that the separation impacts are discrete events occurring at regular intervals. In reality, of course, the strengthening process also proceeds as a series of discrete steps and the time intervals between impacts may vary. Hence, not all granules will strengthen at the same rate, and some may have been exposed to more impacts than others by the time they reach the same age. There is nothing in principle to prevent these factors also being incorporated into the model. However, we do not yet have the experimental data describing these processes to make it worth doing so. Experimental measurements of The model developed has used a very simple approach of characterising the bond strength and the impact force each by a single quantity. In reality, the bonds may have different responses to tensile, shear and torque forces. Similarly, the impact force distribution will need to account for variations in the direction and orientation of the forces imposed and the bending moment exerted on the granule dumbbell. This might be done by integrating over all the possible orientations the granule dumbbell pair would experience in a shear field within the granulator, as done by Hounslow and co-workers to model the aggregation rates inside crystallisers ( The existing models of granule coalescence either fail to consider the possibility of bond rupture after the initial collision (class I), or else they only consider whether or not the bond formed is strong enough to survive the very first impact event that a granule dumbbell pair experiences (class II). Hence, these models neglect the effects of bond strengthening and the poly-disperse distribution of impact forces likely to be present inside most granulators. A new framework for predicting whether or not a collided pair of granules will permanently survive has been developed. This model considers both the effects of bond strengthening with time and also the distribution of impact forces experienced inside the granulator. The probability of survival could range anywhere between 0 and 100%, whereas class I and II models always predict either 0 or 100%. This model can potentially be combined with one of the existing class I models (eg. The author would like to thank Emeritus Professor Ted White at the Department of Chemical Engineering, the University of Queensland, for his assistance in formulating and solving the model equations. This work has been partially funded by an Australian Research Council Large Grant (A89918062), Australian Postdoctoral Fellowship (F89918124) and made use of facilities of the Australian Research Council funded Special Centre for Multiphase Processes at the University of Newcastle.