A newly designed air-assisted solvent extraction (AASX) system was used to extract Cu from dilute solutions in a continuous-mode at pilot scale. The effects of some operational and chemical parameters including aqueous phase flowrate, extractant concentration, organic phase level in an organic coating cylinder (OCC level), Cu concentration, and silicone oil dosage on the efficiency of AASX process were investigated using a response surface methodology. The main and interaction effects of the variables on Cu recovery (26–85%), organic phase recycling (the portion of entered organic phase transferred to the column overflow for stripping, 7–56%), and aqueous/organic phase ratio (A/O, 59–435) were evaluated by the analysis of variance (ANOVA). The results showed that the addition of silicone oil increased Cu recovery and reduced organic phase recycling. Also, increasing OCC level caused to reduce A/O ratio and increase Cu recovery. Increasing extractant concentration and reducing the Cu concentration increased Cu recovery. The results were interpreted by their effects on bubble size, organic coating of air bubbles and A/O ratio. Varying the aqueous phase flowrate changed the A/O ratio in a curved mode which was related to the venturi tube suction force. Results showed that maximum efficiency of the AASX process (78% Cu recovery and 38% organic phase recycling, predicted by the ANOVA model), occurred at the aqueous flowrate of 24 L/min, extractant concentration of 40%, OCC level of 28 cm, Cu concentration of 50 mg/L without using silicone oil with an A/O ratio of 83. It can be concluded that AASX process could be used as an efficient and promising method for treating dilute solutions such as AMDs and wastewaters.Selective extraction of valuable metals such as Cu, Zn, Ni and Co from dilute solutions obtained from the leach solutions of low grade and complex ores and acid mine drainages (AMD) is a challenging issue in the mineral industry. Extraction of these metals from such solutions suggests economic benefits and sustainable developments as well as preventing environmental problems. Various methods such as solvent extraction (SX), ion exchange (IX), and adsorption by activated carbon are conventionally used to treat metal bearing leach solutions ( Solvent extraction is a selective and efficient process for the purification and concentration of metal bearing solutions ( Application of air bubbles in SX was investigated by using bottom-air-injected system ( The addition of some chemicals to both organic and aqueous phases may improve the interfacial characteristics of air/liquids. The previous AASX efforts were mostly conducted on lab-scale, batch systems, and the effects of chemical and operational parameters were not studied comprehensively. In this research, a newly designed continuous-mode AASX system was established on a pilot scale to treat dilute Cu-bearing solutions. The effects of some critical parameters namely, aqueous phase flowrate, organic phase level in the coating cylinder, extractant concentration, Cu concentration, and silicone oil dosage were investigated by experiments designed based on the response surface methodology. The effects of the mentioned parameters on the Cu recovery, organic phase recycling (the portion of organic phase which was transferred to the column overflow for stripping stage), and the aqueous/organic phase volume ratio were evaluated statistically. Chemorex CP-150 (Longlight International Company, United Kingdom) which is a type of aldoxime and a mixture of 5-nonylsalicylaldoxime (C In order to evaluate the applicability of AASX process for metal extraction, a continuous-mode pilot plant was designed and manufactured ( Response Surface Methodology (RSM) was selected as the experimental design to investigate the effects of critical parameters and their interactions on the AASX process in a continuous mode. Central Composite (CCD) and BOX-Behnken (BBD) are the main designs of RSM and are used to find the optimum condition statistically ( The effects of aqueous phase flowrate (L/min), Cu concentration (mg/L), the average of OCC level (cm), the extractant concentration (v/v %), and the dosage of silicone oil in the organic phase (mg/L) were investigated on the Cu recovery, organic phase recycling, and A/O phase ratio (consumed organic phase) as three responses using Design Expert software (DX11). Based on the preliminary experiments, the suitable range of each variable was determined ( It needs to be pointed that the some of the organic phase reported to the column transferred to top-output and the rest exited from the down-output along with raffinate solution. As the upward velocity of the organic phase was more than the downward velocity of the aqueous phase, the organic phase could reach to the top-output (increasing the value of organic phase recycling). Upward velocity of the organic phase depends on some physical parameters such as the size of bubbles and the organic-coating status. Also, the primary experiments showed that a part of the organic phase entered to the aqueous phase form as free organic droplets (uncoated organic phase, Samples were taken from the upward and downward streams during 30 s, after stabilizing the system (after three minutes). The retention time of fluids in the column was in the range of 56–84 s. The volume of the organic phase in the samples was measured after the rest time (5 h) in which the organic and the aqueous phases were completely separated from each other. The Cu concentration in the samples was measured by atomic absorption spectrometry (model: Shimadzu AA-670). pH of the aqueous phase was set at 1.5 in all the experiments. A BBD design was used to investigate the effects of the main critical operating and chemical parameters on the efficiency of the AASX process. The conditions of the experiments and the related responses, i.e. Cu recovery, organic phase recycling, and A/O phase ratio are illustrated in The Cu recovery and organic phase recycling models were obtained without using any transformation, but the A/O phase ratio was transformed to a natural logarithmic model. The models of Cu recovery (Eq. Copper recovery was investigated by ANOVA as presented in The dosage of silicone oil was the main significant parameter affecting the organic phase recycling with the confidence level of more than 99%. The effects of parameter interactions on the organic phase recycling were not significant with the confidence level of 90%. This response changed between 7 and 56%. A/O phase ratio was another critical response of AASX process which varied from 59 to 435 ( The effect of aqueous phase flowrate on the AASX process efficiency was investigated in the range of 20–30 L/min. As Eq. The first decrease of A/O ratio can be attributed to the fact that by increasing the aqueous phase flowrate, the solution velocity increases at the throat of the venturi tube and increases the air suction into the venturi tube (organic coated air bubbles), as a consequence, the flowrate of organic-coated bubbles increased until the maximum vacuum pressure was reached. The effects of aqueous phase flowrate on the Cu recovery and the organic phase recycling were not significant. It could be expressed that increasing the aqueous flowrate led to increasing the turbulence in the outlet of the tube (increasing Reynolds number) and to reducing the retention time of the fluid phase in the AASX column. Theoretically, these two changes affected final metal extraction. Hence, some additional AASX experiments were conducted to determine the fraction of Cu recovery in various parts of the system, i.e. venturi tube and the column. Therefore, the OCC level was changed from 20 to 28 cm and the aqueous flowrate was varied from 20 to 30 L/min. In order to determine the portion of Cu recovery in the AASX column, two samples were taken from the inlet and outlet solutions of the column. In order to determine the portion of Cu recovery in different parts of the AASX system, some additional experiments were carried out at different aqueous phase flowrates and OCC levels. The results showed that Cu was recovered in both parts of the venturi tube and the AASX column ( The concentration of Chemorex CP-150, as the Cu organic extractant in the organic phase was one of the chosen parameters for investigating the Cu recovery, the organic phase recycling, and A/O phase ratio in the AASX system. The effect of extractant concentration was investigated in the range of 20–40% (v/v). The extractant concentration had a significant effect on the Cu recovery with the confidence level of more than 99%. As can be seen in ANOVA results indicated that the extractant concentration did not change the organic phase recycling (  The influence of the organic phase level in the OCC chamber on the AASX process efficiency was investigated. Considering the results of ANOVA ( Reduction of the A/O phase ratio by increasing OCC level could be attributed to two reasons: (1) by increasing the OCC level, the retention time of the air bubbles in the OCC increased which improved the coating degree, (2) by increasing the OCC level, the distance of organic surface from OCC to the venturi tube (ΔH in Higher recovery of Cu from the solution as a result of increasing the OCC level can be related to the reduction of the A/O phase ratio (increasing the extractant in the separation system). The effect of Cu concentration on the efficiency of AASX process was investigated in the continuous mode. As can be seen in The results show that the effect of Cu concentration on the organic phase recycling and A/O phase ratio is not significant. Considering the previous research, The effect of silicone oil dosage on the efficiency of the AASX process was investigated in the range of 0 (with no addition) to 100 mg/L. As can be seen in As can be seen in As can be seen in The interaction of aqueous phase flowrate (X At low level of OCC (20 cm), increasing the solution flowrate from 20 to 26 L/min reduced the A/O ratio intensely from 403 to 131, and rising the flowrate beyond 26 L/min increased the A/O to 205. Change of the A/O ratio with aqueous phase flowrate in a curved mode is according to the vacuum pressure of venturi tube which maximizes at about 25 L/min (the hydrodynamic regime was explained in Influence of the OCC level on decreasing the A/O ratio was more remarkable at the low level of aqueous phase flowrate (20 L/min). This behavior can be related to the variation of the venturi suction force as a function of aqueous phase flowrate which is sharper at the lower flowrates. The interaction between silicone oil dosage and extractant concentration, as chemical parameters of the organic phase, had a significant effect on the Cu recovery with a confidence level of 93%. As can be seen in In the absence of silicone oil, varying the extractant concentration from 20% to 40% increased the Cu recovery from 36 to 54% which can be related to the increase of the extraction capacity of the organic phase. At the highest dosage of silicone oil (100 mg/L), the Cu recovery remained constant (∼76%) for various levels of extractant concentration that may be associated to the limited retention time of the fluids in the AASX column (maximum Cu recovery obtained). It needs to be pointed out that larger bubbles which may be produced at the high dosage of silicone oil have a shorter retention time in the column. Adding frother modifiers can neutralize this negative effect through producing small bubbles as was found in the previous research work ( The main purpose of RSM modeling is to find out the desired response through optimizing the independent input parameters by ANOVA analysis. For optimizing the efficiency of AASX process, the target was to maximize both the Cu recovery and organic phase recycling. ANOVA analysis showed that maximum Cu recovery (72.9%) and organic phase recycling (43.5%) could be achieved at the aqueous phase flowrate of 24 L/min, extractant concentration of 40%, Cu concentration of 50 mg/L, and OCC level of 28 cm without the addition of silicone oil ( A continuous-mode air-assisted solvent extraction (AASX) system was designed and manufactured in a pilot scale for investigating the effects of the operational and chemical parameters, including aqueous phase flowrate, extractant concentration, organic phase level in the organic coating cylinder (OCC), Cu concentration, and silicone oil dosage on the efficiency of AASX process by the experiments designed using the response surface methodology. At various levels of the experimental conditions, Cu recovery (26–85%), organic phase recycling (7–56%), and A/O phase ratio (59–435) were evaluated by ANOVA analysis. The following items were found as concluding remarks: Rising silicone oil dosage from 0 to 100 mg/L increased the Cu recovery from 45% to 77% and decreased the organic phase recycling from 44 to 21%. This behavior can be attributed to increasing the organic coating degree of the air bubbles, an increase of the bubble size (increasing the turbulence in the column), and a decrease of the A/O phase ratio. The increasing of the extractant concentration from 20 to 40% improved the Cu recovery from 52% to 60% mainly as a consequence of increasing the extraction capacity of the organic phase. Also, the interaction effect of silicone oil dosage and extractant concentration on the Cu recovery was significant in which at the high dosage of silicone oil, increasing the extractant did not show a significant effect on the Cu recovery. Rising the OCC level from 20 to 28 cm decreased the A/O phase ratio from 126 to 93 and was accompanied by increasing the Cu recovery from 48% to 63%. This positive effect is probably related to the increase of the organic coating degree and the decrease of the bubble coalescence in the OCC. There was an interaction between OCC level and aqueous phase flowrate. Maximum A/O phase ratio occurred at the low values of OCC level and aqueous phase flowrate. Maximum efficiency of the AASX system that was predicted by the ANOVA model was ascribed as the highest simultaneous values of Cu recovery (72.9%) and organic phase recycling (43.5%). This was achieved at the aqueous phase flowrate of 24 L/min, Cu concentration of 50 mg/L, extractant concentration of 40%, and OCC level of 28 cm without the addition of silicone oil by the A/O ratio of 91. The results of an experiment carried out at the optimum conditions showed that 78% of Cu recovery and 38% of organic phase recycling were obtained with an A/O ratio of 83. In conclusion, the AASX process in continuous-mode has a high potential for the extraction of valuable metals from dilute solutions. This method can rectify the technical and economical problems of conventional SX methods for treating dilute liquor streams such as acid mine drainages. Authors express their thanks to National Iranian Copper Industries Company (NICICO) for the financial support of this research (Grant No. 93/311). Mr. Sina Rahmati, Mr. Yahya Mohammad Sadeghi, and Miss Forouzan Maleki are also acknowledged for their assistance in performing a part of experiments.