Transient mass transfer behavior in a single droplet system was investigated in the presence of a chemical reaction: alkaline hydrolysis (by NaOH) of ethyl acetate. The transfer of ethyl acetate occurred from the continuous (cyclohexanol) to the dispersed (water) phase. A computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulation was conducted for a numerical analysis of the system. The physical mass transfer was simulated showing a good agreement with the experimental result whereas the simulation significantly underestimated the experimental result in the presence of the hydrolysis reaction of ethyl acetate. An interfacial turbulence induced by the reaction product was suggested to explain the deviation between the experimental and the simulation. Effective diffusivity was used for simulating the more enhanced mass transfer rate in the system. The concentration change inside a droplet with time could be calculated with a reasonable accuracy by the introduction of the effective diffusivity in the simulation model.concentration [mol/m  mean concentration [mol/m drop radius [m] diffusion coefficient [m  diffusivity ratio, Damköhler number [–] correlation factor, fractional approach to equilibrium [–] Fourier number, distribution coefficient [–] second order reaction rate constant [L/(mol overall dispersed phase mass transfer coefficient [m/s] molar flux through the interface [mol/m normal coordinate [m] Peclet number, 2 time [s] drop settling velocity [m/s] dynamic viscosity [Pa ratio of dynamic viscosities, density [kg/m subdomain related to the dispersed drop phase (1), continuous phase (2) aqueous and organic phase, respectively at infinite distance from the droplet Liquid–liquid extraction is an important unit operation which is applied in a variety of fields such as hydrometallurgy, recovery of organic acids Clift et al. Another important aspect of an extraction system is whether a reaction is combined with the transport process. Chemical reactions are generally introduced to the extraction process to enhance the selectivity and extraction rate. Brounshtein et al. Alkaline hydrolysis of ethyl acetate using sodium hydroxide is considered here as a model system for a homogeneous reaction occurring in a single droplet. This reaction is an irreversible second order reaction producing sodium acetate and ethanol, and has negligible side reactions. In this study, the mass transfer enhancement by the ester hydrolysis in a single droplet system, in which cyclohexanol and water are used as continuous and dispersed phases, respectively, and the solute, ethyl acetate, is transferred from the continuous (phase 2) to the dispersed phase (phase 1), was investigated. For a deeper insight into the complex behavior of such a system experiments and simulations are combined. First, the physico-chemical properties of the system are measured experimentally or estimated from an empirical equation and used for the CFD simulation. In this study, COMSOL Multiphysics, based on the finite element method, was used to solve the fluid flow and transient mass transfer around the liquid droplet. Ethyl acetate (99.5%) and cyclohexanol (99%) were purchased from Junsei chemical (Tokyo, Japan) and Merck KGaA (Darmstadt, Germany), respectively, and used without further purification. Deionised water was used during the whole experimental process. Both the organic and the aqueous phase were saturated with the opponent phase so that only a transfer of the solute component between the two phases occurs. In the following, saturated aqueous and organic phases are referred to as aqueous (or water) phase and organic (or cyclohexanol) phase. Several physico-chemical properties such as the settling velocity of a droplet, and the distribution coefficient of a solute were determined experimentally. The reaction rate of alkaline hydrolysis of ethyl acetate was obtained by measurement and confirmed by data from literature In order to measure the settling velocity, the motion of a falling droplet in the organic phase was recorded with a video camera and analyzed. The distribution coefficient of ethyl acetate between water and cyclohexanol was determined by the following experiment: A known amount of ethyl acetate was dissolved in the saturated cyclohexanol and mixed with the same amount of the aqueous phase for 12 The reaction rate constant was measured using an experimental setup for the measurement of microkinetic parameters. A defined quantity of a NaOH aqueous solution was introduced into a stirring cell. In the experiments, the NaOH was always in excess. While the solution was vigorously mixed, ethyl acetate was inserted and the change of conductivity was monitored. The measured conductivity value was converted into the corresponding NaOH concentration. Once the concentration was obtained as a function of time, the reaction constant could be estimated by curve fitting of the experimental data with the following equation derived from 2nd-order reaction rate equation:  In the mass transfer cell, the mean concentration inside a droplet for different contact times is measured. For contact times higher than the interval time between drop formations, which is held constant at 6 The droplet coalesces in the funnel and forms the top layer of the aqueous phase in the funnel. This layer is in contact with the continuous phase and thus the reaction of ethyl acetate with NaOH continues in the funnel. For this reason, the level of the aqueous phase in the funnel should be maintained at the lowest level possible to reduce the interfacial area. However, it is not possible to avoid this extra reaction in the funnel unless the reaction rate is very slow. Hence it is necessary to compensate the amount of ethyl acetate consumed by the funnel reaction when estimating the total amount of transferred ethyl acetate. For this purpose, a separate experiment was conducted: droplets of a known concentration of NaOH were released just above the aqueous phase in the funnel so that the droplet coalesces immediately after its formation. This method allowed the measurement of the amount of NaOH reacting in the funnel including drop formation, therefore making the NaOH concentration before coalescence in the funnel accessible. The correlation of the concentration before and after the funnel reaction, respectively, is plotted in After a certain amount of the drop phase is gathered in the sample vial, it is diluted with water for a conductivity measurement. The conductivity of the diluted sample can be correlated with the total amount of ethyl acetate transferred from continuous phase into dispersed phase. The calibration of diluted standard solutions, which are prepared by adding a known amount of ethyl acetate into the aqueous NaOH solution with the initial droplet concentration, is accomplished for the correlation beforehand. The conductivity measurement quantifies the amount of NaOH in the system precisely due to the complete dissociation of the base as well as the high specific conductivity of the hydroxide ion. The conductivity value therefore indicates the amount of ethyl acetate that was transferred over the interface and reacted with the base in the aqueous phase. For the numerical simulation, COMSOL Multiphysics, a commercial computational fluid dynamics (CFD) software package based on the finite element method, was used. To describe the velocity and concentration profiles, two models are solved in order: Steady Navier–Stokes model and transient convective-diffusion model. The following assumptions were made for the numerical calculations: The droplets retain a spherical shape; The flows in both dispersed and continuous phase are steady, axisymmetric, and laminar; The fluids are Newtonian; The physical properties of both phases remain unchanged and the volume change of the droplet by mass transfer is neglected; Only ethyl acetate is transported over the interface and reacts inside the droplet in an isothermal second order reaction with sodium hydroxide. 2D axisymmetric geometry was chosen and the entire domain consists of a semicircle subdomain (1) for the dispersed phase and a rectangular subdomain (2) for the continuous phase. The dimensions of the rectangle domain are 3 and 10 times the drop diameter in width and height, respectively. An unstructured free mesh of triangular elements is used for the whole geometry while a higher resolved mesh is applied close to the drop interface. The fine resolution along the interface is crucial for proper calculation of the mass transfer rate. The default free mesh option was modified by specifying the number of cell at the interface. The final mesh size was determined by confirming the independency of the simulation results on the mesh size increase. The grid is made out of a total of 72,000 cells, of which 36,000 are for the dispersed phase. The interface is simulated with a fixed position and with a non-slip condition. The time step of the simulation is determined by the backward differentiation formula (BDF) method, one of the time stepping methods in COMSOL. In the first step, the steady Navier–Stokes equation is solved setting the inlet boundary (the bottom of the rectangular domain) condition of the continuous phase as the terminal settling velocity of the droplet, previously estimated in the experiment. The wall boundary condition is given as symmetry. The outlet boundary (the top of the rectangular domain) condition is set by no viscous stress condition. The interfacial conditions include matched tangential velocities and shear stresses. Once the velocity profile is obtained, a distance function, The detailed equation formulation and boundary conditions used are described in Yang and Mao's work The reaction source term corresponding to the second order reaction kinetics is added to the convection–diffusion equation of the dispersed phase; The concentration ( As noted earlier, important system parameters and physical properties have been obtained from experiments and empirical equations. For the diffusion coefficient of ethyl acetate in each phase, the Hayduk–Minhas correlation The reaction rate constant for the employed initial concentrations was experimentally measured to be  In This deviation might be explained by the interfacial turbulence at the droplet interface occurring with the hydrolysis reaction of EA. According to Seto et al. Based on this fact, the mechanism of mass transfer inside droplet was assumed the same as the model proposed by Handlos and Baron The In order to make an accurate prediction the constant factor 1/2048 in Eq.   The aim of this work is to investigate the mass transfer behavior in the single droplet system accompanied by the hydrolysis reaction of ethyl acetate. The experimental result of the physical mass transfer was successfully matched with the simulation result without any modification of the model. However, the simulation underestimated experimental result in the presence of reaction. The interfacial turbulence induced by reaction product was suggested as the cause of the enhancement of the mass transfer. Effective diffusivity was used to simulate the interfacial turbulence and showed a reasonable agreement with the experimental result as long as the effect of interfacial turbulence lasted. Financial support by the Genome-based Integrated Bioprocess Development Project (No.