Artificial neural network was used to predict the effects of operational parameters on coal desulfurization using peroxyacetic acid from microwave pretreated coal. Coal particle size (150–1125μm), leaching temperature (25–85°C), leaching time (0–120min), microwave irradiation power (0–1000W) and time (0–110s) were used as inputs to the network. The outputs of the model were organic and inorganic sulfur reductions for 40 of the data sets. The GRNN artificial neural network with spread of 0.3 was used to estimate both organic and inorganic sulfur reduction from a combined database, which was established from microwave pretreatment and leaching experiments. Thirty-two data sets were used for training and eight data sets for testing. Simulated values obtained from the neural network, correspond closely to the experimental results. Satisfactory correlations of R
                     2
                     =0.99 and 0.97 were achieved during the testing stages of the prediction of inorganic and organic sulfur reductions respectively.Artificial neural networks (ANNs) are new intelligent techniques that in modeling and identification of complex relationships between input–output data sets their abilities have been established Microwaves are electromagnetic waves with frequencies that range from 300 Different materials exhibit different characteristics when subjected to microwave radiation. Some materials absorb these waves and are called dielectrics. Other materials appear to be transparent to microwave radiation, while still others reflect the radiation Previous studies concerning dielectric properties of organic and inorganic materials in coal have shown differences in dielectric characteristics and accordingly differential heating of minerals and organic material in coal One of the most important possible applications of microwave heating is coal desulfurization. Sulfur occurs in coal in inorganic forms (mainly pyritic) and organic forms (thiols, sulfides, disulfides and thiophenes). Chatterjee and Misra have shown the dielectric constants for dry coal, pyrite and mineral matter (without pyrite) to be 3, 7 and 4.6 respectively Peroxyacetic acid was used as an oxidative reagent for desulfurization of coal by Pietrzak and Wachowska The positive effect of microwave irradiation as a pretreatment for subsequent desulfurization with peroxyacetic acid has been reported in an earlier published work The sample was obtained from the Tabas coal mine in Iran. Proximate and ultimate analysis of the sample as well as the total, pyritic and sulfate forms of sulfur are shown in At this stage, about 30 After microwave irradiation, the sample was further desulfurized with peroxyacetic acid. The procedure involved dispersing 8 Percentage change in sulfur content as a result of the pretreatment and leaching processes was calculated according to following formulas Results on the optimization of microwave irradiation power and time, leaching temperature and time, and coal particle size are shown in Artificial neural networks (ANNs) are generalizations of mathematical models of the biological nervous systems in our brain. One key advantage of ANN is the ability to build a model of the problem using the data from experimental measurements of the problem domain General regression neural networks (GRNN) have recently been considered in the literature as particularly predisposed to dealing with such complex problems The GRNN is used for estimation of continuous variables, as in standard regression techniques. It is related to the radial basis function (RBF) network based on a standard statistical technique called the Gaussian Kernel Regression, and is a four-layered neural network. Networks that have the universal approximation property GRNN is based upon the following formula: GRNN is a method of estimating A physical interpretation of the probability estimate The resulting regression (Eq. The flowchart of procedure; microwave pretreatment, peroxyacetic acid desulfurization and ANN modeling was shown in The structural properties of coal such as its porosity, surface area and pore size play an important role in its chemical desulfurization. Coal contains some amount of moisture in pores; this moisture is generally removed by heating to around 100 In this study, microwave irradiation was used, not only as a pretreatment for subsequent desulfurization with peroxyacetic acid, but it was also used as a desulfurization method. The tests numbered 1–10 in The tests numbered 11–22 in The pyritic and organic sulfur reduction increased sharply to 92.6% and 40.46% within 90 To evaluate the effect of particle size on the chemical desulfurization process, the representative sample was divided into fractions with 850–1400 Inter-correlations between all variables and sulfur reduction are shown in Using multivariable regression, the following equations were developed to describe the relationship between the input variables and sulfur reduction: Although regression results were shown almost acceptable accuracy in prediction of sulfur reduction, ANN modeling was applied in estimating process to minimize prediction errors. The GRNN was used to predict organic and pyritic sulfur reduction using the experimental results in where For using the GRNN in the MATLAB software package, the main task is arranging the training and testing data. Data selection is the most important key to obtaining a good training set and improving neural network performance. In this work, the classifying process begins with finding the optimal spread value for GRNN. The optimal spread is found by a trial-and-error process for the datasets. The second step of the classifying process is to find a good training set which can give good accuracy both in training and testing. In this work, an instance exchange method was used to choose the best training set. The process starts with a random selected training set. After the first training process, the test data is applied to the network. A randomly selected true-classified instance in the training set ( The common process using GRNN can be done in two steps Definition of input and output matrixes for the training phase after normalization is as follows: T ( Definition of input and output matrices for the testing phase was set as follows: A ( The correlation coefficient ( To survey the accuracy of presented GRNN model, other estimation methods such as feed forward artificial neural network (FANN) and cascade artificial neural network (CANN) were applied with the same procedure and data set. Regard to the obtained results (  Microwave irradiation at 1000 The experimental data were used for desulfurization prediction using regression and ANN. Multivariable regression predicted sulfur reduction with a correlation coefficient of 0.90 and 0.91 for organic and pyritic sulfur reduction, respectively. The coal particle size, leaching temperature and time, and microwave irradiation power and time were used as inputs to a general regression neural network. Thirty-two data sets for training and eight data sets for testing were used on a GRNN model with a spread of 0.3. As compared with regression, the GRNN predicted organic and pyritic sulfur reduction in the testing step with correlation coefficients ( In comparison with other ANN methods, the proposed GRNN model can be used as a reliable method for prediction of organic and inorganic sulfur reduction in coal desulfurization plants. In order to evaluate the process operational variables interactions, this method and its results can further be used as an expert system in coal desulfurization plants for estimating sulfur removal without having to conduct new experiments in the laboratory.