Mechanochemistry is a multidisciplinary branch of science and has significantly developed within the last few years. In the Department of Mechanochemistry at the Institute of Geotechnics of Slovak Academy of Sciences in Košice, Slovakia, the mechanochemical synthesis of advanced nanomaterials, namely chalcogenides and oxides, applicable in energy industry is performed. Furthermore, the treatment of waste, synthesis of antibacterially active nanoparticles, and performing organic reactions using mechanochemistry have been in the spotlight. The possibility to up-scale these processes using vibratory ball mill in collaboration with TU Clausthal in Germany has been successfully applied. These advancements are briefly reviewed in this paper. For complete overview of the section, please refer the article collection - Mechanochemical synthesis is a simple, one-pot solid-state synthesis with capability to reduce or even eliminate the use of solvents, enhance yields, and provide access to new product libraries. It has also been recognized by IUPAC, which considers a chemical reaction as mechanochemical if it is induced by the direct absorption of mechanical energy [ Although mechanochemistry is still gaining more interest in the scientific world, the vast majority of research groups uses it as an alternative method to the classical chemistry (e.g., in organic synthesis). There are very few research groups for whom mechanochemistry is the central point and is applied for a wide variety of research problems. In this context, the multidisciplinary contribution of Institute of Solid State Chemistry and Mechanochemistry in Novosibirsk, Russia, actually a cradle of modern mechanochemistry, cannot be overlooked. Besides this institute, Department of Mechanochemistry at the Institute of Geotechnics, Slovak Academy of Sciences in Košice, Slovakia (at that time Mining Institute), is also focused on multidisciplinary use of mechanochemical approaches. It was established by prof. Tkáčová in 1970s. At that time, the focus was on facilitating the mining activities of carbonates mined in eastern Slovakia. However, also antimony- and copper-containing ore was the focus of mining activities in this area. Antimony and copper were present in a sulfidic form, namely in tetrahedrite (Cu Within this paper, a brief overview of recent activities of our department is provided, demonstrating the multidisciplinary character of mechanochemistry in general. Nanocrystalline chalcogenides, namely those based on copper, exhibit the novel physical and chemical properties different from their bulk equivalents and are applicable in various fields [ CuS (covellite) and Cu Very recently we succeeded in the rapid mechanochemical preparation of needle-like CuS nanocrystals by using copper acetate and sodium sulfide as precursors [ Upon the introduction of tin, ternary sulfide mohite (Cu Cobalt pentlandite (Co Successful mechanochemical/thermal synthesis of freboldite (CoSe) and cobalt pentlandite (Co We have also succeeded in the mechanochemical synthesis of eskebornite (CuFeSe The application of mechanochemistry can also be found in a field of pharmacy and medicine. The tetraarsenic tetrasulfide (As The success in using wet-stirred media milling lies in the fact that in one step, the decrease in particle size and capping of particles with biocompatible polymers (e.g., polyvinylpyrrolidone or Poloxamer 407) can be achieved without necessity of using toxic organic solutions. The average particle size was 115 nm (much lower than 230 nm upon the use of planetary milling) with the unimodal distribution. Arsenic dissolution from the analyzed sulfide compounds in the simulated gastric and intestinal fluid was significantly improved upon milling. Moreover, the samples prepared using this approach were stable for a long time (approximately half a year). The idea of multifunctional material preparation composed of drug (in our case As Later on, we managed to move our research into the preclinical application stage [ High-energy ball milling of oxides is currently often used to activate powders and to prepare nano-oxides at moderate temperatures [ We used mechanical impact for mechanochemical synthesis of several types of oxides, e.g., semiconductor: ZnO [ Within our research, we focused also on spinels [ Also silver nanoparticles with antibacterial activity can be prepared via mechanochemistry utilizing natural sources as stabilizing and/or reducing agents [ Mechanochemistry is also a useful tool for waste treatment [ Among various branches of mechanochemistry, organic mechanochemistry is being developed very rapidly [ Mechanochemical processes need to be scaled up in order to be effective also on the industrial level. One of the possibilities is twin screw extrusion [ Another classical example is wet-stirred media milling [ The potential to scale up our laboratory syntheses was verified in co-operation with Clausthal University of Technology, Germany ( As can be seen, the focus of up-scaled synthesis was mainly on the preparation of energy-related materials. The mechanochemical synthesis of CuS (covellite) could be realized in 60 min by milling elemental precursors under ambient conditions [ Cu The program on industrial syntheses of quaternary sulfides applicable in the field of photovoltaics and thermoelectrics has started in 2017. Namely kesterite Cu Furthermore, also oxide-related work was performed on this device. By direct and short-time mechanochemical reduction of FeTiO Finally, the utilization of the ESM-656, 0.5 ks vibratory mill for waste treatment was shown recently. The scalability of the mechanochemical dechlorination of PVC waste using eggshell illustrating the simultaneous valorization of two wastes was demonstrated in Ref. [ The longer milling times for the scaled-up synthesis in comparison with standard lab-scale planetary ball milling treatment is because the milling conditions were not optimized (e.g., 80% filling of volume with milling balls or ball-to-powder ratio 300 were used). Upon proper optimization, the syntheses could be most probably realized in shorther time. This paper provided a brief overview of the most recent works realized within the Department of Mechanochemistry at the Institute of Geotechnics, Slovak Academy of Sciences in Košice, Slovakia. A few examples of mechanochemical syntheses of materials applicable in optoelectronics, thermoelectrics, fuel cells, lithium ion batteries, and medicine coming from the groups of chalcogenides and oxides were provided. The examples for silver NPs preparation and waste treatment were also mentioned. In the end, the possibility to scale up mechanochemical processes using eccentric vibratory mill was outlined. Nothing declared. This work was supported by the