Fractures of the distal condyles of the third metacarpus/metatarsus (MC/MT-III). Fractures originate at the distal articular surface and propagate proximally in the sagittal plane. These fractures are simply referred to as Condylar fractures occur predominantly in young racehorses. Condylar fractures are most commonly seen in Thoroughbred racehorses. They also occur in Standardbred racehorses; racing Arabians; and occasionally polo ponies, steeplechasers, and eventers. Racing plates with long toe grabs and harder dirt surfaces have been proposed as risk factors based on results of epidemiologic studies.  Fractures may involve either the lateral or medial condyle. Lateral condylar fractures are either incomplete or complete (exit the ipsilateral cortex). The majority of complete fractures are displaced. Medial condylar fractures rarely exit the ipsilateral cortex and instead have a propensity to propagate proximally into the diaphysis or proximal metaphysis. They do so in either a spiral configuration or in a sagittal plane that changes abruptly in mid-diaphysis to take on a  Most horses present with an acute onset of moderate to severe lameness during or shortly after a race or a workout. In some cases, horses finish the race well with no “bad step” perceived by the rider. With some incomplete fractures, lameness is not noted until the following day. Some horses have a history of pain (“soreness”) and inflammation (heat and effusion) in the associated fetlock joint at some point in the days or weeks leading up to fracture.  Horses with condylar fractures generally bear full weight on the limb and exhibit mild to severe lameness at the walk. Lameness in many cases improves rapidly so that by 24 to 48 hours, there may be minimal lameness at the walk (most evident on turns). Fetlock effusion is invariably present and is typically marked. Horses with complete lateral condylar fractures often have noticeable soft tissue swelling along the lateral aspect of the distal metaphysis. Pain on lower limb (fetlock) flexion is typically moderate to severe in the acute stage.  Condylar fractures are fatigue fractures resulting from accumulated high-speed cyclic strains. Subchondral microdamage develops where stress is concentrated along the condylar groove (junction between the condyle and sagittal ridge). Overt fracture occurs acutely and begins in the distal palmar/plantar aspect of the articular surface and propagates proximally between or along the sagitally oriented “plates” of trabecular bone. Other intraarticular fractures of the fetlock joint  Physical examination in the vast majority of cases reliably identifies the fetlock joint as the site of injury. Radiographs confirm the diagnosis. Radiographs should include the four standard views as well as a flexed dorsopalmar/plantar projection to aid in detection of articular comminution (  In rare cases (typically short, chronic, incomplete fractures) diagnostic analgesia (low four-point block or IA anesthesia) is helpful to confirm the fetlock as the site of pain. Nuclear scintigraphy may prove useful in these same cases.  Promote fracture healing and minimize degenerative changes in the affected joint. With medial condylar fractures, avoiding catastrophic failure is also paramount.  Stall confinement, bandaging, and systemic antiinflammatory drugs. Rigid, full-limb external coaptation is indicated after diagnosis of any propagating medial condylar fracture.  Surgical repair using cortical screws in a lag fashion ( Screws in lateral condylar fractures are inserted through individual stab incisions. Complete lateral condylar fractures are reduced under arthroscopic control. All medial condylar fractures with a mid-diaphyseal Medial condylar fractures with a radiographically confirmed spiral configuration may be repaired with lag screws alone, but many surgeons opt for plate stabilization as added security. Nonsurgical management is an option for selected incomplete fractures.  The most devastating complication is a catastrophic failure in cases of medial condylar fracture. Insufficient fracture reduction and failure to accurately realign the articular surface in repairing displaced fractures invariably results in debilitating arthritis. Follow-up radiographs are taken to monitor fracture healing.  The prognosis for nondisplaced condylar fractures is generally good to very good (70%–90% return to athletic soundness). The prognosis for displaced condylar fractures in the forelimbs of Thoroughbred racehorses is guarded to fair (<50% return to athletic soundness). The presence of degenerative joint disease, concurrent proximal sesamoid fracture, or other significant IA pathology imparts a lower prognosis. Concurrent axial fracture of a proximal sesamoid bone is almost always associated with a poor prognosis.  Most horses can resume training 4 to 5 months after surgical repair. The author does not routinely remove screws before training commences, although some surgeons do. Plates must be removed from cases of medial condylar fracture if athletic use is anticipated.  Carefully monitor for early detection of pathology in and around the fetlock. Avoid shoes with long toe grabs. Have the horse race and train on grass or synthetic surfaces. AUTHOR: EDITOR: