This volume contains a selection of papers presented at the first international conference on abrasive processes (ICAP2008). This conference evolved from earlier meetings on erosion: the International Conferences on Liquid and Solid Impact (ELSI) and the International Conferences on Erosive and Abrasive Wear (ICEAW). The conference was held at Churchill College, Cambridge, England from 21st to 25th September 2008. It was inspired by the 50th anniversary of the publication of two seminal papers in the scientific investigation of wear by abrasion and erosion—one by Professor Finnie in the USA ICAP2008 attracted 140 attendees from academia and industry. Almost 140 papers were presented: 57 orally and 81 as posters. The conference ran as a single session stimulating a high level of debate and discussion. The conference included three excellent plenary talks on: toughness and processes of material removal by Professor Tony Atkins, University of Reading, UK; the influence of passive films on the mechanical response of metals in sliding tribo-corrosion contacts by Dr Stefano Mischler, EPFL, Switzerland; and the effect of microstructure and surface finish of advanced ceramics on sliding and erosive wear processes by Professor Karl-Heinz Zum Gahr, Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe, Germany. Invited papers covered a wide range of topics including abrasion of rubber, chemical–mechanical polishing, abrasive micromachining/nanomachining, the modelling and computer simulation of two-body abrasion processes, abrasion in particle-augmented mixed lubrication, and the relation between scratch deformation and abrasion. Papers from the conference are being published, after thorough peer review, in two journals, Wear and Journal of Materials Processing Technology, to reflect the two aspects of abrasive processes on which the meeting was based. This special issue of Wear contains 48 papers and a further 19 papers appear in the Journal of Materials Processing Technology. The organising committee would like to thank Schlumberger-Doll Research USA for sponsoring student bursaries, and also the staff at Elsevier who organised the conference and supervised the editorial process. We hope that the reader enjoys these proceedings and will be sufficiently excited by the subject to feel that they will make a journey to the next ICAP conference.  Ian Hutchings, University of Cambridge (Chairman) Anne Neville, University of Leeds John Williams, University of Cambridge Robert Wood, University of Southampton