In this study, effect of demineralization on the combustion reactivity of 25 lignite samples, originating from different areas of Turkey, was investigated. Non-isothermal thermogravimetry, where the sample was heated in air where temperature increased at a linear rate of 40K/min to 1273K, has been used to investigate the combustion reactivities of the original and demineralized lignite samples. The activation energies calculated by two different methods and the burning profiles of the original and demineralized samples were compared and discussed. It was observed that the combustion reactivity of the samples was considerably influenced by the demineralization process applied.Coal contains variable amounts of mineral matter which includes clay minerals, sulfides, carbonates, sulfates, chlorides, silicates, oxides, hydroxides and phosphates. Mineral matter is generally considered to be the sum of all inorganic minerals and elements that are present in coal. Thus, all elements in coal, except organically combined C, H, N, O and S, are classified by this definition as mineral matter Mineral matter in coal has been classified in different ways, but for practical purposes it is useful to classify it as inherent or adventitious mineral matter The amount and composition of the mineral matter can influence the combustion characteristics of coal, which is important in the design of coal-fired boilers The objective of the research described in this study is to investigate the effects of demineralization on the combustion reactivity of 25 lignite samples originating from different areas of Turkey. In the experiments, 25 lignite samples originating from different areas of Turkey were used. Samples were ground and sieved into a powder with a particle size of 250 Thermogravimetric analysis of the original and demineralized lignite samples was carried out using a Shimadzu TG 41 thermal analyzer. Forty-milligram samples were spread uniformly on the bottom of the crucible made of alumina. The temperature was raised at a heating rate of 40 The analyses results of the lignite samples are shown in The best way to estimate the combustion reactivity of a coal sample is to determine activation energy value from its burning profile. Experimental non-isothermal TG data has been used to calculate the activation energy values of the original and demineralized lignite samples by the methods of Coats–Redfern The comparison of the activation energy values calculated for the combustion reactions of original and demineralized lignites clearly show that the removal of mineral matter causes a decrease in combustion reactivity. The combustion activation energies of the demineralized lignite samples are found to be higher than those of the original samples. The maximum differences were determined as 48% between values calculated by the Coats–Redfern method and 57% between values calculated by the Zsako method. It is known that the demineralization process performed by treatment with hydrochloric and hydrofluoric acids is not successful in removing iron-containing mineral species. This means that the demineralized lignite samples contain iron which has catalytic effect on combustion of coal The burning profiles of the original and demineralized lignite samples are also compared. The characteristic temperatures of the burning profiles are listed in The point of the burning profile at which the rate of weight loss due to combustion is a maximum is called the ‘peak temperature’. Burning profile peak temperature is taken as a measure of the reactivity of a coal: the lower the maximum peak temperature, the more reactive a coal may be considered Jenkins et al. The experimental results obtained in this work show that the application of demineralization generally shifts the burning profiles of the lignite samples to higher temperatures. The conversion values calculated for the combustion reactions of the original and demineralized lignite samples at 873 and 1273 An inspection of The relationship of the conversion differences between original and demineralized samples at 1273