The feasibility of synthesis of nesquehonite powders from natural talc was evaluated both through theoretical and experimental approaches. The change of the Gibbs free energy was −318kJ/mol with its corresponding equilibrium constants (K) of 5.53×1055, which indicated that the reaction could proceed spontaneously. Pure phase of nesquehonite was successfully obtained from natural talc at a low temperature and ambient pressure under the action of ammonia. The effects of reaction temperature and ammonia dosage on the precipitation of MgCO3·3H2O have been investigated. XRD and SEM results demonstrated that the reaction temperature had a significant impact on the crystal phase of the products, while the ammonia dosage showed no serious effect on the morphology of the products, but had important influence on the length of the crystals. With the optimization of operating conditions (reacted at 60°C with 8mL ammonia), the nesquehonite crystals were prepared and could grow up to a length of about 19.31μm and a width of 0.96μm. During the crystallization process, the nesquehonite crystals were transformed from magnesium bicarbonate obtained from magnesium, and have a preferential orientation growth in the (002) direction. The growth process of nesquehonite crystals accorded with the solution-liquid–solid mechanism.The form of particles and their properties are closely related, and different particle shapes and sizes sometimes give different particle properties even for the same substance. The research and development of highly functional materials have been performed for many years through the control of crystal phase and morphology in the field of inorganic powder materials. In recent years, rod-like materials have attracted much attention due to the utilization for various types of functional application fields, such as filter material, pharmaceuticals, cosmetic manufacturing, optical, and chemical devices The design and fabrication of inorganic materials from natural minerals have recently attracted a lot of interest because of relatively low cost, mild reaction conditions, large-scale production and excellent product performance as compared to traditional methods In this paper, the synthesis of nesquehonite (MgCO Pristine talc, obtained from Guangxi, China, was milled to produce talc powder with the following chemical compositions: (mass %) SiO The acid-leaching experiment was performed by subjecting talc samples to hydrochloric acid solution. Carbonation experiment was performed by subjecting ammonia and carbon dioxide to the acid leaching solution. According to the stoichiometric calculation and our previous research The composition of the sample was determined by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) and chemical titration. Powder XRD measurements of the samples were conducted with a DX-2700 X-ray diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation (λ A set of basic parameters were designed to investigate the effects of various experimental conditions on the Mg  A set of basic parameters were designed to investigate the effects of various experimental conditions on the Mg In the gas–liquid–solid system, the chemical reaction is expressed by Eq. From the thermodynamic calculation results, the Gibbs free energy change (Δ  As discussed above, the whole process of nesquehonite synthesized from natural talc showed that the synthesis actually took place via the gas–liquid–solid phases according to Eqs. During the preparation process, temperature can strongly affect the solution precipitation process and the obtained products. Zhang et al.  To better understand the effect of quantity of ammonia on nesquehonite preparation from natural talc, the crystal structure and morphology of the reaction product have been recorded by XRD. Nesquehonite is a kind of carbonates, while CO In the following research, we studied the growth mechanism of nesquehonite prepared from natural talc. With the optimization of operating conditions (reaction at 60 The change of the reaction conditions directly affected the crystalline form. The growth mechanism of crystal usually included the vapor–liquid–solid, solution-liquid–solid The nesquehonite (MgCO This work was supported by the