The 6th Baltic Electrochemistry Conference on Electrochemistry of Functional Interfaces and Materials was held on June 15–17, 2016 in Helsinki, Finland; the previous meeting was held in Tartu, Estonia in 2008. Current increase in production of renewable energies, as well as the ever-increasing interest in electrochemical energy storage and electrocatalysis, provided the impetus to wake up the meeting from its nearly decade long hibernation. Nonetheless, the topics of the meeting selected, demonstrates the strength and wide range of electrochemistry currently researched around the Baltic including: Ionic liquids Electrochemical energy conversion & storage Medical applications Nanoscale electrochemistry Hydrometallurgy & Industrial Scale Electrolysis Functionalized electrodes and sensors Electrodeposition and redox replacement Novel techniques in electrochemistry Liquid–Liquid interfaces Transport processes Theoretical & computational electrochemistry More than 150 abstracts were received by the end of January and altogether ca. 160 participants, ca. 50 female, from 25 countries around the world attended the meeting. A total of 45 oral presentations were given and two poster sessions with 80 posters were displayed with a special emphasis placed on the next generation of young researchers to present their work. Professor Christian Amatore honoured proceedings as the keynote speaker and the other specially invited speakers included profs. Guido Gründmeier (University of Paderborn), Patrik Schmuki (Friedrich-Alexander University of Erlangen-Nuremberg) and Juan Feliu (University of Alicante). The local organization committee was assembled from Aalto University. The members were Drs. Benjamin P. Wilson and Kirsi Yliniemi, Profs. Mari Lundström, Päivi Laaksonen, Tanja Kallio and Eero Kontturi. Prof. Lasse Murtomäki was a conference chair who not only oversaw the proceedings but could also be found providing the musical entertainment, with his band, at the conference dinner. The meeting more than fulfilled expectations, and the next meeting is to be held in Estonia during 2018.  Kirsi Yliniemi (  The