The effect of semirigid Ender nails (EN) in the treatment of closed humeral shaft fractures was reviewed and analyzed. Clinical study was set retrospectively with detailed parameters. One hundred and eighteen closed humeral shaft fractures, treated with closed reduction and internal fixation with ENs, were collected. The follow-up period was 78 (24–175) months. The average operation blood loss was 105 cc, operation time was 57 min, hospital stay was 6.5 days, and union time was 10.5 weeks. The postoperative complications included three superficial infections, one iatrogenic radial nerve palsy, eight nail backouts, and eight nonunions. In our experience, for closed humeral shaft fractures fixed surgically, EN is a good choice for its simplicity and efficacy, but the fracture gap should be minimized after fixation and postoperative care should be closely observed.For humeral shaft fractures, nonoperative management is satisfactory in most cases, but, in some instances, e.g., multiple injuries, poor compliance of patient, poor reduction, or open fracture, surgical management is still required. There is still no consensus on the method of reduction and fixation From November 1984 to November 1997, 135 cases of acute humeral fractures were managed with ENs in our institute, but 118 cases (82 male/36 female, 43 [15–80] years old, and 54 left/64 right) were collected in this study for their complete followup, and the mean (range) followup period was 78 (24–175) months. The 17 cases excluded from this study were due to pathological fracture in 4 cases, death during followup in 5 cases, and loss of followup before union in 8 cases. Cases enrolled included (1) acute displaced closed humeral shaft fracture injured within one week, with exclusion of segmental fractures or fractures within 7 cm of the shoulder or the elbow joint line, and (2) patients with multiple injuries, transverse fractures with fracture gap >0.5 cm, poor closed reduction of the fractures (angulation >20° or irreducible gap >1 cm), or poor compliance with closed treatment. Patients with pathological fractures and those who had died or were lost to followup or expired were all excluded. The indications for surgical treatment were multiple injuries in 46, transverse fracture in 26, poor closed reduction in 16, and poor compliance in 30. The status of fracture comminution and level is shown in All the operations were performed by senior staff. EN was applied according to Hall and DeLong’s descriptions Following surgery, each case was followed once every two weeks in the first month and once every month thereafter. Functional evaluation was performed at every visit and once every two months after the union of the fracture. X-ray checkup was done at every followup visit, and all the evaluations and records were recorded by our senior staffs at the same time. Normal union was defined as appearance of both bridging callus (or bridging of the cortex) and partial obliteration of the fracture site within 5 months, delayed union as union evidenced in 6 to 8 months, and nonunion as no evidence of union after 8 months. Malunion was defined as varus or valgus deformity equal to or more than 20°, anterior or posterior angulation equal to or more than 20°, or shortening equal to or more than 15 mm, compared with the contralateral side. If the active ROMs of the elbow and shoulder were found to be >15° less than those of the contralateral normal side or unable to return to the preinjury work/activity, the functional results were defined as unsatisfactory, and, otherwise, to be satisfactory. In case of unrecoverable neural injury, the functional result was also defined as unsatisfactory. The operation time (from incision to complete closure of the wound) was 57 (30–100) min, intraoperative blood loss was 105 (50–300) ml, the hospital day was 6.5 (4–10) days, and the union time was 10.5 (8–16) weeks. Eight nonunions were encountered in this series (6.8%), and all were revised with decortication, open reduction, exchange of implant to DCP, and bone grafting with successful union. Five cases were transverse fracture, and three had comminution involving >1/3rd circumference of the cortex. During follow-up, all these 8 cases were noted to have 6–9 mm gaps over the fracture sites which were in impacted position initially (<3 mm gap). They were apparently due to over-distraction caused by the weight of the arm despite the arm sling. Six patients were thought to be cooperative and the other two were thought to be uncooperative due to doing early heavy work before fracture union. Noticeable postoperative distraction of the fracture gap was noted in another 10 cases, but the final fracture gaps in these 10 cases were all less than 5 mm. The overall complication rate was 16.9% (20/118) in this series. Excluding the nonunions, the complication rate became 10.2% (12/118). There were three superficial infections noted (2.5%), which healed with antibiotic treatment. There were no deep infections in this series. Iatrogenic radial nerve injury occurred in only 1 case (1%) which was a distal 1/3rd fracture. The injury was thought to be a neurapraxia due to stretching, but did not relate to the approach itself. Recovery was seen after 2–3 months without any specific treatment and without any impairment of the function in the final followup. The incidence of nerve injury in the distal 1/3rd fractures, in this series, was 2.9% (1/35). Two of the three cases with initial radial nerve palsy had complete recovery without surgical intervention within 5 months after the initial injury. The other one had no apparent recovery during followup and neurolysis was preformed at 4 months after the initial injury. The recovery was almost complete with only mild residual numbness of the little finger. Eight cases (6.8%) had protrusion of the ENs, with proximal migration in 4 and distal migration in the other 4, with irritation to the soft tissue. Three of the 8 cases were noted to have the protrusion before union and re-insertion was done. No malunion or nonunion developed in these three cases. The other 5 developed protrusion after the union and removal of the nails was performed without any sequelae. All the cases were found to have satisfactory functional results, with near normal shoulder/elbow function, no significant pain and full return to preinjury activities/work without pain in the final followup. Any discussion concerning surgical treatment of humeral shaft fractures must first consider the excellent results that can be achieved with nonoperative care of these fractures. Many studies of nonoperative treatment report fracture complication in <10% of the cases and fracture union in >90% of the cases, with excellent return of upper extremity function This study assessed a variety of parameters in the use of EN but found a short operation time, little blood loss, short hospital stay (low intraoperative and postoperative risks), quick union time, low nonunion rate and relatively low complication rate. The easier the use and care, the less the associated injury (soft tissue trauma, haemodynamic compromise, and anesthetic risk) and the less the surgical risk. Thus, taking polytraumatized or relatively high risk patients into account, it seems appropriate to select EN for fixation for its ease of use and lower intraoperative or postoperative risks. However, meticulously surgical technique (such as avoidance of forceful traction and large fracture gap), careful wound care and close postoperative follow-up are mandatory to achieve good results and to reduce the incidence of complications, such as infection, nerve injury and nonunion. In our experience, humeral shaft fractures inappropriate for nonoperative treatment do well after sophisticated application of EN but we thought that follow-up should be close and the fracture gap should be kept as little as possible to make the result more predictable.