The batch flotation process has been commonly characterized assuming a flotation rate distribution function F(k), e.g.: Dirac delta, Rectangular, Gamma or Weibull functions. The identification of F(k) for the collection zone of continuous industrial cells is more complex and to the authors knowledge, has not been reported yet.
                  In this work, a novel procedure to estimate the flotation rate distribution from the collection zone of industrial flotation cells, using the radioactive tracer technique, is presented. The approach consists of measuring the impulse response of the floatable mineral tracer concentration, and non-floatable gangue tracer concentration (Residence Time Distribution, RTD), in the cell tailings. Then, the floatable tracer concentration can be compared with the model prediction, using the Gamma function and the RTD of the non-floatable tracer. Thus, the F(k) distribution parameters were obtained by means of the least-square estimation. The new approach was successfully tested in industrial rougher flotation cells of large size.In a batch flotation process the mineral recovery can be described by Eq. In a continuous flotation process, the mineral recovery can be described by the general equation ( From a practical point of view, the overall flotation process has been commonly represented by a first order system with lumped parameters, Eq. Industrial flotation is a continuous operation system. The flotation recovery of a continuous process with a known residence time distribution  Batch flotation tests were carried out in parallel with plant rougher flotation tests in several survey campaigns at different concentrators ( Plant tests were performed in large size cells in two copper concentrators, and consisted of sampling the copper rougher circuits using the short-cut method ( Batch flotation tests were developed for obtaining the parameters of each distribution. Four models for the flotation rate distribution were evaluated: Dirac delta, Rectangular, Gamma and Weibull, in order to find the best estimation of Dirac delta, The Weibull distribution of the rate constant is described by Eq. Based on the experimental procedure previously described for plant testing, the non-floatable tracer concentration, The concentration of floatable tracer in the cell tailings, Batch tests were carried out based on the experimental procedure previously described.  The flotation rate distribution should only consider the valuable mineral which can be floated ( A comparison of the rate constant distributions is shown in The Gamma model, which allows obtaining an analytical expression for the mineral recovery in industrial flotation cells, was used for plant modeling. Substituting The However, a fraction Then, the parameters of the Gamma distribution of flotation rate constant, as well as the The first test was developed in a 130   A second test was carried out in a mechanical cell of 300    From the above results the following advantages of the Gamma model, for representing the flotation rate distribution, can be observed: The function allows for unimodal but flexible shapes, with only two parameters. The model satisfies the condition that the fraction of floatable mineral at zero rate constant is zero, which is not the case for the Rectangular model with a single parameter. The model allows for a simple analytical relationship in order to estimate the mineral concentration. The methodology has the advantage that allows the estimation of the flotation rate distribution of a single industrial cell under continuous operation. This was performed by generating a transient response, by means of floatable and non-floatable radioactive tracers, which allows the identification of the single cell parameters. The method requires additional measurements for mass balance around the cell as well as the froth recovery estimation. The plant cell results were obtained in industrial cells where the froth recovery was about 60–80% ( A new method for estimating the flotation rate distribution in single continuous industrial flotation cells, larger sizes, was developed using floatable and non-floatable radioactive tracers and the Gamma distribution model. It was found that the flotation rate distribution in two industrial cell operations follows a rather normal distribution. The same result was observed in laboratory batch tests. The batch flotation characterization showed that a single parameter model, such as the Rectangular model, can be as good as the Gamma or Weibull distribution in terms of the model fit. However, it fails in terms of the identification of the maximum recovery properly, because it becomes confounded with the presence of a fraction of mineral with near zero rate constant. The authors are grateful to El Teniente Division CODELCO-Chile for providing access to their plant and for valuable assistance in the experimental work. Funding for process modeling and control research is provided by CONICYT, Project Fondecyt 1100854, NEIM, Project P07-087-F, ICM-Mideplan, Santa Maria University, Project 270522, and the Chilean Commission of Nuclear Energy.