This study examined the performance of the CIL (Carbon-in-Leach) circuit at Telfer, a copper–gold plant treating porphyry copper deposits containing gold associated with both copper and iron sulphides, with an objective to identify factors normally limiting the gold recovery in the CIL circuit in the presence of a small amount of copper after copper flotation, and then propose a means to improve it. Diagnostic leaching assessment and mineralogical analysis by MLA revealed that the occlusion of gold by other minerals and the fine grain size of gold associated with them may be the contributing factors to the low gold recovery in the CIL circuit. Fine grinding of the CIL feed increased gold recovery significantly from the leaching process. However, it is interesting to find that fine grinding increased the amount of released copper ions which complex with cyanide resulting in significantly higher cyanide consumption. It is therefore proposed that regrinding of the CIL feed followed by copper flotation is an appropriate pre-treatment method for the CIL circuit.For copper–gold ores, it is a common practice to float copper sulphide minerals and the majority of gold to a concentrate. A review of large porphyry/skarn copper–gold deposits by The fundamental mechanism of gold extraction by cyanide is well established. The dissolution involves the oxidation of gold to form a monovalent cyanide complex and the reduction of dissolved oxygen to hydroxide via hydrogen peroxide intermediate ( Additionally, it is known that sulphide minerals are to varying degrees soluble in cyanide solutions and during the dissolution process sulphur, in the form of sulphide ions, is released into the solution ( Further studies by The removal of dissolved sulphide ions from solution to reduce gold surface passivation can be achieved via its oxidation to thiocyanate. Iron sulphide minerals may also impart a refractory nature to the ore. Despite the high copper flotation recovery, normally more than 90% ( In this study, the Telfer flotation and CIL plant was chosen as a case study, representing a copper–gold ore with a significant iron sulphide content. This plant currently operates at 21 Mtpa ore throughput and recovers gold by gravity separation, copper flotation and CIL. The feed grade is about 0.18% Cu and 0.7 Copper is simultaneously leached in the CIL process. The copper in the liquor of CIL tailings is recovered by a counter-current decantation (CCD) thickener circuit. Precipitation of copper from the CCD supernatant as CuS is completed in the Sulphidisation, Acidification, Recycling and Thickening (SART) circuit. The CIL feed is the pyrite concentrate, with an average grade of 4.9 Monthly composite samples representative of the CIL feed and CIL tailing streams for a six month period were created from routine shift samples that were collected during operation of the CIL plant. Each of these samples was separated into its size fractions. The samples were first wet sieved at 38 A laboratory test program was conducted to investigate the impact of regrinding the pyrite concentrate on the extent of leaching. 1 Diagnostic leaches of CIL monthly tailing composite samples were conducted to identify if the lack of additional cyanide limited further gold recovery. A 500 Gold mineralogy analysis by MLA was conducted at Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre (JKMRC), University of Queensland. The CIL feed sample collected from the plant was first wet screened at 20 and 38 The MLA measurement routine selected for the +75, +53, +38 and +20 Telfer’s CIL circuit typically operates with two of the nine available leach tanks offline as part of a rotatable tank maintenance schedule. Operating with these tanks offline reduces circuit residence time, possibly limiting the CIL stage recovery. Twice-weekly circuit surveys were completed routinely in the CIL circuit. Samples of slurry were collected from each operating tank and immediately filtered to prevent further leaching. The collected solids were dried and assayed for Au, S and Cu. The average solids gold profile along the CIL circuit from these surveys is presented in The CIL feed contains a notable amount of copper averaging 0.18% Cu of which 47% was leached by cyanide. The predominant copper mineral in the Telfer open pit ores is chalcocite ( Diagnostic leaching of monthly CIL tailing composite samples was performed to identify if the lack of additional cyanide limited gold recovery. The tailing samples were leached in the presence of 10,000 To further assess if poor liberation was a factor contributing to the low CIL stage recovery, the size-by-size performance of the CIL circuit was examined. The CIL feed was analysed by MLA to provide a measurement of the visible gold present. It was found that the visible gold was present as both native gold and a gold–silver alloy (electrum). The association of the gold minerals on a size-by-size basis is shown in The grain size distributions of both native gold and electrum for each size fraction measured are shown in Considering diagnostic leaching of the CIL tailing and mineralogical characterisation of the CIL feed, improving gold liberation by regrinding the pyrite concentrate was further investigated as an opportunity for increasing the recovery of gold in the CIL circuit. The pyrite concentrate was taken from the plant, reground and then subjected to the leaching test. Similarly, The leaching test of the pyrite concentrate after regrinding provides empirical support to the mineralogical diagnosis that gold recovery was limited by occlusion and insufficient liberation and that regrinding would provide a means to improve gold extraction. However, the simultaneous cyanide consumption increase would result in the option of leaching after regrind to be an economically unviable, with the gold recovery benefit offset by increased reagent cost. The sequential copper and pyrite flotation circuit used in Telfer represents a way to recover gold from many porphyry copper deposits containing gold associated with both copper and iron sulphides. However, the presence of copper in the feed of the CIL circuit is detrimental to the process’s performance and unfortunately there appears no practical, economic alternative process to avoid the impacts of copper, particularly in gold leaching in the presence of sulphide minerals. The method of gold dissolution in cyanide deficient solutions outlined by Maintaining the molar ratio of CN:Cu above 3–4 appears to be the simplest method to mitigate most of the copper-related complexities, by ensuring that sufficient free cyanide ion is available to leach gold, and copper is held in higher complexes that are not adsorbed by carbon. This approach is the practice in the Telfer CIL circuit where the cyanide dosage is controlled to maintain a free cyanide ion concentration as determined by online potentiometric titration. The notable limitation is that this further increases cyanide consumption beyond what is required by stoichiometry. Considering that numerous operating flotation plants are able to produce a saleable grade copper concentrate from copper head grades much less than that experienced in the Telfer CIL feed, one could expect the flotation of reground CIL feed may produce the acceptable grade of a copper concentrate to be combined with some part of the preceding copper flotation circuit. Gold not recovered to the concentrate by this flotation stage could be then recovered by CIL treatment of copper-depleted flotation tailings. In fact, mill-float-mill-float (MF2) technology has been widely used in the recovery of platinum group minerals (PGMs) with regrinding to better liberate minerals and clean mineral surfaces resulting in improved selectivity between gangue minerals and valuable minerals in subsequent flotation ( The occlusion of gold by other minerals and the fine grain size of gold associated with them can be factors limiting the gold recovery from the CIL circuit post copper flotation in copper–gold plants. Regrinding the CIL feed raises the CIL stage gold recovery by exposing more gold surfaces to cyanide. However, regrinding can result in a significant proportion of the newly released copper ions which complex with cyanide, and therefore increases cyanide consumption by the CIL circuit. It is expected that regrinding the CIL feed followed by copper flotation may be an appropriate pre-treatment method for the CIL circuit after the copper flotation in copper–gold plants. The authors gratefully acknowledge the approval of publication of this paper by Newcrest Mining Limited, and the mineralogical analysis managed by Dr. Elaine Wightman at JKMRC.