Cold upsetting experiments were carried out on sintered Al–Fe composite preforms in order to evaluate their work-hardening characteristics. Preforms of 92% of theoretical density, with two initial aspect ratios were prepared using a suitable die-set assembly on a 0.6MN capacity hydraulic press. Sintering was carried out in an electric muffle furnace for a period of 1h at 520°C. Each sintered compact was subjected to incremental compressive loading after each step of deformation. The instantaneous strain-hardening exponent instantaneous strain-hardening exponent (n
                     i) and strength coefficient instantaneous strength coefficient (k
                     i) of the Al–Fe composite preforms were calculated and found to be reached the peak value when the deformation or packing density is at low value. Further, it has been observed that the value of n
                     i and k
                     i decreased and found to be constant It has further been established that the iron particle-size of the preforms played a predominant role in influencing both n
                     i and k
                     i.initial diameter of the preform bulged diameter of the preform after deformation contact diameter of the preform after deformation initial height of the cylindrical preform height of the barrelled cylinder after deformation instantaneous strength coefficient instantaneous strain-hardening exponent true strain in the axial direction true strain in the hoop direction conventional Poisson’s ratio initial preform density of the cylinder density of the preform after deformation theoretical density of the fully dense material density ratio hydrostatic stress true stress in the axial direction true stress in the hoop direction A real perspective view of the upsetting operation is the induced height strain and the subsequent lateral flow of material of the deforming preform. However, a spherical pore undergoes flattening and simultaneous elongation in the direction of the lateral flow. The shear stress present along with the normal pressure ensures that there is relative motion between the opposite sides of the collapsing pores. Thus, the mechanical rupturing of the oxide film is feasible, with virgin material being exposed for bond formation across the collapsing pore surfaces, as described elsewhere El Wakil Atomised aluminium and iron powders were obtained from M/s. The Metal Powder Company, Madurai, Tamilnadu and M/s. Sundaram Fasteners Limited, Hyderabad, Andra Pradesh, respectively. The purity level of aluminium and iron powder was found to be of 99.70% and 99.62%, respectively. Other characteristics of the above mentioned powders are given in Ceramic coated Al–Fe composite preforms were sintered in an electric furnace at a temperature of 550 The present investigation is based on the analytical determination of the deformed density, Poisson’s ratio, stresses, strains, instantaneous strain hardening and strength coefficient. In the present investigation, the material under consideration is porous. As explained elsewhere Further, using the values of Now Eq.        For higher iron content in Al–Fe composite, the secondary strain hardening takes place during the course of plastic deformation. The iron content in Al–Fe composite decreases, the strain hardening value increases. For fine iron particle-size compacts, the strain hardening obtained is higher for low aspect ratio. For the coarse iron particle-size, the secondary strain hardening takes place. The secondary strain hardening takes place during the early stage of deformation in the case of coarse iron particle-size in the Al–Fe composite, because of more amount of geometric strain hardening. As the iron content in Al–Fe composite increases, the strength coefficient value decreases when the iron particle-size is fine. The iron particle-size is coarser, the strength co efficient value decreases. The aspect ratio increases, the strength coefficient value decreases.