Drilling operations in preparation for natural gas extraction from the Marcellus Shale formation generate large amounts of rock cuttings, which return to the surface coated in drilling mud. Solids control is commonly implemented so that the mud can be recycled, but total removal of the cuttings is uneconomical, so any non-reclaimed cuttings are processed to reduce moisture and then deposited in landfills. Laboratory analyses were conducted to characterize two samples of drill cuttings and to present characterization methods that may be relevant in assessing the beneficial reuse potential of drill cuttings. A key aspect of this study was to evaluate several approaches for providing consistent size distribution data. In addition, degradation testing was performed by submitting cuttings to moderate forms of attrition and sonication. Analyses provided particle size distributions, ash values, moisture content, and total organic carbon content of the samples. Materials analyzed included cuttings from the vertical portion of a wellbore mixed with water-based mud as well as Marcellus Shale cuttings from the horizontal portion of the same wellbore, mixed with oil-based mud. It was found that the size distribution of the water-based cuttings was much broader and finer than that of the oil-based cuttings for the samples analyzed in this study. Size degradation by attrition was minimal. Attempts to disperse the material using sonication were successful but lead to significant particle degradation. On a dry basis, the ash values of the water-based cuttings ranged from 94% to 98% by weight compared to 85–89% by weight for the oil-based cuttings. Total organic carbon content of the oil-based cuttings was approximately 10.6%. Additional testing may be required to ensure compliance with applicable regulations for beneficial reuse of the cuttings.Marcellus Shale is a black, Middle Devonian age sedimentary rock found in the Appalachian Basin Province. The shale contains oil and gas generated from the anaerobic decomposition of ancient, organic-rich material deposits. Adsorbed on the Marcellus Shale mineral grains and trapped in isolated pore spaces and fractures ( Large quantities of drill cuttings are generated in preparation for natural gas extraction from Marcellus reservoir wells. A single typical, fully-cased horizontal well with a 7000 foot target depth and 4000 foot lateral section can produce over 200 According to the Two samples of cuttings from two separate well drilling stages for Marcellus Shale natural gas extraction were provided by a natural gas producer in Pennsylvania. One sample was supplied in the form it emerged from the wellbore with minimal to no treatment and consisted of cuttings from the vertical portion of the borehole, above the Marcellus Shale strata, mixed with water-based drilling mud ( The two samples were provided in separate five-gallon buckets. The oil-based cuttings It should be noted that certain technical details regarding the cuttings were unavailable. For example, details concerning the sampling method with which the cuttings were gathered was not provided. Depending on the drill bit, subsurface position within the wellbore, and the nature of wellbore sampling, cuttings characteristics may differ. Additionally, there are known particle settling effects in non-Newtonian drilling fluids, which are utilized in operations such as this one ( Several types of size characterization tests were conducted to evaluate the effect of preparation technique on the resulting size distributions. Initially, a size analysis was conducted on one of the 14 samples (1700 Another set of size analysis tests was carried out on the WBC and OBC to evaluate the change in size distribution with sieving time. For these tests, the previously discussed combination of wet/dry screening was used to remove material finer than 25 An additional set of size distribution tests was carried out on the OBC to observe the effects of sample dispersion by sonication and wet screening of particles less than 25 A series of tests was conducted to evaluate the effect of sonication treatment time and amplitude on the size distribution of the OBC. Previous work with mineral systems has shown that sonication can affect mineral separations ( These tests were carried out to evaluate potential degradation of the cuttings by attrition. First, one of the 14 samples (1700 The moisture content of the WBC was determined by weight loss after oven-drying one of the 1700 Ash analysis was carried out on head samples and individual size fractions of the OBC and WBC by ASTM D5142 (Standard Test Methods for Proximate Analysis of the Analysis Sample of Coal and Coke by Instrumental Procedures) using a LECO TGA701 thermogravimetric analyzer. Prior to analysis, head samples of the OBC and dried WBC were riffled and ground in a Bleuler puck-and-ring mill, while the +100     It was mentioned that the WBC were presumably siltstone, which is a rock exhibiting great friability if weakly cemented. Also, the OBC consist of Marcellus Shale, which is fissile, meaning the rock tends to break in a sheet-like nature. These characteristics suggest the possibility of size degradation by attrition during material handling. Interestingly, the attrition test results proved otherwise and in fact, the effects of agglomeration seem more pronounced than those of attrition. As can be seen in Oven-drying of the composite or head samples showed that the WBC had a moisture content of 18.8% compared to 5.3% for the OBC. Because the OBC were treated using a physical drying process, this difference was expected. Using the weights of the 1000 cm  Samples of WBC and OBC were obtained from a Marcellus Shale drilling operation in Pennsylvania. These materials were characterized to determine various properties with a focus on the particle size distributions. Observing the gradation of the cuttings presented in