The interest in wetting has increased enormously in the last two decades, in particular since 2010. This increase becomes obvious when looking at the number of publications in the area of wetting phenomena between 1993 and 2014 ( When analyzing the distribution of publications in different journals ( The presented statistical data show a steady increase of science and technology interest in the area of wetting and spreading phenomena especially since 2010. The latter shows the difficult task which the Editors of this Special Issue were facing: how do we cover the huge amount of topics and questions in the area? We adopted a practical approach. First we choose a range of topics which we believe to be relevant for the progress of wetting. Then we selected experts on the respective topics which we knew from interesting presentations at international meetings and important publications. As a result of the selection procedure only a few leading experts in the area could be selected and we are aware of the danger that very important scientific findings could be missed, in particular of young researchers. In the current Special Issue of “Current Opinion in Colloid and Interface Science” 11 topics are covered by leading scientists in the corresponding area. Each of those topics is according to the co-editors' opinion a hot topic in the area of wetting and spreading phenomena. 6 out of 11 papers to this Special Issue are contributed by the participants of the Marie Curie Initial Training Network Complex Wetting (CoWet), which was funded by the European Commission.  Edmund B. Webb III, Baiou Shi Recent experimental and computational investigations into inertial spreading are reviewed. Results and discussion from literature bear out an initially surprising conclusion: even nanometer scale drops exhibit a regime of early stage wetting kinetics that are well described as inertia dominated. Some focus is placed on reviewing results from molecular scale simulations of inertial wetting and how they can be used to battle the lack of understanding regarding fundamental mechanisms of rapid contact line advancement.  Mahdi Gharabaghi, Sajjad Aghazadeh Wetting and spreading phenomena are the most important parameters for understanding of froth flotation practice. This review highlights the various concepts of contact angles and well-known equations in this respect and compares these equations. In order to control flotation performance, efforts should be made to determine the wetting characteristic of the flotation process. It is imperative that an improved understanding of wetting and spreading phenomena in the phase's interfaces will provide an improved and efficient flotation practice.  Panagiotis E. Theodorakis, Erich A. Müller, Richard V. Craster, Omar K. Matar Recent developments in “superspreading” are highlighted, which show this phenomenon to be due to the combined effect of diffusion processes, Marangoni stresses, surfactant, solvent and substrate chemistry, and ambient conditions. The ultimate resolution of the driving mechanisms will involve the application of molecular dynamics simulations together with continuum-scale modeling and multi-scale experimentation.  Véronique Pimienta, Charles Antoine Surface tension gradients are at the origin of the self-motion and deformation of Millimetersized floating objects. Two situations are reviewed. In the first one, the propellant container is the propelled object itself, while in the second case the propellant is placed in a reservoir embarked on a manufactured float. Three mechanisms leading to spontaneous motility have been identified in the literature. Among them two are more largely exemplified in the following as they involve a contribution of the “Marangoni Driven spreading” effect, leading to velocities on the cm/s scale. The main theoretical tools usually used for describing the motion and deformation of such self-propelled systems are also reviewed.  Anatoliy Vorobev The recent achievements gained in understanding of the dissolution dynamics of miscible interfaces are reviewed. Both experimental and theoretical works are examined. The attention is given to the effects of dynamic surface tension, interfacial diffusion, and dynamics of the contact line, and to solutal convective flows. A consistent theoretical description for the slowly miscible binary systems is given within the phase-field (Cahn–Hilliard) approach. Nevertheless, there are just a few modeling works that take into account all effects pertinent to miscible liquid/liquid interfaces.   M. Lotfi, M. Karbaschi, A. Javadi, N. Mucic, J. Krägel, V.I. Kovalchuk, R.G. Rubio, V.B. Fainerman and R. Miller An insight is given into recently developed new experimental approaches, such as fast capillary pressure tensiometry for growing and oscillating drops. These experiments are presented in comparison to more classical techniques like drop profile tensiometry and capillary wave damping. Progress in these experiments based on generated interfacial perturbations can be expected only by a close link to respective CFD simulations. The state of the art of CFD simulations is presented.  Tatiana Gambaryan-Roisman A review of recent advances in understanding and development of prediction tools describing the coupled wetting and transport in porous layers is given. A special focus is laid on fibrous media, which are frequently encountered as natural substances (human hair), as conventional technological products (textile fabric) or as a promising method for heat transfer enhancement (nanofiber mat coating of surfaces). The possible directions of future research are suggested.  Nina Kovalchuk, Anna Trybala, Victor Starov Applicability of classical diffusion model of evaporation, effect of substrate, evaporation of complex fluids and applicability for its description of the theory developed for pure liquids.  Hans-Jürgen Butt, Ilia Roismann, Martin Brinkmann, Periklis Papadopoulos, Doris Vollmer, Ciro Semprebon Characterization of the wetting properties is a prerequisite for a fundamental understanding and the targeted development of superhydrophobic and superamphiphobic layers. Here we describe important methods to quantify the wetting properties of super liquid-repellent layers, including the apparent advancing and receding contact angles, the roll-off angle, tensile and lateral adhesion, the impalement pressure, and the observation of drop impact. The link of these properties to the nano- and microscopic structures of the layer is discussed.  Armando Maestro, Eduardo Guzmán, Francisco Ortega, Ramón G. Rubio The contact angle of particles attached to fluid interfaces plays a key role in many scientific and technological aspects of particle-laden layers. In spite of the recognized importance, the laws that govern this property are still poorly understood. This review discusses the current status and the aspects to be dealt with in the near future in the study of the contact angle of particles attached to fluid interfaces.  Emil Chibowski, Malgorzata Jurak, Lucyna Holysz and Aleksandra Szczes Various aspects of native and model biological membranes' wettability are discussed. Among others hydration of mono-, bi-, and multi-layers of lipids as well wettability of macroscopic surfaces of solid supported lipid films investigated via apparent contact angle measurements and calculation of the apparent surface free energy of the films. The effects of relative humidity on the layer hydration and contact angle changes are also discussed. Finally, the effect of liposomes and enzymes (due to the hydrolysis reactions) on the hydrophobic/hydrophilic character of the film surfaces is overviewed.