This study had compared raw biomass and pre-treated biomass co-gasified with coal with the aim of investigating the reliability of pre-treated biomass for enhancing gasification performance. Sawdust (SD) and wood pellet (palletisation form of sawdust - WP) and blends of these two feedstocks with sub-bituminous coal (CL), were gasified in an air atmosphere using an external heated fixed-bed downdraft gasifier system. Response surface methodology (RSM) incorporating the central composite design (CCD) was applied to assist the comparison of all operating variables. The three independent variables were investigated within a specific range of coal blending ratios from 25% to 75%, gasification temperature from 650 °C to 850 °C and equivalence ratio from 0.20 to 0.30 against the dependent variables, namely the H2/CO ratio and higher heating value of the syngas (HHVsyngas). The results revealed the H2/CO ratio and a higher heating value of the syngas of more than 1.585 and 6.072 MJ/Nm3, respectively. Findings also showed that the H2/CO ratio in the syngas from CL/WP possessed a higher value than the CL/SD. In contrast, CL/SD possessed a higher heating value for syngas with about 1% difference compared to the CL/WP. Therefore, co-gasified coal with wood pellets could potentially be a substitute for sawdust.Overconsumption of fossil fuel due to global energy demands has dramatically increased over the past several decades as a consequence of the advancement in industrial fields and improvement in the living standards on a worldwide scale resulting in the scarcity of energy sources [ Response surface methodology (RSM) is an effective statistical tool for research purposes, which employs both statistical and mathematical methods to develop, improve and optimize the process, as well as to investigate several important responses affected by some variables [ In the present study, the physical and chemical properties of sub-bituminous coal (CL), raw biomass-sawdust (SD) and pre-treated biomass-wood pellet (WP) were investigated to determine the characteristic of each feedstock for corresponding co-gasification investigations. Furthermore, the co-gasification of biomass with a blend of different coal blending ratios, gasification temperature and equivalence ratios has been investigated in an externally heated downdraft fixed-bed gasifier system. The H The CL/SD and CL/WP blends were used as feedstock in this study. The CL was obtained from an electric utility company in Malaysia through a third-party company. Meanwhile, the SD and WP were obtained from a wood industry company located in Penang, north of Malaysia. Both SD and WP are recognized as the by-product of woodworking operations and pre-treated sawdust in a pelletized form. The co-gasification of CL/SD and CL/WP was carried out in a fixed bed downdraft gasifier located at the biomass laboratory, under Department of Mechanical Engineering in Universiti Teknologi Petronas (UTP), Perak. The schematic diagram for the complete gasifier system comprising three main components, namely the gasifier reactor, gas cooling associated with the cleaning system and the online gas analyser, is shown in From the value of the gaseous product obtained from the gas analysis unit, the H An empirical modelling approach known as Response Surface Methodology (RSM) was chosen as the experimental design using the Design Expert software (Version 10.0.3, Stat-Ease Inc., MN, USA). In this study, the selected factors were optimized by applying the centre composite design (CCD) in RSM. Generally, CCD is one of the conventional designs existing in RSM. CCD incorporates two-level full or fractional factorial designs with the addition of axial points consisting of at least one point at the centre of the experimental range. The CCD is also an alternative to the full factorial three-level design since it requires lesser number of runs instead of the stipulated corresponding outcomes [  Subsequently, the experimental results produced and calculated were fitted into the model for both co-gasifications for each response variable. The range of the co-gasification performance for the co-gasification (CL/SD) was 0.380–1.584 for the H  Results of the proximate analysis, ultimate analysis and calorific analysis (as shown in The ternary diagram in In addition, the morphology of the main feedstock was investigated by employing the Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) model Quanta FEI 450, as shown in As mentioned earlier, ANOVA is a powerful tool for simultaneously investigating several variables instead of only one variable at a time. The repetition at the centre of the design points found in the experimental analysis aids in minimising experimental errors [    For the operating factors of the equivalence ratio, both co-gasifications possess similar results, whereby an increase in the equivalence ratio from 0.20 to 0.30 causes an increase in CL/SD and CL/WP by 8% and 29%, respectively. The increment of H Moreover, it can be seen in CL/SD that increasing the coal blending ratio from 25% to 75% increases the H Predicted versus actual values of the co-gasification of CL/SD and CL/WP are presented in The effect of three operating variables on HHV Inversely, the HHV Moreover, the term of the coal blending ratio saw a 4% and 7% increase in the HHV  The optimization of the coal blending ratio, gasification temperature, and equivalence ratio for maximum H Extensive and comparative statistical analyses between the co-gasification of CL/SD and CL/WP on individual and combined effects of co-gasification operating variables (coal blending ratio, temperature, and equivalence ratio) at different process parameters of H This study was carried out with assistance from the Biomass Energy Laboratory (UTP) and financial support provided by the