Cyanobacterial blooming episodes in surface waters used for drinking purposes are increasing due to eutrophication of water ecosystems. Water treatments should be optimised to remove phytoplankton cells as well as their associated toxins. The performance of a multicell electrocoagulation reactor operating under a continuous flow and coupled with flocculation for cyanobacteria removal was examined. Electrocoagulation of a suspension of the unicellular cyanobacteria Microcystis aeruginosa and its related toxin microcystin-LR, as a model of toxic cyanobacterium and cyanotoxin, respectively, showed that cell removal occurred through charge neutralisation with the Al hydroxides generated in the system, whereas the toxin did not undergo electrolytical processes. Cell inactivation was a function of the charge loading and the cell population. Inactivation of a 105 cells/mL suspension was 34% for a charge loading of 50 C/L whereas only 3% was achieved by increasing cyanobacteria concentration by one-order of magnitude. Flocculation of the electrocoagulated suspensions with anionic polyelectrolytes revealed a bridging mechanism, whereas an electrostatic patch aggregation was involved with cationic flocculants. Electrocoagulation/flocculation of a cyanobacterial blooming surface water (about 106 cells/mL) showed quite good concordance of cell inactivation values (9.7–10.7%) with those detected previously with Microcystis aeruginosa (5.4%). However, the performance of the flocculants was slightly worse as determined from the residual turbidity values (17% vs. 7% in pure cultures of M. aeruginosa) due to the different compositions of the extracellular organic matter.Cyanobacteria (also known as blue-green algae) are found in many water ecosystems. High light irradiation and the presence of a high concentration of nutrients, especially relevant nitrogen and phosphorus, are responsible for cyanobacterial blooms with subsequent deterioration of water quality by scum formation, hypoxia, toxin formation, bad taste and odors ( On one hand water purification requires the removal of intact algae to avoid the release of endotoxins by cell lysis; on the other hand, it requires the removal of extracellular toxins. Therefore, the sequence of several water treatment units should be optimised. Studies of the performance of different utilities used in drinking water treatment plants (DWTP) for cyanobacteria removal are scarce. Clarification processes are very efficient for cell removal ( In recent years, electrocoagulation (EC) has received significant attention as an alternative method to conventional C/F processes for remediation of waters ( Application of EC to algae removal is mainly aimed at harvesting biofuel production ( Dream Taq PCR Master Mix, DNA loading and 100 bp DNA Ladder gTPbio were supplied by Thermo Fisher Scientific (MA, USA), ethidium bromide by Sigma-Aldrich (MO, USA) and low EEO D1 agarose by BIOMOL (Hamburg, Germany). The polyelectrolytes Chemifloc AN 270 (AN270), Chemifloc AN 870 (AN870), Chemifloc PA47 (PA47) and Chemifloc AA (CAA) were kindly supplied by Chemipol S.A. (Barcelona, Spain). The polyelectrolytes AN270, AN870 and CAA are anionic flocculants with ionicity % mole of 20, 10 and 8. Their molecular weights are 10 × 10  A cylindrical tank (11 cm radius and 33 cm height) with 10 L of cyanobacteria suspension was connected to a peristaltic pump followed by a flowmeter that permitted a set-up flow between 5 and 35 L/h, before the EC unit began operating under continuous flow to reduce the time for electrocoagulation, and at the same time, increase the amount of purified water relative to batch EC systems. The surface of every electrode used was 162 cm The dosage rate of coagulant in the reactor is dependent on the EC time and the current density which determines the consumption of the material of the anode. These two parameters are related through the charge loading, which is defined as the charges transferred in electrochemical reactions for a given amount of water treated. The charge loading was calculated by: The amount of dissolved Al was theoretically determined by the use of Faraday's law:  A 50 mL aliquot of water was harvested by centrifugation (10000g for 5 min at 4 °C) and the DNA of the cell pellets was extracted by a standard phenol-chloroform procedure ( PCR products were cloned into A FC500 flow cytometer (Beckman Coulter, USA) equipped with an air cooled 20 mW argon laser and an additional red diode laser emitting at fixed wavelengths of 488 and 630 nm, respectively, was used for measurement. Fluorescent filters and detectors were all standard with green fluorescence collected in channel FL1 (525 nm) and orange fluorescence in channel FL3 (620 nm). Probe fluorescence, chlorophyll Flow cytometer analysis with surface waters were performed after sonication for 2 min under 360 W, for disruption of colonies and filamentous cells. Under these conditions, a good agreement between the total cell count using a cell counter and those determined by flow cytometer analysis was obtained. Microcystin-LR was extracted from water samples (50 mL) using OASIS HLB solid-phase extraction cartridges as described in One hundred mL of water samples (cyanobacterial cultures, electrocoagulated suspensions) were placed into 250 mL beakers. In the case of electrocoagulated suspensions, two charge loadings were used, 10 and 50 C/L,corresponding to low and intermediate voltages. A magnetic stirrer was inserted into the beakers and the different volumes of flocculants were added at 700 rpm. Stirring continued at the same speed for 3 min and then decreased to 200 rpm for 15 min. After settling times of 15 min, reading of supernatant turbidity was performed. Residual turbidity was calculated as the fraction remaining in the supernatant from the initial value (expressed as percent). Analyses were performed according to the ISO tools for conductivity (7888:1985), concentrations of nitrate (ISO 7890-1-11986), chemical oxygen demand (ISO 15705) and dissolved oxygen (ISO 17289). Measurement of ORP was conducted using a Hach Lange sensor MTC101. pH was measured using a GLP21 Crison pH meter. An ICP-OES (Varian model 720-ES) was used for the determination of the concentrations of P, K, Na, Ca, Mg, S, and Al in waters. For the Al analysis, the solutions were treated previously with a 4 N HNO A study of cell survival of An analysis of cell survival based on Q values showed that this was strongly related to the initial concentration of the cyanobacteria. The survival decreased concomitantly with increased Q values and was steepest for the lowest cell concentration used. When the total concentration was 10 Microcystin-LR was monitored during the EC process ( The microcystin- LR concentrations in the electrocoagulated suspensions were relatively low if inactivation occurred with full rupture of the cells, because intracellular microcystins can amount to 98% of the total ( This transmembrane potential is dependent on experimental conditions as the pulse or duration of the electric field ( Oxidative stress could also be responsible for inactivation of As shown in Several mechanisms can be operated during the electrocoagulation of the cyanobacteria and formation of settled flocs: charge neutralisation, sweep flocculation, extracellular organic matter acting as an aid coagulant, hydroxide flocs filling gaps between bristles, etc. ( The experimental dissolved Al from the sacrificial anode was lower than that theoretically estimated by Faraday's law ( Application of charge loading of 10 and 50 C/L to a blooming For anionic flocculants, AN870 was the polyelectrolyte with better flocculation properties. With the electrocoagulated suspension at 10 C/L, the residual turbidity showed the lowest values relative to those of AN270 and CAA at the same dose. Especially remarkable was the high residual turbidity with AN270 at the lowest dose. On the contrary, the residual turbidity was already negligible for the 50 C/L suspension, and the use of these flocculants only slightly improved the flocculation process. The mechanism with polyelectrolytes of low charge densities (≤20 mol%) and high molar masses, as with AN270 and AN870, was reported to occur via bridging between particles ( The cationic polyelectrolytes PA47 and CS showed a similar pattern. With a 10 C/L charge loading ( At the lowest polymer concentration, a peak was always present in a very narrow size range (1.9–6.6 μm) and pointed to a charge neutralisation mechanism of free cells in the suspension with the aluminium species, in accordance with the size of In general, using a concentration larger than 10 mg/L did not increase the efficiency of the flocculation process. The anionic flocculants performed better than the cationic ones; therefore, the polyelectrolytes AN270 and CAA were selected as probes for flocculation of electrocoagulated suspensions of bloomed surface waters. The water selected came from a lake with repetitive episodes of cyanobacteria blooming (physico-chemical properties in Application of EC at charge loadings of 10 and 50 C/L only increased the amount of inactivated cells by 5% (up to approximately 10%) ( The flocculants performed worse than those with only Reasoning behind this trend is the effect of the composition of the extracellular organic matter (EOM) formed by photosynthesis and secondary metabolism by-products, which differed between the species. The composition of EOM in The use of the anionic flocculants AN270 and CAA induced lysis of the coagulated cells releasing microcystins ( In the economic evaluation of the process, a clear distinction should be established between the EC process and that of flocculation. The operational parameters for economic estimation with EC are mainly the electrodes, electricity, labour, maintenance, and other fixed costs. Prices for electrical energy and electrode material in May 2019 were 0.120 €/kW h and 1.76 €/kg, respectively. Electricity cost for EC of 1 m Prices for flocculants are in the range 1.29–1.97€/kg. The usual recommended rate is 10 mg/L, so that the price for purification of 1 m EC of Financial support was received by the grant The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at