The aim of this case series is to histologically examine a new hydroxyapatite in sinus lift procedure after 3 months. Ten 2-stage sinus lifts were performed in 10 healthy patients having initial bone height of 1–2mm and bone width of 5mm, asking for a fixed implant-supported rehabilitation. After graft material augmentation, a rough-surfaced mini-implant was inserted to maintain stability of the sinus widow. A bioptical core containing a mini-implant was retrieved 3 months after maxillary sinus augmentation with NanoBone® and processed for undecalcified histology. From the histomorphometric analysis, NanoBone® residuals accounted for the 38.26%±8.07% of the bioptical volume, marrow spaces for the 29.23%±5.18% and bone for the 32.51%±4.96% (new bone: 20.64%±2.96%, native bone: 11.87%±3.27%). Well-mineralized regenerated bone with lamellar parallel-fibred structure and Haversian systems surrounded the residual NanoBone® particles. The measured bone-to-implant contact amounted to 26.02%±5.46%. No connective tissue was observed at the implant boundary surface. In conclusion, the tested material showed good histological outcomes also 3 months after surgery. In such critical conditions, the use of a rough-surfaced mini-implant showed BIC values supposed to be effective also in case of functional loading. Although longer follow-up and a wider patient size are needed, these preliminary results encourage further research on this biomaterial for implant load also under early stage and critical conditions.Clinically, the posterior maxilla often represents a hardly suitable zone for implant placement due to insufficient available bone. Sinus floor elevation was developed to increase needed vertical height to overcome this problem ( A newly developed bone grafting substitute consisting of nano-crystalline hydroxyapatite (HA) and nanostructured silica (SiO The aim of this prospective study was to evaluate tissue composition of the augmented maxillary sinus floor 3 months after using a nano-crystalline hydroxyapatite bone substitute. Histological analysis and bone-to-implant contact (BIC) assessment between the grafting material and inserted mini-implant were achieved. All procedures and materials in the present prospective study were approved by the local ethics committee, and all patients provided informed consent. Ten patients in need of fixed implant-supported prosthesis in the posterior maxillae were recruited for the present study. The patients were in good general health and had a median age of 54 years ranging from 43 to 72 years. All patients underwent comprehensive dental care and were instructed to maintain a high level of oral hygiene. In the present study, inclusion criteria that had to be fulfilled by all patients are listed in Patients received 875 After adequate reflection, the sinus membrane was inspected for tears and NanoBone After a 3-month healing period, a bioptical core containing the mini-implant was retrieved using a 3 After 3 months of healing, varying amounts of newly formed bone were found through the specimens ( The results of this study have indicated that NanoBone In the literature, 6–9 months were considered the optimal period for bone graft healing as the osteogenetic process was considered completed thereafter ( As literature indicates that in instances of severely resorbed maxilla required healing time should be between 6 and 12 months ( Regarding the mini-implant surface used in this study, the resulting mean BIC of 26.02% was comparable to that in a canine model by According to Finally, the tested material showed good histological outcomes also 3 months after surgery. Under such critical conditions, the use of a rough-surfaced mini-implant showed BIC values supposed to be effective also in case of functional loading. The presented preliminary results encourage further research on this biomaterial in augmenting critical vertical bone conditions and immediate or early implant loading for a longer follow-up period and larger patient cohort size. The authors highly appreciated the skills and commitment of Dr Audrenn Gautier for the supervision of this study.