This work describes the study of the potential use of the sludge generated in potable water filtration/cleaning operations (waste material) as set retarder and workability-aid in rendering/plastering mortars. A commercial mortar was used as reference and several formulations were investigated, containing the waste material and sodium phosphate instead of sodium or calcium phosphate enriched bentonites, traditionally used as set retarder and workability-aid in cement based compositions. Sodium tri-polyphosphate was also tested alone for the same purpose. Fresh mortars were prepared with a water-to-cement weight ratio of 1.1 and a sand-to-cement weight ratio of 4:1.
                  The results obtained in set time tests suggest that the retarding effect is associated with the presence of sodium ions. The same set delay can be obtained even with lower contents of the new waste-based additive (0.25–0.50wt%), but the workability window tends to be narrower than that observed with the use of sodium enriched bentonite. The potable water filtration sludge can be a strong candidate in this application, with economical and environmental benefits.Increasing industrial activity and rising cost of natural mineral resources, have forced the transforming industry to review the logistics of raw materials supply. Within this scenario, upgrading industrial wastes to alternative raw materials becomes interesting, both technically and economically, for a wide range of applications All masonry construction demands the use of masonry mortars together with internal plasters and, sometimes, external renders. The mortar industry is associated with the use of natural materials and, generally speaking, mortars can be defined as powder, paste or liquid balanced mixtures of three types of ingredients, namely aggregates and fillers, binders, and additives and admixtures Rendering/plastering mortars are usually divided into conventional and “one-coat” systems. Conventional “multi-coat” systems begin with an under-coat mortar, which fulfils the technical requirements (e.g. mechanical strength, levelling), and end with a finishing mortar that guarantees weatherproofing and the aesthetic demands (e.g. colour, texture) of the coating system. In “one-coat” systems, a designed rendering mortar is applied directly over the brickwork in a single coat, which fulfils as well the functions of levelling, strength, weatherproofing, and decorative appearance of a “multi-coat” system, But the application and use of mortars is not limited to masonry constructions. Special kinds of mortars are used for concrete repair, construction renovation, tile fixing, anchoring of bolts and many other applications Working with hydraulic mortars demands the exact control of a series of parameters, ranging from the transport method to the application technique. The latter is specially affected by the mortar workability On one hand, it is important to know and be able to control the physical, chemical and mechanical properties of all mortar ingredients and their contribution to the final behaviour of the end-product, on the other hand that knowledge might enable the replacement of scarce or costly components by alternative raw materials. Sodium bentonite in particular, is among potential candidates. Replacing raw materials, in turn, can configure the much sought after opportunity to ameliorate today’s waste management difficulties, by reusing inert and non-hazardous industrial wastes. Even if this is done in small amounts, high production rates will translate into significant consumption of waste materials and, for the industry willing to use them, the latter might constitute a cheap renewable raw material source. The basic activity of water filtration/clarification for human consumption is among those that generate high volume of side-products or waste materials. The sludge produced in potable water filtration operations However, aluminium sulphate is known to delay This work describes the study of the effect of two different bentonites on the set behaviour of a one-coat plastering mortar, aimed at understanding the prevalent mechanism. Then, the replacement of bentonite by sodium phosphate-added water filtration sludge is investigated. A stripped commercial one-coat plastering mortar, with a sand-to-cement weight ratio of 4:1, was used as reference (M). To this base material, various additions were made, of two different bentonites (B-a and B-b), a water filtration sludge (W-s), sodium tri-polyphosphate (Na The additives were characterised in terms of chemical composition by X-ray fluorescence (XRF, Philips X’UNIQUE II), and mineralogical composition by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku Geigerflex D/max Series). Differential thermal analysis and thermogravimetry (DTA and TGA, SETARAM – LabSys) were used to compare the clay mineral contents in the bentonites and confirm the chemical composition of the water filtration sludge. Microstructural details were evaluated by SEM (Hitachi, S4100). Given that set retarding efficiency has been associated with the Na Fresh mortars were prepared with a water-to-cement weight ratio of 1.1 and set time was determined with an automatic Vicat’s needle (Vicatmatic L27, Controls), as specified by the European standard ENP 196-3. The test was run at room temperature and the initial set time occurs when the needle 1 For characterization of hardened mortars, a total of 10 samples with dimensions of 4  It is clearly apparent that there are significant differences between the two bentonites, namely in the Na  As for the water filtration sludge, its moisture content reaches ca. 80 The last additive was a reagent grade calcium hydrogen phosphate, and its chemical composition ( The stripped commercial one-coat plastering mortar used as reference (M), without additives, begins set after ca. 250  To clarify this finding, composition M was prepared with additions of sodium tri-polyphosphate (Na   If mineralogy and crystalline structure are not playing such a crucial role, replacing one additive by another, in terms of chemical composition alone, becomes an easy task. As mentioned before, the water filtration sludge, W-s, seems to contain all the relevant ingredients needed to play the role of set retarding/workability agent. The major differences between W-s and bentonite B-b are expected to be due to the much higher CaO content and its effect on pH. Hence, composition M was prepared with additions of water sludge and sodium phosphate, as shown in  From the above, the potential of the use of the water sludge instead of the bentonite B-b, as set retarder, becomes obvious. There should be no harmful effects on the technical performance and the economical and environmental benefits are clear. To throw some light on the set retarding effect observed with the compositions W-s Besides the relative CEC values, the nature of the exchanged cations also deserves a thorough examination, as far as set retarding efficiency is concerned. Sodium is the major exchanged species in bentonite B-a, as was to be expected from its chemical composition ( Rather than the straight competition between sodium and calcium, set retarding might instead depend on the ratio between alkaline (Na To rule out a possible contribution of the phosphate ions to the retarding effect, the original composition M was enriched with calcium phosphate (compositions C Comparative tests determining shrinkage and mechanical strength evolution in hardened mortars prepared with B-a commercial and W-s containing additives (B-a05 vs W-s20F05) did not reveal significant differences. Typical measured values are: shrinkage (mm/m) The results obtained in set time tests carried out with a one-coat plastering mortar containing various additives suggest that the retarding effect is associated with the presence of sodium ions. Apparently, the prevalent mechanism in set delay is chemical in nature, and has to do with the cation exchange capacity of the additive. In the course of this investigation, it was noticed that, rather than the absolute sodium content, set retarding might instead be favoured by a high ratio between alkaline and alkaline-earth cations, and there might be even an optimum ratio that maximises the set retarding effect. Nevertheless, the addition of sodium tri-polyphosphate alone, while having a remarkable set retarding effect, does not fulfil the workability requirements. On the other hand, best workability seems to be associated with the presence of clay minerals, such as bentonites, and organic matter. However, without sodium ions, those materials show a rather light set retarding effect. In this work, the set behaviour, obtained with a sodium phosphate enriched bentonite, as used in industrial practice, was matched with the use of a sludge generated in potable water filtration/cleaning operations, also enriched with sodium phosphate. In fact, the same set delay can be obtained even with lower contents of the additive (0.25–0.50%), but the workability window tends to be narrower. These results suggest that potable water filtration sludge can be a strong candidate to replacing bentonites in plastering mortars. No significant differences were noticed on shrinkage evolution and mechanical strength development of cured samples, when compared with B-a containing commercial mortars. The authors appreciate the financial support received from CAPES–MEC, Brazil, in the form of a Ph.D. Grant (F. Raupp-Pereira), and are thankful to Weber Cimenfix for the experimental facilities made available throughout the work.