Encapsulation is a method to encapsulate active molecules in a carrier material to benefit the final application of the encapsulated system. Although the characterization of the physical properties of encapsulated systems offers meaningful information, it is also helpful to predict and precisely design tailored encapsulation systems and operating conditions. This chapter discusses the fundamental characterization tools used to characterize the encapsulation systems. The chapter also covers a wide array of examples from various applications to signify the utility of these characterization methods in multiple fields. The chapter mainly discusses particle size, polydispersity, surface charges, imaging, crystallinity, and rheology of the encapsulated systems. It also provides a vital reference for characterizing various types of encapsulation systems.Introduction Particle size and its distribution Surface charges Imaging of the encapsulated materials The crystallinity of encapsulation systems Rheology of the encapsulated materials Conclusion and outlook References  While there are a number of independent research articles and exhaustive reviews Particle size and its distribution (polydispersity) are the key parameters that strongly correlate with the stability of the encapsulated system. Particle characteristics are also necessary to create an appropriate delivery system. Researchers have used numerous ways to control these parameters, namely, surfactants, ionic macromolecules/polymers, ultrasonic cavitation, and cross-linking of gels The surface charge of the encapsulated materials significantly correlates with their stability in dispersion. Zeta potential is often used to investigate the surface charges of the encapsulated materials, which indirectly indicates the dominance of electrostatic forces. In the context of encapsulation, researchers have measured zeta potential to investigate the effect of the loading of active molecules on the surface properties of the carrier material. These experiments indicate the stability of the encapsulated materials and reveal the electrostatic interactions between active molecules and carrier material. Generally, it is well-accepted that the particle dispersion is possibly stable if the absolute value of zeta potential is high (whether positive or negative). In biomimetic mineralization of proteins, they are encapsulated in certain materials (cage) to protect and preserve them. Typically, this is achieved by nucleating and further growing a cage material on the protein surface to encapsulate it Researchers have encapsulated nanoparticles by virus coat proteins to better understand virus assembly and further apply the encapsulated nanoparticles in bioimaging and therapeutic applications Electron microscopy (EM) and fluorescence microscopy are arguably one of the most informative and one of the widely used instruments to probe particle morphology, biological Fluorescent markers are often used for in vitro and in vivo biological imaging. Quantum dots can be used as fluorescent markers for biological imaging due to tunable fluorescence and excitation by a single light source. Dubertret et al. encapsulated ZnS–CdSe quantum dots in lipids that were grafted with hydrophilic polymer for in vivo imaging of Researchers have used a variety of methods to investigate the crystal structure of the encapsulated materials, for example, X-ray diffraction (XRD), differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), and Raman spectroscopy. The interaction between the carrier and active molecule, changes in the crystallinity of both materials, and changes in the molecular mass of the carriers can be investigated using crystallinity analysis. Typically, XRD and DSC are used to verify if the active molecules are encapsulated in the carrier material or just aggregated with the Recently, Ahmad et al. used DSC and XRD as complementary tools to support the encapsulation efficiency results of starch-encapsulated catechin De Castro et al. encapsulated the heat exchange material, Often emulsions are used as a platform for the encapsulation and protection of active molecules. Researchers have used single, multiple, and nanoemulsions to encapsulate various In the case of the core–shell type of encapsulation the rheological properties of the encapsulated system were found to be dependent on the operational temperature, the concentration of active molecules in the carrier, and the concentration of additives such as surfactants. Yang et al. encapsulated phase change material in various carriers such as polystyrene, polymethyl methacrylate, and polyethyl methacrylate and studied the effect of temperature and concentration of active molecules on the viscosity of the encapsulated systems Recently, the encapsulated materials are drawing attention in “functional foods” domain. Functional foods contain encapsulated “functional” food gradient that may enhance quality, taste, stability, texture, or some other property of the food. Since the encapsulated materials Researchers have reported the effect of particle shape and particle-size distribution on the rheological properties of the product Physical characterization of the encapsulated systems in a comprehensive manner is essential for the fundamental study as well as industrial applications. Significant literature has reported various types of encapsulation systems and their applications in different fields. However, a particular set of characterization is required to describe the system completely. Many successful formulations for the desired protection and delivery are reported, but the empirical correlations between experimental parameters are still lacking. Nowadays, encapsulation technology is being used beyond conventional encapsulation and delivery of bioactive molecules. A significant number of reports have demonstrated encapsulation-based self-healing technology for various applications. However, an interlinking study between the physical characteristics of encapsulation (viscosity, elastic modulus, strain capacity, etc.) and kinetics of healing is required. One can achieve higher loading capacity, the efficiency of encapsulation, stability, and enhanced released profile using nanosized encapsulation in comparison with microsized encapsulation. Still, improved control on the particle size and prevention of aggregation are required to fetch the benefit of nano-encapsulation. Further investigations can be focused on finding new mechanisms to release the active molecules and improving their efficiency in various systems. Recent advances in the effect of the properties of wall material and storage behavior of the encapsulated materials can be integrated to accelerate their commercialization.