Traditionally, in many universities, student groups that promote critical and informative discussion are organized, aiming to debate themes from scientific articles and recent advances. Such groups are usually called Journal Clubs. Their aim is to provide the tools for both successful presentations and for comprehension/critical analysis of scientific publications, in order to use them in their own research and/or in the classrooms. The present communication details such a project involving engineering students from the Universidade Federal do Triângulo Mineiro (UFTM), located in south-east Brazil. The novelty in this case is two-fold: (1) the Engineering course at the UFTM has only recently been inaugurated and research activities are still tentative, and (2) reported examples of Journal Clubs are rare among engineering courses. This creates a gap between undergraduate studies and research activities, which we try to bridge here. Weekly, 1h meetings were organized in which the participating students developed the skills necessary to understand and interpret scientific articles and present their findings. The principal result of the project was the enriching of the participants’ training and confidence in discussing scientific data and in verbal communication of complex concepts. The project also taught the value of interaction between professionals during the discussion of scientific data. The project also helped to reduce the English language barrier and currently finds itself in its 4th year of activity.The present communication began with the idea that scientific knowledge is only really created and useful when it is shared, disseminated and The During the period of 2003–2012, there was an expansion in the Brazilian federal university system. This involved the founding of new universities and also the expansion of already existing higher education institutions. Special emphasis was given to regions where a higher education deficit existed, which in many cases meant the creation of new campuses in areas of the interior of the country. In this period there was an expansion of 31% in the number of places offered by the federal system and as a result 14 new universities were inaugurated and an 85% increase in existing institutions occurred. Simultaneously, there was a 183% increase in the number of scholarships for Masters, Doctorate and Post-Doctorate programs (CAPES, 2012). Many of the contracted lecturers at the UFTM have a background in research, having completed their doctorates at established universities in different parts of the country, and would ideally like to continue their activities. However, the initial research infrastructure was inadequate, creating an imbalance between teaching and research activities at all levels. It was felt that the students were being deprived of opportunities to extend understanding of their chosen career beyond the classroom—or even having the option to compare and contrast an academic career to an industrial one. Some students attempted to remediate this situation by developing undergraduate research projects with individual lecturers. In these cases, the students lacked basic skills required to search for information and subsequently understand it—frequently relying overmuch on the supervisor. In order to encourage the participation and discussion of scientific issues by students with different backgrounds there is a need to make them interact, with a common starting point—in this case, science itself. For the students inserted in undergraduate research programs, the day-to-day contact with scientific articles is usual. However, there is frequently little attempt to search for articles in higher-impact English language journals. This is due to two factors: The language barrier, as most students have only a basic knowledge of the English language, which has long been recognized as a bottleneck for Brazilian science ( Lack of familiarity with available databases. Traditionally, in many departments of various universities and laboratories, a number of groups of critical and informative discussion are organized, with the aim of debating themes from scientific articles and recent advances in a given area. Such groups are usually called During Journal Club meetings, the students involved are familiarized with an article, have time to study it and present and discuss it afterwards. The pre-selected articles might be numerous, recent and not related to each other or less numerous and included in the same topic. According to In the case of undergraduate research students the Journal Club promotes greater interaction not only between supervisor and the student, but also between students themselves. Journal Clubs also reinforce the scientific knowledge of the participants, enable training in the explanation of figures, tables and in the grounding of their own potential articles. Thus, the Journal Club fulfills three functions: (1) updates the participant about the development of R&D inside their field in a critical manner; (2) promotes scientific communication from the student and (3) trains the participant in their self-confidence while presenting scientific work and clarifying possible doubts. Studies suggest that the Journal Club is an effective learning tool. The format of the Journal Club should require prior planning, an adequate location and predetermined time. The goal should be clear to encourage the improvement of the skills of the participants in their specialty and the development of critical thought. The participation of the coordinating lecturer in some meetings has been identified by participants as beneficial by virtue of their academic experience ( The literature demonstrates that most Journal Clubs are from ​​health-based courses, such as medicine and nursing ( Traditional engineering courses tend to struggle to function beyond the lower order level of thinking and often stifle the creative skills that are necessary for modern engineers ( Additionally, the fact that the engineering courses at the UFTM were only recently established and that many of the benefits of an established faculty (i.e. established researchers, research laboratories etc.) are not present. A Journal Club is not just a meeting to discuss the “hottest” research in a given area, but can be just as effective as a teaching tool when relevant research is discussed ( Every team needs a point man. After defining the mission, the next step was to choose the lead student. The lead student is one in the final stage of the course with more experience and knowledge of engineering disciplines and research. The lead student is responsible for planning meetings, delegating tasks for the meetings, ensuring the selection of appropriate journals and liaising with the coordinator. In the first edition of the project the lead student was an MSc student as the majority of the undergraduate students were only in their 2nd year at the time. In the subsequent editions the lead student was selected amongst the senior undergraduate students. Another important factor in the implementation of the project is the selection of a time and place of regular meetings. A Journal Club without a coordinated schedule can be difficult to maintain. A regular schedule will ensure high levels of attendance, as well as a convenient location. This question is also the responsibility of the lead student, who is responsible for the classroom reservations and the schedule of the project. The lead student of the Journal Club should be directly involved in the process of article selection. Ideally, the chosen journals should be related to the area of applied technology. The lead student is responsible for providing an initial list of journals for the participants and teaching the members how to access academic databases in order to search for articles. Those who participate in Journal Clubs sometimes consider them as being time-consuming, tedious or both. However, proper planning and participation can go a long way to reducing these problems ( The participants of the Journal Club are undergraduate students from different years of the courses of Chemical Engineering and Food Engineering at the UFTM. Initially in the 1st year (2012/13), the project was coordinated by an MSc student, but in the 2nd and 3rd editions a final year undergraduate student has successfully coordinated the activities. Initially, the participating students were all involved in undergraduate research projects. However, it was observed that many students that were not involved in projects were also interested in participating. Thus, with the aim of reaching the largest audience possible, the participation in the project was extended to all students who were interested in taking part. The number of vacancies was stipulated at 20 each year and the selection of interested individuals is now initiated at the beginning of the academic year (February) and is based on academic performance. Overall, since 2012 there have been 4 editions of the project, each lasting 9 months and the 4th edition is currently underway. In all 4 editions of the Journal Club the demand has exceeded the number of vacancies, demonstrating the interest of the students involved. The 1st edition of the Journal Club began in August, 2012 with the initial purpose of reuniting undergraduate research students to discuss their research and debate about different themes. For this a list of Journals was elaborated that took into account the research area of each student ( The coordinating lecturer accompanied a number of the meetings and delegated the general running of the project to the lead student. Initially the meetings were organized during the breaks between lectures, however, it was observed that this led to a rushed and rather tense meeting. As a result, it was decided to hold the meeting during the lunch hour in order to guarantee as casual and relaxed an atmosphere as possible. Due to the habit of each student taking his or her lunch to the meeting in brown paper food bags, the project was nicknamed During the meetings, the phases of the project were: (1) familiarization with the students’ research field and area, (2) initial concepts, (3) main concepts, (4) main multidisciplinary platforms, (5) main databases, (6) journals: (i) scope, (ii) aims and objectives, (iii) JCR, (iv) journal impact; (7) approach of the scientific article; (8) presentation of articles, debate and seminars. The Journal Club intends to encourage the development of practical skills and the initial phases are fundamental for the understanding of the subsequent steps. The definition of concepts (what is an article, what is a multidisciplinary platform, what are reference databases, what is a journal, journal statistics, keywords, etc.) sets the background in view of information the student already has knowledge of; whether in the classroom; the laboratory or in the working place. The following steps are intrinsically linked and are entirely practical in their presentation. After steps 1–7, the students initiate their reference searches in the university library, where computers have access to most of the journals via the government website Subsequently, the group meetings and presentations were performed. At this stage the students are encouraged to make a critical appraisal of their chosen article and summarize information of relevance and elaborate timed presentations using digital media, such as Open Office, Microsoft Power Point and Prezi. The presentation schedule continues for the rest of the academic year and questions, doubts and suggestions from the participating students are welcome and encouraged. The overall flow of the project is given in Various journal articles are presented over the semester. An example is the meeting of 16th June, 2016, during which the following articles were presented:    During their presentation, students discuss the methodologies applied and the results obtained and the relevant conclusions. In the end, feedback from the presentations is provided with a view to improving presentation skills. The number of students interested in taking part in the project increased by over 50% when comparing the 1st to the 4th edition of the project, but the number of participants remained constant at 20 students in order to maintain the original goals of the project. A considerable number of students of both genders apply to join project. However, an interesting fact is that female students generally make up well over half of the total number of participants (normally ∼75%), though constituting ∼52% of the general intake of the chemical engineering course. Of the seven engineering courses at the UFTM female participation varies from 9.5% (mechanical engineering) to 61.8% (food engineering), with an average of 36.6% overall. According to the most recent data available (INEP, 2013), in higher education in Brazil 51.4% of the entrants are female. This puts chemical engineering at the UFTM on a par with national levels. However, nationally, female participation is much greater in areas such as social science/law (58.3%), education (76.3%), health (76.8%) and humanities (57.5%). In engineering courses the female participation is 30.2% with roughly the same proportion graduating at the end of the course. The data for 2013 is, in fact, encouraging as the same census in 2003 totalized only 16.8% of female participation (INEP, 2003). The list of suggested journals was modified according to the context of the students’ courses and scientific interest of the participants, due to the fact that each student had interests in specific scientific topics and different research goals. Moreover, throughout the project, new topics were introduced. In the 1st edition, the participants were allowed to freely choose articles taken from any of the listed journals. In doing so, they were responsible for finding and studying the article and extracting the most relevant information in order to elaborate their presentations. Each presentation should (i) highlight the methods employed, (ii) discuss the results obtained and (iii) critically appraise the article. In the 2nd edition, the participants were separated in groups and each group was responsible for a journal of their own choice, from which the most recent articles were studied. This method was continued for the 3rd and 4th editions. In the 2nd edition, new activities were added, which include: debates; training in verbal presentation, body language and behavior. Additionally, seminars that helped students in the elaboration of banners and posters for presentations in scientific events were presented. The debates were related to a theme of relevance inside the current context. For example, one debate was about the use of renewable energy sources, in which the participants were divided in two groups—those in favor and those who were not The training seminars for verbal presentation skills, body language and behavior enabled the participants to compare their initial presentations to their final ones, identify their difficulties and their improvement throughout the project. The training seminar for banner and poster production encouraged students to publish their research from their undergarduate projects in conferences, symposia and academic workshops at local and national level. The main drawbacks that the participants observed were (i) the comprehension of the methods applied in each article presented and (ii) the results obtained by the researchers who published their experiences in the mentioned articles. This naturally occurs because such papers are initially beyond the novice student’s comprehension. Another common difficulty is related to the foreign language, as many participants are not fluent in English. In both cases, constant exposure to complex foreign-language texts helps to improve general comprehension. Thus, the Journal Club project inserted the different participants involved—professors, graduate students and undergraduate students (who either were or were not participating in research projects as well) in the context of the search for quality articles in journals of excellence. The project also: Updated the group as regards the lastest publications and scientific discoveries, Facilitated the access of students to contents of high reliability and quality, Contributed to the improvement of reviews written by the students in their undergraduate research projects and final year projects. A standback assessment of a Journal Club is important to ensure continuous quality improvement. Participants should be given the chance to discuss elements of the program that functioned well and also point out where improvements could be made ( A few examples of the comments made are given here: The comments made by the students are generally in line with observations encountered in the literature. As is the case here, the literature shows that Journal Club participants are able to develop the essential skills for critically appraising articles and that this can have a potential impact on their professional development ( The Journal Club, initiated in August, 2012, has contributed to the academic training of the students involved. Although normally seen in a healthcare context, it has been shown that engineering courses can also benefit from this type of project. The benefits observed are several and include the improvement in the students’ interest in research and development, enrichment of the participants’ ability and confidence in discussing scientific data and in verbal communication of complex concepts. The project also taught the value of interaction between professionals during the discussion stage of the meetings. In addition, the authors observed an increase in the publication of scientific communications in scientific events by students involved in the project, as well as improved student-supervisor and student-student interactions. It was also observed that command of the English language improved. As a final point, it is interesting to note that a number of the participants in the 1st, 2nd and 3rd editions of the project have been admitted, with full scholarships, to the MSc course in Chemical Engineering at the Universidade Estadual de Campinas (UNICAMP) which is considered the foremost Brazilian university in the area of technology. Other participants have been admitted to the postgraduate programs of other universities and a number of the present participants have expressed a desire to follow an academic career path. The authors would like to thank the support from the Universidade Federal do Triangulo Mineiro for the student scholarships and the funding agencies