This article addresses the concepts of economies of scope and multiproduct production, subadditivity and transray convexity as it applies to the mining industry. The article goes on to expand these concepts to include the case of mining waste utilization. It discusses how the modification of mining wastes into a marketable product can develop a relationship across the cost functions of the modified mining waste and ore production and how this interrelationship affects the profit maximizing condition. It discusses four possible outcomes from mining waste modification and its development into marketable products on the profitability and production of ore by the firm. Finally, it discusses mining waste utilization effects on rehabilitation costs and the potential for a decrease in the adverse community effects due to mine closure.Sometimes ore bodies contain more than one economically viable resource. For example, lead, zinc and copper have been known to reside in close proximity. The extraction processes (and consequently, the cost functions) are similar Within multiproduct space, let us assume that the prices for output are determined in the market and that the owners do not have sufficient market power to influence the price. This means (to the mine owners) that the price is exogenously determined and independent of mine actions, providing a multiproduct revenue plane. An example of a revenue hyperplane is shown in In essence, this means that the mine owner's control variables lie within the realm of the cost structure. For a particular multiproduct revenue plane, the mine will choose the cost functions that correspond with the different products. Given a set of fixed prices the mine owner has the incentive to choose Ramsey-optimal cost output vectors. As the cost functions for the different processes within the total cost function are similar; this smoothes the transition For two levels of output ( A cost function is said to be subadditive if (with given input prices) one firm can produce a given output vector ( More formally, a cost function (  An example of an RAC isocost surface displaying transray convexity is shown in The firm has the profit incentive to choose the least cost combination of output (as prices are market determined and viewed as given by the firm). Let a firm producing two outputs The generalized cost function ( Let Thus, the first order conditions are Letting the product prices and sales be independent The profit maximizing case exists where the marginal revenues equal the marginal costs in each case (assuming second order conditions are met) (see Subadditivity and transray convexity are relevant for multiproduct output production where markets exist and prices are adequate for market participation; in that, the nature of the convexity suggests that the firm will be able to produce a combination of goods at lower costs than firms producing the two products separately. Thus, the firm has an opportunity for increased profits, If we move from the general case involving multiproduct subadditivity to the production of multiproducts involving waste the situation is modified slightly but significantly. Let the amount of waste stored be significant to the extent that current production of the saleable modified waste product When mine wastes are incorporated into a saleable product and removed from site in sufficient quantities, the costs associated with storing the waste on site can decline. Let subscript The generalized profit function ( Thus, the first order conditions are The profit maximizing position for the saleable waste product is the same as that for The first order condition for profit maximization occurs where the marginal revenue plus the reduction in costs of storing mine waste minus the marginal cost of producing the ore equals zero. Let us now consider four potential scenarios of the profit maximizing conditions. These are a rejection scenario; a give away scenario; a market-based scenario; and an increased production scenario. The first situation is the rejection scenario. For a particular price, if the costs of modifying the waste for market are high (i.e. The second situation is the give-away scenario. This exists when the mine is approaching waste storage limits and the modified waste product has low market value. In this scenario, the costs associated with acquiring additional storage capacity are significant (i.e. The third situation is the market-based scenario (Eqs. Finally, multiproduct production (modified waste product and ore) can lead to increased production of ore. The law of diminishing marginal returns and duality This implies that if a firm can find a way to suitably modify mine waste into a product that is market acceptable and allows for normal returns on investments, then this can lead to further increases in profitable ore production. The firm has reduced the mine waste on site and at the same time increased ore production. This results in two possible positive impacts on the economy brought about by the adoption of multiproduct production utilizing subadditivity and transray convexity of production. When the ore body has been depleted or if it is uneconomic to continue the mining activity (due to reduced grade or increased costs) another economic situation occurs. This is mine closure and it requires environmental rehabilitation. As a result, let the waste processing continue after the mine closes Previously the cost function was The generalized profit maximizing point for the post-mining period becomes The first order condition for profit maximization occurs where the marginal revenue of selling the processed waste ( Thus, the fifth situation is the rejection scenario. For a particular price, if the costs of modifying the waste for market are high (i.e. The sixth situation is the give-away scenario. This exists when the reductions to the cost of rehabilitation are significant (i.e. The seventh situation is the market-based scenario (Eq. Finally, the immediate negative socioeconomic impacts of a mine closure on the surrounding community could be reduced. This article addresses the concepts of economies of scope and multiproduct production, subadditivity and transray convexity as they apply to the mining industry. The article expands these concepts to include the special case of mining waste utilization. It develops a mathematical illustration of how the modification of mining wastes into a marketable product could develop a relationship across the cost functions of the modified mining waste and ore products and how this interrelationship could affect the profit maximizing condition of the firm. It illustrates the possibility of obtaining two positive impacts (decreased mining waste and increased ore production) for an economy resulting from the adoption of multiproduct production. Finally, it extends the analysis to illustrate how the incorporation of mining waste utilization could reduce rehabilitation costs and soften the impacts of mine closures on communities.