The effect of 2% V, 2% Nb plus 2% Ti added to a 17% Cr white iron was studied. The experimental alloys were made in an induction furnace by using high-purity raw materials. Alloying elements were added at the end of the ironmaking process before pouring. Thin bars of 25×15mm2 cross section and 250mm length were solidified into sand molds. Several bars of alloyed and unalloyed white irons were obtained for the present study. The as-cast microstructure consisted of eutectic M7C3 carbides in a matrix of austenite for the unalloyed iron, while for the alloyed iron the structure was composed of austenite, eutectic M7C3 carbides and MC primary carbides. The alloys were heat treated at 900°C to destabilize the austenitic matrix; a stronger mainly martensitic matrix reinforced with secondary carbides resulted from such treatment. The as-cast and heat treated alloys were tested under abrasive wear by using a rubber wheel testing machine and SiO2 as abrasive particles of 0.3mm diameter. The wear tests were undertaken by placing the rubbing surfaces against each other with loads of 25, 40 and 54N and pouring the abrasive SiO2 particles between the surfaces. The results indicate a considerable better wear resistance for the alloyed heat treated iron compared with those as-cast and unalloyed irons. The responsible for such better wear behavior is the strengthening of the matrix by the MC carbides plus the precipitation of secondary M7C3 carbides and the partial transformation of matrix from austenite to martensite after heat treatment. The strengthening of the matrix provides better support to the eutectic carbides against cracking which in turn prevents the surface destabilization.High-chromium white irons are ferrous alloys with chromium contents between 12 and 30%. The typical as-cast microstructure is a network of hard eutectic M However, the use of this kind of alloys in components under repetitive impact, sometimes is limited due to their low fracture toughness Some research works From the present study, the effect of adding 2% V, 2% Ti and 2% Nb to a 17% Cr white iron on the microstructure of both as-cast and as-heat treated at 950 The high-chromium irons used in the present study were made in a laboratory induction furnace by using high purity raw materials. 5 Half of the material was heat treated at 950 The chemical composition of the irons is shown in After the destabilization heat treatment, the secondary carbide precipitation contributed to change the microstructure from an austenitic matrix to a mainly martensitic matrix with some retained austenite and reinforced with secondary carbides of the type M    The carbide phase is the main responsible for the wear resistance as mentioned above; however, matrix also plays an important role. In this work the austenitic matrix has been transformed into a mixture of martensite and retained austenite reinforced with secondary carbides. Under these conditions, an increase in the wear resistance was expected. However, this increase was shown to be minimum at least for abrasive conditions used in the present work. We may think that the main role of the matrix is to provide mechanical support to the carbides against cracking during the wear process. Fulcher et al. From   An improvement on the wear behavior was observed in the as-cast alloyed white iron compared to the base white iron, particularly at the highest applied load (54 An improvement of the wear behavior was also observed due to the matrix change from austenite to martensite plus retained austenite plus secondary carbides by the heat treatment. However, this improvement is a minimum for the wear conditions of this work. The authors acknowledge the