We present 16 patients with 17 fractures around the knee (eight distal femoral and nine proximal tibia fractures) which were stabilised using the less invasive stabilisation system (LISS) from January 2002 to September 2003, at John Radcliffe Hospital in Oxford. Functional assessment was performed using the modified hospital for special surgery (HSS) score. The time to union was assessed radiologically and clinically.
                  Our results were excellent in eight cases, good in five cases and fair in three cases. From the 3 patients that scored fair two were polytrauma patients and one had poor mobility pre-injury. We had a case that required revision twice, once due to mal-position and once due to implant failure. One case was complicated due to superficial infection that was treated successfully. The mean time to union was 15.5 weeks for the tibia and 12.5 weeks for the femoral fractures.
                  Our data indicate favorable results using the LISS in stabilizing fractures around the knee. The system introduces a new technique in fracture fixation and as such, requires proper experience prior to its use.
                  We also report some technical tips that can improve the technique of the correct placement of the LISS and can result in fewer complications.Fractures around the knee joint typically require operative fixation to achieve an acceptable, functional outcome. Fracture care has evolved to provide new ways of achieving the balance between mechanical stability and fragment viability. The less invasive stabilisation system (LISS) Using this technique in our hospital the last years, we present our experience and report our results, in both distal femoral and proximal tibia fractures. Between January 2002 and September 2003, 19 patients with 20 fractures were treated surgically from the trauma service in our hospital, using the LISS for fractures around the knee. Ten were distal femoral fractures and ten were in the proximal tibia. One patient was included in both groups, with fractures of both the distal femur and proximal tibia on the same side (floating knee). Demographic data (age, gender and profession), mechanism of injury, severity of the injury (AO classification, Of the 19 patients, three died within 3 months of surgery from causes unrelated to the injury or treatment and were excluded from the final functional assessment. The mean age of the surviving 16 patients, was 54.5 years ranging between 20 and 96 years. There were eight males and eight females. Seven injuries were due to simple falls predominantly in the elderly patients in our study and nine were the result of high-energy trauma (motor vehicle accident or industrial accident). Applying the AO classification there was one type 41A, two type 41B, six type 41C, four type 33A and four type 33C. Four fractures were classified as open, one grade 1, one grade 2 and two grade 3B. The mean injury severity score was 18.8 ranging from 9 to 38. Four patients from the high-energy trauma group with mean ISS score 34.5 were tertiary referrals from other hospitals that were transferred for definitive treatment to our unit. All fractures were provisionally stabilised within 24 Joint mobilisation commenced immediately post-operatively with continuous passive motion (CPM) (the range was variable, depending on the severity of the fracture All the patients were followed up with regular radiological and functional assessments. The mean follow-up was 16 months (range 11–31 months). We had one case (AO classification 41B-3, open G1) which after reduction of the articular surface and insertion of the LISS, optimal proximal positioning of the implant was not possible; the offset of the plate was incongruous with the cortical anatomy. This forced a 10° valgus angulation of the tibia shaft. In one case, (AO classification 33A-1, a periprosthetic fracture above a total knee replacement) ( Local complications included one superficial and one deep infection that were treated with oral and, intravenous antibiotics and wound washouts, respectively. The patient with the deep infection died 3 months post-operatively for reasons unrelated to the surgery or infection. Bony union was achieved on average in 15.5 weeks for the tibia fractures and 12.5 weeks for the femoral fractures (patient no. 8 was not included since prior to LISS failure there was no evidence of callus formation). Union of the fracture is defined as the ability of the patient to fully weight-bear without discomfort in the presence of radiological bridging callus on three cortices, assessed on standard AP and lateral radiographs. We used cancellous bone grafting once at a planned second stage operation, three months after initial fixation, in a polytrauma patient with distal femoral bone loss and during the revision of LISS for an implant failure. Autologous bone graft was used twice primarily, for reconstruction of proximal tibial fracture subarticular defects. The HSS scores were eight excellent (above 85 points), five good (70–84 points) and three fair (60–69 points). For our cases, the mean knee flexion was 108° (range 70°–125°) and only two had a 5° lack of extension. Of the three patients that scored fair two were polytrauma patients (ISSs of 36 and 38), with associated local severe soft tissue trauma and bone loss. The other patient was a frail elderly lady with poor mobility prior to injury; the HSS score failed to demonstrate her good recovery to her pre-injury level of mobility. The author's early experience with the distal femoral LISS (LISS-DF), for fractures around the knee, has demonstrated satisfactory results. It is significantly different from conventional plating techniques and previous experience is not directly transferable. Similarly, the complications that may arise and the tactics to avoid them need to be learned. One of the most important stages using the LISS-DF devise is the correct positioning and alignment of the proximal part of the implant to the femoral shaft. This part of the operation, seems to be responsible for the majority of the LISS-DF misplacements In order to minimize the possibility of LISS-DF misplacement if exact lateral intra-operative images are not sufficient, we recommend a limited open exposure at the level of the diaphyseal end of the plate, in order to visualise the proper alignment of the implant with the diaphysis. This exposure will also confirm the plate has been tunneled through the correct layers. We also recommend the use of the longest possible plate in every case because it adds to the stability of the implant and has the advantage of distancing the diaphyseal incision from the zone of injury. LISS-DF is not a reduction tool. The familiar techniques with angle blade plates and the DCS for the distal femur are not appropriate. After the initial placement of the LISS-DF and the fixation using the first locked screw of its distal part, the implant can be used as a joystick in order to correct the proper alignment of the metaphysial fragments. We found a very helpful to identify the varus/valgus alignment using the “cable technique” as described by Krettec. Our results of the tibia LISS for proximal tibia fractures, with or without intra-articular involvement, are favorable ( In our series we had one implant failure, which is consistent with the low incidence that is documented in the literature. In several papers proximal screw pull-out has been reported. The infection rate in our series was low in spite of four open fractures. We had one case (5%) of superficial infection in a non-insulin dependant diabetes mellitus patient; that settled with appropriate oral antibiotics. One elderly patient (5%) with poorly controlled diabetes mellitus developed deep infection requiring two debridements and intravenous antibiotics. This patient died 3 months post injury from an unrelated disease. The low infection rate was compatible with the incidence reported in literature so far. Alignment was well maintained in all cases with no patient losing the reduction that was obtained in the operating room. Our early experience suggests primary bone grafting seems unnecessary with this system and being reserved for when there is bone loss At the time of fracture union our results of the knee movement, are comparable with the results so far reported in the literature. In our series, we had three cases of periprosthetic fractures, two above total knee replacements and one below a total hip replacement that were treated utilizing the LISS. The LISS-DF allows stable reduction of osteoporotic bone without disturbance of the existing total joint replacement and is a useful alternative to distal femoral locked nailing through the prosthesis aperture. Our results have been satisfactory and in agreement with the limited reports in the literature. Our data indicate favorable results using the LISS in stabilizing fractures around the knee. It can be used in many different types of injuries around the knee, including intra-articular, peri-prosthetic and open fractures frequently without the use of bone graft. Use of the system relies on a very different plate fixation concept and as such, requires proper thought, planning, and experience prior to its use.