A solution casting method followed by thermal homogenization was performed for the preparation of 1:1 blends and non-blended films from poly(d-lactide) (PDLA) and poly(l-lactide) (PLLA) of three different molecular weights, and their thermal and mechanical properties were determined via differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and tensile tests. According to the literature, when M
                     
                        w
                      is below 1.0×105
                     g/mol only stereocomplex crystallization takes place, and when it is higher, both homocrystallites and stereocomplex crystallites co-exist. In order to promote crystallization as a homocrystal in neat polylactides and to promote the stereoselective crystallization as stereocomplex in the case of non-blended films, and in turn, to achieve different degrees of crystallinity, several thermal treatments of annealing were carried out in this work. Highly stereocomplexed blends were found by the stereospecific thermal treatments. As a consequence, the toughness of 1:1 blends was found significantly enhanced over those of non-blended films, irrespective of molecular weight. For instance, in B2-5050 stereocomplexed blend having poly(l-lactide) and poly(d-lactide) of M
                     
                        w
                     =1.2×105
                     g/mol, tensile strength increased from 44.0±2.1MPa to 65.1±6.1MPa, and the elongation at break from 10.8±2.5% to 33.1±8.1% with respect to its non-blended poly(l-lactide) counterpart crystallized as homocrystal. This improvement in mechanical properties in stereocomplexed blends is not attributed to the inherent properties of the type of crystal polymorph but to the presence of a higher density of intercrystalline connections through a mobile amorphous phase, i.e. tie chains in the stereocomplexed supramolecular spherulitic entities that provide in the stereocomplexed samples enhanced strength and elongation at break at the same time.The mixing of two polymers can lead to the formation of a complex whose properties are usually very different from those of the parent homopolymers. When the complexation occurs between polymers with different tacticities or chiralities the process is often called stereocomplex crystallization or stereocomplexation. The existence of stereocomplex crystallites in mixtures of isotactic polylactides of opposing configurations has been extensively studied ( However, stereocomplex crystallization depends on the effect of numerous parameters such as the blending ratio ( PLA stereocomplexes have been studied extensively for a number of applications due to their potential utility in a number of growing technologies, such as in biomedical field in the areas of drug delivery, tissue engineering, and nanostructured surfaces. PLA stereocomplexes nanofibers could eventually find use in reinforcement of meshes or matrices made of the same polymer and can be foreseen as promising tissue engineering scaffolds. Stereocomplexes fibers for self-reinforced polylactide composites can be used in bone tissue engineering, mending bones of critical size. Moreover, polylactide stereocomplexes have greater stability for nanoparticles and also are envisaged as a synthetic alternative for the formation of mixed micelles, vesicles or particles ( There is widespread literature containing information on polylactides stereocomplexation but only a few reports on the mechanical properties of such stereocomplex have been published because of the difficulties associated with the processing technique leading to a unique crystallization of polylactides as stereocomplex. The purpose of this present work was to study the mechanical properties of blended and non-blended films prepared from PLLA and PDLA with a wide range of molecular weights. For this purpose blended and non-blended films were prepared by casting the solutions from PLLA and PDLA; PLLA having an average molecular weight ( In this study three poly( PLLA2, PLLA3 and PDLA were kindly supplied by PURAC BIOCHEM (The Netherlands); and PLLA1 was synthesized by Ring Opening Polymerization (ROP) of A series of 1:1 blends obtained from polymer pair of PLLA1 and PDLA, PLLA2 and PDLA, PLLA3 and PDLA were designated as B1-5050, B2-5050, B3-5050, respectively. B-5050 blends were prepared by solvent casting. Pellets were dried in vacuum at 60 In order to study the crystalline evolution behaviour (type of polymorph and amount developed) of polylactides and their blends, annealing treatments were conducted in a hot press. In the case of neat polylactide homopolymers, the annealing consisted of 1 Gel permeation chromatography (GPC) measurements were performed with a Waters 1515 chromatograph apparatus equipped with a Waters 2414 refractive index (RI) detector. The Styragel columns were calibrated with polystyrene standards at 50 The thermal properties of samples were evaluated using a differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) from TA instruments, model DSC 2920. The DSC was calibrated using the melting temperature and enthalpy of indium. Approximately 5 Crystallinity degree of PLLA/PDLA blends was calculated as The mobile amorphous ( Tensile tests were performed on films of 50   This similarity in molecular weight strongly influences the overall crystallinity of the blends, the B2-5050 blend shows the highest overall crystallinity, as can be seen in  As is evident from The results of the static tensile experiments are summarized in In order to promote the selective crystallization of homocrystallites in the case of non-blended films and stereocomplex crystallites in blended films, and in turn, to achieve different degrees of crystallinity, several thermal treatments were carried out. In this case, in neat polylactides, homocrystal crystallization was attained at 80  As for any thermoplastic material presenting polymorphism the physical and mechanical properties of polylactides are sensitive to the amount and type of crystallization. According to the more compact cell for the stereocomplex, a priori it could be thought reasonable to expect stereocomplexed polylactides to have higher stiffness and strength than homocrystallized polylactides, as has been confirmed by comparing experimental results on blended and non-blended polylactides ( The present study shows that blended films that are rich in stereocomplex crystallites have higher strength and ductility yet are less stiff than non-blended films rich in homocrystallites. It is very likely that the differences in tensile properties between blended and non-blended films are due to the different morphology and phase structural features obtained during processing rather than to the inherent chain packing properties of the two crystal cell polymorphs. In contrast with other reported results (  In this paper high molecular weight poly( To attain stereospecific crystallization specific thermal treatments were conducted producing a high crystalline fraction near full sterocomplexation against homocrystal crystallization. A three-phase model for a semicrystalline polymer consisting of a crystalline fraction, a rigid amorphous fraction and a mobile amorphous fraction was revealed helpful to explain the obtained results. In this way, the improvement in mechanical properties in stereocomplex crystallites is attributed rather than to the type of crystal polymorph to the presence in stereocomplexed polylactide spherulitic morphology of a higher density of intercrystalline connections through a mobile amorphous phase, i.e. tie chains that provide at the same time enhanced strength and elongation at break. The authors are grateful for funds from the