The effect of flotation frothers on the rate of water transfer to foam/froth has been tested. Two-phase experiments with aqueous solutions of the frothers, and three-phase experiments in the presence of solid particles have been carried out. It has been shown that while the rate of water transfer to foam (two-phase system) is well correlated with the fundamental properties of the frothers, the water transfer rates may be quite different when solid particles are present in the system. These water transfer rates may be further modified if also oily collector (e.g. diesel oil) is used.It is well established that with increasing concentration of a frother bubbles carry increasing amount of water and become finer. In a real flotation system, the size of bubbles affects the flotation rate constant, and the amount of water carried with bubbles affects many sub-processes taking place in the froth which determine the froth product quality. Mineral particles report to the froth either via selective attachment of hydrophobic particles to bubbles, or via entrainment with the pulp water which is transported with bubbles to the froth. The entrainment was identified to be linked to the amount of water transferred to the froth ( Since water recovery has become an important parameter to model froth properties, the objective of this paper was to evaluate the relationship between fundamental properties of the frothers and the water recovery rates to the froth. The fundamental studies carried out with frothers over the last decade led to their classification which is based on the CCC (critical coalescence concentration) and DFI (dynamic foamability index) measurements ( In this paper we present the results of the measurements of water transfer rates from aqueous solutions of frothers to foam/froth in the absence and presence of solid particles. A bituminous F4 coal was selected to model very hydrophobic solid particles while sub-bituminous LS20 coal was selected to model slightly hydrophobic solid particles. Since sub-bituminous coal floats poorly with frother only, first we had to select more efficient frother for this coal ( Four different frothers were tested in this project. The frothers were added as a 1 g/L solution prepared with distilled water at room temperature. Two coal samples varying in rank were used in this study: A high rank, bituminous coal sample (F4), was obtained from the Fording Mine, in Sparwood, BC. Low rank sub-bituminous coal (LS20) was provided by the Luscar Sterco mine in Alberta. Both samples of coal were crushed and pulverized to produce a feed of about 80–90% passing 150 μm. The proximate analyses of these two samples are given in All the flotation tests were conducted at 10% solids content in a 3-L Open Top Leeds flotation cell. The concentrates were collected every 1 min in separate trays (previously weighed) over a period of 5 min. The froth was scrapped off every 10 s. Wash water was added during each test in order to remove entirely the froth attached to the scrapper when collecting the concentrates. The pulp level was maintained constant at all times by adding tap water as required. The concentrates were dried in an oven at 90 °C for 24 h. A sample of tailings was collected in each test for mass balance calculations. All the tests were carried out at natural pH to reflect industrial conditions. Due to a high hydrophobicity of the F4 coal the flotation tests were carried out using frother only. Four concentrations of each of the frothers tested in this project were tried, namely 3.3 310 g of the F4 coal were mixed with 2 L of tap water in the flotation cell and stirred at 1300 rpm for 15 min. Such a conditioning time was required to ensure that all the coal particles get completely wet. The froth height was set to 3 cm as preliminary tests indicated that this thickness allows proper collection of the floating material. The froth level was carefully controlled during all the tests. The level was maintained constant throughout the test by adding make-up water (tap water without frother). Once the conditioning is completed, the cell is filled up to 3 L in order to conduct the test with a 10% solids slurry. The impeller is then set to 1000 rpm and the frother added from a stock solution, followed by a short conditioning time of only 30 s to avoid frother adsorption onto coal particles. The flotation tests were conducted at an air flow rate of 5 L/min. Flotation of the F4 coal was quite fast, 60% yields of concentrate were obtained after 2 min of flotation with 70 g/t of MIBC. Likewise the tests with the F4 coal, each frother was utilized at four concentrations, namely 1.1 The froth height was set to 1 cm since the yields are significantly lower compared to those in the tests with the F4 coal. The tests were also carried out with a pulp at 10% solids content. The pulp was conditioned for 5 min at 1300 rpm. Then, the impeller was set to 1000 rpm followed by the addition of the diesel oil emulsion. The emulsion was prepared as follows: The total amount of diesel oil required for each test was placed along with 50 mL of water in a blender. One half of the total volume of frother required to conduct the flotation test was also added to the blender. The content of the blender was vigorously mixed at high speed for 1 min. The emulsion was then quickly transferred to the flotation cell, and conditioned for 15 s. The remaining amount of frother was then added directly to the cell and conditioned with the pulp for another 15 s. After the addition of the emulsion and the remaining amount of frother, the air flow rate was set to 5 L/min and the froth product was collected over 5 min. The LS20 coal, in comparison with the F4 coal, floats poorly. Even with 3000 g/t of diesel oil and 100 g/t of MIBC only 20–25% yields of concentrate were recorded after 2 min of flotation. These tests were also conducted in a 3-L Open Top Leeds flotation cell. For each frother, a number of concentrations were tried. The tests were carried out as follows: the flotation cell was filled with approximately 2.9 L of tap water. The impeller speed was set at 1200 rpm. The required volume of frother stock solution (1 g/L) was then added to the cell and the volume was completed up to 3 L with tap water. After 5 min of conditioning, water was “floated” at an air flow rate of 4 L/min scraping the foam every 15 s. The recovered water was collected in the previously weighed trays, they were weighed again with the recovered water. All the tests were conducted at a foam height of 1 cm. In order to facilitate the interpretation and comparison of the results obtained with different frothers, each water-recovery curve was translated into a single value that represents the performance of the frother in terms of water recovery. This value should also be related to the frother concentration in the system, which decreases continuously during the test, as the water is floated out from the cell. Only at the beginning of the test the actual concentration of frother is known. In this work, the initial rate of water recovery was calculated in each test as a measure of the performance of the frother, since this parameter can be directly related to the actual frother concentration in the cell. The initial water transfer rates for the four tested frothers are shown in The water transfer rates presented in  As In order to compare the effect of four tested frothers on the initial water transfer rates the results were replotted, as suggested by  As surface tension measurements for the tested frothers ( The frothers appear in The results summarized in For the other three frothers it can be said that the presence of strongly hydrophobic particles (F4 coal) increases the water transfer rates. These results then confirm that the solid wettability has a very strong effect on the froth properties/amount of water in the froth. It is also to be pointed out that while the F4 coal was floated using frother only, in case of the LS20 coal also emulsified diesel oil was added (3000 g/t) and this could contribute to the lower water transfer rates to the froth in these tests. As a matter of fact, in the parallel project we investigated the effect of diesel oil on water transfer and entrainment in the flotation of oxidized coal ( In general, the effect of oily hydrocarbons on the froth properties is a very controversial topic. Oily hydrocarbons are known to flatten froth in a flotation cell. However, the addition of oil to a stirred suspension of fine hydrophobic particles leads to agglomeration of the hydrophobic particles. The oil agglomeration of fine coal by hydrocarbons relies on the formation of large agglomerates strong enough to be separated by screening from the pulp. With the oil dosages lower than a few percent the recovery of combustible matter tend to deteriorate since the agglomerates formed under such conditions are not strong enough to withstand handling/screening. But since the agglomerates formed at low oil dosages result in a formation of loose aggregates which easily entrap air bubbles such aggregates can be easily recovered by flotation and a simultaneous use of a frother provides quite good flotation results ( The effect of diesel oil used in the flotation tests with the LS20 sub-bituminous coal may result from: (i) making coal particles more hydrophobic and thus facilitating particle-bubble attachment, or (ii) selective agglomeration of coal fines. It is not possible to discriminate between the two mechanisms on the basis of the results reported here.  In most recently developed flotation models ( Several conclusions are evident from these results: The water transfer rates to foams generated in the aqueous solutions of the four tested frothers correlate very well with the fundamental properties of these frothers. The properties of the most surface active frother tested (DF-1012) turned out to be very different from the other three. The water transfer rates to the froth generated in the presence of very hydrophobic particles of bituminous coal are much higher for α-terpineol, MIBC and DF-200 frothers than those rates measured in the absence of solid particles (in two-phase systems); however such rates are lower for DF-1012. The water transfer rates to froth generated in the presence of less-hydrophobic sub-bituminous coal particles, which were however floated with the use of oily collector, were much lower than those measured in the presence of a hydrophobic coal. This effect may, however, result from the presence of the oily collector in the system. The recovery by entrainment is related to the recovery of water, but at this stage the knowledge of the frother chemistry and properties is not yet sufficient to predict the water recovery in the flotation processes in which these frothers are utilized. Funding for this project was provided by the National Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada through its Strategic Grant.