Skin (SK) and abdominal fat (AF) are by-products that are abundantly produced in poultry slaughterhouses. Skin is used in meat products, especially in sausages, but its use is related to microbiological contamination and susceptibility to oxidation. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the effect of SK replacement with AF on the quality characteristics of emulsified patties stored under freezing conditions (−18°C) for 90 D. The AF showed higher lipid content than did the SK, but the SK had a higher predominance of polyunsaturated fatty acids. Regarding the partial chemical composition, the treatments showed differences in moisture, lipids, and total collagen. The values for para-anisidine and carbonyl compounds at the end of 90 D of storage were not influenced by the incorporation of SK or AF. The judges also did not observe differences in the color and aroma of the emulsified products during the 90 D. Furthermore, volatile compounds considered oxidation markers were not detected at the end of the storage period. Given these results, emulsified patties made with SK or AF undergo, to a similar degree, low levels of lipid and protein oxidation when stored under freezing conditions (−18°C) for 90 D, which allows the use of some of these lipid sources in meat products.The poultry sector has gained prominence in recent years because of its growth, with a further estimated increase in production of 25% by the year 2025 ( Abdominal fat ( Chicken SK, in turn, is considered a source rich in proteins and lipids, where approximately 20% of fatty acids are unsaturated ( A patty is a meat product that is popularly known and consumed by almost all countries, mainly because of its practicality and convenience for the consumer. Normally, patties are not defined as emulsified products; however, the Technical Regulation of Identity and Quality of Hamburgers ( Meat emulsion is a system composed of 2 or more immiscible phases, such as oil-water. It is a technique that can be applied to make the product as homogeneous as possible, in addition to adding value to the final product because it is considered a sophisticated technique ( Normative Instruction no. 20, from July 31, 2000 ( Oxidative processes are responsible for the loss of quality in meats and meat products ( Given the above, the objective of this study was to evaluate the effect of the addition of SK and AF on the lipid and protein oxidation of emulsified patties stored under freezing conditions (−18°C) for 90 D. The effect of fat type (SK or AF) on the chemical characteristics and oxidative stability of emulsified chicken patties was evaluated using a completely randomized design under a 2 × 4 factorial arrangement, analyzing the effects of the source of fat at 4 storage times (0, 30, 60, and 90 D). Breasts, SK, and AF were obtained from commercial Cobb broilers, male and female, with an age at slaughter of between 42 and 48 D, in a slaughterhouse certified by the Federal Inspection Seal in the state of Paraíba, Brazil. The other ingredients used to prepare the emulsified products were purchased from the local market of the city of João Pessoa, state of Paraíba, Brazil. The raw materials were collected from the commercial processing line of the slaughterhouses. Breasts were obtained after deboning and cutting, SK was obtained after removal from the carcass, and AF was collected from the abdominal cavity after the carcass cooling stage. After collection, the raw materials were stored at 4°C for 24 h and frozen at −18°C for 48 h until the emulsified products were prepared. Two emulsified patty formulations were processed as described in The total lipids present in SK, AF, and emulsified chicken patties were extracted using the method proposed by The moisture, ash, total protein, collagen, and pH were determined according to the methodologies of The peroxide value ( The para-anisidine value ( The thiobarbituric acid reactive substances concentration was determined according to the method described by Carbonyl compounds were quantified according to the modified methodology of Volatiles were extracted by solid-phase microextraction ( In the sensory analysis, the color and aroma parameters of the products were evaluated during the 90 D of storage by approximately 70 untrained judges who reported regularly consuming patties. A hedonic scale of 9 points was used, ranging from disliked it very much (1) to liked it very much (9). The emulsified chicken patties were cooked on a preheated (175°C) hotplate (CKSTGR 3007, Oster, China) for approximately 6 min, that is, 3 min on each side until reaching an internal temperature of 75°C. To evaluate color, cylindrical samples (2.5 cm in diameter and 1.0 cm in height) were obtained from each emulsified patty and served in 50-mL plastic cups. For aroma, approximately 5 g of the cooked and ground samples were placed in 50-mL Falcon tubes sealed and wrapped in aluminum foil according to the method described by The instrumental color was determined by reading the parameters L* (lightness), a* (redness) and b* (yellowness) in 6 different portions of the emulsified product using a Minolta digital colorimeter (Model CR Miner, Mahwah/NJ). Before the readings, the instrument was calibrated. The total colorimetric difference (ΔE) was calculated using the equation ΔE = [(ΔL*) The texture profile was determined using a TA-XT2i texturometer (Stable Micro Systems, Surrey, UK) equipped with a P/35 cylindrical probe. The samples were obtained using a cylindrical cutter (2.5 cm diameter × 1.0 cm height). The evaluated parameters were hardness (N), gumminess (N), chewiness (N), elasticity (dimensionless), cohesiveness (dimensionless), and resilience (dimensionless), according to the methodology proposed by Data were processed using IBM SPSS Statistics 2.3 software. For the SK and AF lipid profile and characterization of the emulsified patties, Student Abdominal fat had a lipid content approximately 45% higher than that of SK, as shown in The fatty acid profiles for SK and AF were similar ( The total unsaturated fatty acid content was above 65% for the 2 by-products, demonstrating agreement with the study by Regarding nutritional quality indicators, there was no significant difference for AI ( The physicochemical composition of the emulsified patties is provided in The emulsified chicken patties with 15% SK ( In the TPA of the emulsified patties ( The fatty acid profile at the beginning and end of storage (times 0 and 90) are shown in Regarding the AI and TI ( The results for lipid oxidation analyzed through the formation of peroxides and aldehydes are provided in Regarding the formation of the secondary aldehyde compounds quantified by pAV analysis, there was no difference between the formulations ( For the formation of malondialdehyde ( The results for protein oxidation can be observed in A total of 22 volatile compounds were identified in the emulsified chicken patties, which are presented in Aldehydes were detected in high amounts in the formulations. This group is seen as an indicator of lipid oxidation, especially pentanal and hexanal compounds ( Volatile sulfur compounds were found in significant quantities only at the beginning of storage for both formulations, which was expected because the volatile sulfur compounds have high volatility and are rapidly released from the product ( Terpenes were the most predominant volatiles in the formulations. According to The perception of consumers regarding the color and aroma of emulsified products (  The a* values varied significantly between the formulations ( For the b* parameter, the formulations exhibited opposite trends ( Regarding the SF and hardness ( The use of SK or AF in the preparation of emulsified chicken patties had no great influences on the lipid and protein oxidation rate when the products were stored under freezing conditions (−18°C) for a period of 90 D, indicating that the use of these by-products in meat products is feasible as a result of their oxidative stability. However, further analysis such as free thiols and disulfide bonds are required to validate protein oxidation results. When considering the results obtained for the TPA and SF, the use of AF, which has greater tenderness and succulence and lower chewiness, is indicated. In addition, further studies assessing a combination of SK and AF are needed. The authors thank Guaraves Guarabira Aves Ltda. for donating the study material. They also thank the National Council for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq) and the Brazilian Federal Agency for Support and Evaluation of Graduate Education (CAPES) for the scholarship and grants awarded to students MMFS and DASL and for the financial support through projects 401167/2014 and 430832/2016-8. Lastly, the authors declare that the present study was conducted with the support of CAPES—Financing Code 001.  Supplementary data associated with this article can be found