In this work, a nanotwinned structure of a two-phase titanium (TC21) alloy was prepared via the martensitic phase transformation method. The TC21 alloy forms initially a single phase β when the temperature reaches 1050 °C. Then, it transitions into an orthorhombic martensite (α″) material when quenched in water. After tempering at 500 °C, the martensite transforms into a high-density nanotwinned α phase material. The hardness of the nanotwinned alloy is 25% higher than that of the TC21 raw material.Nanotwinned metals and alloys are well-known for their high hardness, high strength, and high heat capacity A nanotwinned microstructure can be processed by inducing a severe plastic deformation on the material via the equal-channel angular pressing and the accumulated roll-bonding methods Recently, nanotwinned Fe-Mn alloys were prepared into austenite via the mechanism of reverse martensitic phase transformation: the investigations on this method show its potential in producing bulk nanotwinned materials In this paper, a two-phase titanium (TC21) alloy, which is able to easily convert into martensite upon water quenching, is investigated. Via a high-temperature solid solution at 1050 °C, large β phase grains are obtained to favor the twin formation. The martensite undergoes then a phase transformation and forms nanotwinned structures upon the tempering treatment. The composition of the TC21 alloy investigated in this work is defined in   When the tempering temperature rises to 550 °C, the (1 1 0) and (2 1 1) planes characteristic of the β phase appear. The peak intensity of the β phase is weaker when compared to the α phase. At 650 °C, the peak intensity of the β phase (1 1 0) plane further increases, indicating an increase in the β phase formation and the decomposition of the martensite into both the α and β phases. These observations are similar to the Ti–30% Ta alloy case, in which the α″ martensite decomposes into the (α + β) phases when the aging temperature reaches 550 °C The Vickers hardness of the raw materials, of martensite, and of the tempered samples was investigated ( A TEM measurement was carried out to study the evolution of the martensite hardness at three tempering temperatures ( The transformation of α″ martensite into a nanoscale stripes-like structure is completed at a tempering temperature of 500 °C ( A large number of nanotwinned lamellar structures can be observed at 550 °C ( In this paper, the formation process of nanotwinned structures in a TC21 two-phase titanium alloy is investigated by using the martensitic phase transformation method. The hardness of the nanotwinned alloy increases by 1.25 times when compared to the TC21 raw material. The largest value of the hardness is measured when the tempering temperature is raised to 500 °C. After tempering the material at 500 °C and 550 °C, the α″ martensitic phase is transformed into the α nanotwinned phases. The formation of such structure is responsible for the large hardness of the alloy. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors thank the financial support of the