The high levels of sulfate and the metals in acid mine drainages generate important environmental problems. This paper describes the synergistic combination of a biosorption process and a new sulfate removal process. The treatment for the elimination of metals by biosorption with a Bacillus strain allowed reducing the high metal concentrations that had a toxic effect on the sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB). On the other hand, the sulfate removal process used a microbial sulfate-reducing halotolerant consortium, which was able to reduce the sulfate concentration using low-cost organic substrates such as spirulina, cellulose and industrial starch. Independent of substrate present in the culture medium, the SRB was the predominant group. The sulfate-reducing consortium was cultured on a bench-scale upflow anaerobic packed bed bioreactor filled with Celite R-635. It was possible to reduce the concentration of sulfate in the culture medium in batch or semi-continuous operation. This integrated process is an inexpensive alternative for the elimination of metals by biosortion and the elimination of sulfate using a sulfate-reducing consortium.Sulfate and metals are pollutants present in acid mine drainage (AMD). AMD is the acidic metal rich water formed by the reaction between the water and rock containing sulfur-bearing minerals. The resulting acidic solution acts as a leaching agent containing dissolved metals and sulfuric acid that in contact with water bodies can contaminate those, making them unfit for use ( There are currently some alternatives to remove sulfate and metals from water. The most commonly used method for treating AMD is based on chemical neutralization (e.g., lime addition) resulting in the precipitation of metal hydroxides ( The use of sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB) is an option for the treatment of water with high levels of sulfate ( In this study, a halotolerant consortium was enriched using complex substrates such as Spirulina, cellulose and industrial starch. The halotolerance of microorganisms is an important characteristic for the treatment of mining effluents that contain high levels of salts. For metal removal was, a biosorption process previously developed by our research group used (  A sample of AMD was collected from a copper mine located in the Andean Mountains of Central Chile. This AMD had a pH value of 2.95, a sulfate concentration of 3602 mg/L and following concentrations of heavy metals (in mg/L): copper, 1400; iron, 27.9; zinc, 20.4 and nickel 0.60. The microbial consortium used in this study was enriched from black anaerobic sediment of a saline lagoon (Atacama Salt Flat, Chile). All growth experiments were performed at 28 °C in modified Postgate C culture medium ( A PTFE bioreactor with a useful volume of 412 cm The bacterial strain An amount of lime necessary to reach a pH equal to 6.3 to pre-treat the AMD was used. The characterization of the microbial populations enriched in the different complex organic compounds was done using the in situ hybridization technique. The specific oligonucleotide sequences of CY3-labeled probes and the hybridization conditions are summarized in the To perform the microbial consortium in situ hybridization, 100 μL of culture was taken and placed in 900 μL PBS and centrifuged for 5 min at 4724 x g. Once the centrifuging was done the supernatant was discarded and the pellet was re-suspended in 900 μL PBS, then centrifuged for 3 min at 112 x g. A sample of 50 μL was placed on a glass slide and was fixed with heat. Once fixed, 20 μL 37% formaldehyde was added on each sample for 20 min. Then, 50 μL of the hybridization solution was added to each sample (see Once washed the glass slides were left to dry. Then the samples were treated with 20 μL DAPI (50 μL/mL). After 10–15 min they were rinsed with distilled water to eliminate the excess of DAPI. Once the hybridization is done, they were observed in a Zeiss epifluorescence microscope with filter Zeiss N° 20 for the CY3-labeled probe and with a filter Zeiss N° 09 for DAPI. The samples were photographed using a Canon PowerShot sx110 IS camera and a Remote Capture v.3.0.1.8 software. The images were processed using the ImageJ software. The hybridization in situ was applied to the microbial consortiums cultures between 5 and 7 days in test tubes with cellulose, starch and Sulfate removal was determined by a turbidimetric method ( Enriched cultures were able to grow and reduce sulfate using complex organic substrates like In order to know the composition of the microbial community a FISH analysis was performed. When  Therefore, these halotolerant sulfate-reducing microbial consortia were comprised by Bacteria and Archaea. Its proportion depends on the complex organic compound used for its enrichment and culture. Regarding bacteria, these belong to, at least, the phylogenetic groups of α-, β- and γ-Proteobacteria and bacteria of the The presence of Archaea in the bacterial community can be explained by the high salinity of the culture medium used ( For the following studies in bioreactors, starch was selected as electron donor, because of its homogeneous composition and simplicity of its management. The sulfate-reducing consortium was cultured on three bioreactors with different configurations: with starch, siliceous river gravel or Celite R-635, as support material. In these experiments, a synthetic sulfate solution without toxic metals was used (culture medium). To abbreviate, only the best configuration with Celite R-635 is described below. The bioreactor, using starch as a substrate, was operated 97 days batch wise, until achieving the formation of a sulfate-reducing biofilm on Celite R-635. The operating parameters of the bioreactor are shown in To evaluate the capacity of the microbial consortium to eliminate sulfate present in an AMD, a bioreactor containing Celite R-635 was used, because this bioreactor had greater capacity to reduce sulfate and greater stability of the microbial consortium inside the bioreactor. To treat an AMD, it was necessary to remove toxic metals, which have an inhibitory effect on this microbial consortium. In previous experiments in culture tubes, it was found that this sulfate-reducing microbial consortium was able to grow in a culture medium with starch up to a copper concentration of 25 mg/L, while no growth was observed at concentrations higher than 50 mg/L. Similar copper-induced growth inhibition of sulfate-reducing bacteria using isolated Process of treatment with lime and biosorption: the AMD contained a copper concentration of 22.0 mM (1400 mg/L) and a sulfate concentration of 67.6 mM. The treatment with lime allowed reducing the sulfate concentration to 18.8 mM and the concentration of copper at 0.31 mM. To eliminate the remaining copper, a biosorption process with aggregated Sulfate reduction process: the bioreactor was initially operated with culture medium. After 10 days, the bioreactor was fed with AMD treated with lime and biosorption. In the literature, high performance sulfate removal processes using low molecular weight compounds as carbon sources and electron donors have been described. The preferred organic substrates were lactate (  The following conclusions can be drawn from this study: A sulfate-reducing consortium able to reduce the sulfate concentration using low cost organic substrates like Spirulina, cellulose and industrial starch was enriched. Independent of substrate used in the culture medium, δ-Proteobacteria was the predominant group, but an important proportion of α-, β- and γ-Proteobacteria, Cytophaga-Flavobacterium group and Archaea were also present within this microbial community. Using this sulfate-reducing consortium in a packed bed bioreactor, with Celite R-635 as support, it was possible to reduce the sulfate concentration in the culture medium. It was possible to removing metal and sulfate from an acid mine drainage through the synergistic combination of a treatment system by biosorption, to reduce the inhibitory concentration of metals, followed by a new process of elimination of sulfate that uses a halotolerant sulfate-reducing the microbial consortium. The findings reported here show that this integrated biological process represents a more economical alternative for the removal of metal and sulfate. This work was supported by