The simultaneous electroleaching-electrodeposition of silver was studied systematically to develop an alternate process for the recovery of metallic silver. The system was assessed employing electrochemical and microstructural characterization techniques in a thiosulfate-ammonia medium. The electrochemical studies revealed the dependence of silver electroleaching rate in thiosulfate-ammonia solutions on different processes controlled by anodic potential. At the anodic potential below 200mVSHE, the silver is electro-oxidized and complexed by the applied potential and thiosulfate, respectively. Increasing the potential up to 445mVSHE, the thiosulfate is oxidized and the silver leaching current is decreased due to the diffusional control of the leaching. It was also found that the sulfite species formed from the thiosulfate decomposition can leach small amounts of metallic silver. Finally, at potentials from 695 to 795mVSHE, the thiosulfate is further decomposed and a silver sulfide film is generated which inhibits the silver dissolution. The simultaneous electroleaching-electrodeposition of silver was also studied in an electrolytic cell with graphite electrodes at room temperature. The results showed that a 74% of silver can be recovered at a low applied current density of 0.066mA/cm2 with a negligible thiosulfate decomposition and a current efficiency of 76.54%. On the other hand, when the current is increased the silver recovery and current efficiency is decreased, due to the oxidative decomposition of thiosulfate which promotes the formation of silver sulfide. These results are corroborated by the X-ray diffraction and SEM-EDS analyses.Currently cyanidation is the most used process in the hydrometallurgical industry to carry out the leaching of precious metals from different sources ( As regards the metallic silver, it can be found in different wastes, e.g., the so-called urban ores. From the sustainability point of view, it is extremely important to recover metallic silver from these urban ores. In this context, it is important to mention the attempts made on the dissolution of metallic silver and silver compounds from the printed circuit boards (PCBs), electronics, spent catalysts, fabrics containing silver nanoparticles, jewelry, and X-ray and photographic films ( In order to reduce the thiosulfate degradation, different researchers have proposed the use of complexing agents for cupric ions to lower the redox potential thereby moderating the oxidizing ability of the system ( On the other hand, various electrolytic processes have been developed to electro-leach the metals such as copper, nickel, cadmium etc., contained in different materials, e.g., minerals or e-wastes ( In this research, the electroleaching of silver with thiosulfate solutions has been studied in a single chamber-three electrodes electrochemical cell, using carbon paste electrodes at different applied anodic potentials to ensure the desired oxidizing conditions instead of a chemical oxidant; this is attempted to gain a better understanding of the electroleaching behavior of silver and establish the most suitable conditions to accelerate the leaching kinetics. This novel concept was employed to maximize the silver recovery and minimize the energy consumption and thiosulfate decomposition in the simultaneous electroleaching-electrodeposition (SEE) process at room temperature. This information can be used in future to develop an efficient SEE reactor for the recovery of metallic silver contained in different wastes, using thiosulfate solutions without using any chemical oxidizing agents (e.g., cupric ions). Carbon paste electrodes (CPE) with and without electro-active species (Ag, Ag All electrolytic media were prepared in a 50 Voltammetry and chronoamperometry tests were carried out in a conventional single chamber-three electrodes electrochemical cell which consisted of a 100 The procedure for preparing the carbon paste electrode containing the electro-active species is as follows: 0.8 Since one of the objectives of the present investigation is to study the dissolution of silver as well as the oxidative destruction of thiosulfate at different conditions of anode potential employing carbon paste electrodes with and without electro-active species, several solutions of thiosulfate and sulfite were assessed by cyclic and linear voltammetry or chronoamperometry techniques. The electrolytic medium consisting of 50 Stirred chronoamperommetric experiments were carried out using a CPE with 8.1 Linear voltammetry and multiple cyclic voltammetry experiments were performed with a CPE-Ag in a solution of 0.2 The simultaneous electroleaching-electrodeposition of silver was evaluated in a 0.5 The procedure employed to carry out the electroleaching-electrodeposition experiments was as follows: 0.5 As one of the main objectives of the present research is to determine the most suitable conditions to electroleach the metallic silver in thiosulfate solutions employing an electrolytic cell with graphite electrodes, the electroleaching tests were performed using conventional techniques coupled with the surface characterization studies. In order to have a similar scenario to that found in an electrolytic cell with graphite electrodes ( Moreover, by magnifying the potential domain from 200 to 700 In alkaline solutions tetrathionate can further decompose to sulfite according to Eqs.  Actually, peak a) found in In order to further confirm that peak a) is related to Eq.  From a kinetic point of view, it was expected that an increase in the thiosulfate concentration from 0.2 to 0.3 The regularities of diffusion mass-transfer can be described by the Randles-Sevcik equation (Eq. Therefore, anodic polarizations were carried out for a CPE-Ag immersed in 0.2 This diffusional control is in good agreement with the low increase in the current recorded at peak a) when the thiosulfate concentration is increased from 0.2 to 0.3 Up to now, the results of Furthermore, according to Cyclic voltammetries were carried out with a CPE-Ag immersed in two different solutions at pH Comparing the voltammograms of the thiosulfate and thiosulfate-sulfite solutions (see In order to validate that metallic silver can be electro-dissolved in sulfite at an anodic potential similar to that of peak b) (  On the other hand, With the aim of showing that below 150 The current decrease observed is associated with the gradual consumption of the reactants (i.e., shrinking of silver particle and thiosulfate depletion) to produce a silver-thiosulfate complex, according to Eq. The polarization data shown in  The EDS analysis reveals the presence of Ag, Si, C and O, the last three elements being related to the binder employed in the CPE fabrication. In turn, the morphology of the CPE-Ag surface ( This result is in good agreement with the occurrence of the corrosion pits shown in Equivalent cyclic voltammetry and microstructural characterization tests were also performed with a CPE-Ag immersed in a 0.2 As mentioned before, the increase in anodic potential above 200 Finally,  Sulfide ion (S In order to confirm that the sulfur film produced at this anodic potential consisted of silver sulfide, a CPE-Ag was pre-treated at 695, 745 and 795 This peak represents the reduction of the solid products formed during the anodic pre-treatment, in the present case it may be related to the reduction of silver sulfide to metallic silver. It is also interesting to observe that when the potential of the anodic pre-treatment is increased, the current magnitude of the reduction peak d) is increased. This reveals that the quantity of the silver sulfide formed at 795  Having established the silver electroleaching with electrochemical and surface characterization techniques, the simultaneous electroleaching-electrodeposition of silver employing thiosulfate-ammonia solutions in an undivided electrolytic cell is examined, with the aim of developing an alternative technology which permits the recovery of metallic silver minimizing the thiosulfate decomposition and the energy consumption. It is worth mentioning that, this first paper is only focused on the electrochemistry for the silver electroleaching to arrive at the suitable electric potential that can facilitate the silver electroleaching while minimizing the thiosulfate decomposition. For this reason, the effect of the applied current in the SEE process is presented in the next section and the results are discussed based on the fundamental electrochemistry study shown in the previous sections. The effect of time, temperature, and thiosulfate concentration on the silver recovery with the SEE process will be presented and discussed in our next paper. In order to determine the effect of the applied current on the silver recovery, the SEE process was examined using a leaching solution containing 123  The current efficiency can be calculated using Eq. As can be seen the current efficiency is considerably decreased when the applied current is increased, e.g., a current efficiency of 76.54, 44.75, 11.41 and 0.31% is obtained for the SEE process operated at 8, 12, 24 and 36 It is evident from On the other hand, the SEE test performed at 8 In order to confirm that silver sulfide is formed when the SEE is operated at applied currents higher than 8 The XRD analysis ( With respect to the leach solid residues obtained at 12 and 36 Up to now, the results presented in this paper for pure silver, revealed the possibility to electroleach-electrodeposit the silver simultaneously in thiosulfate solutions, establishing the electrochemical and surface characterization techniques as important evidence of the energetic conditions as well as the products that can be formed under different scenarios. This concept could be applied with a waste containing other metals like Cu, to evaluate the effect of other solid impurities on the silver recovery efficiency with the SEE process. However, this information will be presented in our next paper. In this investigation, the simultaneous electroleaching-electrodeposition of silver has been studied systematically in thiosulfate solutions. Initially the investigation involved the silver electroleaching process using electrochemical techniques complemented with SEM-EDS characterization. The results show that silver is electro-oxidized to the complex [Ag(S The simultaneous electroleaching-electrodeposition of silver was then studied using a conventional undivided electrolytic cell with graphite electrodes, at different applied currents. The results reveal that the system operated at the lowest applied current i.e., 8 The authors are grateful to CONACyT (México) for the postgraduate scholarship awarded to Daniel Alejandro Urzúa-Abarca. Also, the collaboration of Ana Elena Muñiz, Felipe Márquez, Sergio Rodriguez Arias and Socorro García in this investigation is duly recognized.