The volcanic activity of Mt. Karacadağ (SE Anatolia) is divided into three major stages: Siverek Stage (∼11–2.7Ma), Karacadağ Stage (∼1.9–1.0Ma) and Ovabağ Stage (0.4–0.01Ma). The magmas are mildly alkaline mafic rocks, mostly basanites, hawaiites and alkali basalts. Detailed geochemical investigation indicates a continuous variation of composition with time, with the oldest products (Siverek Stage) being characterized by average lowest HFSE (Ti, Hf, Zr, Nb, Ta), 143Nd/144Nd, Nb/U, Ta/Yb, Nb/Nb* and the highest ΔQ, La/Nb, Ti/Nb, Zr/Nb, Ba/Nb, Th/Ta, K/La, and the youngest products (Ovabağ Stage) at the opposite end of the trend. The overall incompatible element content of the Karacadağ volcanic rocks resembles closely average HIMU-OIB compositions, with the oldest samples deviating more strongly from typical compositions of “anorogenic” magmas.
                  We interpret these geochemical variations with a process of partial melting of a chemically and mineralogically heterogeneous mantle source rather than with process of variable crustal contamination at shallow depths. During the first stages of mantle melting the volumes with lowest solidus temperature (e.g., the amphibole and phlogopite-rich metasomes, particularly abundant in the Arabia mantle xenolith suite) contributed significantly to the partial melts. “Average” peridotitic matrix is involved in partial melting processes only when these metasomatic volumes start to be exhausted, producing mantle melts with geochemical composition resembling average “anorogenic” mildly alkaline sodic rocks, common in the circum-Mediterranean area.The ability to interpret the geochemical message of an igneous rock to infer the mineralogical and chemical characteristics of its source depends on the clearness of the signal. The chemical composition of oceanic basalts (MORB and OIB) is considered to reflect their mantle sources because of the presence of relatively thin crust, mostly with basaltic composition. This means that the mantle-derived partial melts that reach the surface can be modified only in minimum amounts while passing through the oceanic crust. On the other hand, the geochemical message of basaltic rocks emplaced on continental settings can be potentially obscured by the presence of much thicker crust, typically with very different chemical composition and much older than the rocks investigated. The lighter continental crustal rocks represents, indeed, a classical density barrier for relatively dense basaltic melts, forcing them to pond and, therefore, experience Assimilation and Fractional Crystallization-(AFC-) type processes. On these grounds, all the hypothetical mantle end-members proposed in the last 25 Excluding magmas produced after partial melting of a supra-subduction mantle wedge, continental basalts can, however, still be used to infer the composition of their mantle sources. The presence of mantle xenoliths associated with alkali sodic basaltic rocks is evidence for rapid magma ascent to the surface. However, rapid and turbulent ascent may also produce a sort of crustal contamination by digesting small amounts of crustal lithologies (e.g., The Karacadağ volcano (also known as Karacalıdağ) in south-eastern Anatolia offers a unique opportunity to investigate the potential effects of crustal contamination. Its activity lasted from ∼11 The only accessible paper dedicated to the petrology of Karacadağ volcano (other papers dealing with this volcano are written in Turkish) is Below we report a detailed petrographic investigation and the large number of major and trace element data mostly on the younger volcanic activity (<2.6 The Karacadağ volcano ( Geophysical studies have revealed that the Eastern Anatolian–Iranian high plateau had a slightly thickened crust (∼40–50 The collision has been accompanied by a widespread and long-lasting volcanic activity on the Eastern Anatolian–Iranian high plateau. The volcanism commenced with the eruption of volcanic units around ∼11–13 Contemporaneous with the block uplift of the Eastern Anatolian–Iranian high plateau, the collision also gave rise to N–S extending impactogens on the Arabian Platform. These can be interpreted as an indication of E-W extension related to N–S shortening. One of them is represented by the Akçakale Graben in the vicinity of Urfa city while the other is thought to be covered by the lavas of the Karacadağ shield volcano ( The Precambrian basement of the Arabian foreland is exposed near the town of Derik, SE of the Karacadağ volcano. It is represented by the Telbesmi formation consisting of an unmetamorphosed sequence of dacitic-rhyolitic lavas interlayered with pyroclastics and sandstones. The Telbesmi formation is unconformably overlain by the Cambrian Sadan, Koruk and Sosink formations respectively, composed of detrital and carbonate sediments ( On the basis of the stratigraphic and geochronological studies ( The petrography, geochemistry and Sr–Nd isotopic composition of the early (∼11 to ∼2.7 Analytical methods are as reported in Major-element analyses were performed on small glassy pearls produced from ignited powders of the samples following the method described in Trace element contents were analyzed by ICP-MS at Actlabs, Ancaster, Ontario, Canada ( On the basis of the mineral assemblages and textures, the lavas of the Karacadağ volcano can be divided into six petrographic types, some of which are further divided into sub-series (types and sub-types). A detailed description of the samples can be found as The samples analyzed in this study belong to the younger phases of Karacadağ volcano (Karacadağ and Ovabağ Stages). These data are compared with those of the early-stage (Siverek Stage, divided into Early- and Plateau-phases in the diagrams; The Karacadağ lavas are mafic (all but four samples with MgO ranging from ∼4.7 to ∼11.4 Negative correlations with MgO are visible only for Al Large ion lithophile elements (LILE) do not show any particular correlation with MgO, Rb, Sr and Ba being scattered within the MgO interval ( Among transition elements, only Cr, Co and Ni show clear positive correlation with MgO, with V and Sc contents randomly distributing against MgO. The young products show generally lower Cr and Sc, but indistinguishable Co, Ni and V compared with the old samples ( The high field strength elements (HFSE) Zr, Nb, Hf and Ta behave coherently as a group. They show a crude negative correlation with MgO in the old samples, but no correlation or rough positive correlation in the young rocks. Compared with the old samples, the young rocks are generally characterized by higher HFSE contents at a similar MgO ( Rare earth elements (REE) show variations with MgO similar to those observed for the HFSE. The old samples show a crude negative correlation, whereas the young lavas are more dispersed in REE vs. MgO diagrams (not shown in The behaviour of Th and U closely resembles those of the HFSE and REE, with old samples showing a rough negative correlation with MgO and the young samples displaying greater scatter ( Chondrite CI-normalized REE patterns show a nearly continuous increase in LREEs and LREEs/HREEs ratios through time ( Primitive mantle-normalized multi-elemental diagrams also show interesting features. Some characteristics such as peaks at Nb–Ta and Sr, and, less prominent, at Zr–Hf are nearly common in all the four age groups ( With the exception of two samples (3MO-134 and 3MO-142) showing slight troughs at Nb–Ta, the rest of the Siverek early-phase basalts show a multi-elemental bell-shaped pattern that resembles the typical HIMU-OIB magmas such as St. Helena Island basalts. The only exception is the absence of a typical trough at K, which is common for HIMU-OIBs, a clear peak at Sr and a generally lower content of the most incompatible elements ( The bell-shaped pattern of the Siverek plateau-phase basalts peaks at Nb–Ta (∼50 times primitive mantle estimate) and, excluding the peaks at Sr and Ti, is relatively smooth with not so many spikes ( Karacadağ-stage basalts show the same features as the old basalts, with overall bell-shaped patterns resembling HIMU-OIBs, peaking at Nb–Ta, with spikes at Sr, TiO Lastly, the Ovabağ-stage basalts and hawaiites show a homogeneous composition, being undistinguishable in primitive-mantle normalized diagrams ( The studied samples share the same mineral paragenesis, with the common presence of olivine, clinopyroxene and plagioclase in a matrix of the same phases plus opaque minerals and rare amphibole. However, the presence of noteworthy geochemical variations in a relatively narrow silica range led us to evaluate a number of alternative processes including the tapping of different mantle sources, the possibility of crustal assimilation combined with fractional crystallization and the periodic replenishment of the plumbing system. The existence of an almost systematic variation of several geochemical parameters of Karacadağ lavas with volcanological age can be explained either with a process where partial melts are gradually contaminated with lower degrees of crustal rocks at shallow levels or with that they represent diverse partial melts from heterogeneous mantle sources. A characteristic of the Karacadağ lavas is the variation of the parameter Δ The decrease of SiO Some major oxide correlation with age (e.g., increase of TiO Incompatible–incompatible trace element ratios with Nb as the denominator (e.g., Ba/Nb, La/Nb, Zr/Nb) show a clear decrease with decreasing age ( Little is known of the Sr–Nd isotopic variation with age for the Karacadağ lavas. The few analyses available refer to three Siverek early-phase lavas (∼11–6.6 The MgO-rich (MgO The Nd isotopic ratios of the Karacadağ lavas show good negative correlation with age ( The positive correlation of In conclusion, despite the limited number of published analyses, it is possible to summarize the main Sr–Nd isotopic variations in the Karacadağ lavas with age as follows: A general decrease of The youngest Karacadağ stage lavas (∼1.2–0.9  What is seen for Major and trace elements, as well as Sr–Nd isotopic variation with age indicate either a gradual decrease in crustal contamination with time or the tapping of geochemically and isotopically different mantle sources. In the following paragraphs, we evaluate the geochemical and petrological constraints for and against these possibilities. There are several grounds for dismissing the possibility that the geochemical variations in the Karacadağ lavas originate from AFC processes at shallow depths ( A prominent process of crustal contamination (with up to 30–40% of assimilated upper crustal lithologies) has been proposed in other volcanic districts from the Arabian foreland (Mashrek area) on the basis of petrographic evidence (presence of quartz xenocrysts or crustal xenoliths in basaltic lavas), major-element (evolved compositions with relatively SiO This, of course, does not mean that the process of crustal interaction does not exist at all. The chemical composition of the sample 3MO-18, indeed, can be better interpreted as the effect of such type of a process. This mantle xenolith-free lava is characterized by the lowest Nb, Ta, Zr, Hf, Ta/Yb, Nb/Nb In the absence of geochemical data for local lower crustal rocks, we have collected literature data on lower crustal xenoliths associated with Cenozoic within-plate magmas from the Arabian plates ( The Arabian lower crust xenoliths are characterized by very low Rb content (typically <8 The xenoliths indicate an isotopically depleted composition ( The geochemical and isotopic variations with age of the Karacadağ lavas are more likely compatible with their derivation from a compositionally heterogeneous upper mantle. During the first stages of the volcanic activity, the more fusible metasomatic levels would have been preferentially tapped. With continuing melt extraction, the contribution of the peridotitic matrix (characterized by higher solidus temperature) might have been gradually increased, producing typical within-plate mildly alkaline sodic magmas. The existence of such a type of heterogeneous mantle source is in agreement with modern interpretations of the rheological and geochemical state of the Earth’s mantle (e.g., Several lines of compelling evidence for multistage metasomatic events in the Arabia lithospheric mantle come from petrographic, mineralogical and geochemical studies of mantle xenoliths seldom associated with the most primitive alkali basaltic/basanitic melts (e.g.,  In conclusion, we favour the existence of heterogeneous mantle sources to explain the trace element and Sr–Nd isotopic variations of the Karacadağ lavas. Such a model accords with what has been proposed for other Arabian plate volcanic districts (e.g., The Karacadağ volcano (SE Anatolia) has been active from at least ∼11 On the basis of the above characteristics, the following conclusions can be raised: With decreasing age, the Karacadağ lavas become more enriched in Nb, Ta, Hf, Zr, Nb/U, Ta/Yb, Nb/Nb A significant interaction of Karacadağ mantle melts with upper crustal lithologies is an unlikely process, due to the very different major and trace element composition of the local upper crustal contaminant (i.e., Derik Pre-Cambrian acid rocks) and average upper continental crust estimates. However, minor degrees of interaction with these upper crustal lithologies (no more than few percent of digestion) can be hypothesized for a very small number of Karacadağ lavas. Geochemical and isotopic modelling also provide counter evidence for any significant interaction with lower continental crust. If an AFC process involving lower crustal lithologies is assumed, an unrealistically high assimilation rate (and/or mass of fractionated material) should be hypothesized. Arabian lithospheric mantle is very heterogeneous. The metasomatic networks in the local upper mantle are represented by hydrous phases (mostly pargasite and phlogopite) as well as pyroxenitic/websteritic lithologies, all characterized by solidus temperatures several hundred degrees lower than the average peridotitic mantle ( We thank the local people for their warm welcome during the fieldwork. Bob Stern (Dallas, USA) is thanked for the help in collecting Arabian Plate lower crustal xenolith data. Samuele Agostini (Pisa, Italy), Brian G.J. Upton (Edinburgh, UK) and an anonymous referee provided constructive reviews that helped to improve the quality of the manuscript. Raffaello Trigila (Rome) is thanked for designing and assembling the equipment to produce the glassy beads. ML thanks, as usual, his three women Enrica, Bianca and Laura for their immense patience during the writing of this manuscript. ML also thanks Rick Wakeman, Bill Bruford, Steve Howe, Jon Anderson and Chris Squire for being so “fragile”. MK thanks the Istanbul University Research Fund (project # ACIP-1282) for their support during the fieldwork in 2007. This work was supported by a joint project TUBITAK-RFBR (TUBITAK Project # 108Y222, Turkey and RFBR project # 09-05-91220-CT) between 2009 and 2010, by research grants from University La Sapienza (AST 2008, 2009) and from PRIN 2008 (Research Grant#: 2008HMHYFP_005). O.K. thanks M. Sefik İmamoğlu for a discussion on field geology. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 