As a part of technological evaluation of Eskisehir-Beylikahir thorium–Rare Earth Elements (REEs) ore of Turkey, a novel study investigating the extraction behaviours of light REEs for Cyanex 272 impregnated Amberlite XAD–7 resin was carried out. Solvent impregnated resin (SIR) was prepared by the impregnation of kerosene diluted Cyanex 272 onto Amberlite XAD–7 resin. SIR was characterized by FTIR, SEM, TGA–DSC, surface area and porosity analyses. The usability of Cyanex 272 impregnated XAD–7 for the extraction of La, Pr, Nd, Sm, Eu and Gd from nitric acid solution was investigated by batch experiments. Parameters affecting the uptake of these metal ions such as pH, contact time and liquid/solid (V/m) ratio were studied. Experimental data indicated that REEs have a tendency to behave as two separate groups as La, Pr, Nd and Sm, Eu, Gd. Light elements are being displaced by the heavier elements as they load up. Kinetic data fit the pseudo second order model for each element and the capacity values at the equilibrium were obtained as 11.1, 0.56, 1.69, 0.75, 0.10 and 0.25 mg g−1 for La, Pr, Nd, Sm, Eu and Gd, respectively. Complete stripping of Pr(III), Nd(III), Sm(III), Gd(III) and 95.1% of Eu(III) ions were achieved by using 0.1 mol L−1 HNO3 in one stage batch contact.Rare earth elements (REEs) are a group of 17 elements, including scandium (Sc), yttrium (Y) and 15 lanthanides from lanthanum (La, 57) to lutetium (Lu, 71). They show the similar chemical properties, and tend to occur in the same mineral deposits. This leads to a major difficulty in REE separation from an aqueous solution ( The extraction and individual separation of REEs have been increasingly arousing interest. These elements and compounds are used in a variety of commercial applications. REEs are used in metallurgical industry, ceramic technology, electronics and catalysts as well as the components of hybrid or electric cars, wind turbines, thin film solar cells, LEDs, high performance batteries and cell phones. With technological advance, demand for high purity rare earth elements is increasing day by day. Basic knowledge are available for the separation and extraction mechanism of REEs, however high degree of chemical similarity limits the selective separation of REEs individually. Efficient, economical and eco–friendly technologies are necessary to extract and separate REEs from each other ( Chemical deposition, liquid chromatography, solvent extraction and ion exchange have been used to separate REEs. Among them, solvent extraction is an effective and simple separation method ( Macroporous polymeric resins such as Amberlite XAD–4, XAD–7 and XAD–16 have high specific area, high mechanical strength and rather low solvent swelling during the impregnation process. Due to these key features, they can incorporate large amounts of extractants. They are also, characterized by their organophilic nature ( Bis (2,4,4–trimethylpentyl) phosphinic acid, Cyanex 272, is an acidic type of an organophosphorus extractant. Cyanex 272 can effectively extract transition metals such as iron, zinc, copper, cobalt, cadmium and vanadium. Besides, it has been used for the extraction of REEs. The usability of Cyanex 272 in solvent extraction and SIR processes have been reported in literature (   Extraction and kinetic studies of Sm(III) from chloride solutions using Na salt of Cyanex 272 were carried out by   Although there are some studies have been conducted for the separation of REEs using Cyanex 272 by solvent extraction method, very few papers have been published on the utilization of SIRs containing Cyanex 272 for this purpose. An investigation focused on the extraction and separation studies of La(III), Pr(III), Nd(III), Sm(III), Eu(III) and Gd(III) by Cyanex 272 containing Amberlite XAD–7 resin has not been reported in the literature. Eskisehir–Beylikahir ore of Turkey may be described as one of the largest Th and REEs deposits of the world. However, it has not been exploitable up to now because of its highly refractory character ( Taking into consideration this opinion, a Th–REEs mixed oxalate intermediate product has been precipitated from leach liquors. Following the separation of thorium and cerium, a REEs concentrate free from Th and Ce, including REEs (La, Pr, Nd, Sm, Eu, Gd) has just been obtained in our previous study ( In the present study, 0.5 mol L The extractant Cyanex 272 was kindly supplied by Cytec Inc. LME Group Ltd. Co and used without any purification. Kerosene, Amberlite XAD–7 resin, lanthanum nitrate (La(NO In this study, Amberlite XAD–7 and Cyanex 272 were used as a support material and a solvent, respectively. Amberlite XAD–7 is the only “moderately polar” XAD resin now available. It has been used to remove relatively polar compounds from non-aqueous solvents, and to remove non-aromatic compounds from polar solvents. The pH range is 0–14, with maximum usage temperature 300 °F ( The active component of Cyanex 272 is bis (2,4,4–trimethyl pentyl) phosphinic acid. Initially, washing process was applied to remove inorganic impurities and monomers in the resin. It was carried out in order of 2 mol L The preparation steps of the SIR are as follows: Cyanex 272 was diluted to 25 mL in kerosene to prepare 0.5 mol L The amount of impregnated Cyanex 272 onto XAD–7 was separately determined by quantitative FTIR analysis and weighing method. In the first method, calibration and analysis were conducted by FTIR spectrometer equipped with CaF In the weighing method, dry XAD–7 and the Cyanex 272 impregnated resin were separately weighed. The weighing difference is equal to amount of impregnated Cyanex 272 in kerosene. By the comparison of two methods, it was found that data obtained from FTIR analysis is in accordance with weighing method. In order to characterize the SIR, fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), thermal analysis (TGA–DSC), surface area and porosity analysis were used. FTIR spectra of the SIR were acquired between 400 and 4000 cm Initial concentration values of REEs were as follows: La 751 mg L FTIR spectra of XAD–7, Cyanex 272 and Cyanex 272 impregnated XAD–7 were shown in Surface area and porosity analysis were performed for dry XAD–7 and 0.5 mol L SEM images of XAD–7 and Cyanex 272 impregnated XAD–7 before and after impregnation are presented in TGA–DSC curve of 0.5 mol L Lanthanide ions in the aqueous solution are tend to the exchange with H The species located on the SIR are indicated with a bar and the functional groups of the extractant are denoted as HA. As seen from Eq. The effect of pH on the distribution coefficient (K The effect of contact time on the distribution coefficient (K The pseudo first order ( The corresponding kinetic parameters of pseudo first order kinetic equation Eq. 2.5 mL, 5 mL, 10 mL, 20 mL and 40 mL of volumes were taken from stock solution. 0.1 g of Cyanex 272 impregnated XAD–7 was added into each solution, thus 5 different V/m ratios were obtained as 25, 50, 100, 200 and 400.  The effect of HCl and HNO HCl and HNO On the other hand, it was determined that 0.01 mol L In this study, we investigated the extraction and separation of La, Pr, Nd, Sm, Eu an Gd from nitric acid solutions by Cyanex 272 impregnated XAD–7 resin. The prepared SIR was characterized by FTIR, SEM, thermal analysis, specific surface area and porosity measurements. FTIR spectra and surface area analysis data demonstrate that the impregnation of Cyanex 272 on Amberlite XAD–7 was successful. Parameters affecting the extraction and separation of REEs such as pH, contact time and V/m ratio were investigated. Experimental data revealed that distribution coefficients of REEs decrease in the range of Gd > Eu > Sm > Nd > Pr > La. REEs have a tendency to behave as two different groups which can be separated into two fractions. At the equilibrium pH of 2.45, the highest K From the stripping data with 0.01 mol L This research revealed the adsorption behaviours of La, Pr, Nd, Sm, Eu and Gd onto Cyanex 272 impregnated XAD–7 in nitric acid media. The data and findings obtained from the experiments are promising and deserve further studies in a SIR filled column under dynamic conditions. These column studies, which are important for the individual separation of REEs in stripping step, would significantly contribute to efforts in the creation of a process flow chart for the technological evaluation of Eskisehir-Beylikahir thorium–REEs ore of Turkey. This work was supported by The