The presence of aragonite inclusions in garnet from diamond-grade metamorphic rocks from the Kokchetav Massif, Northern Kazakhstan was identified for the first time by means of Raman analyses and mapping. Aragonite appears within the inclusions up to 50μm in size as a single crystal. These inclusions have rounded shape. The grain boundary between the host–garnet is smooth. No cracks occur around the aragonite inclusions. No significant shift in the main aragonite Raman band was measured. These observations indicate that residual pressure within the inclusion is minor. These findings imply either non-UHPM origin of the host garnet or significant plastic deformation of host minerals during retrograde stage. These features should be taken into account for recovery peak metamorphic conditions and modeling of exhumation processes of UHPM complexes.Aragonite, the high-pressure CaCO Carbonates (e.g. calcite, dolomite, aragonite) are quite common in high pressure metamorphic rocks. Whereas CaCO The presence of aragonite inclusions in metamorphic diamonds by Raman mapping was performed with a Sentera Raman system equipped with two lasers at 532 Textural relations were examined in polished thin sections by transmitted and reflected light optical microscopy and back-scattered electron images on a JEOL 6380LA (Institute of Geology and Mineralogy SB RAS, Novosibirsk). The phase compositions were determined on a JEOL JXA-8100 using an acceleration voltage of 15 The samples in this study belong to the carbonate-bearing garnet–pyroxene rocks of the diamondiferous Unit 1 of the Kokchetav Massif Sample GAK101 consists of four different layers ranging from almost white (layer 1) over grey (layers 2 and 3) to green (layer 4) with variable amounts of carbonate minerals, garnet and clinopyroxene ( Grey layers are rich in sulphides (e.g. pyrite and pyrhotite), Ti–clinohumite and serpentine pseudomorphs after forsterite. Dolomite was identified exclusively in layer 2 ( Polycrystalline and monocrystalline carbonate inclusions up to 400 Identification of aragonite in diamond-grade metamorphic rocks is very challenging because of the size of the carbonate inclusions, and of the very low response to cathodoluminescence Diamond and graphite occur exclusively in diamond-bearing marbles, mainly as inclusions in K-bearing clinopyroxene and garnet porphyroblasts. Graphite was found (i) as inclusion in garnet and clinopyroxene (often together with diamond) and (ii) in the sample matrix. No graphite/diamond was found in the aragonite or aragonite-bearing inclusions. Carbonates are distinguishable by their diagnostic Raman spectra The two polymorphs of CaCO Raman mapping of a monocrystalline carbonate inclusion revealed mainly calcite and only exceptionally rare monocrystalline inclusions with bands, typically assigned to aragonite, were found ( Over 100 monocrystalline carbonate inclusions were analyzed by CL and SEM. Monocrystalline calcite or dolomite inclusions exhibit strong orange and dark red cathodoluminescence, respectively ( Aragonite-bearing assemblages (e.g. aragonite The authors are grateful to anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments. B. van der Veken is thanked for his editorial handling. This study was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (10-05-00616-a, 10-05-00575-a).