Phenolic resin was mixed with a cross-linking agent divinylbenzene (DVB) to prepare a polyaniline-based electrically-conductive thermosetting polymer composite. It has been shown that this Phenol-DVB mixture can undergo cationic polymerization in the presence of the dodecylbenzene sulfonic acid (DBSA)-doped polyaniline (PANI). Composites with different weight ratios of phenolic resin and DVB were mixed with a fixed weight of DBSA-PANI (i.e. 30 wt. %). Increasing the phenol content in the resin system was found to improve the electrical conductivity of the composite to almost 2700%. This improvement has been assigned to the reduced de-doping of polyaniline in phenol-DVB resin. Active sites of phenol effectively attached to the β carbon of DVB and reduced the proton subtracting species of DVB, leading to reduced de-doping of PANI. This behavior was studied through various characterization techniques including differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), FT-IR spectroscopy and Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). Electrical conductivity measurement, mechanical properties, and in-situ electrical conductivity measurements were performed to find the optimized properties of the composite. Optimized composites prepared with the composition of 30 wt. % DBSA-PANI and 70 wt. % of phenol-DVB (50 wt. % each), have shown electrical conductivity of 0.20 S/cm and a flexural modulus of 2.1 GPa, which is a significant improvement in the flexural properties of polymer based-thermosetting composites with similar electrical conductivity. This material can be a potential candidate for the lightning strike protection of fiber reinforced plastics.Since the discovery of conductive polymers, researchers have looked for applications in thermoset composites. Polyaniline (PANI) is slowly gaining the reputation of a multifunctional material that is used in various applications such as capacitors, sensors, electromagnetic shielding, etc. [ Thermoset polymers are of particular interest to the aerospace industry. Many researchers have attempted to mix conductive polymers like PANI with aerospace grade commercial epoxies. While they are able to get some conductivity into the composites, the full potential of the conductive thermoset composite is yet to be realized. An extensive survey was conducted by Perrin et al. The survey reported electrical conductivity values in order of 10 Yokozeki et al. and Hirano et al., reported that a PANI-based composite could help to withstand a lightning strike [ Other than de-doping of PANI, another disadvantage of PANI is that it hinders the polymerization of many commercial resins, i.e., epoxy and DVB. This is defined as a scavenging property of PANI [ In the present research, authors have tried to solve both problems as mentioned above by replacing bisphenol type epoxy with DVB in combination with Phenol-based (KAYAHARD GPH-65) hardener. Mori et al. reported that phenol resin could be modified with vinyl components and the modified complex could be cured using protonic acids [ The novelty of the present work is that researchers used a combination of phenolic resin with divinylbenzene (DVB) cured in the presence of DBSA-PANI complex, obtaining a good curing property and a relatively good electrical conductivity of the thermoset composites. A pure phenol resin cannot be cured with DBSA-PANI and a pure DVB resin led to de-doping of PANI. Therefore, the combination of Phenol and DVB provided the needed synergic balance. In this work, efforts have been made to discover the best resin composition for optimized mechanical and electrical properties by keeping DBSA-PANI amount constant but changing the ratio of phenol and DVB. Concerning electrical, mechanical, and rheological properties, an ideal composition of the resin is proposed. The following chemicals were purchased from different commercial producers, polyaniline (PANI) in its emeraldine base form, from Regulus Co. Ltd., Divinylbenzene (DVB) of 80% technical grade from Sigma Aldrich Co. and dodecylbenzene sulfonic acid (DBSA) from Kanto Chemical Co. Inc. Bisphenol-F type epoxy RE-303S-L and phenol-based hardener KAYAHARAD GPH-65 were purchased from Nippon Kayaku Co. Ltd., and curezol C17Z catalyst was procured from Shikoku Chemical Corporation. All chemicals were used as received, without any modifications. Plausible cationic polymerization of Phenol-DVB in the presence of a protonic acid like camphor sulfonic acid (CSA), dodecylbenzene sulfonic acid (DBSA), and p-toluene sulfonic acid (PTSA) is shown in Semi-doped polyaniline is necessary for desired electrical, mechanical and rheological properties of the PANI-based composites as explained in previous work by authors [ Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) analysis was conducted using a DSC-60 Plus (Shimadzu Co. Japan). FT-IR spectra of all specimens were obtained by the IRAffinity-1S spectrometer (Shimadzu Co. Japan). For electrical conductivity DC measurement, the specimens were polished using a grinding machine. Electrodes made of aluminium tape were attached to the polished side via conductive silver adhesives. The silver adhesive was dried completely at 60 °C before measurement. DC electrical resistance was measured using 3522-50LCR meter (Histester, Hioki E.E. Corporation, Ueda, Japan). Mechanical properties were measured using Instron-5582 UTM machine. A flexural bending test was performed in a 3-point bending configuration. At least five specimens were tested for both electrical and mechanical property measurement. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) with an energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) was employed with a JSM-7900 F (JEOL, Japan). Viscosity was measured using Viscometer TV-25 Type H (Toki Sangyo co. ltd.), at 10 rpm speed with a 3 × R9.7 cone. DSC analysis was performed to understand the reaction mechanism during doping of PANI and curing of phenol-DVB, and the results are shown in A shoulder-like peak appears with an increased amount of phenol in the composite. This could be due to the effect of the phenol content in the resin and curing of phenol-DVB. The second peak, around 140 °C–170 °C, is the radical polymerization of remaining DVB. It can be observed that this peak shifts to a lower temperature with decreased DVB content. The third peak is attributed to the decomposition of the dopant DBSA. From DSC analysis, it can be inferred that with increased phenol content in the composite, exothermic reaction reduces, as indicated by reduced intensity of first joint peak. With the shifting of the second peak toward a lower temperature, it can be inferred that polymerization time required for the complete curing of the resin reduces with increasing phenol content. This finding bolsters the idea that DVB is highly prone to the scavenging behavior in the presence of doped polyaniline [ DSC of cured specimens was also conducted to find out the cure percentage after a fixed curing time of 1 h at 130 °C. DSC curves for cured specimens are shown in the It should be noted that the first peak is a joint peak of doping of PANI and cationic polymerization of the resin. Therefore, to calculate total curing percentage, heat flow for 30 wt.% of DBSA-PANI is subtracted from the total heat flow as shown in FTIR characterization of the uncured PDD & PDD-ph-4 and cured PDD & PDD-ph-4 was performed to study the reaction mechanism of PDD-phenol composite with results shown in By comparing PDD and PDD-ph-4 spectra we can easily identify the difference due to the adding of phenol. A broad, but weak, peak at 3522 cm The electrical conductivity value of the composites is shown in It is known that the β-carbon of DVB has a high proton affinity compared to polyaniline and hence causes the de-doping of PANI. In phenol-DVB resin, the β-carbon of DVB is utilized to initiate phenol-DVB cationic polymerization as explained in An innovative technique was utilized to measure the in-situ electrical conductivity of the composite during the transition from its uncured state to a fully cured state. The uncured resin was poured into a mould, which is attached to conductive aluminium tape at two opposite ends as shown in For in-situ electrical conductivity measurement, 50 wt. % of DBSA-PANI was added to two specimens: Phenol-DVB and DVB resin. The in-situ electrical conductivity of both specimens was calculated using resistance recorded during curing profile and the dimensions of the mould. Results are shown in Reduction in the electrical conductivity with respect to time was observed in both cases. The reduction of electrical conductivity with curing time can be assigned to the de-doping of PANI. However, the rate of de-doping in the case of phenol-DVB, was significantly lower compared to the rate of de-doping in only DVB case. This further emphasizes our hypothesis that the phenol-DVB structure helps reduce de-doping of polyaniline. Electrical conductivity of a pure DBSA-PANI complex, with respect to temperature, from room temperature to 250 °C is shown in UV-vis spectroscopy is a very useful methodology to study the electronic structure of PANI. To understand the different de-doping process in both cases, we also performed the UV–vis spectroscopy of PDD and PDD-ph resins with 50 wt. % of DBSA-PANI in them. Specimens were subjected to thermal treatment for 2 h at 130 °C. UV–vis spectra were taken after 0, 10 and 120 min. The UV–vis spectra obtained for resin PDD and with PDD-ph are shown in The degree of doping of PANI can be determined by studying the joint peak of PANI and DBSA around 400–420 nm. The bifurcation of the joint peak at 400 nm corresponds to the detachment of DBSA from PANI. The overlapping of π-π* peaks at 350 nm and 420 nm, which represented PANI and DBSA respectively, indicates doping while their separation indicates de-doping. Formation of a distinct peak in PDD after a 2-hr thermal treatment clearly shows the de-doping of PANI. There is no such separation of the peak at 400 nm wavelength, in the case of PDD-ph specimen. This confirms that there is less de-doping of PANI in PDD-ph resin. Flexural properties of PDD-ph composites were investigated using a 3-point bending test, and the results are shown in On the other hand, flexural strength was found to be decreasing with the reducing DVB content. This suggests that the cross-linking polymer DVB is very effective for enhancing the strength of phenol resin. It can be concluded that complete curing of resin resulted in improving the flexural modulus of the composite, but it also increased the brittleness. Nevertheless, optimum mechanical properties seem to have been achieved in the cases of PDD-ph-3 and PDD-ph-4 specimens. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was employed to study the morphology of the composites. The specimens were observed without platinum coating due to the conductive property of PANI, as shown in To better explain the conclusion of the SEM photographs, the element mapping performed by EDS was utilized to study the dispersion of polyaniline. Through analyzing the components of raw materials, nitrogen could only be found in polyaniline molecular chains. Therefore, the N mapping via EDS was performed and the results are shown in One of the primary potential uses of this resin system is for it to function as an electrically-conductive matrix of CFRP for lightning strike protection application. Therefore, proper impregnation of carbon fibers should be kept in mind while designing such a resin system. The phenol used in this work is in the form of yellowish solid flakes and the DVB is a low molecular weight (liquid) monomer. The mixture of phenol and DVB is a wax-like complex initially, but over an extended time period it changes to the more viscous form of phenol (solid) at room temperature. Therefore, it was observed that the viscosity of PDD-ph increased with the higher content of phenol in the mixture as shown in A phenol-DVB complex was synthesized to be cured in the presence of semi-doped PANI. PANI was semi-doped with a protonic acid, i.e. dodecylbenzene sulfonic acid. Curing of phenol-DVB resin and complete doping of polyaniline was carried out using a single thermal treatment without any additional catalyst. It was found that due to the formation of a new structure between phenol and DVB, there are fewer number of proton-subtracting species in the system, which causes de-doping. The addition of phenol in DVB improves the electrical conductivity and flexural modulus of the material. An innovative method was utilized to measure the in-situ electrical conductivity of the composite with and without phenol. It is shown that the rate of de-doping is significantly high in the case of DVB-only resin. The reduced de-doping of the PANI is also corroborated by UV–vis spectroscopy. A good dispersion of polyaniline was observed using SEM and EDS element mapping. Optimal material composition, prepared with 30 wt. % DBSA-PANI and 70 wt. % of phenol-DVB, resulted in the achievement of electrical conductivity of 0.20 S/cm and a flexural modulus of 2.1 GPa as well as viscosity of 3600 mPa.s. There is a high potential that an electrically-conductive adhesive layer or conductive CFRPs with better mechanical properties can be prepared using this newly developed resin system. The authors acknowledge