The present work investigates the conjugation of flotation and photo-Fenton techniques on oil removal performance from oilfield produced water. The experiments were conducted in a column flotation and annular lamp reactor for induced air flotation and photodegradation steps, respectively. A nonionic surfactant was used as a flotation agent. The flotation experimental data were analyzed in terms of a first-order kinetic rate model. Two experimental designs were employed to evaluate the oil removal efficiency: fractional experimental design and central composite rotational design (CCRD). Overall oil removal of 99% was reached in the optimum experimental condition after 10 min of flotation followed by 45 min of photo-Fenton. The results of the conjugation of induced air flotation and photo-Fenton processes allowed meeting the wastewater limits established by the legislations for disposal.Throughout the productive life of an oil field, the simultaneous production of gas, oil and water generally occurs. However, the economic interest is focused on the production of hydrocarbons (oil and gas), thus requiring the separation of these three fluids. The treatment of produced water (aqueous stream) aims to recover the dispersed oil and frame the final effluent for the purpose of reuse or disposal. In Brazil ( Several methods are applied to TOG reduction in aqueous effluents, such as liquid–liquid extraction ( The probability of flotation is defined as the product of the collision probabilities, adhesion and transport ( Thus, a photodegradation step subsequent to the flotation process can improve oil removal efficiency in the effluent. Recently, some researchers have suggested the application of integrated processes as being the most appropriate solution for the treatment of various industrial effluents ( In this context, the aim of this study was to evaluate the integration of induced air flotation (IAF) and photo-Fenton processes for reducing the oil from oilfield produced water. From this integration, the aim was to recover the maximum amount of oil by flotation, and then degrade the remaining oil fraction in the aqueous phase by the photo-Fenton process. This study used a real crude oil sample from Potiguar Basin (Natal, Brazil). The oil was free of dissolved gas and water and its properties are summarized in A surfactant ethoxylated derived from fatty alcohol used as a flotation agent was supplied by Oxiteno Experiments were carried out using effluent prepared carefully from the dispersion of real crude oil in a saline aqueous solution containing: 17 ppm (NaNO The determination of the TOG in aqueous samples was performed by liquid–liquid extraction, using chloroform as a solvent, followed by the measurement of the extract in molecular absorption spectrum, at Flotation experiments were carried out in the flotation column using induced air aeration as a system for generating bubbles. Schematic diagram of column is shown in a previous work ( The experiments were carried out in an annular reactor with a capacity of 0.6 L. A mercury vapor lamp was used as source of radiation (high pressure 400 W, FLZ) and located on the longitudinal axis of the reactor, inside a quartz jacketed well with refrigerated water circulation. A schematic diagram of reactor is shown in a previous study ( A full factorial design was conducted to evaluate the influence of the concentration of Fenton's reagents in reducing TOG. To carry out an experimental design with two independent variables (  First order kinetic considers that the bubble-particle collision rate is first order with respect to the number of particles and that bubble concentration remains constant over time (Eq. Previous work has demonstrated that gasoline degradation under conditions of photolysis (light UV only) was under than 6% ( The degradation kinetics of the photo-Fenton step was expressed in terms TOG removal (Eq. The mathematical model that describes the response function ( The response function (   The integration process resulted in greater TOG reduction efficiency for each individual stage. In the flotation stage, the surfactant concentration was equal to 4.06·10  Photodegradation experiments were carried out to verify the influence of the concentration of dissolved oxygen and the results are reported in In The experimental results of oil removal by flotation were described by a first-order kinetic model. For the evaluated surfactant concentrations, the highest removal rate ( Brazilian financial support provided by ANP (Agência Nacional do Petróleo, Gás Natural e Biocombustíveis), Petrobrás S.A, CAPES (Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior), CNPq (Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico) and INCT (Institutos Nacionais de Ciência e Tecnologia de Estudos Do Meio Ambiente) is gratefully acknowledged.