The effects of inoculation of earthworms and arbuscular mycorrhiza separately, and in combination, on Cd uptake and growth of ryegrass were studied in soils contaminated with 0, 5, 10, 20mg of Cdkg−1 soil. Both earthworms and mycorrhiza were able to survive in all the treatments with added Cd. Earthworm activity significantly increased mycorrhizal infection rate of root and ryegrass shoot biomass. Earthworm activity decreased soil pH by about 0.2 units, and enhanced root Cd concentration and ryegrass Cd uptake. Mycorrhiza inoculation increased shoot and root Cd concentration substantially, and at the highest dosage of 20mg Cdkg−1 decreased biomass of ryegrass. Inoculation of both earthworms and mycorrhiza increased ryegrass shoot Cd uptake at low Cd concentrations (5 and 10mg Cdkg−1 soil), when compared with inoculation of earthworms or mycorrhiza alone. In conclusion, earthworm, mycorrhiza and their interaction may have a potential role in elevating phytoextraction efficiency in low to medium level metal contaminated soil.With the development of industries, mining activities, application of waste water and sewage sludge on land, heavy metal pollution of soils is increasingly becoming a serious environmental problem. Phytoremediation (such as phytoextraction, phytostabilization, and rhizofiltration) of soils contaminated by heavy metals has been widely accepted as a cost-effective and environmental-friendly cleanup technology. However, the progress in this field is hindered by a lack of understanding of complex interactions in the rhizosphere and plant-based mechanisms which allow metal translocation and accumulation in plants ( Complex interactions between roots, microorganisms and fauna in the rhizosphere have a fundamental effect on metal uptake and plant growth. Earthworms are important components of the rhizosphere ecosystem, and they are capable of enhancing plant growth by improving soil fertility and nutrient cycling ( Providing a direct physical link between soil and plant roots, the arbuscular mycorrhiza (AM) fungi are important rhizospheric microorganisms. They can increase plant uptake of nutrients especially relatively immobile elements such as P, Zn and Cu ( In order to understand if the interaction of earthworm and AM fungi would impose a benefit effect in elevating phytoremediation efficiency, the effects of earthworm ( An ultisol used for the present experiment was collected from Loi Tung Village in Hong Kong. It was air-dried, sieved (2 The arbuscular–mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) inoculum was a mixture of Earthworms ( Seeds of ryegrass ( The experiment consisted of four levels of Cd addition (0, 5, 10 and 20 Mineral nutrients were added uniformly to the soil at rates of 162 Samples of oven-dried roots and shoots were digested in a mixture of nitric and perchloric acids. Multi-element analysis, including P, K and Cd, was then performed using an inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES). The air-dried soil samples were tested for pH (5 The mycorrhiza infection rate of root was higher in the EwM treatment (31%) than in the M treatment (22%) ( Compared with the control, earthworm addition increased shoot dry weight significantly, but had no apparently effect on root dry weight ( Cadmium concentration in the shoot and root of ryegrass increased ( When inoculated with either earthworm or AMF, the total shoot and root Cd uptake increased significantly when compared with control, except under the highest dosage (20 Earthworm activity (both Ew and EwM treatments) significantly decreased soil pH by about 0.2 units, while mycorrhiza inoculation had little effect on soil pH ( At harvest, all earthworms were alive and the soils were burrowed completely by earthworms. It has been noted that in metal polluted soils earthworms can accumulate metals in their tissues and survive by metal detoxification involve binding and storage of the metals in metallothionein and metal-binding proteins ( The present experiment shows that earthworm addition resulted in enhanced ryegrass shoot yield and Cd uptake. The beneficial effect of earthworms on plant growth by improving soil physical and chemical conditions has been well documented ( The present experiment also demonstrates that earthworm activity significantly decreased soil pH, which confirmed results of The slight decrease in soil pH may result in increased bioavailability of some nutrients and heavy metals in soils. In a relevant experiment studying availability of Cd (data not shown here) in the same Cd added soil, a significant correlation was obtained ( Phytoextraction uses metal-accumulating plants in metal polluted soils to remove metals by concentrating them in the harvestable parts ( The mycorrhiza infection rate was not affected by the addition of Cd in soil. This finding is in line with results of  The present results also indicated that AMF inoculation decreased shoot biomass especially in soils with high Cd concentrations. The AMF mycelium is important in nutrient transfer in soil, but this process is affected by the activities of earthworms ( The shoot dry yield and shoot Cd concentration in the EwM treatment were higher than those of M treatment, except under the highest Cd dosage, where similar shoot dry weight and lower shoot Cd concentrations were obtained ( In conclusion, earthworms, mycorrhiza and their combination may have a potential role in elevating phytoextraction efficiency in low to medium level metal contaminated soil. Since most of the metal-accumulating plants belong to the family Brassicaceae are non-mycorrhizal plant, other plants with large biomass like trees can be considered ( The authors would like to thank the Research Grants Council of the University Grants Committee, Hong Kong (HKBU 2049/00M), National Natural Science Fund Committee, China (40271068) and Natural Science Fund Committee, Shandong Province (Y2002E02) for financial support.