To investigate dental development in patients treated with a hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT), 42 children and young adults who were under 12 years old at time of HSCT were examined for dental agenesis, microdontia, and root-to-crown ratio. Conditioning regimens were total body irradiation (TBI) based in 12 patients, busulfan based in 21 patients, and 9 patients had other chemotherapeutic agents. Sixteen patients were <3 years old, 9 patients were 3 to 6 years old, and 17 patients were 6 to 12 years old at HSCT. Prevalence of agenesis and microdontia of at least 1 permanent tooth were, respectively, 51.3% and 46.2% in the study population, and 76.3% had an aberrant root-to-crown ratio. All these results were highly different from the prevalence in the healthy population. Patients treated before the age of 3 years had more microdontia (76.9%) and agenesis (92.3%) compared with patients treated at an older age. In the subgroup of patients treated after 6 years, there was more microdontia when treated with busulfan (50%) compared with treatment with TBI (0%) (P = .044). Patients treated with HSCT had many disturbances in dental development. Age at HSCT and possibly also the conditioning regimen used had an effect on their type and prevalence. Dental follow-up should be incorporated in the multidisciplinary follow-up program of these patients.Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is currently the only treatment with curative potential for various malignant and nonmalignant disorders An aberrant dental development can be due to genetic and/or environmental factors including chemotherapy or radiation therapy The prevalence of microdontia (teeth smaller than normal) is between 1% and 2.5% The root-to-crown ratio is the ratio of the length of the root to the length of the crown. After normal tooth development extrinsic factors like external root resorption or dental trauma can cause reduction of the root length Previous studies mainly investigated the effect on dental development of radiotherapy and chemotherapy in a non-HSCT regimen This study investigates dental status of patients who underwent HSCT during early childhood. Prevalence of agenesis, microdontia, and root-to-crown ratios in this population is calculated, and the possible impacts of age at HSCT and of different conditioning regimens are examined. Patients who had HSCT from 1988 until 2016 at the Department of Pediatric Hematology/ Oncology and HSCT of the Ghent University Hospital and who were between 1 and 12 years old at the time of HSCT were included in the study. Another inclusion criterion was an interval of more than 1 year between the HSCT and this study. Exclusion criteria were genetic disorders with a possible impact on dental development (eg, Hurler's disease, osteopetrosis, or severe combined immune deficiency). Ninety-five patients were eligible, and 42 of them participated. Main reasons for dropout were nonresponders (n = 31), refusal to participate (n = 6), loss to follow-up (n = 8), speaking a foreign language (n = 2), family history of dental aberrations (n = 2), deceased (n = 2), and other reasons (n = 2). This study was approved by our institutional ethical committee (B670201525400) and carried out in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. This study investigated the impact of age and conditioning regimen as possible risk factors for dental abnormalities. The patients in the study were divided into 3 age categories: <3 years old, 3 to 6 years old, and >6 years old. To investigate the impact of the different conditioning regimens 3 treatment categories were made: TBI based, busulfan based, and other chemotherapeutic agents. Patient characteristics are listed in Each patient was examined at the department of Pediatric Dentistry of the Ghent University Hospital. A medical history of dental care and a clinical and radiographic examination focusing on dental agenesis, microdontia, and root-to-crown ratio was performed by 2 independent investigators (a final year dental student and a pediatric dentist). In addition, an orthopantomogram (OPT; Planmeca ProMax 2D, Location: Department of Dentistry at the Ghent University Hospital, Manufacturer: Planmeca, Planmeca Oy Asentajankatu 6 FI-00880 HELSINKI Finland) was taken. Finally, medical history focusing on relevant diseases and medication use, family history of dental aberrations, oral hygiene, caries and fillings, eruption, and occlusion were evaluated. Third molars were excluded for all analyses, and only permanent teeth were taken into account. Knowledge of the mineralization process of the permanent teeth was of crucial importance for this research. Agenesis was diagnosed based on the clinical and radiologic examination. Clinically, all teeth should be present in the oral cavity at ages 12 to 14 Because tooth size depends on many different factors like ethnicity, there is no strict definition of microdontia and no clear limits to help regarding measurements as normal The root-to-crown ratio was measured by 2 blinded investigators on the OPT using (Image J is an open source Java image processing program. National Institutes of Health and the Laboratory for Optical and Computational Instrumentation at the University of Wisconsin). This software allows precise measurements. Reference points are the cement–enamel junction and the crest of the alveolar bone for, respectively, the anatomic and the clinical root-to-crown ratio The prevalence of agenesis, microdontia, and aberrant root-to-crown ratio found in our study was compared with the prevalence within a normal population as mentioned in the literature Prevalence of agenesis of 1 or more teeth was 51.3% (95% confidence interval, 36.2% to 66.1%) in the study population. The lower second premolar (29.5%) and the upper second premolar (27%) were found to be the most agenetic in this study population. The upper and lower first molar and the lower canine showed no agenesis. Prevalence of microdontia of 1 or more teeth was 46.2% (95% confidence interval, 31.6% to 61.4%) in the study population. The lower first premolar (14.3%) and the upper second molar (13.4%) were most affected by microdontia in this study population. The upper first molar was not, and the lower first molar was only affected by microdontia in 2.6% of patients. An aberrant root-to-crown ratio was seen in 76.3% (95% confidence interval, 60.8% to 87%) of patients. There was no significant difference for agenesis in the different conditioning regimen groups ( There was a significant difference for microdontia in the different conditioning regimen groups ( When comparing the total effect (agenesis and/or microdontia and/or aberrant root-to-crown ratio) of conditioning regimen on dental development, there was no significant difference between the 3 conditioning regimens ( Age had a strong effect on agenesis ( Age had a very strong significant effect on microdontia ( There was no significant difference in effect on root-to-crown ratio aberration between the different age groups ( When comparing the total effect (agenesis and/or microdontia and/or aberrant root-to-crown ratio) of age on dental development there was a significant difference ( Age had a significantly different distribution in the 3 conditioning groups ( A logistic regression was performed to evaluate the individual impact of both risk factors. Corrected for conditioning regimen, age had a strong significant association with agenesis (    This study investigated the impact of different conditioning regimens (busulfan based, TBI based, and other chemotherapeutic agents) and age at HSCT on dental development in children who underwent HSCT before age 12 years. The impact of head and neck radiation therapy and TBI on dental development has been described in the literature, but little is known about the late effects of non–TBI-based conditioning regimens and more specific busulfan-based regimens. This study showed that the younger the patient at HSCT, the higher the risk of dental agenesis, with a prevalence of up to 92% for the youngest patients. The chronology of mineralization of the permanent dentition as depicted by Koch et al. defines possible dental aberrations that can be expected at a certain age In this study we looked at the impact of the procedure of HSCT on dental development, especially the possible impact of chemotherapy-based conditioning regimens and more specifically busulfan-based conditioning regimens. In our study more agenesis was seen in patients treated with busulfan compared with treatment with TBI or other chemotherapeutic agents, but the difference was not statistically significant. Preliminary data of Dahllöf et al. The prevalence for microdontia in our study was highest in the youngest age category. This result is in accordance with previous research We noticed that microdontia was more apparent in patients treated with busulfan compared with the other conditioning regimens in our study population. Dahllöf et al. A high prevalence of aberrant root-to-crown ratios in the middle age group was seen, and all 3 different conditioning regimens had a similar effect in this study. In contrast, Hölttä et al. Because TBI is predominantly used in patients older than 6 years and busulfan can be used in younger patients, age and conditioning regimen may not be independent. Therefore, conditioning regimens were compared within age groups and vice versa. Our study hypothesizes that age at HSCT has a stronger effect on dental development compared with type of conditioning regimen. Nonetheless, more microdontia was noticed in patients older than 6 years and treated with a busulfan-based conditioning compared with a conditioning regimen including TBI. Vesterbacka et al. We are aware of possible limitations of the study. It investigated a small group of pediatric HSCT recipients with a large variety of underlying malignant and nonmalignant diseases. Despite the variety of the underlying diseases, the conditioning regimens used were mostly myeloablative, and there was an equal distribution of patients who were heavily pretreated in the different study groups. The cytotoxic treatment before HSCT may have an influence on the high prevalence of dental aberrations reported in this study. Therefore, the reported data must be interpreted with caution, and more investigations are needed to confirm these preliminary results. Children under 1 year and older than 12 years at HSCT were excluded from this study. At age 12 dental development, excluding the third molar, is complete, and therefore these children have little to no risk for dental disturbances. The inclusion criterion of those < 12 years old at HSCT was also used by Näsman et al. Effort was made to exclude confounding variables causing dental aberrations. For example, patients with genetic disorders linked to dental disturbances or a family history of dental aberrations were excluded. However, unknown inborn errors responsible for the agenesis or microdontia in patients treated at an older age cannot be excluded from this study. All examinations were performed by the same 2 independent investigators, which limits the amount of interobserver bias. Considering the inclusion and exclusion criteria of this study, a relatively large group of patients was examined compared with other studies In conclusion, patients treated with HSCT before age 12 had many disturbances in dental development. Age at HSCT and possibly also conditioning regimen used had effects on their type and prevalence. Dental follow-up in a specialized setting is recommended. Additionally, parents and patients should be given adequate information on this topic. The authors thank the Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology of the Ghent University Hospital and “het Kinderkankerfonds” for their funding to perform the statistical analysis and the Department of Dentistry at the Ghent University Hospital for the use of their infrastructure. The authors also thank Adrian Sugar and Paul Thielens for reading the manuscript.   Supplementary data related to this article can be found online at 