In beneficiation of Ni ores containing fibrous serpentines in large amounts, flotation pulps exhibit high viscosity, impacting Ni recovery and grade. Fibers entangle in pulp with formation of inter-fiber networks made up of micro floccs that spread across the pulp volume. These networks are sturdy and difficult to disentangle as inter-fiber frictional forces which are the predominant among the inter-particle forces restrict sliding of fibers at the inter-fiber contact points. The net force from numerous contact points in a network is significant. Therefore, the pulp yield stress value, a measure of net inter-particle forces, is considerably higher than that is typical in flotation. According to this study, the pulp yield stress decreases upon addition of H2SO4 to the pulp, which also correlates to the extent of serpentine dissolution. The continuation of fiber dissolution is necessary to maintain the inter-fiber frictional forces to a lower value, and serves as an inter-fiber lubricant for loosening of these networks. Thus, acidic conditions alleviate the impact of pulp rheological behavior on Ni ore beneficiation.Beneficiation of Ni ores consisting of fibrous serpentine minerals in large amounts has been a technological challenge as the ore pulps are atypically viscous, resulting in significantly lower Ni recovery and grade Fiber aspect ratio, bending/twisting equilibrium, effective stiffness, and frictional coefficients are the fundamental parameters of fibers that interrelate inter-fiber network structural characteristics (size/shape) and strength to the pulp rheological behavior The friction forces are subjected to Coulomb friction law, Fibrous Ni ores were supplied by Vale Technical Services, Canada. Porphyry copper ore (0.7% Cu) spiked (10 SEM micrograph of chrysotile fibers suspended in water indicated that the fibers entangle to form networks ( Chrysotile dissolution in presence of Na Slime-coating (attachment of the positively charged chrysotile fibers to negatively charged pentlandite Ni minerals) has been proposed to be a route cause towards poor froth flotation beneficiation of fibrous Ni ores Froth flotation processing of fibrous ores under acidic conditions is a suitable option to deal with the technological challenges owing to pulp rheological aspects. Fiber dissolution at the inter-fiber contact points serve as a lubricant enabling sliding of fibers, and loosens the network. According to our earlier studies, such loosening of network, where pulp yield stress decreases, leads to improvement in Cu/Ni recovery and grade. Thus, maintaining acidic conditions throughout flotation leads to continuation of fiber dissolution, and regulates pulp rheological behavior for improved Ni beneficiation. We acknowledge support from