Friction and wear behaviors of in-situ Cf/Al2O3, Cf/Al2O3, and Al2O3 were examined under dry sliding, water, PAO oil and PAO+carbon nanotube (CNT) grease at applied load of 6.86N by ball-on-disk sliding tribotester. Both in-situ Cf/Al2O3 and Cf/Al2O3 were fabricated by hot-press sintering in vacuum. In-situ Cf/Al2O3 used cheap and flexible pre-oxidized polyacrylonitrile fibers to in-situ transform into Cf during sintering and that Cf/Al2O3 used commercial Cf directly. The experimental results indicate that in-situ Cf/Al2O3 has comparable friction-reduction ability with Cf/Al2O3 under dry and water lubrication. Specifically, friction coefficient μ of in-situ Cf/Al2O3 reduces from 0.45 to 0.39 with time and fluctuates around 0.17 under dry and water lubrication respectively, while μ of Al2O3 is about 0.52 and varies around 0.35. Meanwhile, in-situ Cf/Al2O3 shows best wear-resistance among the three specimens with slightest spalling under dry and water lubrication because in-situ Cf has good interfacial bonding with matrix. However, lubrication property of carbon fibers are hidden by good lubricants (PAO and PAO+CNT grease), the worn surfaces of all of three specimens look like polished. All these results indicate that in-situ Cf/Al2O3 should be a better and cost-effective self-lubricated composite.Friction and wear of materials are a very common phenomenon, which exists in any relative moving systems, such as sliding, rolling, or rotating components. It has been fully-proved from some statistics that a great deal of non-renewable fossil fuel has been wasted due to friction, which aggravates the energy shortage issue and the green-house effect problem. In addition, mechanical elements or even whole machines are frequently replaced due to severe wear costing a large amount of government expenditure With the aim of exploring the tribological performance of in-situ C The two types of composites were both prepared by the hot pressed sinter technology. Alumina powder and 3 vol% CaO–MgO–SiO Friction and wear performances of three kinds of specimens were tested by a ball-on-disk tribotester (Kaihua Co. Ltd, WTM-1E). The configuration of the tester is displayed in Before friction and wear tests, all samples surfaces were ground by 1200 grit sand paper and then polished by diamond polishing paste followed by being rinsed by ethyl alcohol and water. The average roughness (Ra) values of Al  Under water lubrication, the in-situ C Under PAO oil lubrication, the friction coefficients of all the three kinds of specimens are similar and remain relatively steady-state value of around 0.11 during testing time ( Under PAO+CNT grease lubrication, steady friction coefficients are obtained during the tribo-tests. Among the three tested specimens, the Al  It should be more significant to understand the wear mechanism of the in-situ C A comparison of the overall Si In summary, in-situ C  Under PAO oil and PAO+CNT grease, all of the three specimens keep almost their original surface morphologies, as seen in As stated above, both PAO oil and PAO+CNT grease are better lubricants than water, which corresponds to the lower friction coefficient as showed in  In-situ C Carbon fibers strengthen the alumna matrix and lubricate rubbing surfaces. Under dry sliding, as for in-situ C In-situ C This work is supported by