Today different types of wastes are used as refuse-derived fuels (RDF) either in waste-to-energy plants or as fuel substitutes in energy-intensive industrial processes. In order to quantify their greenhouse-gas relevance (fossil carbon content), reliable and practical analytical methods are required, which allow differentiation between biogenic and fossil organic carbon. In the present paper, an alternative method to determine the fossil share in RDFs is examined and validated. The so-called “adapted Balance Method” (aBM) is applied to three different RDFs and the results are compared to three standardized methods, namely the Radiocarbon Method (14C-Method), the Selective Dissolution Method (SDM), and the Manual Sorting Method (MS). The aBM is based on the distinctly different elemental composition of water-and-ash-free biogenic and of fossil matter (TOXBIO
                      and TOXFOS
                     ). Within the study, these compositional data are derived by manual sorting of the RDFs. The results show that the values obtained by the aBM are in excellent agreement with the results of the 14C-Method (considered as reference method). Mean deviations between the two methods of −0.9 to +1.9% absolute for the share of fossil carbon are found which are statistically insignificant. High trueness and reliability of the aBM can be expected, independent of the RDF type. In contrast, the reliability of the other standardized methods (SDM and MS) appears to strongly depend on the type and composition of the RDF. The results further indicate that the generation of RDF-specific data on TOXFOS
                      is important for the aBM if significant shares of polymers with comparably high oxygen content might be present in the RDF and if low uncertainties of the results (<3% relative) are required. The findings demonstrate that the alternative method has advantages compared to standardized methods with respect to reliability and/or costs.The utilization of waste materials as a secondary energy resource is increasing throughout most of the world. Today many wastes and waste fractions are used for energetic applications, a practice supported by national governments and the European Commission The prime example for the utilization of RDFs is the cement industry, which represents one of the most material-, energy-, and CO Compared to fossil fuels, RDFs exhibit a much broader variation in composition, which strongly depends on the waste utilized for RDF production. Variations can easily appear due to different types of commercial and industrial waste, municipal solid waste, waste collection scheme, or seasonal variations in waste generation. In order to check the quality of solid RDFs with respect to their composition (e.g. calorific value, biomass content, heavy metal contents) and their associated environmental impacts, reliable and practical methods are required. Both, waste management companies generating RDFs and industries utilizing these fuels require tools for reporting and documentation purposes. With respect to the determination of the climate-relevant share in solid RDFs, three methods are described in the standard EN 15440:2011: the Manual Sorting method (MS), the Selective Dissolution Method (SDM), and the Radiocarbon Method ( Only the BM and In contrast to SDM and MS, the uncertainties of the aBM results are statistically derived. They are propagated from the uncertainties of the input parameters The aBM is far less time- and cost-intensive than MS or the High trueness and precision of the aBM was found recently when defined mixtures of biogenic (e.g. cardboard, paper) and fossil materials (plastics) were investigated (deviations from the theoretical value below 4.5%rel; precision of ±3%rel) Contrary to most standardized methods, the aBM can provide a range of parameters with reference to the fossil/biogenic content in RDFs, including the key parameters identified in Finally, during a recent interlaboratory comparison, the SDM was applied to determine the ratio of biogenic carbon in RDF samples (output of mechanical biological plant). The results showed that from the values generated by 12 laboratories only 30–70% were within the tolerance limits of two standard deviations The objective of the study presented is to examine the aBM as an alternative method for determining the fossil carbon (and mass) share in solid RDFs. Following the promising results with artificially produced RDFs To do so, the method is applied to three different RDFs which are drawn from different plants and are produced from different types of waste. The results obtained are compared to results of the standardized methods, particularly the The aBM relies on the distinctly different elemental composition of biogenic and fossil organic matter on a water-and-ash-free basis (where fossil is understood as materials produced out of crude oil, natural gas or coal). The necessary input data for the aBM comprise: data on the chemical composition of the water-and-ash-free RDF ( data on the elemental composition of the water-and-ash-free biogenic and fossil organic matter present in the RDF ( Uncertainties in Inserting the results ( If required, the fossil carbon content of the RDF can easily be transferred to fossil carbon dioxide emissions (CO Finally, fossil CO Three different types of solid RDFs are investigated in the study presented: Residues of a pulp and paper factory ( RDF prepared from commercial & industrial waste ( RDF prepared from pre-processed municipal solid waste and commercial & industrial waste ( Details on the RDF types are provided in For the elemental analysis (necessary to determine the elemental composition of the RDF samples Around 4 kg per sample are milled down to a grain size of <4 mm by means of a cutting mill (Essa CM 1000). The sample <4 mm is reduced to around 500 g using a riffle divider and further milled down to <1 mm (by cutting mill Retsch SM 2000). After another splitting step using a riffle divider, one part of the 1 mm sample is set aside to apply the Selective Dissolution Method (Section In order to examine the robustness and validity of input parameters of the adapted Balance Method, new input data on the elemental composition of the water-and-ash-free biogenic and fossil matter ( Around 4 kg per RDF are sorted into 9 categories: Thus, the appraisal on the rough mass share of biogenic and fossil matter in the sorted compounds is carried out by a preliminary evaluation by means of the aBM, using analyses of the sorted compounds ( applying the Selective Dissolution Method (see Section conducting Radiocarbon analyses (see Section For (1), the following assumptions are made: Natural Synthetic Compounds of   Additional sortings of the  The definition of The water content of each laboratory sample is determined by drying the unprepared sample at 105 °C for at least 24 h (start of drying directly after the delivery to the laboratory). For each analysis sample the ash content is analyzed in duplicate and in accordance with EN 15403:2011 The water-free (dried at 105 °C for 24 h) analysis samples are analyzed for the elemental composition using an Elementar Vario Macro instrument (Elementar Analysensysteme GmbH, Langenselbold, Germany). At a combustion temperature of 1150 °C, the total carbon The total oxygen content Each analytical sequence is accompanied by verification samples and blanks to assure accuracy of the measurement result and to control disturbed baselines. Calibration correction factors are determined with set control limits of 5% (for C, N, S) or 10% (for H, O) (according to DIN 51732:2014 and manufacturer information; see also Each RDF-analysis sample is analyzed. In addition, the ignition residue of each test sample treated in the muffle oven is analyzed for its elemental composition to appraise the total inorganic content of carbon In order to compare the results obtained by the aBM to results of standardized methods, the Selective Dissolution Method (SDM) and the Radiocarbon Method ( The Selective Dissolution Method (SDM) relies on the assumption that biogenic components will selectively dissolve and oxidize when concentrated sulphuric acid and hydrogen peroxide are applied. The fossil components are expected to remain in the dissolution residue. Various materials do not entirely act in accordance with this assumption of selective dissolution and can introduce errors to the results of the SDM For the investigations presented, the SDM is applied as described in EN 15440:2011. Threefold test portions are used (15 g; double determination) in order to account for the rather heterogeneous samples (particles sizes of <1 mm are used as stipulated in EN 15440:2011). The carbon content is determined in the <1 mm sample, in the dissolution residue, and in the ignition residue using an Elementar Vario Macro instrument (Elementar Analysensysteme GmbH, Langenselbold, Germany). Equations are provided in EN 15440:2011 and in In total, 25 samples are analyzed according to the SDM (15 Paper Reject-, 5 RDF C&I-, 5 RDF MSW+C&I-samples). The uncertainty of the results is estimated from the duplicate determination (repeatability) and from values for the reproducibility of the method given in Table F.1.4 in EN 15440:2011. The Radiocarbon Method ( Within the study presented, radiocarbon analyses according to EN 15440:2011 using AMS are conducted ( The uncertainty of the radiocarbon analysis results mainly from the Analyses by means of The samples are sorted into 9 categories (same sorting as described in Section A biogenic share is assigned to each sorted compound according to EN 15440:2011 (values given in Due to the usually small or compressed constituent particles in RDF, a visual recognition is challenging and manual sorting is only attainable with great effort. At the same time, the uncertainty can hardly be quantified; also due to the strong dependence on a person’s subjective categorization of particles. Within the study, the uncertainty of the manual sorting is estimated based on evaluations by aBM, by SDM, and Statistical tests are carried out in order to evaluate differences between data sets regarding their central tendencies (means) and variances. All tests are carried out using the program R (Version 3.0.2) Shapiro test: Test for normal distribution (required to decide which subsequent statistical test, e.g. t-Test, Wilcoxon rank sum test, is to be applied) 2-sample F-test: Test for homogeneity of variances between data sets; applied when there is no evidence that the data sets are not normally distributed Levene test: Test for homogeneity of variances between data sets; applied when there is evidence that the data sets are not normally distributed Paired Wilcoxon rank sum test (non-parametric test): Test for differences in means; applied when there is evidence that the differences between the data sets are not normally distributed For all statistical tests a level of significance of 0.05 is used. The aBM requires data on The composition of the biogenic matter tends to less variability compared to the composition of the fossil matter. The values derived for The fossil mass fraction (  In the Paper Reject samples, the aBM reveals fractions of fossil matter The aBM delivers results in a similar range as the  Comparing the mean values obtained – Based on statistical tests, the results of SDM compared to aBM and MS appears to significantly overestimate the fossil mass fraction It can be estimated from the aBM results that the fossil mass fraction in the reject of the paper and board factory considered is around 38%wt (on a dry basis) and can vary ±7 wt%abs. The share of fossil carbon is expected to be 54 wt% with a variability of ±8 wt%abs (standard deviation between sample results). Thus, around 54 wt% of the CO  When RDF C&I samples are considered, Low deviations between results of different methods for Slight underestimations by SDM of As there are only 2 MS values available for RDF C&I to be compared to the When all 8 samples of RDF C&I are considered (  The different methods deliver a broad range of results for samples of RDF MSW+C&I (sample results presented in As already observed for Paper Reject and RDF C&I, there is good agreement between the results of aBM and Different observations are made when results of SDM are compared to For the 2 RDF MSW+C&I samples, where MS results can be compared to In order to evaluate the agreement of the aBM results with the results of the standardized methods, a simple linear regression is performed. The SDM results can be considered to have a clear relationship to aBM results for the other RDFs (Paper Reject and RDF C&I). Correlation coefficients of 0.80 (Paper Reject) and 0.72 (RDF C&I) are determined (see A significant deviation from aBM is also noticeable when Concluding from the separate regression curves per RDF, it has to be considered that especially for RDF C&I and RDF MSW+C&I, only a very limited number of data points are compared (between 4 and 6), which are all in a similar range (between 60 and 90% of fossil carbon). Thus, the findings are regarded as qualitative, rather than quantitative trends. The elemental composition of the RDF (C, H, N, S, O), which is determined when applying the aBM, can be used to estimate the heating value of the RDF by means of empirical equations. This can be regarded as an advantage of the aBM over the standardized methods as no additional analyses to derive the heating value are necessary. CO The results show that the fossil CO The study shows that the values obtained by the adapted Balance Method (aBM) are in excellent agreement with the results of the Radiocarbon Method ( By applying the SDM, underestimations (although not consistent between the samples) of the fossil carbon share ( A critical factor for the application of the aBM is the choice of the necessary input values − the water-and-ash-free elemental composition of the biogenic and the fossil organic matter ( Concerning the viability and costs, the aBM is regarded as competitive with the SDM (which is the method currently most often applied). When the fossil or biogenic content in RDFs is to be determined routinely, the aBM might even be superior to the SDM (faster, less chemicals needed). The The study demonstrates that the developed method is a valid alternative to standardized methods for determining the fossil and biogenic share in solid RDFs. This confirms and rounds up the previous findings when defined RDF mixtures were investigated by the authors Further investigations will focus on possible simplifications of the method, in particular regarding the generation of the necessary input data ( The authors would like to acknowledge the funding of the present study, which was provided by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 