Tumbling mills using balls as grinding media are used in a variety of ways to produce fine powders. Mills in this category are ball, planetary and vibratory mills. The fineness of powder produced in such mills depends on the powder strength characteristics as well as the impact energy of the tumbling balls. In order to understand the collision frequency and the collision intensity of the ball media, a numerical simulation tool using the discrete element method (DEM) has been developed. The impact energy spectra of these mills can be modified via suitable choice of operating conditions. The significance of the impact energy spectra of vibratory and planetary mills are discussed.The size distribution of material ground in tumbling mills is determined by the strength characteristics of the material and the energy available for grinding. This energy is imparted to the particles as hundreds and thousands of collisions of varying intensity and frequency. Thus, the mill may be visualized as a device generating a characteristic impact energy spectrum which depends on the set of design and operating conditions. However, all impacts may not lead to material breakage at all. Some impacts are of excessive intensity that only a part of the energy is utilized in breakage, the rest is lost in overcoming interparticle friction. Impacts of low energy intensity may not cause any breakage. Therefore, the study of impact energy spectrum of a given mill ultimately leads to the selection of optimal operating conditions for a desired degree of fineness of the product. There has been an increasing demand for ultrafine powders of specified size and shape dispersion, ranging in their application from minerals to modern materials. In minerals processing operations, particles in the range of 200 μm and below are often desired for complete liberation of valuable material from the gangue. In magnetic material for recording, it is required not only to produce micron-level particles in a narrow size range but to have particles conform to a particular shape. In pigment production for paints, the pigment particle size must be below 300 nm for high light reflectivity. Such stringent requirements make the powder processing operation quite complex and often challenging. There is a limit to the fineness of material that can be produced by conventional milling such as ball milling with a tolerable energy efficiency. This has prompted the use of other tumbling devices such as vibrating mills. The motion of vibrating mills is characterized by the circular oscillation of a point on the mill shell at high frequency. They are generally of small diameter, 25 to 91 cm and operate at high mill filling, up to 60% to 70% of mill volume, with smaller diameter balls (about 6 to 12 mm). This results in higher energy efficiency for the production of micron-size material. Ultrafine grinding to the submicron level is possible in planetary mills. The planetary motion of the mill as a whole by means of a gyrating shaft produces excessively high force field sufficient enough to grind the particles to micron and submicron size range. In some situations, upon prolonged grinding the smaller particles acquire enough surface charge to agglomerate, thus limiting the grindability of the particles. Operation of planetary mill is controlled by the relative speeds of the mill shell and the gyration shaft. A comparison of relevant data pertaining to these tumbling mills is shown in The purpose of this paper is to show that the impact energy spectrum could be calculated. Then the different mills are compared in terms of the spectra. The usefulness of certain impacts and the energy wasted in some other impacts are also discussed. The modeling of the motion and collision of balls in a multi-body system is definitely not an easy task. In the past, most works have treated the ball charge as a continuum with specific properties. These over-simplified assumptions have only led to an empirical treatment of the charge dynamics. However, with the use of the discrete element method (DEM), the mechanics of charge motion is tackled without any of the simplifying assumptions. In this paper, DEM is used to model the motion of the balls. Results of numerical simulations are presented to characterize the en masse motion of the balls within the mill. A unique aspect of DEM is that it is possible to quantify the energy involved in individual collisions which leads to impact energy spectrum. Tumbling mills are well suited for analysis by DEM Discrete element models are used to analyze dynamic systems. Tumbling mills problems (analysis of media motion) in particular are mainly dynamic problems where time dependent ball motion is of interest. The individual balls are modeled as rigid element having deformable contacts. The details of the numerical algorithm and model parameter values is described in Mishra and Rajamani The motion of balls is computed by integrating In the above equations, In summary, the discrete element analysis starts with a mathematical representation of each element or entity comprising the physical system. In a two dimensional model of a simple system such as tumbling mills, these elements are line-type or disc-type or both. More complex systems are modeled using superquadric elements to study spatial behavior of particulate systems in three dimensions. A proper contact detection scheme is implemented depending on the shape of these elements. Knowing the contacts for any given element and their relative displacements, the forces acting at each contact are calculated using a contact deformational equation. These forces are incorporated into the translational and rotational equations of motion. The major computational tasks of DEM in each time step are as follows: (a) sum all forces on balls and update position, (b) add/delete contact between particles, and (c) compute contact forces from contact properties. Contact detection takes the bulk of the computation time. For this reason, the motion of balls is monitored within a subregion of the system. Contact detection is triggered when the displacement of a ball exceeds a specified value. The details of the contact search procedure and other pertinent details of the algorithm is best described in Cundall and Strack In the past, characterization of charge motion inside tumbling mills has received considerable attention in order to predict power draw, breakage of particles, and hence, mill performance. Here, several numerical experiments are done to analyze the complex charge dynamics of tumbling mills. All of the results reported here are done with a two dimensional version of DEM algorithm. Two types of mills are considered: vibratory and planetary mills. In vibratory mill, the mill frequency and the vibration amplitude are generally varied to achieve the proper circulation of the charge. The computer animation of ball charge profile in vibrating mills shows that, in the radial plane of the mill, grinding balls circulate in the reverse direction of the mill shell oscillation. The circulation of ball charge accelerates as the vibration frequency increases. The circulation of balls in the radial plane of the mill is very important because it helps the transportation of ground particles from the bottom of the mill to the grinding zone Fine grinding in vibration mills takes place due to its inherent design that increases the number of collisions available per unit volume of mill. The high surface area (per unit volume) of the grinding media leads to an increase in the number of collisions. The motion in planetary mill as opposed to vibratory mills is even more complex. As shown in A 10-cm diameter mill is simulated to study the motion of the charge during one revolution. This mill is loaded with 400 balls of diameter 3 mm up to a 50% filling. The gyration arm is 60 cm and it revolves at 315 rpm, generating a centrifugal field of 33 times that of gravity. For this system it is found that It is possible to compute the impact energy distribution in the planetary mills. Zhao ⋅ Tumbling mills such as conventional ball mills, vibrating and planetary mills are very similar in operation. The size distribution of material produced in these mills is both a function of material strength and the impact energy spectrum in the mill. In this paper, DEM is used to calculate the ball charge motion and energy spectrum of vibrating and planetary mills. ⋅ The numerical experiments are done to study the effect of vibration frequency on the ball charge profile and impact energy spectrum of vibrating mills. These experiments can be readily extended to other parameters such as mill filling, vibration amplitude, etc. ⋅ The effect of gyration speed on the mill charge profile and energy spectrum of planetary mills is also studied by means of numerical experiments. The effect variables such as gyration arm length, mill filling, etc. can be investigated. ⋅ DEM appears to be a very convenient tool to study the effect of various design and operating parameters on the impact energy spectrum of tumbling mills. Thus, this tool can be used to select the best set of parameters for a desired product fineness. More comprehensive work is being done to relate the impact energy spectrum to the operating and design parameters with a view to optimizing the process performance.