Glass in the CaO–Al2O3–MgO–SiO2 quaternary phase system has been obtained by the Bayan Obo tailing and fly ash as main raw materials. On the basis of differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) analyses, this article took the glass and glass–ceramic samples which the Bayan Obo tailing and fly ash added respectively to 50% and 20% as the object of study. Nucleation experiment was carried out at 720°C for 2h whereas crystallization experiment was performed at 880°C for 2h. The phases and microstructure of glass and glass–ceramic samples were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD), Raman spectra, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM). In addition, physical and mechanical properties of the produced glass–ceramics have been examined. The results demonstrate that the glass–ceramics have potential for a wide range of construction application.Glass–ceramics, which have unique physical and mechanical properties such as high bending strength and hardness, good corrosion resistance and abrasion resistance, are fine-grained polycrystalline materials formed when glasses of suitable composition are heat treated and thus undergo controlled crystallization In recent years, with the rapid development of industrialization, a lot of industrial wastes have been produced in China, especially fly ash from power plants, slag from steel production and tailings from mineral separation. It is reported that the power plants in China annually consume a total of about 305 Recently, considerable research has been focused on utilization of fly ash or tailing as the raw materials to produce glass–ceramics because fly ash and tailing contain a large amount of SiO In this paper, glass–ceramic material was prepared from Bayan Obo tailing and fly ash as the main raw materials by the melting method. The chemical compositions of as-received Bayan Obo tailing and fly ash were listed in The thermal behavior of the glass sample, a less than 20 Powder X-ray diffraction investigations were obtained using a Bruker D8 Advance with Cu Kα radiation, operated at 40 Raman spectra measurements were made with a Raman microscope (Jobin Yvon, HR 800) equipped with an Ar The microstructure characterization of glass–ceramics produced from Bayan Obo tailing and fly ash was performed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM). The TEM and STEM characterizations of the side-projected phlogopite plates were performed on a Tecnai G2 F20 S-Twin electron microscope operated at 200 For glass–ceramic samples, the physical and chemical properties including three-point bending strengths, density, acid resistance and alkaline resistance were also investigated. The volumetric density was measured by the Archimedes method using distilled water as medium. Hardness was analyzed by the Vickers indentation method. Vickers hardness was measured with a load of 300     EDX analyses of the phases in With the added amount of Bayan Obo tailing increased, the temperatures of the shallow endothermic peaks start and the sharp exothermic peaks decreased. It indicates that the glass transition temperature (Tg) and the crystallization temperature decreased as the added amount of Bayan Obo tailing increased. The results appeared to have been mainly caused by the interaction of Fe The assignment of the peaks was done following guidelines of earlier studies on alkali and alkaline earth silicate Seen from The density of the glass–ceramic was around 3.0 In this work, glass has been prepared by adding 50 After the heating of the glass at 720 The annealed glass and glass–ceramic have a different structure. In the annealed glass sample, bands at 535 The density of the glass–ceramic was around 3.0 This paper is sponsored by the