Models capable of predicting thermodynamic equilibrium data are essential in developing projects for chemical processing plants. Liquid-liquid equilibrium data (LLE) for systems including ionic liquids are essential for the design and operation of separation processes, but are still scarce. In this sense, the objective of this work is to apply the group contribution ASOG method for calculating activity coefficient data to predict liquid-liquid equilibrium and evaluate their effectiveness in representing the calculated data. ELL experimental data are required for the prediction obtained from the literature for binary and ternary systems containing hexafluorophosphate anion. The modeling was performed with 19 binary and 27 ternary systems at 101.3 kPa and several temperatures. As a result, new ASOG pairs groups were obtained that serve to model new systems that include ionic liquids and other compounds. The average deviation (rms) is approximately 4%. It can be concluded that the ASOG method predicts with good accuracy.Several chemical, pharmaceutical, metallurgical, and petrochemical industries include liquid-liquid extraction as a separation technology. For proper understanding the extraction process and for modeling, optimization, and design it is necessary to know the phase behavior. Although experimental data is essential, the application of models such as Analytical Solutions Of Groups (ASOG) is imperative for the prediction of the liquid-liquid equilibrium (LLE) behavior. For example, ASOG model allows to the analysis of the composition of the two phases in equilibrium, which supplies considerable information for mass balance and mass transfer calculations in the design and optimization of separation processes. On the other hand, several companies have shown an appreciable interest in ionic liquid as solvents. Several ionic liquids, which are molten salts, offer desirable characteristic such as high thermal stability, negligible vapor pressure, high chemical stability, convenient solvating capacity. In addition, when they are used as solvents, the regeneration, reutilization, and low energy consumption are advantages in comparison with traditional solvents. In this sense, the objective of this work is to apply the ASOG contribution method for calculating activity coefficient to predict liquid-liquid equilibrium and evaluate their effectiveness in representing the calculated data. Some recent studies Liquid - liquid equilibrium data are essential for a proper understanding of extraction processes. The analysis of the composition of the two phases in equilibrium supplies considerable information for mass balance and mass transfer calculations in the design and optimization of separation processes. In this work, LLE data for binary and ternary systems including ionic liquids with the hexafluorophosphate anion are modeling by a group-contribution model for the activity coefficient, the ASOG model The requirement of thermodynamics for any type of phase equilibrium is that the compositions of each species in each phase in which it appears must meet the criteria of equilibrium Introducing the activity coefficient into Eq. The sets of mole fractions In this work, the activity coefficients are calculated with ASOG method. The analytical solution of groups, ASOG In ASOG, the Flory–Huggins The activity coefficient of component, i, can be calculated by the following equations: In Eq. In this work the group hexafluorophosphate anion (PF6) is proposed. The tetrafluoroborate (BF4) and bis[(trifluoromethyl)sulfonyl]imide (NTf2) anions and the imidazolium cation (Imid) were proposed in previous works The prediction can be evaluated by comparing the experimental data with the calculated through the absolute deviation, mean square (rms) between the experimental and calculated for each component in both phase compositions. This rms deviation is given by: New group interaction parameters for CH2/Imid, CH2/PF6, CH2/Pyrid, OH/Imid, OH/PF6, ArCH/PF6, Imid/PF6, Imid/COO, Imid/H2O, PF6/COO, PF6/H2O, PF6/CYCH, PF6/Pyrid and H2O/pyrid, have been determined from 19 binary and 27 ternary systems.    Also,   For a more general view of the results,  These results are expected because the UNIQUAC and NRTL models are models of local composition where the interaction parameters are determined for specific molecules, while being ASOG and UNIFAC group contribution models necessarily be less accurate. With this limitation, the ASOG model performance is surprisingly good. In this work the group hexafluorophosphate anion (PF6) was proposed. New group interaction parameters for CH2/Imid, CH2/PF6, CH2/Pyrid, OH/Imid, OH/PF6, ArCH/PF6, Imid/PF6, Imid/COO, Imid/H2O, PF6/COO, PF6/H2O, PF6/CYCH, PF6/Pyrid and H2O/pyrid, were determined from 19 binary and 27 ternary systems. LLE data for 46 systems and 351 tie lines including ionic liquids were predicted by the ASOG model for the activity coefficient. The results of the prediction were satisfactory, with the rms deviations values between the experimental and calculated equilibrium compositions always below 10%. The average deviation (rms) is approximately 4%. It can be concluded that the ASOG model predicts with good accuracy. Pedro A. Robles is grateful to the  group interaction parameters, temperature dependent component number of data sets equations fugacity  number of systems number of tie lines number of components number of data points number of groups in the mixture pressure objective function absolute temperature mole fraction in liquid phase group mole fraction  group activity coefficient activity coefficient number of groups  combinatorial size contribution group contribution standard state (pure component i) liquid phase residual molecule 1, 2, i, and j calculated value experimental value group k, l, and m group k in molecule i  analytical solutions of groups liquid–liquid equilibrium root mean square absolute deviations universal functional activity coefficient reference