Energy wood thinning has become a feasible treatment alternative of young stands in Finland. Energy wood thinnings have been carried out mainly in stands where precommercial thinning has been neglected and the harvesting conditions for industrial wood thinning are difficult. Despite of its positive effects on harvesting costs and on renewable energy potential, whole-tree harvesting has been constantly criticized for causing growth loss. In this paper, the profitability of energy wood thinning was studied in 20 Scots pine-dominated stands where energy wood thinning was carried out. The growth of the stands after thinning was predicted with the help of Motti-stand simulator. Entire rotation time of the stands was simulated with different management alternatives. The intensity of first thinning and recovery level of logging residues varied between alternatives. In order to attain acceptable harvesting conditions, industrial wood thinning had to be delayed. The effect of energy wood thinning on subsequent stem wood growth was almost the same as in conventional thinning. Whole-tree harvesting for energy proved to be profitable alternative if the stumpage price is around 3€m−3, the interest rate is 3% or 5% and the removal of pulpwood is less than 20m3
                     ha−1. If the harvestable pulpwood yield is over 20m3
                     ha−1, integrated harvesting of industrial and energy wood or delayed industrial wood harvesting becomes more profitable.Forest growing is a series of interdependent choices. Each operation or its default has an influence on stand development and need of future treatments. When a path is chosen, it cannot easily be deflected. Thinnings usually do not increase the total volume growth of stem wood, but repeated thinnings improve the economic result due to advanced income, reduced natural loss and larger dimensions and saw timber proportion. In thinnings valuable tree species proper to the stand conditions are favored, low-quality trees are removed and high-quality trees are left growing. The economy over the rotation period depends on the income, costs and timing of thinnings and final felling In Finland, both early treatments of young stands and first thinnings have not been carried out as much as needed in recent years. However, compared to the 1990s the situation in the young stand treatment is better today partly due to a successful campaign for young forest management 1997–2002. Subsidies (the Kemera funds, financing aid for sustainable forestry) play an important role in management of young stands. Also energy wood harvesting from young stands is subsidized. Neglecting early tending can result in a too dense stand with an uneconomic removal structure for industrial wood harvesting. In these stands directing all thinning removal to energy use can be a reasonable alternative. This kind of young stand treatment is called energy wood thinning. If the removed trees are thick enough to allow pulpwood to become the primary product, with fuel wood as a by-product, the treatment is called first thinning. Energy wood thinnings of today are concentrated in young stands, where tending has been neglected. The national biomass potential of energy wood thinnings is 4 Typically, in the first thinning the share of stem wood waste is one fourth of the removal The choice between energy wood thinning and first commercial thinning has not been based on the estimates on the future stand development. When harvesting conditions have been too difficult for profitable industrial wood harvesting, the energy wood harvesting has become an attractive alternative. There are ambitious goals to increase the use of forest chips in the Finnish energy and climate strategies, and there is also an increasing demand for small-wood chips, which are a preferred fuel for small heating plants. Small-wood chips are also needed to balance the fuel quality of larger plants whose primary source of chips is logging residues from final fellings. This need can create pressure to direct also industrial wood to energy use. In the stands proper for small-wood chip production most of the removed trees are too small for industrial wood There is no common practice for the stumpage price of energy wood. The payment to forest owner is based either on the area harvested or on the removal of energy wood State subsidies play an important role in energy wood harvesting of young stands Comparisons between industrial and energy wood can be done from the perspective of forest owner, wood using industry or even national economy. Depreciation values of industrial and energy wood assortments have been studied Small-wood chip production also has important local socio-economic effects. The employment effects are high especially in small-scale operations. In a small local heating plant operated by energy co-operative the employment effect of chip supply was 1.4-man year Possible nutrient loss also affects the economical result of forest growing but the knowledge concerning effects of whole-tree harvesting is still insufficient (e.g. The silvicultural result of energy wood harvesting has also been studied In this paper, effect of energy wood thinnings on the stand development during the entire rotation period is compared with other treatment alternatives. The thinning result is compared with alternative energy wood thinning intensities as well as with industrial thinning. Volume growth over the rotation period, harvesting conditions and costs, silvicultural results and the income of forest owner are compared. The question is how to identify the stands, where energy wood thinning is an optimal solution, and how the treatment should be carried out. Material of the study consisted of 20 young first thinning stands ( Main tree species was Scots pine. Stand was located in mineral soil. Mean diameter at breast height, weighted by basal area was under 16 Stand was treated with mechanised energy wood thinning less than 1 year prior to field measuring. No industrial roundwood (pulpwood or saw timber) was harvested. Site type of the stand was All stands did not fully meet all criteria. One of the stands was in poor The stands were measured after thinning by using circular sample plots. Fifteen plots were placed in each stand in the longest diagonal line of the stand. Distance between the plots varied so that all of the plots could be fitted to the line. In some cases a secondary diagonal line was placed at the opposite direction of a primary line and some of the sample plots were placed onto that line. From sample plots all living trees with diameter over 3.0 To estimate the removal in first thinning diameter and species of the stumps were measured for stumps with ground level diameter over 0.5 Stand data was created by merging data from all sample plots. Breast height diameter was calculated for removed trees and height, crown ratio and age were calculated for both living and removed trees by using the data of sample trees. Coefficients of the functions were calculated separately for all stands. The forms of functions were An input data for Motti-stand simulator was created from the calculated tree data. The input data included tree species, number, age, diameter, height, and crown ratio of both removed and remaining trees by diameter classes. Site parameters used were site type, main tree species, regeneration method and location of the stand. Simulations were made in order to estimate growth and yield of the stands following different first thinning alternatives. The input data including stand properties before first thinning were fed into Motti-stand simulator. Motti is a stand-level simulator with distance-independent tree-level models for, e.g. growth, mortality and natural regeneration. It is designed to simulate stand development under alternative management regimes and growth conditions in Finland Motti includes a model for estimating growth reduction due to biomass and nitrogen loss of whole-tree harvesting. Growth reduction was estimated with help of nitrogen concentration of different tree parts. Furthermore, the model included percentual growth loss model based on experiments on the effect of whole-tree harvesting Eight alternatives for carrying out first thinning were created. For each of the alternatives stand development was simulated until final felling. Alternatives were: No thinnings, only final felling [NT]. First thinning 5 years later than it was actually done. Harvesting of only merchantable stem wood (pulpwood and saw timber) [IWT]. First thinning as it was actually done, whole-tree harvesting [EWT_R]. First thinning with 600 remaining trees, whole-tree harvesting [EWT_600]. First thinning with 900 remaining trees, whole-tree harvesting [EWT_900]. First thinning with 1200 remaining trees, whole-tree harvesting [EWT_1200]. First thinning with 1500 remaining trees, whole-tree harvesting [EWT_1500]. First thinning as it was actually done, but 40% of branch and needle mass was left into the forest to decrease nitrogen loss [EWT_40%]. In alternatives 3 and 8 the same trees where cut in simulations that were cut in reality. In alternatives 2 and 4–7 selection of removed trees was also based on realized first thinning. However, additional trees were either removed or left uncut systematically by diameter classes according to the criterion (number of remaining trees) of the alternative. The number of thinnings over rotation time was not limited. After first thinning there was zero to two later thinnings depending on growth of the stand. Timing of thinnings was determined by basal area, based on the current recommendations of good silviculture Almost all of the stands were mixed conifer and broadleaved stands. Thinning intensity was higher with broadleaved than conifer species so that in most of the alternatives only conifer species remained at the time of final cutting. Time of the final cutting was determined by mean diameter of the trees in accordance with the common recommendations. In pine-dominated stands final felling was done at the average diameter of 25 The energy wood removal was calculated with the help of Marklund's functions Stumpage prices used in the economic analysis were based on year 2004 level in southern Finland ( Harvesting cost of pulpwood, saw timber and whole-trees was estimated by functions The stands of the study had quite high density of small-diameter trees due to low silvicultural activity. Effect of understory vegetation on productivity of cutting was assumed to be biggest in simulation alternative 2 where only industrial wood was harvested. Pre-harvest cleaning was thus assumed to be needed. In energy wood thinning also small-diameter trees can be harvested with felling heads capable of multi-tree handling. It follows that pre-harvest cleaning is then not necessary. To estimate cost of removing non-merchantable small stems in industrial round wood cutting a time consumption function of precommercial thinning with brush saw was used In actually realized thinning the intensity was much higher in small diameter classes than in large diameter classes ( Average proportion of damaged trees was 3.2%. Stem damages occurred in 2.5% and root damages in 0.7% of trees. Soil damages i.e. the rutting depth was over 10 Delayed industrial wood thinning (IWT) resulted in 35 Harvesting cost of first thinning was higher in energy wood thinning than in industrial wood thinning ( The range of rotation time in different management alternatives was very narrow ( High intensity of first thinning resulted in lower industrial wood recovery than low-intensity thinning but high-energy wood recovery compensated the loss ( On average whole-tree harvesting increased the nitrogen removal by 38.5 Alternative where no thinnings were carried out was not competitive with any interest rate ( Choosing the management regimes between energy wood harvesting and industrial wood harvesting is not simple. In The results show that on average it is more profitable to choose industrial wood harvesting if pulpwood removal exceeds 20 The study is based on field data of energy wood thinning stands and growth predictions of stands. Reliability of the results depends on representativeness of the data and accuracy of the growth predictions. The data consisted mainly of pine-dominated stands and broadleaved species admixture varied from non-existent to abundant. Two of the stands were dominated by spruce and some spruce admixture existed in almost all of the stands. Heterogeneousness of species mixture is very typical for energy wood thinning stands. Broadleaved species composed 47% of trees before thinning and 35% of remaining trees in the set of 26 energy wood thinning stands Reliability of growth predictions of Motti-simulator have been studied earlier Simulations were made systematically and the later thinning treatments and final cuttings were carried out strictly according to the current recommendations of good silviculture In the economical analysis also industrial-sized stem wood was included in energy wood removal. This was made to estimate the economic effect of whole-tree harvesting. With rather low current stumpage price of energy wood assorting industrial wood separate from energy wood would be an interesting possibility, but increasing harvesting cost is a problem. Assorting industrial and energy wood has been reported to increase cutting cost by 10–20% The area of first thinnings has been around 170 If the stumpage price of energy wood was around or over 3€ With the current level of harvesting cost large-scale users of energy wood are not able to pay any stumpage price for small-sized energy wood if there were no state subsidies. State subsidies for cutting and forest transportation of energy wood is 7€ A noteworthy result is that in Scots pine stands the nitrogen loss of whole-tree harvesting causes only marginal growth losses within the entire rotation time. The average annual production of stem wood was only 0.09 This study was carried out at the Vantaa Research Center of the Finnish Forest Research Institute and was financed also by Tekes, Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Metsäliitto Osuuskunta, Stora Enso Oyj and UPM-Kymmene Oyj. We are grateful to Jari Hynynen and his research group for giving the Motti-simulator in our use and for their advice. We wish to thank Pentti Hakkila, Antti Asikainen, Mikko Kukkola and Pentti Niemistö for valuable comments of the manuscript. Tenho Hynönen, Hanna Turunen and Kalle Korhonen from the Forestry centre of Pohjois-Savo and personnel of Vapo Oy and Metsäliitto Osuuskunta helped us with the data collecting.