The half-Heusler thermoelectric bulks ZrxTi1−xNiSn (x=0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4) were rapidly prepared by microwave heating. The phase composition and microstructure were characterized by X-ray diffractometer (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The electrical and thermal properties were measured by Seebeck coefficient/resistance analysis system (S/RAs) and laser flash thermal analyzer (LFT). The point defects came from Zr-substitution and the in-situ nanostructure attributed to microwave sintering were found to lead to special microstructure and excellent thermal performance. The grain size of Zr0.3Ti0.7NiSn is ∼10μm. The in-situ nanoscale pores and inclusions are about 300–500nm. The highest ZT 0.60 for Zr0.3Ti0.7NiSn was achieved at 673K.Half-Heusler alloys are 18-electron intermetallic compounds with cubic MgAgAs-type structure (SG 216 F-43m) and stoichiometric composition Microwave heating technique relies on dielectric loss material to couple with the microwave radiation, or by putting the weakly absorbing materials contact or close to a strong absorbing susceptor material, In the present work, we proposed an efficient method in order to obtain half-Heusler thermoelectric bulk. Zirconium element was doped in the sample to improve the thermoelectric properties. The phase composition and microstructure were discussed. The electrical resistivity, Seebeck coefficient and thermal conductivity were also systematically investigated in the temperature range from room temperature to 773 The starting metal powders are titanium (99.99%), zirconium (99.99%), nickel (99.9%), and tin (99.99%). The samples were prepared by microwave heating in vacuumed sealed quartz for 5 The phase composition of as-prepared sample was analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) on Shimadzu/XRD-6100 diffractometer. The microstructure of cross-section of as-prepared samples was analyzed by scanning electron microscopy on Jeol/JSM-6510LV. The sample density was determined basing on the Archimedes’ method. The Seebeck coefficient and electrical resistivity was tested on JouleYacht/Namicr thermoelectric test system. The thermal diffusivity was tested on Linseis/LFA-1000 laser flash thermal analyzer. The X-ray diffraction patterns for the Zr The microstructures of cross-section for Zr As  The measured Seebeck coefficient and electrical resistivity and the calculated power factor for Zr As shown in As shown in The total, electronic and lattice thermal conductivities for Zr The thermoelectric figure of merit for Zr In summary, the half-Heusler thermoelectric bulks Zr This work was supported by Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at    