Synthesis of hydroxyapatite (HA) using carboxylated carbon nanotubes were investigated using simulated body fluid (SBF) similar to physiological condition and products tailored to have chemistry found to mimic natural bone. Composites were synthesized under ambient condition and physiological temperature (37°C). Former results the formation of dense net over carbon nanotubes even after 21 days of reaction, a hierarchy assemblies, whereas later results the formation of large crystals after 7 days of reaction. Physico-chemical characterization of composite material showed that the nucleation of HA initiates through the carboxyl group. Different parameters like temperature and reaction time were found to control the crystallization of HA. After 7 days of reaction, the crystal becames denser and directs towards the single plane; (002), thereby showing its phase purity. The result showed that the carboxylated carbon nanotubes were capable to nucleate HA from SBF, which can be used as a biomaterial for the modification of implant materials.Recent years have witnessed a significant interest in the field of novel solid state nanomaterials. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have been an attractive candidate for fundamental research studies since its potential applications including miniature biological devices. Several applications were proposed for CNTs many of which are concerned with conductive or high strength composites, in which the inclusion of CNTs in a ceramic matrix is expected to produce composites possessing high stiffness and improved mechanical properties Many of the metal–nonmetal structures known as ceramic materials have traditionally been synthesized by fusion or sintering of complex mixtures of inorganic compounds such as metal oxides We explored nature's use of simulated body fluid as manipulators of mineral microstructure to synthesize materials designed to serve as human artificial bone in similar to that demonstrated earlier All the reagents used in this experiment were purchased from Aldrich Co. and used as received. MWNTs were purchased from CNT Co. Ltd. Yeonsu-Cu, Incheon, South Korea and were purified by washing with concentrate hydrochloric acid and nitric acid, respectively, to remove the amorphous carbon particles. FT-IR spectra of the samples recorded from Bio-Rad Win spectrometer in KBr pellets and powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the crystals were obtained from Shimadzu Lad-X 600 X-ray diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation. Morphology and elemental analysis of the HA crystals have been studied by JEOL GSM scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis. SBF was prepared by dissolving appropriate quantities of chemical reagent in de-ionized water following the procedure reported by Ciineyt MWNTs with negative charge were achieved by refluxing MWNTs with nitric acid To develop novel biomaterials that mimic bone, it is essential to develop strategies for crystal under physiological friendly conditions. However, many factors which affect the mineralization process, molar ratio of the reacting species have primary importance. In order to provide general means of control mineralization, we have investigated synthesis of HA using SBF and to provide control crystal growth, we have employed CNTs as a matrix. We attempted our experiment under ambient condition and body temperature (37  On the other hand, the Raman modes of apatite growth on MWNTs-COOH have almost similar spectroscopic features to those of human bone ( The XRD pattern of as synthesize samples at 37 Different parameters like temperature, elemental ratios, etc. were found to control the growth direction of the crystals. In our result, the energy dispersive X-ray analysis shows the Ca/P ratio varies with the reaction time in both cases, The SEM micrographs ( From this study we found that MWNT-COOH was efficient for the growth of HA from SBF. The large surface area of nanotubes enables the interaction of SBF and carboxyl group thereby controlling the crystal growth. Furthermore, tuning the temperature and reaction time of the system rendered the formation of nano to macro crystallites. Our results showed that MWNT-COOH was capable to nucleate the HA crystals form SBF within 7 days resulting the formation of hierarchy assemblies. This research was supported by the Korean Ministry of Education and Human Resource Development through the Center for Healthcare Technology Development, Chonbuk National University, Jeonju 561-756, Republic of Korea. We thank Dr. N. Dharmaraj, Department of Chemistry, Government Arts College, Udumalpet 642 126, India for helpful discussions.