This article deals with problems relevant to implementation of magnetically stabilized beds (MSB) as separation devices. The main issues discussed are: bed mechanics, bed structure, possibilities to create controllable filter media, etc. As examples several separation techniques are discussed: dust filtration—magnetic and non-magnetic, ion-exchange, copper cementation, yeast filtration from biological liquids, particle separation by density and magnetic properties, dangerous wastes removal. Only key publications will be quoted that provide a basis for further reading and study and relevant information.Magnetically assisted fluidization is a technique combining classical fluidization with an externally applied magnetic field to control the movement of solids, which are magnetic (see Fluidization is suppressed by the induced interparticle forces that enable the operation as a fixed bed at velocities higher than that at minimum fluidization, thus increasing the fluid–solid slip velocity to enhance heat and mass transfers ( The magnetic particulate phase could be tailored to be selective in response to specified species in the fluid phase, thus permitting their separation. Such tailoring could involve covering the particles with extractants ( The magnetic phase may only constitute a portion of the particles forming the bed. Admixtures of magnetic particles with chemically (or bio-chemically) active but non-magnetic particles enable the formation of stabilized beds operating at velocities much higher than the conventional fixed beds of the non-magnetic particles ( The ability of the external magnetic field to control the movement of particles opens up the possibility of counter-current ( Differences in both density and magnetic properties of mixed particles (naturally occurring or industrial) enable solids–solids separations in magnetically controlled beds ( Magnetically suppressed fluidization (see below) manifests itself as a pseudo-homogenous (macroscopic point of view) bed expansion without particle mixing, a state known as the magnetically stabilized bed (MSB), that is, a fluid-driven deformation controlled by the intensity and orientation of the external magnetic field ( Without adequate knowledge of bed mechanics, however, it is not possible to build properly operating devices and successful mechanical or heat and mass transfer operations. Details and extensive discussion on magnetic field assisted fluidization are available elsewhere ( This paper deals with magnetic field and fluidizing flow as two independent physical entities acting simultaneously on a granular bed under gravity. We can either let the magnetic field act on the particles before applying flow (Magnetization FIRST mode) or to apply the magnetic field to an already fluidized bed (Magnetization LAST mode) ( With the Magnetization FIRST mode the bed starts to expand at a gas velocity close to but slightly higher than the minimum fluidization velocity Obviously, the field intensities required for particular applications depend on the solid phase properties and the field lines orientations. These conditions determine the choice of the field needed and the design of the corresponding magnetic system ( MSBs of magnetic and non-magnetic particle admixtures offer similar applications as the pure magnetic counterpart, though the velocity range for its existence diminishes with reduction of the magnetic component ( The fluid-driven bed expansion reaches its limit at the break down of MSB when fluidization begins at High slip velocity. Renewal of fluid–solid contact area. Particle aggregation (flocculation) can be controlled by both field intensity and field orientation: the axial field generates longer and more stable aggregates while in transverse field the aggregates are short and unstable. For Magnetization LAST, macroscopically the gross bed behaviour resembles that with Magnetization First beyond Intensive particle mixing. Renewal of fluid–solid contact area. Easier particle segregation. The third operating mode, On-Off consists of pulsed magnetizations by fields that alter the bed behaviour between MSBs are a better alternative for dry solids–solids separations than non-magnetic fluidized beds as sorting media ( Magnetic field control of the apparent MSB bulk density was developed by Liu et al. ( MSB as a packed bed enables deep filtration of particulates from liquid or gas streams, in particular, dust collection from gas streams by debris filtration ( Most extensive studies have been performed on aerosol filtration by MSB which offers low pressure drop and the bubbleless structures of packed solids, as performed by Exxon in the 1980s and further developed by Tien and coworkers ( Adsorption in beds consisting of magnetizable particles calls for specific requirements of the particle surface with respect to the species to be removed from the stream: They have to be magnetic in nature in order to enable their magnetic separation from the stream. They should have surface properties enabling highly selective separations. The surface often needs be tailored to particular applications. A comprehensive analysis was reported by Chromatographic devices based on cross-flow MSB were developed by Siegell ( In a sense, particle capturing by MSB and its capability to serve as a chromatographic bed can be linked to adsorption or entrainment chromatography ( Magnetic carriers for metal ion removal from dilute solutions such as mining drain waters, natural pollutions, and hazardous wastes are effective tools allowing remote and safe operations. Removal of heavy metals (Pb, Cu, and Cd) by carrier magnetic separations of adsorptive particulates (clinoptilolite/magnetite) ( Cementation of metal ions by other metals is the oldest method for metal recovery such as copper, silver and gold, etc. ( Chromium and nickel removal from spent electroplating solutions by magnetically stabilized bed of iron–zinc (  Precipitations of gold on mild steel ( Mercury on iron and zinc ( Tin and lead on iron ( Chromium ( Nitrates deposition on iron particles ( Arsenic removal by iron coated sands and iron-oxide loaded polymers ( Uranium from groundwater on iron surfaces (mild steel) ( Adequately designed fluidization vessels and magnetic systems would provide versatile separation devices with high separation efficiency for these applications of magnetic particulate systems. MSB is adequately applied for flue gas desulphurization enabling reduction of pollution from coal plants. Gui et al. ( Similar approach but with chilled gases and chemisorption capture of SO Successful development of separation techniques based on the MSB should be considered as optimized compromises among various engineering solutions, that is, the keystones outlined below. Possible MSB processes involving both magnetic and chemically (biochemical) active particles are limited to only three elements, Fe, Ni and Co. Magnetic beads can be made from either inorganic materials or synthetic or natural polymers. High mechanical strength, thermal stability, resistance to solvent and microbial attacks are commonly desired features. Ease of manufacture and long shelf life make inorganic materials ideal supports. However, inorganic supports have limited functional groups for selective binding such as through silane coupling. Magnetic beads are more commonly made from polymers whose functional groups could be tailored to suit specific applications ( The methods of making the particles are classified as: Direct use of a coupling agent. Adsorption, encapsulation. Formation of a thin film of polymer. Either coating or entrapping magnetic particles in a polymer matrix ( Magnetically susceptible supports belong to two main groups: porous and non-porous beads.  Magnetite dispersed in crosslinked polysaccharide (chitosan, agar, agarose, κ-carrageenan, dextran), magnetite/calcium alginate mixture ( Magnetite imbedded in polyacrylamide gel ( Thermo-sensitive polystyrene beads ( Magnetic polyurethane (  Silica containing magnetite ( Magnetic cores covered with a non-porous alumina layer ( Stainless steel spheres ( Composite sorbents of inorganic ion-exchangers ( Some recent studies ( Proper choice of the operating mode, e.g., fluidization and magnetization, is also a key to successful application of MSB, as follows:     Magnetic systems used so far have been extensively reviewed by Magnetic system should be designed to conform to the principal condition that should be created in the bed. This definitely determines the shape of the coils, field orientation, etc. and relevant mechanical and electrical designs should then follow suit. This overview and related analyses show the basic directions for applying MSB in separation techniques that are in most cases mass-transfer dominated. Ideas of potential applications are based on laboratory studies now performed in flasks with particulate materials, which allow magnetic control. These processes are still waiting for MSB-based engineering design for future application. The keystones of future successful applications are better development of bed mechanics, adequate magnetic system design, specific tailored magnetic carriers, and, last though not least, adequate process design. We hope that the information provided here will serve as a source of ideas for further development of the magnetic field assisted fluidization technology and its implementation in practice. A part of this review was financially supported by the author's home university UCTM-Contract 10275/2006. Jordan Hristov especially thanks several outstanding individuals who helped collection of articles, including Dr. Hao Zhang, ISP, Beijing, China; Prof. K. Gui, South-East University, Nanjing, China; Prof. Qingjie Guo, Qingdao University of Science and Technology, China; Dr. Fabrice Gros, Univ. Clermont-Ferrand, France; Prof. Marc Aurouseau, INPG, Grenoble, France; Dr. Mark Leaper, Univ. Nothingham, UK.