Sn-doped In2O3 (ITO) powder was prepared by co-precipitation through ion exchange method with the solution of InCl3 and SnCl4·5H2O under the condition of the different temperatures and different molar ratios of Sn to In. ITO precursor was analyzed by TG-DTA, and the morphology, phase composition and particle size of the powder were characterized by TEM and XRD. The effects of calcination temperature and molar ratio of Sn/In on the phase composition, particle size and conductivity were discussed. The results showed that the phase transformation occurs at a temperature of over 332°C, and an ITO powder with perfect crystalline structure, minimum crystallite size, minimum powder resistance and the best conductivity can be prepared at the calcination temperature of 700°C with 10% molar ratio of Sn/In.Sn-doped indium oxide (ITO) is a promising n-type semiconductor material in screen display techniques Preparation of the fresh resin High pure Indium ingot was dissolved in thick hydrochloric acid to prepare a 1 After a further calcination at a temperature range of 500–900 Thermal property of ITO precursor was analyzed with TG-DTA apparatus USA PE TGA27. The grain size distribution and morphology were measured with TEM adopting Philips-TecnalG2 20. The crystal structure was analyzed with XRD supplied by Beijing XD98. The BET surface area was determined with the apparatus supplied by Quanta chrome Autosorb-1. The powder resistance was determined with digital micro-ohm meter supplied by Beijing Ruipu HZ2520. To study the conversion of the precursor of ITO into ITO powder by Co-precipitation through ion exchange method, simultaneous thermal analysis has been done on the wet precursor of ITO. TEM patterns of ITO powder prepared at 200 From the XRD patterns shown in As can be seen in the patterns, the strength of diffraction peaks is enhanced and the width of peaks is getting narrow and sharp as the temperature increases, which means that crystallization character is getting obvious, crystal structure is getting perfect. In Scherrer formula,  As shown in As shown in Doping is a main route to raise the concentration of carrier (free electron) and reduce the resistivity. As commonly considered, the greater of the dosage is, the lower resistivity can be achieved The resistance of ITO powder can be calculated by the formula as follows: Sn-doped In This project was supported by The Postdoctoral Science Foundation of Central South University and National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars.