Grade estimation is directed toward mineral inventory estimates for a mineral deposit. In this paper, a new uncertainty oriented methodology for global grade estimation is given and its stages are demonstrated in a step by step manner. The proposed fuzzy method uses a series of fuzzy algorithms and finally estimates the ore grades based on fuzzy interval arithmetic. The method is relatively simple, and practical especially for limited numbers of data. In addition, the uncertainties can be taken into account by using fuzzy numbers. The results show that the method can be applied in reserve estimation.Reserve estimation is one of the most important stages of evaluating a mineral deposit. The mineralized reserves that are required for a cut-off analysis are estimates of tonnages and grades ( A number of methods such as geometrical and, geostatistical approaches have been developed for the purpose of grade estimation. Geometrical methods ( On the other hand, the applicability of new mathematical methods in geological estimations has been discussed in detail by In this study, a new grade estimation methodology based on fuzzy modeling and fuzzy arithmetic is proposed. The main purpose of this method is to estimate the ore grades and overall relative errors globally. The proposed approach consists of three stages. The first stage uses fuzzy clustering and data projection. In this stage, input for the data driven model is provided. In the second stage, parameter optimization is carried out using least squares estimation. The purpose of this step is modeling the relationship between spatial coordinates and grade values. In the last stage, outputs from the first two modules are combined, and using fuzzy arithmetic both average grade and global error are derived from the membership function directly. The article is organized as follows. The true reserve of a mineral deposit is not known until mining has been finished. It is usually is estimated using the available data in the feasibility stage. Global ore reserve estimation includes estimating the reserves (grade and tonnage) of an entire deposit. Such estimates are called global estimates. Grade estimation should be discussed as not only a mathematical problem, but also for reliable deposit modeling. In mineral inventory estimation, models are used as a means of focusing attention on particular characteristics; the aim should be to determine to what degree a “deposit-to-be-estimated” fits a model ( Suppose that we have a block V and a sample inside it. When we extend the grade of the sample to the block V, we make an error. The problem considered in this paper can simply be formulated as follows: given a mineral deposit sampled at Let Global grade estimation is directed toward mineral inventory for entire deposit. The principal purpose of this estimation is presented by To quantify the likely target as a guide to further data-gathering decisions relatively early on in the evaluation of a deposit. To summarize the resources/reserves of a deposit as a basis for medium- and long-term planning in a feasibility or production situation. In practice, these procedures include some uncertainties. Actually, all geological measurements and calculations contain some type and degree of uncertainty. Both In the grade estimation, some of the sources of the uncertainty described above should be considered. As a new and effective tool, fuzzy set theory offers a sophisticated way to describe uncertainty by using fuzzy numbers ( Several authors have suggested fuzzy numbers for handling geologically based problems. One of these authors, The uncertainty oriented approach described in the following section, may assist in dealing with problems associated with grade estimation. The most attractive characteristic of the proposed fuzzy method compared with other conventional techniques used in reserve estimation is that the proposed method is able to represent uncertainty in a transparent way by fuzzy numbers, which are robust descriptions of the uncertainty. In order to quantify the uncertainty, these numbers describe uncertainty at various levels of possibility using lower and upper data level. By the use of fuzzy numbers the entire error of grade estimation could be determined quantitatively ( The proposed fuzzy methodology aims to estimate ore grades based on a series of fuzzy algorithms. The main stages of the method and fuzzy algorithms used in each stage are explained in the following section. The purpose of fuzzy data clustering is to distill a data set into different subgroups, which are characterized by cluster centers. Each data point belongs to a cluster center with a degree, which is determined by the membership grade. In this study, the fuzzy FCM partitions a collection of Projection is one of the effective techniques for deriving the membership functions from fuzzy partitions. Main advantage of the projection method is that it allows a direct interpretation of the fuzzy model via membership functions defined directly for the input variables ( The antecedent fuzzy sets are obtained from the membership matrix whose In this stage, the data set and its membership matrix are used and parameter vector, which will be evaluated for global grade estimation, is estimated using the least square optimization. The global regression equation, which is derived from this optimization, indicates the relationship between spatial coordinates and grade values. The global least squares method considers the contribution of all clusters simultaneously ( In the last stage, using the membership functions which are derived from projections and the resulting global least squares equation, estimation is carried out based on fuzzy arithmetic operations. One of the main components of fuzzy arithmetic operations is fuzzy numbers. A fuzzy number is defined as a fuzzy quantity with ( an upper semicontinuous membership function, a bounded support, and a unique modal value Such a fuzzy number is a description of the imprecisely described quantity “ Fuzzy numbers are very conventional tools for system modeling (    Thus, the system output (grade) value Fuzzy arithmetic operations can be applied in grade estimation based on fuzzy intervals. A general representation of fuzzy intervals (numbers) has been suggested by A trapezoidal fuzzy number may be seen as a fuzzy quantity General form of a trapezoidal fuzzy number can be given as  The proposed methodology is illustrated using two data sets. In the first case study, the proposed method is used on simulated ore grades. In the second case study, a real data set is considered. The data set used in this study was obtained via conditional simulation using the lower-upper (LU) simulation technique (Deutsch and Journel, 1998). Simulation is carried out on a 21×21 regular grid with 7 unit grid spacing, yielding a total of 441 values. The conditioning data are obtained from an Andesite quarry ( In the first step, data clustering was carried out by using the FCM algorithm. Optimal number of clusters was determined using the index method expressed in Describing the parametric membership functions for each spatial coordinates, point-wise projection operator was used and data projections are carried out between each coordinate values and their membership values which were taken from the membership (partition) matrix. These approximated trapezoidal membership functions are shown in In the next step, using the same membership and input data matrix, global weighted least square optimization was carried out and the global regression equation, which indicates the relationship between spatial coordinates and grade values, was calculated as follows: As can be seen in The Afsin-Elbistan lignite deposit, covers an area of 900 The training data set could not be used in the fuzzy method. The performance of the proposed fuzzy method was controlled by the kriging on the test data set. Variogram model parameters were determined from the training data and the kriging estimations were carried out on testing data using XVOK2D from GSLIB ( The clustering applications were conducted by using the FCM clustering method. Using the cluster validity approach, the optimal number of clusters were retained as 3. Next, data projections were carried out using point-wise projection operator. As a result of these projections, membership functions were determined as shown in Before the arithmetic operations, in the last stage, the global least squares optimization was carried out using data and clustering partition matrix. The resulting regression equation is given as follows: The core of the membership function in In this methodology, calculating the overall relative error of the estimation is preferred. This approch allows a realistic comparison of a few ore deposits. Using this concept, the ore reserves and their estimation errors can be calculated separately. This evaluation is very important for mine planning. In practice, the estimation error is strongly dependant on the number of data points ( The proposed method provides a suitable tool for dealing with grade estimation. The method, which has geological applicability, uses fuzzy algorithms and fuzzy arithmetic for evaluating the uncertainties and estimates the ore grades based on fuzzy interval operations. The main advantage of the proposed fuzzy method in this paper is its flexibility and suitability for a limited number of data. Another major advantage of the method is that fuzzy numbers, which are used as the main indicators of estimations, describe estimates of uncertainty at various levels of possibility. These members are robust and the outcomes are not affected by subjective variations. The uncertainty oriented fuzzy method presented in this paper has been performed by using both simulated and real data sets. In these applications, average ore grades and amount of the relative errors have been calculated. The central point of the proposed methodology is the length of the confidence interval, which can be shortened by diminishing the level of confidence, but this procedure results in a decrease of the reliability of the results. Therefore in the proposed methodology, reliability has a priority over the degree of accuracy. The author would like to extend his appreciation to Professor Aysen Apaydin of Statistics Department at Ankara University and Professor A. Erhan Tercan of Mining Engineering Department at Hacettepe University.