Background
                  Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a rare genetic bone disease characterized by bone fragility and low bone mass. OI was mainly caused by genetic mutations in collagen genes, COL1A1 and COL1A2. Nevertheless, new genes have been identified to be causally linked to OI. The clinical features between each OI groups share great similarities and it is sometimes difficult for clinicians to diagnose the disease accurately. Here, we identify the genetic mutations of OI patients from Malaysia and correlate the genetic mutations with the clinical features.
               
                  Method
                  Targeted sequencing of fourteen genes panel was performed to identify the mutations in 29 OI patients with type I, III, IV and V disease. The mutations were determined using Ion Torrent Suite software version 5 and variant annotation was conducted using ANNOVAR. The identified mutations were confirmed using Sanger sequencing and in silico analysis was performed to evaluate the effects of the candidate mutations at protein level.
               
                  Results
                  Majority of patients had mutations in collagen genes, 48% (n = 14) in COL1A1 and 14% (n = 4) in COL1A2. Type I OI was caused by quantitative mutations in COL1A1 whereas most of type III and IV were due to qualitative mutations in both of the collagen genes. Those with quantitative mutations had milder clinical severity compared to qualitative mutations in terms of dentinogenesis imperfecta (DI), bone deformity and the ability to walk with aid. Furthermore, a few patients (28%, n = 8) had mutations in IFITM5, BMP1, P3H1 and SERPINF1.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Majority of our OI patients have mutations in collagen genes, similar to other OI populations worldwide. Genotype-phenotype analysis revealed that qualitative mutations had more severe clinical characteristics compared to quantitative mutations. It is crucial to identify the causative mutations and the clinical severity of OI patients may be predicted based on the types of mutations.Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI) is a group of genetic bone disorders primarily characterized by low bone mass, which results in increased bone fractures and disrupted growth [ The initial assumption was that this disease was caused by a mutation in either The phenotypic severity of OI patients depends on the affected gene, position of mutation, substituted amino acid and the final protein product [ The study was implemented in compliance with the ethical principles formulated in the declaration of Helsinki and was approved by our local Ethics Committee. Patients granted their informed, written consent to participate. Patients were recruited from the UKM Medical Centre (UKKMC) and Hospital Putrajaya. Written informed consent was given by patients, their parents or legal representatives. The inclusion criteria for OI patients include being Malaysian and with the clinical features of OI. All 29 patients from 28 families which comprise of 16 males and 13 females were recruited. They underwent clinical and physical examination to evaluate their clinical features and all medical histories were recorded. The clinicians classified the patients into four groups (OI-I, OI-III and OI-IV) according to Sillence classification. OI-V was categorized according to description by Glorieux et al. [ Total genomic DNA was extracted from EDTA-preserved peripheral blood using Macherey-Nagel Nucleospin Blood QuickPure kit (Macherey-Nagel, Germany. The Gender validation test was performed for each DNA sample as part of quality assessment. Briefly, PCR was performed using Targeted sequencing was performed using Ion PGM Semiconductor ™ (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) sequencer with a total of 14 genes with 214 exons selected for the gene panel. The selected genes are associated with osteogenesis imperfecta: Data from sequencing run were processed using Ion Torrent Suite software (version 5.0.4; Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) for base calls, read alignments and variant calling using the reference genomic sequence (hg19). Called variants were annotated using ANNOVAR [ Statistical analysis was performed using Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) version 21. Age differences between the patients and normal was calculated using Independent T Test. Qhi-square was used to determine the gender differences between the patients and normal group. Fisher test was carried out to determine the correlation between gender, OI groups and types of colagen with the patients phenotype. P less than 0.05 was considered as significant. Most of our patients (62.1%) were OI type III, followed by 17.2% of type I and IV respectively. One patient was classified as type V. A total of 22 variants were identified in 26 patients and most variants were found in There was a significant association between the types of mutation in alpha 1 chains with the types of OI ( The phenotypic variation with relation to the position of mutation was not significant due insufficient sample size. However, in the patient with mutation affecting amino terminal of Gly22 (p.G200 V) in α1 (1) showed no presence of DI ( We have identified 16 (73%) mutations in Similar with other published reports, our study also showed that mutations in Bone deformities in OI often occurred at birth and usually resulted from frequent bone fractures and repeated bone modelling particularly at the long bones [ Blue sclera is one of distinctive clinical feature in OI and commonly observed in patients with OI type I [ DI is also another key feature in OI and has been identified to occur frequently in OI type III and less common in type I [ In this study, most qualitative mutations involve glycine substitution within the triplet Gly-X-Y sequence of α1 helical domain. Out of 10 glycine mutations, 70% ( Our findings also support earlier observations that nonlethal substitutions by branched or charged amino acid residues (aspartic acid, valine, arginine) were frequently identified at the amino-terminal portion of α1 (1) helical domain, whereas substitutions in other parts of the chain resulted in lethal outcomes [ Previous studies demonstrated that glycine substitution within amino terminal of α1 (1) and α1 (2) chains had negative correlation with DI, whereas substitution towards carboxyl terminal were present with DI [ Our results are similar with the mutation report by Marini et al. that described some mutations between α1 (1) and α1 (2) regions had lethal consequences [ One of our patients was clinically diagnosed as OI type V and revealed to have c.-14C > T mutation in Apart from collagen genes, our patients also had novel mutations in genes that were previously known to cause autosomal recessive OI. Mutations in Our study also found a homozygous mutation (p.L207R) in Despite sufficient sequencing coverage of 400× for each sample, we failed to identify mutations in 3 of our patients. This probably occurred because the patients carry mutations that were not targeted in this study. For instance, We have successfully identified 22 variants including 9 novel variants in 26 OI patients. Overall, our mutation results are similar to other OI populations, with majority in our cohort showing mutations in collagen genes. Genotype-phenotype analysis confirmed earlier findings that qualitative mutations had more severe clinical characteristics compared to quantitative mutations. Presence of DI also associated with position of glycine mutation concerning C– or N-terminal portion of type 1 collagen chains. Although small in numbers, we have identified a few patients with mutations in non-collagen genes that displayed either moderate or severe phenotypes. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. We wish to thank the patients and their family for participating in this study. We thank the This study was supported by research grant from NMN was responsible in conducting the experiment and writing the manuscript. NMS and RR participated in samples and patient's clinical data collection. SZ, ZAL and BB contributed in development of protocol and analytical framework. Together with NAAM and RJ, they supervised the study design and execution, as well as funding attainment. CYP helped NMN for the data analysis of targeted sequencing.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at