Prediction of carbon (C) and nitrogen (N) mineralization patterns of plant litter is desirable for both agronomic and environmental reasons. Near infrared reflectance (NIR) spectroscopy has recently been introduced in decomposition studies to characterize biochemical composition. The purpose of the current study was to use empirical techniques to predict C and N mineralization patterns of a wide range of plant materials incubated under controlled temperature and moisture conditions. We hypothesized that the richness of information in the NIR spectra would considerably improve predictions compared to traditional stepwise chemical digestion (SCD) or C/N ratios. Initially, we fitted a number of empirical functions to the observed C and N mineralization patterns. The best functions fitted with R
                     2=0.990 and 0.949 to C and N, respectively. The fractions of C and N mineralized at different points in time were then either predicted directly with regression functions or indirectly by prediction of the parameters of the empirical functions fitted to incubation data. In both cases, partial least squares (PLS) regressions were used and predictions were validated by cross-validations. We found that the NIR spectra (best R
                     2=0.925) were able to predict C mineralization patterns marginally better than the SCD fractions (best R
                     2=0.911), but considerably better than the C/N ratios (best R
                     2=0.851). In contrast, N mineralization was better predicted by SCD fractions (best R
                     2=0.533) than the C/N ratio (best R
                     2=0.497), which was better than NIR predictions (best R
                     2=0.446). Although the predictions with the NIR spectra were only slightly better for C and worse for N mineralization compared to SCD fractions, NIR spectroscopy still holds advantages, as it is a much less laborious and cheaper analytical method. Furthermore, exploration of the applications of NIR spectroscopy in decomposition studies has only just begun, and offers new ways to gain insights into the decomposition process.Controlling the loss of nitrogen from agricultural systems partly depends on the synchronization of N supply from plant litter decomposition with the demand of the plants ( An important aspect of litter quality is the biochemical composition of the material. One of the first characterizations of the biochemical composition of plant materials to be applied was the C/N ratio ( More refined ways of characterizing the biochemical composition of litter have also been used. Stepwise chemical digestion (SCD) refers to different methods involving chemical treatments to fractionate litter into biochemical fractions of varying decomposability. Such methods have been used extensively in decomposition studies to characterize the biochemical composition of plant litter (e.g. However, the biochemical composition of plant litter is very complex and litter fractions found through SCD are not homogeneous and may be expected to vary between species and development stages. Light reflected from (or absorbed by) a material in the near infrared range gives a unique signature depending on the composition of functional groups found in the material ( The present work was part of a project involving five collaborating research groups from the Nordic countries. The project examined mineralization dynamics of plant residues as related to their biological origin and gross biochemical composition ( The purpose of this study was to predict C and N mineralization patterns of plant materials from their NIR spectra, SCD fractions, and C/N ratios and to compare the predictive capability of the different types of data through empirical modeling. Carbon and N mineralization patterns of 76 different plant materials from a wide range of agricultural plants and anatomical components from Northern Europe were examined using incubations ( The incubation procedure is described in We calculated the amount of C mineralized from the plant materials by subtracting the C mineralized in the control soil, assuming that the effects of the added plant material on the decomposition of the organic matter present in the soil were negligible. Subsequently, we calculated the fraction of added plant C mineralized ( The SCD fractions were obtained using the method described by NIR spectra were recorded for all the incubated plant materials ( Three different calibration techniques (I, II and III) were used to calibrate the observed mineralization data (    The empirical functions were fitted to the mineralization data of each plant material (three replicates) using the solver in Excel To determine whether any of the samples were very different from the others and could be expected to have a large influence on regression models we analyzed the NIR spectra and SCD fractions with precursory principal component analysis (PCA) and uncertainty tests ( The predictions of the mineralization patterns through the calibration techniques were based on cross-validated fractions of mineralized C and N in technique II and cross-validated function parameters in technique III. This means that the predictions were based on regression models that did not include the predicted data. Thus, the predictions were independent. Each of the mineralization patterns predicted by the calibration techniques were evaluated by plotting predicted against measured values of the fraction of C and N mineralized. We also calculated a number of statistics measuring the quality of the predictions. The first of these was the fraction of explained variation ( To be able to compare the uncertainty of the predictions with the measurement error we also calculated the above statistics on the different batches of the reference material, where The measurement error calculated on the different batches for the reference material was found to be rather small, especially for C mineralization. The relative uncertainty of the measurements ( The fit of the C6 and N3 empirical functions used in calibration technique III to the data from the first incubation of the reference material in Denmark is shown as an example in Although all the N mineralization functions produced better fits than calibration technique I, the fits of the two-parameter N2 function were still very poor. The three-parameter function N3 produced slightly better fits to the N mineralization data than the four-parameter N1 function. However, very high parameter dependencies of some of the parameters of the N1 function indicated that the model was highly over-parameterized. The precursory PCA analysis and the uncertainty test of the NIR spectra showed that one sample deviated from the rest, especially in the two first components (data not shown). However, the uncertainty test showed that this only influenced the PCs to a small degree and therefore all samples were included in the calibration and cross-validation of the PLS regression models. The PCA analysis of the SCD fractions did not show any deviating samples. The cross-validation results of the PLS regressions in calibration technique II, which predicted the incubation directly, are shown in The cross-validation results of the PLS regressions in calibration technique III, which predicted the parameters of the empirical functions are given in The measured fractions of C and N mineralized are compared with the values predicted by different calibration techniques using the NIR spectra, the SCD fractions and the C/N ratios in In all cases the measurement errors (SER, Of the predictions made by calibration technique III, the C6 function showed the best prediction statistics. However, these predictions and the predictions made with the functions C2–C5 were almost equally good. The N1 function produced very poor predictions of N mineralization patterns, whereas the N3 function produced the best predictions with all types of biochemical characterizations and these appeared to be significantly better than those of the other functions. Predictions made by calibration technique II, where the information in the biochemical characterizations (NIR spectra, SCD fractions or C/N ratios) was used directly to predict C and N mineralization patterns, were better than calibration technique I. Similarly, calibration technique III produced better predictions than technique I, except in the case of the C1 and N2 functions. In these cases, the very poor fits they produced offset the predictive capability. In the case of predictions of C mineralization, better predictions could be obtained by calibration technique III in combination with the best empirical mineralization function (C6) than calibration technique II when the NIR spectra were used as a predictor although the differences were small. The predictions made with the SCD fractions and C/N ratios were almost equally good with the two calibration techniques. Likewise, NIR calibrations of calibration technique II produced worse prediction statistics of N mineralization in the cross-validations than calibration technique III with the best function of technique III (N3). Most predictions of C mineralization were better using NIR spectra than SCD fractions, but this was not true in all cases and in general the differences were small. In contrast, C mineralization was not predicted as well with the C/N ratios as with the other types of data. This means that we can rank the predictors of C mineralization as NIR≥SCD>C/N ratios. Predictions of N mineralization patterns were best with the SCD fractions, then the C/N ratios and finally the NIR spectra. This means that we can rank the predictors of N mineralization as SCD>C/N ratios>NIR. A wealth of studies have correlated litter decomposition patterns with different SCD fractions (e.g.  A reason why In our study, almost all the PLS models used for N mineralization prediction with technique II or III contained only one component. In the calibrations based on the SCD fractions, it was the N content that was the most important variable as it had the highest weighted regression coefficient in the PLS calibration models. Moreover, with the same dataset, NIR successfully predicted total N, N in soluble fractions, soluble C and cellulose C in the SCD fractions ( The information contained in all three types of data characterizing the biochemical composition considerably improved the calibrations of C and N mineralization (in techniques II and III) compared with the calibrations that did not use this information (technique I). This confirms that the information contained in all three types of biochemical characterization is relevant for characterizing both C and N mineralization patterns of plant materials. In the case of C mineralization, the predictions were within reasonable range of the measurement error as assessed by the reference material. However, this was not the case for the predictions of the N mineralization pattern, where the measurement error was small compared to the prediction errors. The use of the variation between incubations of the reference material to assess the measurement error is problematic as the reference material may not be representative for the measurement error of the other materials. Nevertheless, as the estimated measurement error is very small compared to the prediction errors, the deficiencies in predicting N mineralization were probably not only due to measurement errors. An explanation may be that the litter quality characterizations chosen here were inadequate, but may also be that the N mineralization process is dependent on factors other than litter quality. Net N mineralization, being the result of the mineralization and immobilization processes, is a more complex process than C mineralization. Although we attempted make the litter material be the only factor differing between incubations by having the same physical conditions and adding nitrogen to avoid nitrogen limitation of micro-organisms, the different litter additions might still have altered other factors over which we had no control.  For both C and N mineralization patterns, we were able to improve predictions through the use of empirical functions (calibration technique III) compared to predicting the data directly (calibration technique II). Although the differences were small, this indicates that the best empirical functions were able to average out some of the random variation in the mineralization data. Calibration technique III also holds the advantage over technique II that it can be used to predict the fraction of C and N mineralized at other points in time than those that have been sampled. However, only the best functions used in calibration technique III gave better predictions than those made directly with calibration technique II. If the fitted mineralization function contains too many parameters, this may result in large areas of the parameter space describing the observations equally well and several local optima in the parameter space. In this case, the values of the optimal parameters may be sensitive to very small differences and noise in the observed values, making it impossible to predict them (over-fitting). On the other hand, if the function contains too few parameters it may not be able to describe the observations at all (under-fitting). Therefore, the functions should describe the mineralization patterns as closely as possible with as few parameters as possible. The parameter dependencies of the function fits indicate that the N1 function was very highly over-parameterized and C2 slightly over-parameterized for the current data. Thus, the models applied encompass examples of over-fitting in the case of model N1 and under-fitting in the case of C1 and N2. The current study did not support our hypothesis that calibrations of C and N mineralization with NIR spectra could be considerably improved compared to calibrations based on SCD fractions. Nevertheless, NIR spectra still offer advantages as the recording of a NIR spectrum is much easier than the chemical fractionation procedure. Furthermore, the number of decomposition studies that have used NIR spectroscopy is still rather limited and its applications in decomposition studies are still far from fully explored. This work was funded by the research councils in the five Nordic countries (SJVF Denmark, Formas Sweden, NFR Norway, Agricultural Production Fund Iceland, Finnish Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry) through the Nordic Joint Committee for Agricultural Research (NKJ).