This study investigates the optimization of simultaneous dissolution of gold and silver from a refractory gold ore through determination of pre-treatment stages. Based on the mineralogical studies (thin layer and polished section) and chemical analysis on the ore sample, a “diagnostic leaching” procedure was designed. Results from diagnostic leaching suggest that the most effective pre-treatment agents for gold and silver are ferric chloride and sulfuric acid media, respectively. Optimum conditions for the simultaneous dissolution of gold and silver were determined using a two factorial design technique. Pre-treatments with sulfuric acid and ferric chloride reagents increased the efficiency of the dissolution of gold from 54.7% to 82% and silver from 37.4% to 81.6%.One of the most important problems facing the gold and silver industry is that the placer and free milling gold and silver ores are almost terminating. Hence, the use of refractory ores has been increased during the recent years. In general, gold refractory ores are classified into carbon, sulfide and tellurium ores. Among the refractory ores, the sulfide type is the most common ( To extract gold and silver by hydrometallurgical route, cyanide leaching has been the dominant process in gold mining industry in the past two centuries. To reduce environmental and toxicity risks associated with the use of cyanide, many efforts have been made to replace cyanide media with other reagents such as thiosulfate ( In addition to the above-mentioned methods, The main problem facing the silver diagnostic leaching is the silver affinity to form complexes with some of the oxidizing reagents. In the presence of nitric acid as an oxidizing reagent, silver nitrate (AgNO However, the previous researchers have not considered this large amount of silver which could be as high as 1 In this study, a diagnostic leaching process was designed for the simultaneous dissolution of gold and silver from a refractory sulfide ore. Accordingly, a suitable pre-treatment procedure for increasing the efficiency of cyanide dissolution of gold and silver was proposed. Two factorial design of experimental technique and ANOVA were used to optimize the pre-treatment procedure for simultaneous cyanide dissolution of gold and silver. The leaching procedure used in the diagnostic leaching procedure in this study is shown in Optimization of the pre-treatment stages was carried out using a two factorial technique. Optimization parameters were considered as categorical parameters to determine their value at which maximum dissolution of gold and silver were reached. By using two factorial technique, oxidizing reagents in diagnostic leaching were divided into two categories. The first group (Factor A) consisted of ferric chloride and hydrochloric acid and the second group (Factor B) consisted of sulfuric acid and nitric acid, are illustrated in The sulfide ore used in this study was obtained from Sardasht area in Northwestern of Iran. Elemental analysis of the sample is presented in The ore sample was divided into two homogeneous fractions. For the mineralogical tests, one fraction was divided into six size fractions; 100% passing coarser than 300 To design a diagnostic leaching procedure efficiently, a complete mineralogical examination of the ore sample is required ( The thin section images for two different particle sizes are shown in Polished sections for different particle sizes, from fine to coarse, are shown in The thin section and polished section results of the ore sample are illustrated in All leaching experiments were performed in a 500 Types of the leaching reagents and sequence of their addition in the diagnostic leaching procedure are presented in The oxidizing reagents used to destroy the associated phases with gold and silver were ferric chloride or nitric acid. Other chemicals given in Ferric chloride also reacts with silver (reactions are given in Section Not only nitric acid reacts with pyrite, but also with the presented silver (see Section Overall results of diagnostic leaching of the ore sample are given in Analysis of variance (ANOVA) for diagnostic leaching of gold and silver is shown in Au recovery in terms of codec factors: These equations were obtained from analysis of variance of effective pre-treatments in gold and silver recovery. Through equations derived from ANOVA, recovery of gold and silver using the designed pre-treatment procedure were optimized and characterized.  Using mineralogical analysis and a diagnostic leaching design procedure, four oxidizing leaching reagents were used to recover 98.1% Au and 99.8% Ag. Diagnostic leaching and mineralogical analysis suggested that most of the gold in the sample was trapped in tetrahedrite, while most of the silver was trapped in unstable sulfide phases. To dissolve gold in cyanide solution the most effective leaching reagents were ferric chloride, hydrochloric acid, sulfuric acid and nitric acid, respectively. To dissolve silver in cyanide solution the most effective leaching reagents were sulfuric acid, hydrochloric acid, nitric acid and ferric chloride, respectively. A correlation for dissolution of gold and silver was proposed using ANOVA. The most effective pre-treatment reagents for gold and silver are ferric chloride and sulfuric acid, respectively. Pre-treatments with ferric chloride and sulfuric acid increased the efficiency of the dissolution of gold from 54.7% to 82% and silver from 37.4% to 81.6%.