A novel hydrometallurgical process was developed to produce metal co-doped magnesium ferrites from saprolite and limonite laterite blends by using an atmospheric acid leaching–coprecipitation method. The effects of initial acid concentration, liquid to solid ratio and leaching time on the metal leaching efficiencies were investigated systematically. It is shown that extraction efficiencies of Fe, Ni, Mn, Co and Mg can reach 94.6%, 96.9%, 86.0%, 84.8% and 72.6%, respectively, after leaching for 60min at 100°C with the liquid (2.75mol·L−1 HCl acid) to solid (saprolite and limonite laterite blends) ratio of 10:1mL·g−1, and saprolite to limonite mass ratio (Msaprolite/limonite) of 5:5. Under the optimum leaching conditions, the influence of Msaprolite/limonite on the synthesis of metal co-doped magnesium ferrites from leaching solutions was also discussed. X-ray Diffraction (XRD) results showed that pure metal co-doped magnesium ferrites could be obtained when the Msaprolite/limonite was controlled at 7:3, with the initial acid concentration of 2.75 and 3.0mol·L−1, respectively.At present, with the reduction of the world's nickel sulfide ore and rising demand for nickel, more and more attention has been paid on the nickeliferous laterite ore, which is an important nickel oxide ore that amounts to about 70% of global land-based nickel resources although it has lower grade and is difficult to treat ( Generally, traditional hydrometallurgical processes of the laterite ore including pressure acid leaching and atmospheric acid leaching have attracted considerable interests because low Ni grades make pyrometallurgical processes uneconomical. For pressure acid leaching process, the most important characteristic is selective extraction of Ni and Fe ( Spinel ferrites such as NiFe In this paper, synthesis of metal co-doped magnesium ferrites from laterite blends was investigated by using an atmospheric acid leaching–coprecipitation method. During the leaching process, the effects of the critical factors including the initial acid concentration, liquid to solid ratio and leaching time on metal leaching efficiencies were studied. Then coprecipitation method was adopted to separate Ni, Co, Fe, Mn and Mg from Al and Cr in the leaching solution by adjusting the pH value due to their different precipitate behaviors. After the coprecipitation process, metal co-doped magnesium ferrites were successfully synthesized from the precipitate. This paper may explore a novel pathway for efficient and comprehensive utilization of laterite ore. The saprolite and limonite laterite ores used in this study were supplied by Beijing Research Institute of Mining and Metallurgy. These raw ores were firstly dried overnight at 105 From the table, it can be found that the saprolite laterite ore is rich in Mg and low in Fe, while the limonite laterite ore is rich in Fe and low in Mg. According to the calculation, when the saprolite to limonite mass ratio (M Leaching experiments were performed by taking initial concentrations of acid (2.5 to 3.0 For the separation process, firstly, 100 Concentration of Ni In order to synthesize metal co-doped magnesium ferrites, the R A series of leaching experiments were carried out under the following conditions: leaching temperature at 100 It can be seen from In order to make sure that the metal phases in the laterite dissolved completely, experiments were carried out using different liquid to solid ratios in the range of 6 to 11  In stage I, it can be seen from According to the leaching experiments above, it can be concluded that the optimum leaching conditions were as follows: HCl acid concentration of 2.75 In our study, the leaching solutions were used to prepare soft magnetic material metal co-doped magnesium ferrites. However, Al and Cr in the leaching solutions are nonmagnetic elements, which can lead to the weakening of magnetic properties. Consequently, for preparation of ferrites with good magnetic properties from laterite leaching solutions, it is critical to separate Al and Cr from Fe, Ni, Co Mn and Mg. As we all know, the compounds of aluminum and chromium are amphoteric compounds, suggesting that it is feasible to separate Al and Cr from the precipitate by adjusting the pH value of the solution during the coprecipitation process. After the coprecipitation process, the precipitate was measured by XRF as shown in In recent years, many efforts have been taken on the preparation of all kinds of ferrites due to their novel properties and great applications in various fields. Generally, analytical chemical reagents (e.g. ferric salts and nickel salts) with controlled R  Based on the experimental study and detailed analysis of synthesizing metal co-doped magnesium ferrites from different leaching solutions with the initial acid concentration of 2.75 According to the experiments, the optimum leaching conditions for synthesis of single phase metal co-doped magnesium ferrite were as follows: HCl concentration, 2.75 A novel hydrometallurgical process was reported to produce single phase metal co-doped magnesium ferrites from laterite blends by using an atmospheric acid leaching and coprecipitation methods. The initial HCl concentration of 2.75 The work was financially supported by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at