The enrichment of fine boron ore containing colemanite mineral was investigated using shear flocculation, two-stage shear flocculation, column flotation and floc flotation techniques. In these fine particle processing methods, sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and Aero 801 were used as surfactant for colemanite. Also, sodium pyrophosphate and sodium hexametaphosphate were employed to improve the selectivity of the processes. The highest grade of the colemanite concentrate was obtained with two-stage shear flocculation method using Aero 801 and sodium hexametaphosphate. Under the optimum conditions, a concentrate of 38.65% B2O3 could be recovered by two-stage shear flocculation from the ore containing 26.98% B2O3.In present day society, boron, an important element of both chemical and biological interest, has a variety of uses. Modern uses of boron-bearing minerals and boron derivatives include heat resistant glass (e.g., Pyrex), fiberglass, ceramics, washing products (e.g., detergents and soaps), special alloys, fertilizers, fire retardants, wood treatment agents, insecticides, and microbiocides Flotation appears to be a promising technique to recover valuable minerals from fines Column flotation was developed as an alternative to the conventional, mechanically agitated flotation machines. The main advantages of column flotation compared to conventional cells are a better product without sacrificing recovery, a reduction in the number of stages of operation, ability to handle a finer feed, savings in collector requirements and simplicity in design for construction without any moving parts and less floor space requirements. However compared to conventional cells the water requirement per ton of feed processed and consequently the frother requirement may be more. In many studies, it has been claimed that column flotation gives a higher recovery with better grade The friable nature of the colemanite leads to produce a large amount of fines in mineral processing operations. Although there have been various studies on the conventional flotation behaviors of colemanite mineral, there has not been any investigation on the column flotation, two-stage shear flocculation and floc flotation properties of fine boron ores containing colemanite mineral in the literature. Therefore, this paper aims to determine those characteristics experimentally. Determination of such properties regarding to boron ores containing colemanite will help improving the alternative processes for the recovery of fine boron ores. On the other hand, the vast majority of the studies made on the shear flocculation technique have been carried out using high purity samples of minerals. Therefore, this paper also purposes to reveal the applicability of the shear flocculation process on fine ores. The experiments were carried out using boron ore sample containing colemanite from Bigadic, Turkey. The chemical composition of the sample consists of 26.98% B The shear flocculation experiments were carried out in a 400 cm The column and floc flotation studies were carried out in a laboratory scale flotation column having a square cross section of 5  The effects of the concentrations of sodium dodecyl sulfate and Aero 801 on the enrichment of colemanite ore by shear flocculation at pH 9.3 are given in The effects of sodium pyrophosphate concentration as dispersant on the enrichment of colemanite ore with shear flocculation at pH 9.3 and 11.5 are shown in The effects of concentration of sodium hexametaphosphate as dispersant on the enrichment of the ore in the presence of 60 Some researchers found that sodium pyrophosphate and sodium hexametaphosphate were strong dispersants  The enrichment of boron ore containing colemanite mineral with column flotation in the presence of sodium pyrophosphate and sodium hexametaphosphate is given in The enrichment studies of boron ore containing colemanite by floc flotation were investigated depending on sodium pyrophosphate and sodium hexametaphosphate concentrations. In the presence of 60 The comparison of the processes of shear flocculation, two-stage shear flocculation, column flotation and floc flotation in the enrichment of colemanite ore with 60 The variation of B The following conclusions can be drawn from this study: In the enrichment studies with shear flocculation of boron ore, the concentrates with high B The highest values of B In the enrichment studies of boron ore containing colemanite by column flotation, sodium pyrophosphate improved the concentration of boron ore with SDS. Compared to the column flotation, the higher values of B The comparison of shear flocculation, two-stage shear flocculation, column and floc flotation processes in the enrichment of boron ore containing colemanite showed that floc flotation and particularly two-stage shear flocculation methods with SDS were more effective in achieving the concentrates of high B As a result, the findings obtained from this study indicates that shear flocculation and two-stage shear flocculation techniques can be promised when these methods are industrially applied for processing of fine boron ores containing colemanite mineral. The authors acknowledge the financial support of this study provided by