Background
                  The literature has limited evidence regarding the mid-term survivals of cemented calcar-replacement bipolar hemiarthroplasty (HA) in elderly patients with unstable intertrochanteric (IT) fracture. The purpose of the present study was to evaluate clinical and radiological outcomes of cemented calcar-replacement bipolar HA for unstable IT fractures in elderly patients.
               
                  Methods
                  One hundred and twenty-two patients with the mean age of 80.6 years were enrolled in this retrospective study after they met the selection criteria. Demographics, main clinical characteristics, and operative data were recorded for all patients. Functional outcomes were assessed according to Koval's categories. Clinical and radiological evaluations were performed. Kaplan–Meier survival analysis was used to construct the cumulative survival rate. The mean follow-up time was 25.7 ± 2.9 months (ranges 0–72 months).
               
                  Results
                  Based on Koval's categories, 3 or 4-level decrease was detected in 21 patients (17%). Three patients (2 periprosthetic infections, 1 periprosthetic fracture) underwent reoperation during follow-up. No patient underwent revision of bipolar HA prosthesis. Femoral stem loosening and stem subsidence was the most common complication, observed in 22 patients (18%), followed by acetabular erosion that was seen in 12 patients (9.8%). The mean cumulative survival rate of prosthesis was 56.5% (95% confidence interval: 51.3–61.6).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Based on the results of our study, cemented calcar-replacement HA is an appropriate treatment option in elderly patients with unstable IT fractures owing to the advantages of satisfactory functional outcomes and lower reoperation rates. However, orthopedic surgeons should consider the low survival rates of cemented calcar-replacement HA prosthesis because of the increased femoral loosening in osteoporotic elderly patients.The elderly population has increased considerably in developed countries Nevertheless, nonunion, implant failure, and screw perforation of the femoral head can occur in elderly patients treated using internal devices because of severe osteoporosis On the other hand, cemented fixation is advantageous for enhancing the initial fixation strength in elderly patients with poor bone quality. In addition, cemented bipolar HA is typically preferred in low-demand patients with high mortality risk. However, the literature reveals limited evidence regarding mid-term survivals of cemented calcar-replacement bipolar HA for unstable IT fractures in the elderly population. Therefore, the primary aim of the present study was to evaluate the clinical and radiological outcomes of cemented calcar-replacement bipolar HA after unstable IT fractures in elderly patients. Additionally, we aimed to determine the mid-term survivals of cemented calcar-replacement bipolar HA prosthesis. This retrospective study was performed with the approval of our institution's ethical review board. Overall, 133 patients (133 hips) with unstable IT fracture were surgically treated using a primary cemented calcar-replacement bipolar HA between 2010 and 2014. The primary indications for cemented calcar-replacement bipolar HA were unstable (Muller type A2.2 or A2.3) IT fracture with the loss of posteromedial cortex support, ≥65 years of age, and severe osteoporosis (Singh index ≤4). The exclusion criteria included being wheelchair-bound or bedridden before the fracture, incomplete medical records, or incomplete follow-up. Patients’ demographics (gender, age), body mass index (BMI), American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) score Two types of cemented calcar-replacement bipolar HA prosthesis were used, either tapered design (Calcar Replacement Stem, Zimed Medikal, Gaziantep, Turkey) or non-tapered design (CFS stem, Sistem Ortopedi, Konya, Turkey). Both designs had a rectangular collar in different sizes (15 mm, 25 mm, 35 mm, 45 mm, or 55 mm) for the bone deficiencies of the proximal medial femur. The total length of the stems ranged from 160 to 190 mm and the diameter of the stems ranged from 9 to 21 mm in 2 mm increments ( Radiographic evaluation was performed by an independent observer who did not perform the operations. Second postoperative week standard anteroposterior and lateral radiographs were defined as the baseline and compared with the latest follow-up radiographs. Patients who were lost to follow-up because of death were recorded, and their latest control radiographs were evaluated as the final follow-up control. The radiographic evaluation of femoral stem was performed using the zonal system of Gruen et al. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS 20.0. Kaplan–Meier survival analysis was performed to determine mid-term survivals of the cemented calcar-replacement HA prosthesis. Femoral loosening, femoral stem subsidence, acetabular erosion, or revision surgery were defined as endpoints. One hundred and twenty-two patients (65 females, 57 males) with the mean age of 80.6 ± 6.8 years (ranges, 66–102 years) were evaluated in the current study. Demographics, main clinical characteristics, and operative data of the patients are shown in Based on Koval's categories, 84 of 122 patients (68.8%) were independent community ambulators and 38 patients were community ambulators with a cane, preoperatively. At postoperative last follow-up, 28 patients (22.9%) returned to their pre-fracture ambulatory status, 39 (31.9%) dropped 1 level, 34 (27.8%) dropped 2 levels, and 21 (17.2%) dropped 3 or more levels. Three patients underwent reoperation during follow-up. Two patients underwent debridement because of prolonged postoperative wound drainage and suspected infection, and 1 patient underwent plate fixation for periprosthetic femoral fracture. No patient underwent prosthesis revision. Femoral stem loosening and stem subsidence was the most common complication, observed in 22 patients (18%), followed by acetabular erosion that was seen in 12 patients (9.8%). Heterotrophic ossification was encountered in 8 patients (6.5%). Leg length discrepancy was detected in 17 patients (13.9%). Kaplan–Meier survival analysis was based on 122 patients at risk during follow-up. The cumulative survival rate was 56.5% (95% confidence interval: 51.3–61.6). IT fractures account for 45% to 50% of all hip fractures. Notably, more than half of these are unstable, with comminution of the posteromedial support, displaced lesser trochanteric fragment, or those with the subtrochanteric extension When the clinical data of our patients were reviewed, 28 of 122 patients (23%) were able to walk independently, and 73 of 122 patients (60%) could walk independently with the help of a cane or walker. Overall, 21 patients (17%) were found to have 3- or 4-level decrease per Koval's categories, which means that the patients needed someone's help for walking. Lee et al. reported that 21 of 60 patients (35%) in their study dropped 3 or 4 levels and 21.7% of patients were bedridden after cementless total or HA for failed internal fixation of IT fractures According to our radiographic outcomes, femoral stem loosening, and stem subsidence were the most common radiographic problems at the latest follow-up. Femoral stem subsidence over 5 mm, which was defined as a definite diagnosis of femoral loosening, was detected in 22 patients (18%). In their study, Celiktas et al. reported no femoral loosening or femoral stem subsidence over 5 mm after cemented HA in 64 patients with a mean follow-up of 31 months Among 122 patients, 3 patients underwent reoperation owing to postoperative complications (2.4%). Infection was the most common complication in 2 patients (1.6%), and we observed periprosthetic femur fracture in 1 patient (0.8%). Dislocation of the prosthetic hip joint and periprosthetic fracture were not detected during the follow-up. Lee et al. reported 3.3% dislocation and 3.3% infection rate after cementless calcar replacement HA in 60 patients of their study There is limited knowledge regarding the mid-term survival of cemented calcar-replacement bipolar HA. In the present study, acetabular erosion was observed in 12 patients (10%) and femoral stem subsidence over 5 mm, which was defined as a definite diagnosis of femoral loosening, was detected in 22 patients (18%) during 5-year follow-up. There were no cases of calcar resorption. Grimsrud et al. reported no femoral loosening or femoral stem subsidence over 5 mm after cemented HA in 39 patients with a mean follow-up of 12 months Nonetheless, this study had several limitations. First, it was a retrospective evaluation of prospectively followed patient group. Second, only a small number of patients were able to complete the follow-up over 5 years (12 patients). However, our study group consisted of extremely old patients, and this study population is the largest in the literature which reported mid-term survival of cemented calcar-replacement bipolar HA prosthesis. On the other hand, we reported clinical and radiological outcomes of a relatively homogeneous patient population who were operated in a single center by the same surgical team. However, further studies are needed to procure valid evidence regarding survivals of cemented calcar-replacement HA prosthesis. Based on our study results, cemented calcar-replacement HA is an appropriate treatment option in elderly patients with unstable IT fractures considering the advantages of satisfactory functional outcomes and lower reoperation rates. However, orthopedic surgeons should consider the low survival rates of cemented calcar-replacement HA prosthesis owing to increased femoral loosening in elderly patients with osteoporosis. None.