Experimental investigation of the effect of carbon particle size on its deposition efficiency on the surface of plastic particles has been performed in stirred vessel. A model based on Langmuir kinetics was used, and it provided a good fit for the experimental results. The effect of de-inking conditions such as, carbon particle size, calcium chloride concentration, and carbon concentration has been investigated.
                  Different sizes of carbon particles were tested. It was found that the deposition rate and the deposition efficiency were generally higher for the larger carbon particles.
                  The effect of CaCl2 concentration on the deposition efficiency was investigated. Results showed that the deposition rate increased when the concentration of CaCl2 increased from 0.05 to 0.10g/l (the stochiometric ratio needed to react with sodium stearate). Moreover, the deposition efficiency was higher at this concentration. Concentrations above the stochiometric ratio did not show a systematic behavior for the deposition rate and the deposition efficiency.
                  Finally, the effect of carbon concentration was examined. Carbon concentration of 0.25, 0.30, and 0.40g/l were used. Results showed that the concentration of carbon did not affect the deposition efficiency nor the rate of deposition.
                  This study confirmed the applicability of the method of ink removal from recycled waste paper using plastic particles, proposed by previous investigators.radius of the carbon particles (m) radius of the plastic particles (m) parameter defined as shear rate (1/s) fitting parameter of a modified Langmuir model, dimensionless fitting parameter of a modified Langmuir model, dimensionless number of carbon particles per unit volume (particle/m dimensionless number of particles defined as number of carbon particles at number of plastic particles at time (s) dimensionless time defined as 4 orthokinetic deposition efficiency defined by density (kg/m The process of waste paper recycling is an essential step in removing contaminants from the usable pulp fibers. There are three basic steps of ink removal in a successful de-inking process: ink removal from pulp fibers (chemical addition), ink removal from pulp slurry (washing or froth flotation) and ink removal from effluent wastewater (clarification). Analysis of the above three steps of ink removal from the pulp fibers, the pulp slurry, and the effluent wastewater, shows that high consistency washing offers significant advantages when fine ink dispersion can be achieved Ink particles’ size plays an important role in the success of the de-inking process. Experimental investigations showed that the ink particle diameter resulting from a successful pulping stage ranges from 3 to 190 Ink particles’ size is a primary parameter for the control of efficiency of the separation processes in secondary fiber recycling. The effect of particle size and shape is shown to depend on the pulp consistency and on other technological parameters as predicted by theoretical considerations Focusing attention on the removal of printing inks and specks, the effect of particle size is of primary importance for each step and its effects on the over all efficiency of the de-inking according to the choice of the equipment and operating conditions. The pulping step determines ink release and particle size. The effect of particle size on the efficiency of the separation process in secondary fiber recycling have been confirmed, and specified in the case of ink and speck removal by flotation and cleaning The washing and flotation steps in the de-inking process are primarily used for the removal of small ink particles to improve brightness. In addition, particles in the visible range, such as those produced by laser print and varnished papers, are also eliminated by flotation. Forward cleaning can efficiently complete the removal of these heavy weight specks. The efficiency of ink removal, i.e. the number of removed ink particles, show great variations with particle size One of the primary parameters that control the efficiency of ink removal by washing is particle size. As the ink particle size increases, the tendency for entrapment of ink particles in the fiber matrix also increases, which makes the removal less efficient Mousa and Qasaimeh Adamczyk et al. The objective of this investigation is to study the influence of ink particle size, CaCl The rate of change of the number of monodisperse ink particles subjected to simple shear flow due to its deposition on the surface of plastic particles is given by the following non-dimensional equation A certain amount of carbon from Ballot trees was crushed, milled, and screened in ASTM sieves to different meshes of mesh numbers 270, 325, and 400 to get different sizes of carbon particles with a mean diameter for each as: 58, 49, and 42 Sodium stearate as a surfactant was prepared according to the procedure suggested by Young and Matijevic Distilled water was then added to adjust the total volume to one liter. The solution was heated until its temperature reached 80 The plastic particles that were used in the experiments were low density polyethylene (LDPE) manufactured by SABIC marketing Ltd., Saudi Arabia. The particles were nearly spherical in shape, with an average diameter of 1.36 Calcium chloride, made by Northampton, UK, was used. The concentrations of CaCl A 200 The required amounts of carbon, plastic, and calcium chloride were added to the solution, respectively. The whole suspension was then mixed with magnetic stirrer at a mixing speed of 300 The rate of deposition of carbon particles on the plastic particles was followed by measuring the change in carbon particles’ number in solution with time. A sample of 2.5 The effect of carbon particles’ size on their deposition rate was studied under a mixing speed of 300  The effect of calcium chloride concentration on carbon deposition and the deposition efficiency was studied for the case where the carbon particles’ diameter is 58  This study confirmed the applicability of the method of ink removal from recycled waste paper using plastic particles, proposed by previous investigators. In general, regardless of the size of carbon particles, 35% of the initial number of carbon particles could be deposited. The highest efficiency and highest rate for carbon deposition was for the 58 As for calcium chloride, it is concluded that the maximum deposition efficiency is achieved when calcium chloride is present at its stochiometric ratio needed for the present amount of sodium stearate. Finally, one can conclude that, relatively, the lower the concentration of carbon, the better the deposition.