Litter quantity and composition and its fall pattern throughout the year in Mediterranean pine afforestation of Pinus pinaster in Fuencaliente (Central Spain) were studied in relation to thinning treatments. The experiment lasted 10 years (1986–1995) and tested two low thinning regimes with a control one and with a stand that had never been thinned. Mean litter production for all years and treatments was 3284kgha−1
                     year−1 although it varies between 1520kgha−1
                     year−1 for the heavy thinning in 1994 and 5700kgha−1
                     year−1 for moderate thinning in 1989. Litter fall had two relative maximums throughout the year, the largest during the months of July, August and September, and the second one during January and February. The temperature of the previous month and moisture deficit resulted to be the most correlated climatic variables with monthly litter fall. Both time and treatments, and also their interaction, had a significant effect on litter fall, decreasing the quantity of litter fall with thinning intensity. Five years after thinning, this effect on the litter fall disappeared.The organic layer of the forest floor regulates most of the functional processes occurring throughout the forest ecosystem: it acts as an insulating layer which protects the soil from extreme changes in moisture and temperature; it protects the soil from erosion and frost and it improves water infiltration. Litter fall is a particularly key process in nutrient cycling of forest ecosystems as it provides the main above-ground contribution of carbon and nutrients to the forest floor through the formation of humus that is characteristic of each ecosystem ( The process of decomposition is mainly controlled by climate ( Several studies have reported litter fall nutrient content and mineral return on Mediterranean forest ecosystems, which show important interspecific differences ( To adapt to water deficit conditions, trees tend to shed old leaves in order to reduce the transpiration surface. This adaptative mechanism leads to a rapid substitution of old leaves by new shoots, which exert a high photosynthetic capacity and are more efficient in water regulation ( The objectives of this research were: (a) to increase knowledge regarding the dynamics of plantation pines, through the quantity and composition of the litter and its fall pattern throughout the year in Mediterranean pine forests of The study was carried out in a The thinning experiment was carried out in 1984 according to a random complete blocks design with three treatments and three blocks. Treatments applied consisted of comparing two low thinning regimes with a control one, with no thinning (C); moderate thinning (T In each plot five 0.5 Nutrient content in litter fall (needles) was analyzed monthly during the first 3-year period. At each sample, the content in N, P, K, Ca and Mg was determined as a percentage of total dry weight. Samples were dried at 75 The measured annual litter fall has been referred to the hectare and transformed through logarithm to achieve normality. Differences in nutrient content of litter between months were analyzed using ANOVA techniques for each element. The potential relation between the amount of litter and climate was explored using Pearson's correlation. Climatic variables analyzed were monthly precipitation and monthly mean temperature for each month and, with the same climatic variables, from the month before, 2 months before, etc. to the data for the previous year. Litter amount was also compared with an edapho-climatic parameter – the monthly moisture deficit – ( Since two thinning has been applied (1984 and 1992), the measured series of litter fall (years 1986–1995) have been divided into two periods to study the effect of the time elapsed after the thinning: between first and second thinning (1986–1991) and after the second thinning (1993–1995). The effect of thinning and the effect of the time since the thinning on annual litter fall were analyzed by repeated measurement analysis of variance (RMANOVA). The general expression of the model for a complete random block design is: In the same way the RMANOVA analysis was used to analyze differences in litter fall between seasons of the year in the following order: spring (April–June), summer (July–September), autumn (October–December) and winter (January–March). For each season the same post-hoc test procedure was performed. The evolution of annual litter fall of all tested treatments during the decade studied is shown in Litter fall has two maximums throughout the year; the largest maximum is in summer, during the months of July–September, especially in August ( For all treatments, the mean litter fall amount for spring is 13% of the total, 59% for summer, 17% for autumn and 12% in winter. At every season the above-mentioned maximum of 1989 can be recognized (more noteworthy in autumn and winter), as can the relative maximum of 1992–1993, while the minimum of 1994 is not so clear among seasons (  Transformed climatic variables from the temperature and the precipitation of previous months turned out to be the most significantly correlated with monthly litter fall (mean value for all treatments), with  A repeated measures analysis of variance was used to evaluate significant differences through time and those due to treatment (control, moderate and heavy thinning) for the two periods of time considered ( In the study by seasons, time and treatment continue to have a significant effect in every season during the two periods of time considered (before and after the thinning of 1992). Results for interaction of time Neddle fall observed for In relation with the common rhythm of litter fall for all treatments, similar seasonal trends have been obtained in other Mediterranean species. In general, needle litter fall increases in summer with a unique maximum in the annual distribution from August to October although the annual litter fall pattern can vary slightly from year to year ( Although we found slight differences in some nutrient content (N, K) in litter fall throughout months and seasons of the year, there was no common trend in other studies published about this issue. Ca is the most abundant element in litter fall nutrient content, as the greatest needs for Ca is in the leaves. Similar levels were found in We did not find significant differences in litter fall nutrient content for P, Ca and Mg between months. Since we only measured nutrient contents in litter fall, other ecological processes such as translocation could be hiding the differences between months ( The effects of thinning on litter fall have been studied in two periods. Firstly the interval of 1986–1991 after thinning in 1984, and secondly the period of 1993–1995, after the second thinning in 1992. We did not report a growing trend in litter fall after thinning as other authors have done ( Both times (1984 and 1992) thinning type was low, eliminating smallest, worst formed and generally dominated trees. Dominated trees do not contribute to litter fall production at stand level too much because of their small crown size ( To evaluate the sustainability of the thinnings, it is necessary to deeply study their effects on the production and nutrients content of litter fall with regard to thinning rotation. In that sense, at least, the interval between two thinnings must be long enough to allow the forest to recover the extracted biomass and nutrients ( Mediterranean type ecosystems are characterized by hot, dry summers and warm, wet winters. This temporal asynchrony of favourable temperature and moisture conditions could limit rates of litter decomposition ( The silvopastoral aptitude of Mediterranean The authors would like to thank all who collaborated in field data collection, especially A. Bachiller and R. Ruiz-Peinado. This work was carried out within the framework of the INIA research project OT03-002.