A series of coal permeability experiments was conducted for coal samples infiltrated both with non-adsorbing and adsorbing gases – all under conditions of constant pressure difference between the confining stress and the pore pressure. The experimental results show that even under controlled stress conditions, coal permeability decreases with respect to pore pressure during the injection of adsorbing gases. This conclusion is apparently not congruent with our conceptual understanding: when coal samples are free to swell/shrink then no effect of swelling/shrinkage strain should be apparent on the permeability under controlled stress conditions. In this study, we developed a phenomenological permeability model to explain this enigmatic behavior of coal permeability evolution under the influence of gas sorption by combining the effect of swelling strain with that of the mechanical effective stress. For the mechanical effective stress effect, we use the concept of natural strain to define its impact on the change in fracture aperture; for the swelling strain effect, we introduce a partition ratio to define the contribution of swelling strain to the fracture aperture reduction. The resulting coal permeability model is defined as a function of both the effective stress and the swelling strain. Compared to other commonly used models under specific boundary conditions, such as Palmer–Mansoori (P–M), Shi–Durucan (S–D) and Cui–Bustin (C–B) models, our model results match the experimental measurements quite well. We match the experimental data with the model results for the correct reason, i.e. the model conditions are consistent with the experimental conditions (both are stress-controlled), while other models only match the data for a different reason (the model condition is uniaxial strain but the experimental condition is stress-controlled). We have also implemented our permeability model into a fully coupled coal deformation and gas transport finite element model to recover the important non-linear responses due to the effective stress effects where mechanical influences are rigorously coupled with the gas transport system.Coal Bed Methane (CBM) is naturally occurring methane gas (CH A broad variety of models have evolved to represent the effects of sorption, swelling and effective stresses on the dynamic evolution of permeability over last few decades. In the latest review (  A number of coal permeability models were developed based on strains.  As reviewed above, there are a large collection of coal permeability models from empirical ones to theoretical ones. These models normally have a set of common assumptions: (1) the overburden stress remains constant; (2) coal deforms under the uniaxial strain condition; (3) the effective stress coefficient is assumed as one; and (4) the sorption-induced strain is totally counteracted by the closure of the fracture aperture. These assumptions have limited their applicability as Previous work of Experimental observations have shown that swelling response to the infiltration of CO We use the idealized model as illustrated in In this section, we define the behavior of coal fracture where the effective stress is applied in a non-adsorbing medium. Coals are viewed as naturally fractured reservoirs with a matrix that is often assumed to have a negligible permeability in comparison to the fracture system. These fractures in coal are known as cleats with the cleat aperture sensitive to the effective stress, and increased effective stress acting to decrease the cleat aperture and thus permeability. A number of empirical and theoretical expressions exist in the literature for describing the observed relationship between effective stress and fracture aperture (  To deal with this issue, it is conceptualized that the fracture system has two parts, which are subject to the same stress, but follow different varieties of Hooke's law: the hard part follows the engineering-strain based Hooke's law, and the soft part obeys the natural-strain based Hooke's law, as shown in Considering a fracture to be embedded into a core sample subject to a stress,  Combining the relation of fracture aperture change for both “hard” and “soft” parts, as shown in Eqs. From We represent the behavior of coal permeability where fluid pressures are applied in an adsorbing medium. When the influence of swelling strain is investigated, a common way is to assume that the swelling strain is totally accommodated by the closure of fracture aperture, which could dramatically overestimate the influence of the swelling strain ( The influence of swelling process on the internal stress distribution of coal fracture is analyzed in the following section. From Because Combining the effective stress effect (Eq. For a negligibly small residual fracture aperture ( Based on the cubic law between aperture change and permeability ( Coal permeability model as shown in Eq. The initial fracture porosity, In order to explain the physical meaning of the new parameter, Therefore, A series of gas flow-through experiments have been carried out all under constant pressure difference conditions ( Model results were compared with experimental data for cores No. 01 and No. 02. Effects of sorption-induced strain alone on permeability change were investigated in this comparison. In this comparison, only the sensitivity ratio, Both data matches verify the validity of this newly developed coal permeability model. It can be seen that the sensitivity ratio, In this section, experimental data from core Anderson 01 ( Coal swelling parameters from laboratorial tests were used, as listed in For the compared permeability models, as shown in For our model, we considered that only part of the total swelling strain contributes to the cleat aperture change, while the remaining part contributes to coal bulk deformation. The effect of swelling strain on permeability change is evaluated by a partition factor, as defined in Eq. In order to better explain this model, the relationship between cleat porosity and the partition ratio of total swelling strain contributing to cleat aperture change was listed and plotted in As demonstrated in All three sets of matches have illustrated that using the total swelling strain to calculate the permeability change could dramatically overestimate its contribution, which clearly demonstrates the contribution of this work. In our previous studies ( This numerical model fully couples coal geomechanical deformation, gas flow, and gas adsorption/desorption induced coal matrix swelling/shrinkage processes (see This example is to investigate the sensitivity of transient permeability with CH     When the gas pressure is applied in an adsorbing and swelling coal, the sensitivities of coal permeability are regulated by the initial effective stress coefficient when coal swelling parameters are maintained unchanged. Therefore, when the effective stress coefficient is equal to 0.8, more reduction in coal permeability is observed, as demonstrated in  Coal permeability models are required to define the transient characteristics of permeability evolution in fractured coals. A broad variety of models have evolved to represent the effects of sorption, swelling and stresses on the dynamic evolution of permeability. These models can be classified into two groups: permeability models under conditions of uniaxial strain such as Palmer–Mansoori (P–M), Shi–Durucan (S–D) and Cui–Bustin (C–B) models, and permeability models under conditions of variable stress such as the one developed in this study. Although laboratory experiments are conducted under controlled conditions of stresses, analyses of laboratory observations are normally conducted by using permeability models under conditions of uniaxial strain. The inconsistency between experimental conditions and modeling conditions is the reason why permeability models under conditions of uniaxial strain cannot match the laboratory observations well as demonstrated in this study. Permeability models under uniaxial strain are more appropriate for the overall behavior of coal gas reservoirs under typical in situ conditions while models representing variable stress conditions are more appropriate for behavior examined under typical laboratory conditions. In this study, a phenomenological permeability model has been developed to explain why coal permeability decreases even under the unconstrained conditions of variable stress. Unlike permeability models under the uniaxial strain condition, this model under conditions of variable stress is effective-stress based and can be used to recover the important nonlinear responses due to the effective stress effects when mechanical influences are rigorously coupled with the gas transport system. The consistency between experimental conditions and modeling conditions is the reason why this model can match the laboratory observations reasonably well. Our modeling results illustrate that coal permeability profiles under the controlled stress conditions are regulated by the following five factors: (1) confining stress – when coal swelling parameters remain unchanged, coal permeability profiles are regulated by the initial effective stress. Coal permeability reduces initially, recovers and then reaches the final equilibrium magnitude. When the confining stress is higher, the final equilibrium coal permeability is much lower than the initial permeability; (2) swelling capacity – when confining stress conditions remain unchanged, coal permeability profiles are regulated by coal swelling capacity. Coal permeability reduces initially, recovers and then reaches the final equilibrium magnitude. When the swelling capacity is higher, the final equilibrium coal permeability is much lower than the initial permeability; (3) fracture compressibility – when the confining stress is kept as constant, both the effective stress effect and the swelling strain effect are defined as a function of gas pressure. Under these conditions, when the facture compressibility is higher, the permeability enhancement due to the decrease in effective stress may take over the permeability reduction due to swelling; (4) effective stress coefficient – the reduction in coal permeability is larger when the effective stress coefficient is lower because the effective stress increases as the effective stress coefficient decreases; and (5) sensitivity factor – the sensitivity factor represents the ratio of fracture aperture strain to swelling strain incremental. When the sensitivity factor is higher, the reduction in coal permeability is more significant. This study demonstrated the crucial role of the consistency between experimental conditions and modeling conditions and the rigorous coupling between coal mechanical deformation and gas transport in the evaluation of coal permeability observations. This work was supported by WA:ERA, the Western Australia CSIRO-University Postgraduate Research Scholarship, National Research Flagship Energy Transformed Top-up Scholarship, and by