Copolymers of acrylamide and vinylpyrrolidinone with varying compositions have been synthesised and employed to depress talc in a model flotation system with process plant operation conditions. Adsorption isotherms indicated that the hydrophilic acrylamide homopolymer has a very low affinity for the hydrophobic talc surface, whereas vinylpyrrolidinone homopolymer strongly adsorbs onto the talc surface. Micro-flotation experiments revealed that the copolymer system can induce stronger talc depression than the homopolymer variants, with the most effective copolymer depressant having 25–30% vinylpyrrolidinone incorporation. The copolymer system is observed to have inherited the strong talc affinity of vinylpyrrolidinone polymer and the strong hydrophilic property from polyacrylamide. This combined effect facilitates the desired strong talc depression in single mineral flotation. However, this copolymer system has similar adsorption affinity on both the talc and pentlandite, hence depressing both talc and pentlandite in the mixed mineral flotation system. This research shows that a sufficient hydrophobic balance on the polymer is necessary for the adsorption and subsequent depression for talc. However, polymer with high adsorption selectivity is required to be a successful synthetic talc depressant for mixed mineral system.Talc is a common gangue mineral found closely associated with many complex valuable mineral ores. The natural hydrophobicity of talc means that it tends to be collected with the valuable minerals during the froth flotation process. As talc is essentially a magnesium silicate mineral ( Guar gum is one of the most widely used industrial depressants for hydrophobic talceous gangue minerals in flotation of nickel bearing ores. However, guar is a natural product and is subject to seasonal variation. Thus, there is a lack of control over its micro-structural properties such as the galactose:mannose ratio and distribution, a problem which can lead to fluctuations in depressant performance. Other polymers have been used to depress talc in flotation. The basic concept is to employ polymers with particular functional groups to render the gangue mineral hydrophilic and hence prevent the flotation of the gangue mineral ( This paper presents an approach in employing a copolymer of acrylamide (Am) and vinylpyrrolidinone (VPD) as a synthetic depressant in froth flotation system. The concept of this synthetic depressant is to develop a polymer with balanced hydrophobic/hydrophilic nature to overcome the natural hydrophobicity of talc and hence to prevent it from attaching to the air bubbles in the froth flotation process. However, the acrylamide homopolymer does not adsorb strongly onto talc and hence has a weak talc depression because of the opposing hydrophobicities of the polymer (hydrophilic) and talc (hydrophobic). This paper investigates a solution to this problem by incorporation of less hydrophilic monomer into the acrylamide polymer, thus providing anchor points for the hydrophilic copolymer to adsorb onto the hydrophobic surface of talc and to reduce its floatability. Micro-flotation and laboratory-scale flotation devices, as well as isotherm adsorption experiments, have been employed for the study of flotation and adsorption selectivity respectively in this research. Talc sample for single mineral flotation was sourced from the Mt. Fitton mine site in South Australia with XRF analysis showing more than 99% purity. The sample was milled and wet-screened, before being collected for use in the flotation study. The volume weighted mean diameter, Talc sample used in the adsorption studies was purchased from Unimin Australia (>95% purity) with a volume weighted mean diameter, Pentlandite sample used in the adsorption studies was sourced from CSIRO with a volume weighted mean diameter, For the mixed mineral experiments, high grade sample of talc was obtained from Steetley Minerals and was crushed to pass a sieve mesh size of 1.65 Polyfroth H57 (Huntsman), acrylamide (Am) (Merck, 98%), 1-vinyl-2-pyrrolidone (VPD) (Sigma–Aldrich, ⩾99%), 2,2′-azobis(2-methylpropionamidine) dihydrochloride (AMPA) (Sigma–Aldrich, 97%), NaCl (Chem-Supply, 99%), CaCl Copolymers of Am and VPD (see  The molecular weight characteristics of the polymers were determined via size exclusion chromatography performed on a Shimadzu liquid chromatography system fitted with a Wyatt mini-DAWN TREOS laser light scattering detector (690 The corresponding composition of each polymer was analysed using proton nuclear magnetic resonance ( Micro-flotation tests were performed using a modified Hallimond tube. Hyper saline solution used was 0.825 Preliminary time-dependent adsorption experiments indicated that maximum adsorption was attained within 15 All polymers exhibited relatively high affinity isotherms, and hence can be analysed using the Langmuir expression for adsorption at the solid–water interface ( The plateau adsorbed amount and the Langmuir affinity constant can be determined in this expression. The affinity constant can be used to determine the equilibrium constant, Mixed mineral flotation experiments of talc, quartz and pentlandite were conducted on a modified 3 In the flotation cell, the impeller was driven from below to allow the whole surface of the froth to be scraped with a paddle at constant depth and time intervals. The cell was fitted with a rubber diaphragm, sight tube and electronic sensor for automatic detection and control of pulp level. With this cell design no air is entrained during conditioning, unlike most commercial cells, and the flotation gas only enters the pulp when the gas on/off control is activated. The gas flow rate was 8 For all mixed mineral tests, the ball-mill ground slurry was transferred to the flotation cell, the water level was raised, and the pH adjusted to the test value. The SEX collector and talc depressant were added sequentially and the pulp was conditioned for 7 The effectiveness of the P(Am Initial studies on the modified Hallimond tube had shown that the flotation characteristic of mineral particles in the absence of depressant was different in the hyper saline water system (with frother and pH adjustment) comparing to a pure water system. In the hyper saline water system, both the naturally hydrophilic (brucite) and hydrophobic (talc) mineral particles transported to the froth phase much faster under the same operation conditions (identical air flowrate and impeller stirring speed) in the modified Hallimond tube than with the original column ( Results of the depressant effect of the P(Am Interesting results were observed when applying the P(Am Detailed adsorption experiments were carried out to study the adsorption of the synthetic polymers on talc. The adsorption isotherms of the different P(Am P(Am) homopolymer had the lowest affinity constant on the talc sample, 0.0045 Nevertheless, the results from the isotherm adsorption experiment clearly show that the P(Am From the single mineral talc flotation investigation above, the 25% VPD copolymer was identified as the most effective talc depressant out of all the copolymers. Therefore, the P(Am The results showed that the application of guar in the system achieved a high pentlandite recovery (maximum nickel recovery of ∼95%) and strong depression of talc (maximum magnesium recovery of ∼50%). It was found that the use of P(Am The difference in mineral selectivity of the two depressants can be explained by their respective adsorption affinity on pentlandite and talc. Adsorption isotherms of P(Am The adsorption selectivity for P(Am This study has successfully shown that the hydrophobicity characteristic has a major role in the adsorption of polymer onto talc. A less hydrophilic functional group can be employed to aid the docking of hydrophilic polymer onto the hydrophobic surface of talc. Flotation experiments performed under realistic flotation conditions showed that the P(Am We would like to acknowledge the CRC for Polymers for the funding of this research, as well as CSIRO Minerals for performing the mixed mineral flotation experiments.