Recycling spent lead-acid batteries has always been a research hotspot. Although traditional pyrometallurgical smelting is still the dominant process, it has serious environmental drawbacks, such as the emission of lead dust and SO2, and high energy consumption. This study presents a clean process for recycling spent lead-acid battery paste. The lead in paste was recovered via hydrometallurgical leaching and electrowinning in chloride solution. The leaching ratio of lead was >99% under optimum conditions: temperature of 90 °C, CaCl2 concentration of 400 g/L, Fe2+ concentration of 5 g/L, pH 1.0, and leaching time of 2 h. The appropriate minimum Pb concentration and optimum current density for electrowinning were determined to be 10 g/L and 200 A/m2, respectively. Cathode lead powders with a purity of 99.6% were obtained via electrowinning. The current efficiency and the power consumption at 200 A/m2 were 96.3% and 85.9 kWh per ton of lead produced, respectively. Due to the use of soluble anode (iron), the energy consumption of the electrowinning process was considerably reduced and the chlorine evolution was avoided. The electrowinning has obvious economic advantages over cementation, and the metallic lead with high purity can be obtained using this method. Furthermore, as the spent electrolyte containing ferrous ions is recyclable, the consumption of reagents and the liquid effluent are minimised. The final leaching residue is a mixture of harmless akaganeite and calcium sulphate. The experimental results show that the proposed process is promising for the recovery of lead from spent lead-acid battery paste.Lead-acid batteries are the oldest type of rechargeable battery and have been widely used in many fields, such as automobiles, electric vehicles, and energy storage due to the features of large power-to-weight ratio and low cost ( Usually, spent lead-acid batteries are separated in lead recycling plants by dismantling and sorting into four fractions: lead paste, metallic fragments, waste acid, and plastic case (  Herein, a novel direct leaching-electrowinning process has been proposed to recover lead from spent lead-acid battery paste. Calcium chloride was used as the leaching agent and iron sheet was used as a soluble anode. The spent electrolyte containing ferrous ions can be returned to leach lead paste and thus the use of reducing agent hydrogen peroxide becomes unnecessary. The factors affecting the leaching and electrowinning were optimized. For comparison, the recovery of lead from the solution via cementation using iron powder was conducted. To the best of our knowledge, this study represents the first attempt to produce metallic lead from spent lead-acid battery paste via hydrometallurgical leaching and electrowinning in a chloride solution. The dry spent lead paste sample was provided by a spent lead-acid battery recycling plant located in Hubei Province, China. The sample was ground to a particle size below 0.15 mm and analysed using inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES). The spent lead paste was composed of lead, oxygen, and sulphur with lead accounting for the largest proportion (71.1%). The sulphur content was determined to be 6.75% using a carbon-sulphur analyser (EMIA-920 V2, HORIBA). The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the lead paste sample was measured using a Rigaku Ultima IV diffractometer (Cu, Leaching batch tests were performed in a beaker under mechanical stirring (RW20 digital, IKA, Germany) at 500 rpm in a water bath (DF-101S, Bangxi Instrument Technology Co. Ltd., China). The mass of lead paste and volume of CaCl Lead electrowinning was conducted at room temperature (25 ± 2 °C) in a cubic vessel (70 × 70 × 70 mm) with an iron cathode (30 × 50 × 1 mm) and two iron anodes (30 × 50 × 1 mm). The electrode gap was maintained at 20 mm and the electrodes were connected to a direct current regulated power supply (IT6332A, ITECH). The electrolyte was periodically collected to determine the lead content and calculate the current efficiency. The lead content in the leaching residues, liquors, and electrolyte were analysed using ICP-AES. The lead content in the cathode crude lead was analysed using the EDTA volumetric method. The metal extraction ratio, current efficiency, and energy consumption were calculated according to the method reported by As a considerable proportion of lead in lead paste exists in the form of PbO Lead sulphate and lead peroxide can be dissolved in calcium chloride solution containing ferrous ions, according to the following reactions: The leaching of lead is mainly attributed to its complexation with chloride ions. Therefore, increasing the concentration of chloride can promote the dissolution of lead. To study the effect of the chloride concentration on the leaching of lead, the CaCl The concentration of calcium chloride was found to have a great influence on the leaching of lead ( The Fe  Although the stable pH range of lead chloride is enlarged in the chloride system ( The results illustrated in Leaching tests were performed for durations between 0.5 and 3 h under constant conditions of 90 °C, 400 g/L CaCl Based on the single-factor experiments, an integrated experiment was conducted under the determined optimized leaching conditions (CaCl Cementation is an electrochemical process widely used in the industry for the recovery of copper and precious metals ions (  Cathodic reaction: Anodic reaction: Overall reaction (Eq. As the metallic iron was used as the soluble anode, the anode potential decreased and thus the chlorine evolution was avoided. The effects of the lead concentration and current density on the electrowinning process were investigated. The lead in the solution becomes depleted during the electrowinning process. Therefore, the effect of the lead concentration on the current efficiency was investigated. As shown in  The lead deposited at 100 and 200 A/m According to the current price of iron powder, scrap iron and industrial electricity in China, it is estimated that the cost of producing one ton of metallic lead is $ 133.5 using the cementation method, while only $ 55.1 for the electrowinning process. Therefore, soluble anode electrowinning has an obvious economic advantage. In addition, the metallic lead with high purity can be obtained using this method. The detailed calculated results are shown in After the electrowinning process, the lead in the electrolyte was depleted and ferrous ions were simultaneously accumulated, which makes it possible to return the spent electrolyte to leach the lead paste. To assess the feasibility of recycling, 300 mL of spent electrolyte (Pb 8.3 g/L) was returned to leach 6 g of lead paste under the optimum leaching conditions. Ferrous chloride was not added to this process. A lead leaching efficiency of 99.1% was obtained. This result indicates that the spent electrolyte is recyclable and can be replenished with Pb Based on the results presented herein, an integrated flowsheet ( The proposed process is an attractive solution to extracting Pb from spent lead-acid battery paste. The lead in the raw material was recovered via a direct leaching–electrowinning process in calcium chloride solution. Different from the traditional hydrometallurgical processes used to treat the lead paste, this new process does not require the desulphurisation step. The lead was almost completely leached within 2 h with 400 g/L calcium chloride, 5 g/L Fe This research was funded by the