An effective and simultaneous liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) method was used with the aim of quantifying monosodium glutamate (MSG) in foodstuffs, such as chips, taste cubes, sauces and soups. The results were linear (R
                     2 = 1), with very low LOD and LOQ values, 1.0 µg/kg, 5.0 µg/kg, respectively. Excellent repeatability and reproducibility were also achieved. This highly sensitive and robust LC–MS/MS technique was applied successfully for the detection and quantification of MSG in a wide variety of foodstuffs. MSG contents ranged from 0.01 g/100 g to 15.39 g/100 g in food samples. Importantly, determination of free glutamic acid in the daily diet could also prevent various side effects associated with consumption of excess free glutamic acid. Today, most people consume MSG in foods that are a normal part of their diet. MSG is found naturally in many foods. However, it is also added as a flavour enhancer. MSG can be added to foods “openly” (declared on labels) or “covertly”, as yeast extracts or hydrolysed proteins that contain high levels of MSG ( The safety status of MSG has been contentious since the early 1980s. According to the literature, addition of MSG to the foods in large amounts may result in health problems ( MSG was ascertained as the cause of so-called ‘Chinese restaurant syndrome’, which typically is associated with headache, burning sensations, facial pressure and chest pains ( Considering the research findings that demonstrate the potential impact of MSG on health, the development and application of effective and robust methods for detection and quantification of MSG in foodstuff is important for public health. In literature, generally, chromatographic, spectrophotometric and fluorometric techniques have been used for the detection of MSG ( Liquid chromatography combined with MS has been regarded as the “gold standard” for quantitative screening of foods ( In this study, our aim was to detect and quantify free glutamic acid in foods using a sensitive and specific LC–MS/MS (liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry) method. We used known derivatization procedures for sample preparation prior to the analysis. For the first time, however, we used LC–MS/MS combined with established derivatization method for the detection and quantification of free glutamic acid in food samples. The method was validated with respect to linearity, limit of detection and quantification. In addition, the results obtained in this study were compared with the findings of previous studies and there was in high agreement between the results of food items. HPLC grade acetonitrile (ACN), methanol (Lichrosolve purity ≥ 99.9), formic acid (Emprove, 100%) and hydrochloric acid (HCl) were purchased from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). The water used to prepare the solutions was purified in a Milli-Q Plus system (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA). Pure standard To fully represent Turkey, samples represented in Individual stock solutions of the reference standard MSG were prepared in 0.1 N HCl at a concentration of 1000 mg/kg. A mixed intermediate standard solution was prepared by diluting the stock standard solution in 0.1 N HCl at a concentration of 100 mg/kg. Stock and intermediate standard solutions were stored at 4 °C in amber flasks and were found stable for at least 6 months. Derivatizations of samples were performed prior to the LC–MS/MS analysis. In the derivatization process, 100 µL of the standard solution at concentration of 100 mg/kg was transferred to glass tube and 100 µL of 0.1 N HCl solution was added. The mixture was vortexed for 10 s. Then, 200 µL of the solution (80% n-propanol-20% pyridine) was added and vortexed for 10 s. Similarly, 200 µL of solution (83% isooctane – 17% propylchloroformate) was added and vortexed for 10 s. The mixture was maintained for 3 min then vortexed for 10 s again. Then, 200 µL of solution (60% chloroform – 38% isooctane – 2% propylchloroformate) was added and vortexed for 10 s and mixture was maintained for 1 min. The final sample was transferred into a tube and centrifuged for 5 min at 500 rpm. Then, 200 µL of the upper phase was transferred into a glass tube and evaporated under nitrogen stream. Finally, 5000 µL of mobile phase A/Mobile Phase B (20/80) was added to the tube and vortexed for 10 s. The final sample was kept in an ultrasonic bath for 1 min and transferred into sample vials. Samples that are presented in The chromatographic analyses were performed using an HPLC system consisting of a binary pump (Shimadzu UFLC LC-20AD model), Shimadzu automatic injector (Auto Sampler SIL-20A HT model) and a column oven (CTO-20AC). Analytical columns, EZ: FAAST 4 µ AAA-MS 250 × 2 mm were used. The method included a gradient programme using water with 1 mmol/L formic acid as mobile phase A, and mobile phase B containing methanol with 1 mmol/L formic acid. The column temperature was maintained at 40 °C with a flow rate of 0.25 mL/min. The gradient profile was scheduled as follows: 0.1 min, 38% B; 12 min, 65% B; 12.1 min, 95% B; 14 min, 95% B; 14.1 min, 38% B; 20 min, 38% B. The injection volume was 10 µL. The LC–MS/MS system consisted of an HPLC (Shimadzu) coupled with Applied Biosystems MDS SCIEX 4000 Q TRAP mass spectrometer. The MS/MS detector conditions were as follows: curtain gas 20 mL/min, exit potential 10 V, ion source gas 1 and ion source gas 2 were set at 50 mL/min, ion spray voltage 5500 V, and turbo spray temperature was set at 550 °C. MS data were acquired in the positive ion ESI mode using two alternating MS/MS scan events. Two transitions were monitored for the analyte. The selected molecular ion and optimized collision voltages of product ion used for quantification and confirmation were summarized in The analytical method for determination of MSG in samples was validated according to the Eurochem documentation ( The selectivity of the method was assessed by duplicate analysis of seven blank samples. In this selectivity study, samples were prepared as explained in section of sample preparation using the same chemicals. Distilled water was placed in the tubes instead of food samples. No peaks of interfering compounds were observed within the intervals of the retention time of the analytes in any of these samples. Linearity was evaluated from the calibration curves by triplicate analyses of reference standard analytes at five (0.005, 0.010, 0.050, 0.100, 0.200 mg/kg) concentration levels. Linearity was expressed as the coefficient of linear correlation (r) and from the slope of the calibration curve. The linearity of the analytical response across the studied range was excellent, with a correlation coefficient higher than 0.999 for the MSG linearity plot are shown in The LOD and LOQ were determined by analysis of 10 lowest concentration of calibration curve and the signal to noise ratio (S/N) is calculated at the time window in which the analyte is expected. The LOD values were calculated as three times of S/N. The LOQ was calculated by analysing the 6 lowest concentrations of the calibration curve at LOD. Then, the LOD value added up to 3 times the corresponding standard deviation and 10 times the corresponding was calculated as LOQ. The calculated LOD and LOQ values were 1.0 µg/kg, 5.0 µg/kg, respectively for MSG. The LOD value is expected to be three times lesser than LOQ value and ideal LOD and LOQ values were obtained in this study. The standard limit of detection and limit of quantitation values are presented in Precision of the results was calculated using real samples (known) for MSG. The precision of the method was determined in two stages: repeatability (intraday) and reproducibility. Repeatability was expressed by the RSD of the results from ten replicates analysed on the same day by the same analyst using the same instrument. The reproducibility was expressed by the RSD of the results of twenty analyses performed by two different persons (n = 2) in two different days, ten analyses/day, by the different analysts using the same instrument. The intraday RSDs (repeatability) result by the present method was 4% for MSG. The reproducibility (RSDr) result was 2.99 for MSG ( The recovery study was performed to determine the accuracy of the method. The recovery of the method was determined by adding a known amount of standard MSG to the food products of preanalysed samples, afterwards spiked food samples were analysed using same method. The recovery values were calculated by comparing the concentration of the spiked sample with those of unspiked sample. Recovery values for MSG are presented in Furthermore, we evaluated the matrix effect for several food matrixes (bouillon cube, dressing, soup, chips and cooked dough). Quantitative estimation of ionization suppression is possible with post-extraction addition methods. The post-extraction spike method evaluates matrix effects by comparing the signal response of an analyte in neat mobile phase with the signal response of an equivalent amount of the analyte in the blank matrix sample spiked post-extraction ( In other words, for evaluation of the matrix effect we used post-extraction spike method by adding the same quantity of analyte to the extracted food sample. Theoretical and detected free glutamic acid concentration of spiked food samples are shown in  The results are presented in An LC-MS/MS method coupled with derivatization was used for the detection and quantification of MSG in foodstuffs. Samples were analysed in 20 min by LC–MS/MS using 1 mmol/L formic acid in water as mobile phase A, and mobile phase B containing methanol with 1 mmol/L formic acid. The product ion was observed to be 172.1 for MSG. In this survey, the study for crucial (MSG suspected) food samples, the applied method showed good linearity with very low LOD and LOQ values. The calculated LOD and LOQ values were 1.0 µg/kg, 5.0 µg/kg, respectively for MSG. Sensitive and selective results were obtained using tandem mass spectrometric detection. The parameters were evaluated for the validation, and all of them had a satisfactory score. Statistically, the applied method was regarded as acceptable for food samples since repeatability and reproducibility values have been less than 10%. Using tandem mass detection for MSG offers certain identification and confirmation in foodstuffs. Using robust LC–MS/MS technique, free glutamic acid (MSG) content can be quantified in a wide range of foodstuffs. In other words, LC–MS/MS technique combined derivatization method can be effectively employed to determine added glutamate in foodstuffs. Considering the obtained results, it is seen that taste cubes have the highest MSG content, with 1 cube containing approximately 1% MSG, and another MSG-rich product is vegetable seasoning with 10% added glutamate content. Obviously, using the LC–MS/MS technique, it can be determined whether food products contain additional glutamic acid so there is a new opportunity to avoid hidden MSG in foodstuffs by dissemination of the method around the food control mechanisms of governments. Importantly, detection and quantification of free glutamic acid in our daily nutrition will prevent health problems or various diseases due to free glutamate consumption. A future use of such a qualitative approach may be established by the food industry, and second derivative study of the LC–MS/MS method can be done to alleviate any doubts about the MSG source and adulteration in foodstuffs. The authors declare no competing financial interest. This research is supported by the Project No. 115O065 of TUBITAK TOVAG 1003. Additionally, the authors would like to thank Berrak Özışık for her valuable and devoted support.