Osteopontin (OPN) is an important mediator of bone remodeling. However, the role of OPN in the process of bone formation is not fully understood. In previous studies, we have shown that MC3T3-E1 pre-osteoblastic cells at higher passage number exhibited weakened osteogenic capacity and elevated OPN mRNA expression. In this work, we investigated the role of OPN on proliferation and differentiation of low-passage MC3T3-E1 cells by studying stable cell lines overexpressing either OPN mRNA or its antisense RNA. Overexpression was verified by both Northern and Western blot analyses. Overexpression of OPN markedly inhibited proliferation as determined by daily cell counts, while overexpression of antisense RNA stimulated cellular proliferation. We also examined the effect of OPN level on BMP-2-induced alkaline phosphatase activity. Overexpression of OPN inhibited BMP-2 responsiveness while overexpression of antisense RNA enhanced the effect of BMP-2 on alkaline phosphatase activity. Increased OPN expression also caused decreases in expression of osteocalcin and bone sialoproteins while a reduction of OPN level caused the opposite. Furthermore, endogenous OPN expression in response to BMP-2 exhibited a biphasic pattern, that is, it was initially inhibited and then enhanced by the treatment of BMP-2, indicating that OPN might function as a negative feedback regulator for osteoblastic differentiation. Finally, overexpression of OPN inhibited mineral deposition. In contrast, overexpression of antisense RNA enhanced mineral deposition. These results indicate that OPN is a negative regulator of proliferation and differentiation in MC3T3-E1 cells.Osteopontin (OPN) is an extracellular matrix protein and a cytokine that has been suggested to act in a number of physiological and pathological events including bone remodeling OPN contains an Arg–Gly–Asp (RGD) amino acid sequence that mediates attachment of a variety of cells, including osteoblasts, osteoclasts, and fibroblasts Although expression of the OPN gene is ubiquitous in all skeletal tissues during embryogenesis, OPN-deficient mice do not show any structural alterations in bones at birth and during further development Compared to our understanding of OPN action in bone resorption, much less is known about the role of OPN in bone formation. Because of its highly anionic and phosphorylated nature and its ability to bind hydroxyapatite, OPN was hypothesized to play a role in the regulation of the mineralization process. A number of in vitro studies have revealed that OPN binds to the calcium phosphate crystals in mineralized tissues and inhibits crystal growth through its abundant aspartate and phophorylated serine residues The MC3T3-E1 pre-osteoblastic cells were derived from calvaria of newborn mice The full-length OPN cDNA fragment was amplified by RT-PCR using total RNA extracted from MC3T3-E1 cells. MC3T3-E1 cells were grown in α-MEM (Sigma, St Louis, MO) containing 10% FBS, 1.2 mM Total RNA from cultured MC3T3-E1 cells was isolated using the RNeasy kit (Qiagen). The OD To perform quantitative real-time RT-PCR, each 25 μl RT-PCR mix contained 12.5 μl of 2× QuantiTect SYBR Green RT-PCR Master Mix (Qiagen), 500 nM forward and reverse primers, 10 ng total RNA template, 0.5 μl of QuantiTect RT Mix (Qiagen), and RNase-free water. Cycle conditions for RT-PCR were as follows: reverse transcription at 50°C for 30 min, activation of HotStarTaq DNA polymerase (Qiagen) and inactivation of reverse transcriptases at 95°C for 15 min, and 45 cycles of 94°C for 15 s, 58°C for 30 s, and 72°C for 30 s. The GAPDH gene was used to normalize the amount of template for each sample. Each reaction was run in triplicate with the results averaged. Primer sequences for tested genes were as follows: (1) GAPDH, 5′-CCGGTGCTGAGTATGTCG-3′, and 5-CCCTGTTGCTGTAGCCGTA-3′; (2) OPN, 5′-TGGAACTTGCTTGACTATCGA-3′, and 5′-GACCACATGGACGACGATG-3′; (3) OCN, 5′-GAACAGACTCCGGCGCTA-3′, and 5′-AGGGAGGATCAAGTCCCG-3′; and (4) BSP, 5′-GGGGTCTTTAAGTACCGGC-3′, and 5′-TGTCTGCTGAAACCCGTTC-3′. Standard curves for each amplification product were generated from 10-fold dilutions of pooled total RNA to determine primer efficiency and relative expression values. Annealing curve was performed to ensure absence of primer dimers. Data were analyzed with Microsoft Excel 2000 to generate raw expression values. Total cellular RNA was isolated using the RNeasy kit (Qiagen). Samples of 15 μg of total RNA were subjected to electrophoresis on a 1% formaldehyde-agarose gel, and transferred to a Hybond N nylon membrane (Amersham). The membranes were prehybridized and then hybridized with [ Immunoblot analysis was performed according to standard procedures To determine the growth rate by cell counting, 50,000 cells were seeded into six-well plates. Cells were harvested daily by trypsinization and counted in a hemocytometer for 6 days. Only viable cells, as revealed by their ability to exclude trypan blue, were counted. MC3T3-E1 cells, grown in 10-cm culture plates until 70% confluent, were treated with 100 ng/ml of rhBMP-2 (Genetics Institute) for a period of 48 h. Cells were harvested by scraping, rinsed twice with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.4), resuspended in Tris/glycine/Triton buffer (pH 10.5, 50 mM Tris, 100 mM glycine, and 0.1% Triton X-100), and lysed by sonication on ice with two 15-s pulses. The lysate was centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 5 min at 4°C in a microfuge to remove cellular debris. Supernatant (200 μl) was mixed with 100 μl of freshly prepared MC3T3-E1 cells were incubated in differentiation medium (complete α-MEM culture medium containing 10 mM β-glycerol phosphate and 50 μM ascorbic acid) in six-well plates for a period of 10 days. Cells were washed twice with 1× PBS buffer and fixed with 10% formalin in neutral buffer (Sigma) for 30 min. Cells were extensively rinsed with double distilled water and covered with 0.5 ml of 5% silver nitrate. Cells were exposed to UV light for 5 min and rinsed with distilled water. Cells were then treated with 2.5% sodium thiosulfate for 5 min and rinsed extensively with water. Staining results were captured by a Nikon Coolpix 990 digital camera. Data were presented as means ± SD. Unpaired Student's Serial passage of MC3T3-E1 cells resulted in reduced cell growth, decreased DNA synthesis, decreased response to BMP-2 and TGF-β1 treatment, and decreased osteoblastic function as measured by alkaline phosphatase activity and osteocalcin secretion To further study the role of OPN in MC3T3-E1 cells, we modified OPN expression in MC3T3-E1 cells by stably overexpressing either OPN mRNA or its antisense RNA. To confirm the expression of desired mRNA in stable MC3T3-E1 cell lines, we performed Northern and Western blots to measure the levels of mRNA and protein, respectively. Northern blot analysis showed that the OPN mRNA level in control cells transfected with expression vector only was minimal, while OPN mRNA and its antisense RNA were highly expressed in their respective stable cell lines ( Because high-passage MC3T3-E1 cells express high level of OPN and demonstrate markedly reduced proliferation, we hypothesized that changing OPN levels may bring about a similar effect on growth of stable cell lines. We compared the growth curves of control and two experimental cell lines in a 6-day period. After 3 days of culture, cells began to exhibit differences in their ability to grow Bone maturation is signified by accumulation of ECM proteins such as type I collagen, osteocalcin (OCN), osteonectin, and bone sialoproteins (BSP). We examined the effect of OPN on expression of OCN and BSP using real-time RT-PCR analysis when cells were cultured in regular proliferation medium that does not contain osteoinductive agents for either 1 or 7 days. As expected, OPN-specific signals were higher in both experimental cell lines ( It is well known that osteoblastic differentiation is accompanied by an increased expression of OPN. However, the effect of OPN level on osteoblastic differentiation is largely unknown. To understand the role of OPN in osteogenic differentiation, we studied the responsiveness of MC3T3-E1 cells to recombinant human BMP-2 treatment. Cells were subjected to 100 or 200 ng/ml of BMP-2 treatment for 2 days and assayed for their alkaline phosphatase activity. Cells transfected with vector alone showed a moderate response to BMP-2 treatment and this response was dose dependent To gain additional insight into the relationship between BMP-2 treatment and OPN, we further examined the effect of BMP-2 on endogenous OPN expression in MC3T3-E1 cells. Because endogenous expression of OPN was very low, we decided to employ quantitative real-time RT-PCR to detect the OPN mRNA. Finally, we examined the effect of OPN on mineralization capability of MC3T3-E1 cells by von Kossa stain. Cells were cultured in mineralization medium for a period of 10 days and subjected to von Kossa staining to assay for mineral deposition. After 10 days of culture, the plate containing the control cells (vector alone) exhibited moderate mineral deposition, indicating initiation of the mineralization process Our results support the hypothesis that OPN is a negative regulator of osteogenesis by inhibiting both proliferation and differentiation of osteoblastic cells. Previous studies have shown that OPN is a negative regulator of calcification, likely through inhibition of mineral crystal growth at a later stage of osteogenic differentiation Progressive development of the osteoblastic phenotype requires precise coordination between proliferation and differentiation Various hormones and cytokines are required for the regulation of osteoblastic differentiation. BMPs are among the most potent inducers of osteoblastic differentiation, especially during the early stage of osteogenic differentiation. We used BMP-2 responsiveness as a measure for early onset of differentiation of MC3T3-E1 cells. Our results clearly showed that the cellular OPN level is inversely related to the activity of alkaline phosphatase, an immediate early biomarker of osteogenic differentiation. To our knowledge, this is the first study to illustrate the role of OPN during early-stage differentiation of osteoblasts. Studies in OPN-deficient mice have shown that those mice can resist bone loss caused by tail-suspension-stimulated unloading To investigate whether or not there is a reciprocal effect between OPN and BMP-2, we further examined the effect of BMP-2 treatment on endogenous OPN expression in MC3T3-E1 cells. We found a significant decrease in OPN steady-state mRNA expression after a 24-h period of BMP-2 treatment. This result is intriguing partially because OPN is a known osteoblastic differentiation marker and its expression, in many cases, is induced by osteoinductive agents. We also found that the response of OPN to BMP-2 is biphasic and time dependent. As an osteoinductive agent, BMP-2 does not only stimulate expression of other osteoinductive signals, but also reduces inhibitory signals such as OPN in a relatively short period of time. This inhibition only occurs during a short period after BMP-2 treatment. Continuous BMP-2 treatment of cells undergoing later stage differentiation actually increases OPN expression. It appears that OPN might serve as a feedback control during the later stage of differentiation. The negative effect on the mineralization process by OPN has been long recognized. Our current observation is consistent with a number of published studies It is well known that OPN can activate intracellular signaling pathways and regulate gene expression as a consequence of its interactions with various receptors. It is possible that the inhibitory effect of OPN on BMP-2 responsiveness is mediated by changes in expression of one or more key molecules involved in the BMP signaling pathway. On the basis of this hypothesis, we examined the expression level of Type II BMP receptor, Smad5, noggin, and Smad6, and found that their levels were unchanged (data not shown). We are currently investigating other modifications to these proteins, such as phosphorylation. It will be interesting to identify one or more targets of OPN in the BMP-2 signaling pathway. Conversely, it is equally important to delineate the molecular mechanisms underlying down-regulation of OPN expression by BMP-2. In conclusion, our observation indicates that OPN exerts its negative regulatory effect on the development of MC3T3-E1 cells by inhibiting both proliferation and osteogenic differentiation. Its negative effect can be observed at both early and late stages of osteogenic differentiation. While OPN expression inhibits osteoinductive activity of BMP-2, reciprocally, BMP-2 can counteract the effect of OPN by down-regulating OPN expression. We thank Genetics Institute for providing recombinant BMP-2 used in this study. We also thank Dr. David Bischoff for critical reading of the manuscript. This work was supported by Merit Review Grant awarded by the United States Department of Veterans Affairs to T.A.M.