In the study area, uncontrolled landfill leachate is a serious cause of groundwater contamination that occurs extensively and rapidly following the rainy season. For this reason, the use of traditional hydrogeological monitoring methods using drilled wells is expensive and limited. Electrical resistivity imaging (ERI) is suitable for monitoring groundwater contamination because this method helps quickly investigate a large site without the need for well drilling. The resistivity of the landfill leachate is lower than that of clean groundwater; based on this fact, we evaluated the diffusion of landfill leachate before and after the rainy season using 3-D ERI characterization. In addition, ERI results were compared with piezometric and hydrochemical data obtained from observation wells for the purpose of cross-validation. The groundwater monitoring results agreed with the 2-D and 3-D interpretation of ERI results. The electrical resistivity values of contaminated zones were lower than those of clean zones due to an abundance of ions or molecules in the groundwater. The resistivity boundary between contaminated and clean zones observed in the inverted 2-D and 3-D ERI sections was considered to be approximately 100Ω-m. The low-resistivity anomaly of the contamination zones increased in extent after rainfall. The expansion was likely accelerated by groundwater movement and diffusion of the landfill leachate. Images of the change in electrical resistivity were helpful for characterization of the behavior. The two-directional behaviors of NE-SW and N-S trends were confirmed by the 3-D ratio images. It is therefore, considered that the ERI technique is excellent for imaging contaminated zones as well as monitoring the behaviors of landfill leachate in uncontrolled landfills.Groundwater used for public-supply, agriculture, and industrial purposes can be contaminated as a result of various environmental problems. Amongst these, landfill leachate is a serious issue because of its continuous inflow into subsurface materials. The diffusion of landfill leachate is extensive and occurs quickly owing to an increase in groundwater flux following heavy rain. Hydrogeological monitoring is useful for characterizing contaminated sites and a variety of methods are available to measure groundwater contamination ( Electrical resistivity imaging (ERI) has been applied to hydrogeological studies such as groundwater contamination survey ( Two-dimensional (2-D) electrical and electromagnetic methods have been utilized for groundwater monitoring. However, it is known that more accurate and useful geological features are obtained from 3-D ERI results ( Satellite photography and locations of ERI monitoring lines and observation wells for the survey area are shown in The ERI monitoring system consists of a transmitter-receiver instrument, an automatic channel switch, distribution cases, electrodes, flat ribbon cables, and cable protectors (  Eight observation wells were drilled in the survey area ( The installed survey lines consisted of seven N-S and three E-W lines with intervals of 4  A dipole–dipole array was used for ERI data acquisition. Although the signal to noise level of this configuration is known to be relatively low compared to that of others such as pole-pole, Wenner, Schlumberger, and pole-dipole arrays, it is excellent for interpreting complex structures or small-scale anomalies because it provides high-resolution data ( Two- and three-dimensional inversions were conducted using DC 2D Pro and DC 3D Pro inversion programs, respectively, developed by Six layers and a maximum depth of 10 Groundwater resistivity and water table data obtained from observation wells are shown in The second monitoring results (in blue) during the rainy season show that water table values after rainfall were higher than those before the rainy season ( However, the groundwater resistivity of KB09 and KB05, which were the two observation wells outside of the landfill or stream ( The third monitoring results (in green) during the rainy season show that both groundwater resistivity and the water table in all observation wells were raised (  However, shapes of all the high-resistivity zones (red) in the lower aquifer are approximately constant before and during the rainy season (  Although the values of resistivity change for the lower aquifer of lines 3 and 5 in both phase 2/phase 1 and phase 3/phase 1 images are below 1, those in phase 3/phase 2 are above 1. Rapid resistivity change occurred in these zones. Therefore, it is considered that the resistivity change is related to the inflow of landfill leachate and is useful for characterizing temporal and transient resistivity variations.   In the 2-D resistivity inversion, it is assumed that the x-z directional resistivity is variable and the y-directional resistivity is identical. However, all resistivity changes of the three components are assumed in the 3-D resistivity inversion ( We demonstrated the use of ERI for monitoring groundwater contamination in order to spatially and temporally characterize the leak of landfill leachate in an uncontrolled landfill in South Korea before and during the rainy season. In addition, hydrogeological monitoring using observation wells in the survey area was conducted for groundwater characterization. In the ERI result, low-resistivity anomalies related to groundwater contamination were located in the NE upper aquifer near the landfill and the high-resistivity zones were in the lower aquifer. The anomalies expended during the rainy season and this temporal variation was effectively characterized by the resistivity change ratio. These characteristics were in accordance with the hydrogeological monitoring results. In addition, the 3-D ERI method is considered to be more useful for groundwater monitoring and more realistic than the 2-D ERI method. This research was supported by the Basic Research Project of the Korea Institute of Geoscience and Mineral Resources (KIGAM) funded by the The following KMZ file contains the Google map of the most important areas described in this article. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version, at doi: