Utilization of supported liquid membrane (SLM) for the extraction of Au(I) from alkaline cyanide solution was investigated. The SLM consisted of a synergistic mixture of primary amine N1923 and bis(2-ethylhexyl) sulfoxide (BESO) in kerosene as carrier and a hydrophobic microporous polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membrane as the solid support. The presence of both BESO and N1923 extractants in the liquid membrane induces an evident synergistic effect, allowing the latter to transfer Au(I) from the highly alkaline solution (pH>9.21). The fundamental parameters influencing the gold transport, such as stirring speed, composition of the liquid membrane, feed pH, NaOH concentration in stripping solution, and initial gold concentration in the feed solution were explored. The gold transport is almost quantitative after 7h under the optimum process conditions: a mixture of (0.50mol/L N1923 + 0.75mol/L BESO) in kerosene as membrane phase, stirring rate of 1000rpm in both phases, 5.0mg/L gold in 0.20mol/L NaCl solution with a pH of 9.60, and 0.10mol/L NaOH as stripping agent. The parameters defining the mass transfer model of Au(I) through the SLM are experimentally determined as: maximum permeability coefficient, P = 31.45 × 10−6
                     m/s, the diffusion coefficient for [Au(CN)2
                     −·RNH3
                     + ·2BESO] complex across the liquid membrane, Dorg = 1.42 × 10–12
                     m2/s, and the thickness of the aqueous diffusion layer, daq = 2.07 × 10−5 m. Selectivity of this SLM system was evaluated by performing the permeation test of Au(CN)2
                     - with other metal cyanide species in aqueous solution and it was found that the gold ions were preferred over other impurity ones. Finally, stability of this SLM system has also been examined on a continuous run mode and satisfactory stability was observed for five runs.Extraction equilibrium constant Distribution coefficient of Au(I). Initial gold concentration in the feed (mg/L). Gold concentrations in the feed phase at time t (mg/L). Permeability coefficient (m/ s). Flux (mol/m Geometric membrane area (m Transport percentage of gold. Transport resistance due to diffusion across the aqueous feed boundary layer (s/m). The transport resistance due to diffusion through the membrane (s/m). The thickness of the aqueous boundary layer (m). The membrane thickness (μm). Diffusion coefficient of the Au(I) complex across the membrane (m Average aqueous diffusion coefficient of the Au(I) complex (m Tortuosity of the membrane. Porosity Gold is an important noble metal, which is widely applied in electrical systems, catalysis, fuel cell devices, and economic activity. Traditionally, gold bearing low-grade ores and other secondary materials are subjected to a cyanide leaching process to bring gold into solution as its cyanide complex. Subsequently, the gold containing solutions are subjected to carbon adsorption for concentration and separation of gold Conventionally, a heap leaching process usually produces a very dilute gold solution in the range of only 1.0 The primary amine N1923, which possesses two branched carbon chains with the structure of R In view of the above, the present work aims to evaluate the performance of SLM technique for Au(I) separation from alkaline cyanide solution under mg/L-level with the synergistic mixture of N1923 and BESO immobilized in a PVDF membrane based on our previous liquid-liquid extraction investigation. To the best of our knowledge, there are no published data in the literature concerning the extraction of Au(I) by using N1923/BESO mixture as carrier through supported liquid membranes. The effects of several process parameters on the pertraction of Au(I) were investigated including concentrations of N1923 and BESO in the membrane phase, initial pH of the feed solution, stirring speed, the initial gold(I) concentration in the feed solution, and the NaOH concentration in the stripping solution. Furthermore, the parameters defining the mass transfer model of gold across the SLM are determined as well. In the SLM system, the mixture of N1923/BESO diluted in kerosene was used as the carrier immobilized in a PVDF membrane. The feed and stripping phases were aqueous solutions of Au(CN) The mechanism of the extraction of Au(I) using the synergistic system of N1923/BESO has been extensively studied in the previous work The equilibrium constant K Stripping of Au(I) from the organic phase is effectively achieved by means of aqueous NaOH solution at the membrane/strip interface by the following chemical equilibrium as Eq. The chemical reaction of the [Au(CN) Alternatively, the permeability coefficient can also be obtained experimentally using the following equation The transport percentage of Au(I) ions (%T) for a period of time was calculated by the following equation: Primary amine N1923 (98% purity) with the total carbon atom number of 19–23 and the average molar weight of 310.30 Millipore Durapore GVHP 4700, a hydrophobic microporous polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membrane was selected as the solid support for the liquid membrane. The membrane has a diameter of 47 Supported liquid membrane (SLM) transport experiments were performed in an acrylic cell consisting of two compartments separated by a PVDF flat-sheet membrane containing the carriers as described elsewhere The total resistance for metal ions across a SLM is comprised of the resistances derived from the boundary layer at both the feed/membrane and membrane/strip interfaces and the hydrophobic membrane intrinsic resistance. Hence, the stirring speeds in both feed and strip phases are important influencing factors on the facilitated transport of metal ions. The experiments were conducted to optimize the stirring rate by varying the speed from 400 As can be seen from The composition of the extractants in liquid membrane plays the paramount role in facilitating transport of the metal ions across the SLM. Experiments were conducted to gain insight into the transport behavior for different compositions of extractants in liquid membrane by varying the concentration of N1923 (0–0.75  The cyanide solution for gold leaching must be maintained in an alkaline range (e.g. pH ≥ 9.21) to prevent the escape of toxic hydrogen cyanide due to the existence of free cyanide in aqueous solution. Moreover, the pH of the feed solution is a crucial parameter in the transport of aurocyanide complex across the SLM using (N1923 + BESO) as the carrier because the proton is directly involved in the formation of extracted complex species at feed solution/membrane interface. The influence of feed pH on permeation of Au(I) was studied in the initial pH range of 9.60 – 11.32 with a fixed gold(I) concentration of 5.0 Theoretically, the extraction of Au(CN) Since the extraction and stripping processes are performed simultaneously in the SLM systems, the composition of strip phase is another crucial parameter for determining the transport of gold(I) from feed solution to strip solution across the SLM. Therefore, according to Eq. The diluent composition plays a key role in the entire membrane transportation process because the diluent reduces the viscosity of the extractant for effective transport and also ensures stability of the liquid membrane phase. It is widely recognized that addition of an electrolyte, such as NaCl, in the aqueous solutions enhances the interfacial tension between liquid membrane and the aqueous phases, which decreases the solubility of LM in aqueous solutions, and thereby improves the stability of SLM To investigate the influence of initial Au(I) concentration on the permeability, experiments were conducted by varying the initial concentration from 2.0 The concentration profiles of gold in feed and strip phase as functions of time are illustrated in To determine the value of the diffusional parameters of the mass transfer, Eq.  The transport resistance due to diffusion across the membrane (Δ According to Eq. The selectivity of a SLM system is a crucial parameter for evaluation of the degree of purification of target metal ions with respect to the impurity metal ions present in solutions. The separation factor of gold over another metal (M) in the SLM, β The selectivity experiments were conducted by performing the transport of Zn(CN) The most crucial drawback associated with the SLM-based system is its instability, which is the main obstacle for its scaling up to industrial levels. The major reason for the instability is the loss of the membrane phase from the micro-pores of the solid membrane into the feed and the stripping phases, caused by the emulsification induced by shear forces due to the stirring of the aqueous solutions, solubility of the extractant and diluent in the adjacent feed, difference in osmotic pressure over the membrane and wetting of support pores by aqueous phases Facilitated transport of Au(I) from alkaline aurocyanide solutions across a supported liquid membrane (SLM) employing a mixture of (N1923 + BESO) as the selective carrier has been investigated. The mixture of N1923 and BESO in the liquid membrane exhibits an obvious synergistic effect on the pertraction of the gold. The optimum operating conditions observed for this SLM system are: stirring rate of 1000 The authors gratefully acknowledge financial supports from the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 