Processes of carbonation of calcium-rich aqueous industrial wastes from acetylene production were performed mimicking rock weathering, using the atmospheric carbon dioxide as reactant. This residue was carbonated exposing it to the air in artificial pools with controlled solid-to-liquid and surface-to-volume ratios, and the efficiency of this simple mineral carbonation process was maximized. Considering realistic values of just one acetylene production plant, the intelligent handling of the calcium-rich waste would make it possible to counteract the emission of around 800t of carbon dioxide per year, so the CO2 emissions of the acetylene production could be completely compensated and its carbon footprint significantly reduced.
                  X-ray diffraction patterns and thermogravimetric analyses reported the conversion, up to 88%, of the calcium hydroxide into calcium carbonate under atmospheric conditions. So, considering a realistic industrial scale-up, 476kg of CO2 could be captured with 1t of dry waste. The morphology of the grains is resolved by electron microscopy, and can be described as needles 15nm wide and 200nm long arranged in grains smaller than 1 micron. We exploit these nanometric textural parameters (nanometric pores and particles having a specific surface area ∼50m2/g) to design an efficient carbon fixation procedure. The aim of this work is to propose this simple carbonation technology, based on aqueous alkaline industrial waste, as a contribution to reducing global CO2 emissions.The increase in the concentration of CO Currently, most of the works about carbon capture and storage (CCS) technologies comprise geological storage and ex situ mineral sequestration, and they work once the CO The strongest advantage of mineral sequestration The use of industrial alkaline wastes will contribute to reducing the costs of carbon sequestration enormously, besides avoiding the ecological impacts of mineral extraction on a massive scale. Some prototypes based on the absorption of the atmospheric CO In this work, we have considered the calcium rich waste of the industry of the production of acetylene as a new material for carbon dioxide sequestration. Acetylene produced via calcium carbide generates an aqueous suspension of portlandite (calcium hydroxide, Ca(OH) The sample is an industrial waste discarded by the acetylene industry, and it was supplied by the AIR LIQUIDE España S.A. acetylene factory located in Seville (Spain). The waste is an inhomogeneous greyish water slurry. Chemical analyses performed on the original sample, prior to any carbonation experiment, were done by X-ray fluorescence (AXIOS, Panalytical, with an Rh tube) using the semi-quantitative method. Crystalline phases of the samples were identified by X-ray diffraction (XRD) in a Philips X’Pert diffractometer with Cu K Finally, the carbonation degree of the samples was estimated by thermogravimetric analyses (TGA) in a STD Q600 experimental device. The experiments were carried out under a nitrogen flux of 100.0 Calcium hydroxide reacts with CO The carbonation of this industrial waste was studied using the atmospheric CO The second studied parameter is the height of the volume that occupies the aqueous system. This parameter is critical as it defines the surface-to-volume ratio of the system, that is, the quotient of the surface in contact with the air by the volume of the system. In other words, it defines the surface in contact with the atmosphere, which controls the kinetics of the drying as well as the dissolution of the CO Finally, the influence of rewetting daily or stirring was also tested. Rewetting the sample consisted in adding 3 The original waste was characterized prior to any carbonation process. The results of the chemical analysis by XRF ( The morphology of the portlandite grains suspended in the aqueous waste was studied by nitrogen physisorption and electron microscopy. Measured values of the structural parameters are listed in Up to now, the main drawback of some of the carbon mineral sequestration technologies was the cost of milling to obtain a small grain size (and large reactive area) from bulk mineral, which is necessary to obtain significant values of carbonation efficiency. In the samples presented in this work, large reactive surface areas are present due to the particular morphology of the calcium hydroxide rich waste, enhancing the carbonation reaction as the carbonation efficiency is very sensitive to particle size To avoid the precipitation of some carbonate while handling the sample for thermogravimetry, and to verify the absence of calcite in the original waste, a sample of the original wet paste was taken and quickly submitted to the TGA. The drying process was carried out in an inert atmosphere of nitrogen inside the experimental device. The curve obtained (not shown) presented a first large weight loss at around 100 The carbonation of the samples due to the atmospheric carbon dioxide, the so-called weathering, was studied by measuring the degree of carbonation for different experimental configurations. First of all, the carbonation reaction was verified by the appearance of different calcium carbonate polymorphs (calcite, vaterite, and aragonite) in the samples, as revealed by XRD. In Firstly, the influence of the surface-to-volume ratio was studied. Two different samples were considered. Details of their configuration and carbonation efficiency are listed in Secondly, the influence of the solid-to-liquid ratio of the wet paste was researched. The considered values of the ratio and the carbonation results are listed in Some additional technical measures were considered to improve the efficiency of carbonation. Firstly, stirring the sample was tested to avoid the appearance of the calcite floating layer. It was observed that the floating layer appeared even under vigorous stirring. Stirring yields small increases in the carbonation efficiency from 10% up to 15% for the pool P3_S and from 15% to 18% in the case of pool P4_S. Details of the pools and carbonation efficiencies are listed in Rewetting the sample was also considered to achieve higher carbonation efficiency. In SEM images have revealed some steps of the structural evolution of the carbonation of the fibrous clusters of portlandite to calcium carbonate crystals. In Firstly, considering an acetylene industrial plant of 80 But, considering the 1 Secondly, regarding to the assisted carbonation procedures, the experimental set-up with maximum carbonation efficiency was considered, that is, rewetting the weathering pool with minimum height. Water consumption was estimated by Dunne and Leopold This research work has proven that the management of aqueous industrial alkaline wastes can be an effective strategy for carbon dioxide mineral sequestration. Carbonation efficiencies up to 88% were achieved using just carbonation pools where the aqueous residue is disposed and let to dry, under atmospheric conditions. Actually, this work is proposing a change in the waste management pointing to CO The authors would like to acknowledge the research services of the ICMSE (CSIC-US), Air Liquide España S.A. for supplying the samples and especially Mr. Miguel Bermejo from Trenzametal for taking the initiative. The authors are grateful to the