This study provides an understanding of the way in which microwave treatment affects the processing and recovery of complex sulphide ore. The influence of microwave irradiation on the heating characteristics, breakage response, mineralogy, and the mechanisms of dissolution in sulphuric acid and hydrochloric acid was investigated. It was observed that both ore mineralogy and microwave heating had dual effect on each other. Microwave heating at increased power and time had a positive effect on size reduction, due to internal stresses arising from the complexity in the mineralogy which induced cracks within the matrices of the ore. Microwave irradiation did not cause any significant mineral phase change, but altered the peak intensities of sphalerite and pyrite. Dissolution potentials were shifted to more negative values after microwave treatment, while dissolution currents, dissolution current densities, and dissolution rates were also increased. Dissolutions were higher in hydrochloric acid medium. An increase in dissolution rate after microwave treatment was also observed in sulphuric acid media. The increase in dissolution of the microwaved treated samples was attributed to an increase in electrochemical sites resulting from an increase in the number of cracks, and increased pyrite phases which promoted galvanic interaction within the system.The applications of microwave technology in mineral processing and extractive metallurgy have been of great and particular research interest for over the past three decades. The driving forces towards its application are the reduction in processing costs ( Several investigations on the application of microwaves in improving minerals processing and recovery have been reported. Research studies on the microwave application in ore leaching ( In order to provide an understanding of the means by which microwave processing improves recovery, it is imperative therefore that an understanding of microwave interaction with minerals and its corresponding effects on dissolution behaviour. This could provide useful information for optimizing the operation of microwave processing and for minimum energy consumption. An approach for understanding the influence of microwaves on processing can include its effects on the treatment of ore prior to leaching, and subsequent investigations on the dissolution mechanisms of microwave treated ores. While mineralogy is critical to the behaviour of ores during leaching, it is observed that attention has not been given to studying the effects of microwave treatment on ore mineralogy and the probable influence on the dissolution mechanism of the treated ores. Relevant mineralogical information resulting from microwave heating could be useful in interpreting interrelationship between microwave processing and dissolution process. Since ore dissolution involves electrochemical and chemical reactions of the mineral with the leaching solution, an understanding of the dissolution mechanism of microwave treated ores could be enhanced by using electrochemical techniques. This study therefore aims to investigate the influence of microwave irradiation on the dissolution mechanisms of complex sulphide ores using sulphuric acid and hydrochloric acid. It also provides possible reasons from a mineralogical view point for the improvement in recovery resulting from the microwave heating employed. The ore used for this study is a complex sulphide ore consisting of silica, siderite, ferrous sphalerite, galena, pyrite and covelite. The ore was crushed, ground, and screened to size fractions of + 100 g each of the representative samples of the ore was used for microwave heating in a kitchen type microwave oven. It had a variable power of a maximum output 1100 W and 250 GHz. The samples were put in an alumina crucible, and placed in the central position of the microwave oven in order to minimize the effect of the field pattern variations in the oven. The samples were subjected to radiation at varying power levels and heating time. After switching off the microwave power, the bulk temperature of the microwaved samples was taken using a thermocouple. The microwaved samples were ground under the same conditions as the un-microwaved samples. Both the microwaved and un-microwaved samples were subjected to particle size analysis using laboratory sieve analysis. Samples of the un-microwaved and the microwave heated ore having a relatively best particle size distribution were characterized. Mineral phases within the samples were identified by powdered X-ray diffractometry. Morphological and qualitative analyses of the bulk ore were performed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) equipped with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) to produce Backscattered Images (BSI). Quantitative analysis of the elemental distribution within the particle sizes was determined with optical emission spectrometry using the Inductively Coupled Plasma-Atomic Emission Spectrometer (ICP-AES). The mechanism of dissolution of the ore was studied using potentiodynamic polarization technique in 1 M sulphuric and hydrochloric acids. A conventional three-electrode system electrochemical cell comprising the working electrode, graphite counter electrode, and a silver/silver chloride, 3 M KCl, reference electrode was used. The working electrode was a particulate electrode made from the powdered samples of the un-microwaved and the microwave heated ore having a relatively best particle size distribution. These electrodes were prepared similar to the procedure recommended by All electrochemical measurements were conducted at 25 °C. Electrochemical polarization tests were carried out using an Autolab potentiostat (PGSTAT20 computer controlled) using the General Purpose, Electrochemical Software (GPES) version 4.9. Polarization curves were obtained at varying applied voltages and at constant scan rate of 2 mV/s from − The size distribution pattern of the ore after microwave treatment and different power levels at 5 minute heating is shown in Bearing in mind that energy is a major operation cost, it is envisaged that heating at 1100 W with the view to reduce particle size and obtain an even size distribution might probably be an expensive route. In view of this, a small reduction in the total energy expended might have a large impact on the operating cost of a plant. In an attempt to minimize possible operational cost that could be incurred from higher heating power, further heating at 880 W (having a relatively even size distribution) was done at different heating time intervals. The size distributions obtained from the different heating times are presented in Although heating for 11 min resulted in larger amounts of fine particles, it should be borne in mind that too much fines can create problems during mineral processing and hydrometallurgical processes. Research studies reported on the influence of particle size on hydrometallurgical processes ( Considering the need to carefully select a route that could result in optimal processing and recovery, it would be most economical to adopt a heating route that has the most even distribution of particles within +  The temperature response of this ore corroborates the observations by The SEM micrographs presented in Distribution of elements within the particle size ranges of the untreated and microwaved ore was studied using ICP analysis. This was aimed at determining the influence of microwave heating on the breakage characteristics of the constituent minerals. Results obtained are presented in The breakage characteristics of the minerals could be attributed to their varying responses to microwave heating ( The diffraction patterns of the ore before and after microwave treatment are shown in The results for the dissolution potentials, dissolution current, dissolution current densities, and the dissolution rates of the ore before and after microwave treatment, as obtained from the potentiodynamic polarization tests carried out in 1 M sulphuric and hydrochloric acids, are presented in The polarization curves shown in It was also observed from the polarization curves that untreated ore exhibits a shaper transition between active and passive when compared with the treated ores. Passivation began at a potential of 570 mV during sulphuric acid leaching and at potential of 620 mV during hydrochloric acid leaching. Polarization curves for both microwave treated and untreated samples show that current was not limiting but increased regularly in both leaching media. Increase in dissolution in the microwaved treated samples as compared to the untreated samples could be attributed primarily to two major factors. Firstly, increase in dissolution could result from the cracks and faults ( The results of this study have shown that the application of microwave heating has a beneficial effect on the processing behaviour complex sulphide ore and its dissolution in sulphuric and hydrochloric acid. Ore mineralogy and microwave heating have shown to have dual influences on the heating characteristics, size reduction, and the effectiveness of microwave treatment in improving dissolution. The temperature of the ore increased with increasing power and heating time. The ore generally exhibited poor microwave absorbing characteristics as the silica and siderite contents inhibited an increase in the ore's temperature; the maximum temperature of 270 °C was obtained at 1100 W in 5 min. Complexities in ore mineralogy resulted in poor heat transmission within the ore, which caused a build up of internal stresses in the ore, and gave rise to crack initiation, propagation, and prolongation. Microwave treatment increased the peak intensities of pyrite, which promoted galvanic interaction within the system. Induced cracks also served as electrochemical active sites that accelerated dissolution of microwaved samples more than in the case of the untreated samples. The authors wish to acknowledge the cooperation agreement between the University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, and the Institute of Materials Processing, Michigan Technological University, USA where major part of this study is carried out. The financial support received from the Mellon Postgraduate Mentoring Programme and the Research Office, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, for this study and the duration of stay of P. A. Olubambi at the Institute of Materials Processing, Michigan Technological University, Houghton, USA for the research is highly appreciated.