Interaction between multi-layer coal seams is of significant guidance for designing gas drainage boreholes and maximizing the drainage performance. Although extensive investigations on the multi-seam interaction have been conducted from perspectives of rock deformation and variations in mechanics and permeability, sensitivity analysis on the seam interaction is done at a less extent. In this study, a 2D simulation model is established based on data of a coal mine. Weibull statistical distribution is adopted to assign the geomechanical property in the model to reveal rock heterogeneity. Meanwhile, a mathematical model that incorporates coal permeability with the coal damage, mechanics change and gas desorption is developed. This permeability model is implemented into the numerical simulation to investigate the effects of geomechanical properties of interburden on the permeability change in the de-stressed underlying coal seam, as well as the gas drainage performance. Results show that: (1) when assigning the geomechanical property using Weibull statistical distribution, the property homogeneity is positively correlated with Weibull shape parameter, (2) overall, the permeability increases significantly in the de-stressed underlying coal seam, and with the increase in the distance to interburden, the increase ratio decreases rapidly before a relatively slight decline, and (3) the average permeability ratio decreases initially but then rises with the increasing Young's modulus. In contrast, the average permeability ratio and the Poisson's ratio show a positive linear relationship. The gas drainage performance in the underlying coal seam is corresponding to the permeability variation of each geomechanical parameter group and could be verified with each other. In summary, when the interburden possesses smaller Young's modulus and greater Poisson's ratio, the interaction between adjacent seams becomes more intense and the permeability in the underlying coal seam tends to increase more. Therefore, when designing the mining sequence for the coal-seam group with high interaction potential, mining the neighbouring coal seams of the targeted seam first could be an effective method to increase its permeability and gas drainage efficiency.In nature, a coal seam always coexists with one or several other coal seams to form a multi-layer coal seam group. Interaction between the adjacent coal seams plays a significant role in increasing coal permeability and enhancing gas drainage performance ( A large number of studies have been conducted to investigate the seam interaction in coal seam group: It can be seen that previous investigations on the coal-seam interaction mainly focused on the impact of mining one coal seam on other coal seams from perspectives of the rock deformation, stress redistribution and permeability change. There have been few studies conducted on the sensitivity analysis of the seam interaction. Interburden refers to the rock layers between the first-mined seam and the relieved seam. It exists as a bridge between those two seams. Therefore, the interburden properties play a significant role in determining the seams interaction, which forms the basis of this study. Specifically, few studies have investigated the effects of interburden properties on the mining-induced permeability variation, as well as the gas drainage performance in the de-stressed seam, taking into account the coal damage in the coupled permeability model. Particularly, as longwall mining always causes severe damage to coal mass, this could lead to many fractures generating around the mining panel and significant permeability increase due to the coal-dilatancy phenomenon ( Meanwhile, rocks are normally heterogeneous, which affects its mechanics properties and damage characteristics, and thus the permeability change ( To this end, in this paper, based on the data from an actual coal mine, a fully coupled numerical simulation model is established. Weibull statistical distribution is adopted to assign the Young's modulus ( As discussed in the Introduction section, longwall mining always induces severe coal damage due to the nature of the mining method. Thus, the impact of damage on the permeability variation under mining panel is significant and should be considered for estimating the permeability more accurately. Meanwhile, there are few current coupled permeability models considering the damage effect. Therefore, a damage-based model will be established in this section, which will be used to predict the permeability changes and govern the borehole gas drainage process in the underlying coal seam. Coal is typically composed of the matrix and cleats, among which, the cleat networks mainly affect the coal permeability compared with matrix ( Eq. At the same time, And Based on the Langmuir-type equation of coal which has been experimentally verified ( Substituting Eqs. As shown in In The 2D numerical simulation model shown in In this model, the overburden is applied at the top of the model ( The meshing function helps to realize the geometry discretization, generating small units of simple shapes, i.e. mesh element. There are nine predefined mesh element sizes in the Comsol software, ranging from Extremely coarse, Extra coarse, Coarser, Coarse to Normal, Fine, Finer, Extra fine and Extremely fine. In this model, the Extremely fine mesh element size is applied in the upper Medium-grained sandstone and the lower Limestone and Fine-grained sandstone. In those areas, the maximum element size and the curvature factor are 3.68 and 0.2, respectively. Particularly, to obtain better simulation-analysis accuracy, for the two coal seams and other rock strata around them, the element size is further refined, the maximum element size and the curvature factor are improved to be 1.68 and 0.1, respectively. In the entire model, there are 44066 triangular elements and 22212 mesh vertices. Model convergence is closely related with the mesh element size, the time step and the defined tolerance. This simulation work is time dependent, and the multifrontal massively parallel sparse direct solver is used. The simulation runs for a timeframe of 1500 h, with the results recorded every 100 h in the simulation process. Meanwhile, the absolute tolerance of this model is 0.001. Model test results have reflected that above model meshing, time step and absolute tolerance could realize the accurate result collection and guarantee the convergence of iterative solvers. Borehole gas drainage process in the de-stressed Ji As stated in the Introduction, Weibull statistical distribution is of significance and frequently adopted in modelling work for revealing the heterogeneity of rock property. In this 2D modelling study, the Weibull statistical distribution is introduced to assign the Young's modulus of each rock layer, to make this study more practical. Its probability density function could be defined as follows: The Weibull scale parameter and shape parameter of Young's modulus of each rock layer are shown in The shape parameter As illustrated in This study concentrates on investigating the effects of geomechanical interburden properties (i.e. Young's modulus ( To reveal the impacts of The damage-based permeability model in section Mining of the Ji Firstly, from Gas pressure change during the borehole drainage in the underlying seam is an important index to assess the gas drainage performance and to verify the permeability change in the underlying seam, thus to reveal the impacts of those six parameter groups on the two-seam interaction. In this section, a borehole with the diameter of 120 mm is drilled in the middle of Ji  To reveal the effect of different parameter groups on the pressure changes around borehole, the gas pressure differences along the vertical line between those six parameter groups are plotted in It can be seen that after 100 h gas drainage the gas pressure of group 2 and 5 are both larger than that of group 3. In contrast, the gas pressure of group 1, 4 and 6 are smaller than group 3. As the drainage goes on, above pressure differences become more apparent. After 900 h of gas drainage, the maximum gas pressure difference is seen between group 1 and 3, which is over 0.004 MPa. Higher residual pressure means that the drainage process is relatively slower due to the lower permeability. Therefore, the lower the permeability ratio is, the slower the pressure decreases. As illustrated in In Section The average permeability change ratios in terms of Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio are shown in In this study, a coal damage-based permeability model is implemented into the numerical simulation to analyse the impacts of interburden geomechanical properties on the permeability variation in the underlying seam, as well as the gas drainage performance. The following conclusions are obtained: Weibull statistical distribution is of significance for realizing rock heterogeneity and improving the numerical simulation accuracy. The Weibull shape parameter mainly determines the heterogeneity level. The higher this parameter is, the more homogeneous the rock property is. The interburden Young's modulus values are more concentrated to During the mining of Ji The higher the permeability ratio is, the more the pressure decreases, e.g. the Outcomes of this study could provide related researchers and mining engineers with new understanding of the relationship between interburden geomechanical properties and the seam interaction. For the coal seam group with small interburden Young's modulus and big Poisson's ratio, the seam interaction is likely to be more intense and the permeability in the underlying seam increases more. Therefore, during the mining design of such coal-seam group, mining the adjacent coal seams firstly could be an effective method to enhance the gas drainage performance of one coal seam. Two limitations of this study are the two-dimensional numerical modelling and the lack of considering the water impact on gas flow. It is recommended that the future work should consider a three-dimensional computational domain and the water impact on the gas flow. This study is financially supported by the CSC-UQ Scholarship, the University of Queensland Top Up Assistance Scholarship and the fund from State Key Laboratory of Coal Resources and  First strength criterion Mohr-Coulomb criterion Damage variable Young's modulus (GPa) Weibull scale parameter of Young's modulus (GPa) Uniaxial compressive strength (MPa) Uniaxial tensile strength (MPa)  Initial coal permeability (m Weibull shape parameter of Young's modulus Gas pressure (Pa) Initial gas pressure (Pa) Ventilation air pressure (Pa) Drainage suction pressure (Pa) Langmuir pressure constant (Pa) Average permeability ratio Elastic modulus reduction ratio Langmuir volume constant (m Damage coefficient Cleat porosity Initial cleat porosity Maximum principal stress (MPa) Minimum principle stress (MPa) Poisson's ratio Internal friction angle (degree) Maximum principal strain Minimum principle strain Maximum compressive principal strain Mechanical strain in Initial mechanical strain in Langmuir volumetric strain constant Maximum tensile principal strain Methane dynamic viscosity (Pa∙s) Total equivalent strain change in Sorption-induced strain change Strain change resulting from mechanics change