We report on a new, promising nanotechnological approach for hydrometallurgy based on recyclable, chemically functionalized superparamagnetic nanoparticles. In this process, the metal ions (e.g. Cu2+) are captured by the nanoparticles and confined at the electrode surface by means of an external magnet. Due to the pre-concentration effect the electrodeposition process is greatly improved, yielding the pure metal in a much shorter time in comparison with the conventional electrodeposition process. After the electrolysis, the magnetic nanoparticles are ready to return to the process. The proposed strategy can advantageously be incorporated in hydrometallurgy, reducing the number of steps associated with complexation, organic solvent extraction, metal release and diffusional electroprocessing, leading to a more sustainable technology.In the past two decades the global production of strategic metals such as copper has trended away from pyrometallurgical processes, in part because of the rich ores depletion and global warming concerns. New initiatives have been directed by legislation towards the supposedly greener hydrometallurgical technologies. In particular, heap leaching of oxide copper ores and cathode copper recovery by solvent extraction (SX) and electrowinning (EW) is well established as a primary low-cost hydrometallurgical copper recovery method. Presently, more than 20% of total world production of copper is achieved through the solvent extraction route ( It has already been mentioned that hydrometallurgy has typically an interdisciplinary nature ( We are employing nanoparticles composed by magnetite. They are exceptional magnetic carriers exhibiting a very large magnetization response as a consequence of the predominance of single magnetic domains, in addition to a very large collective area to interact with the chemical species in solution. Many interesting bioelectroanalytical and catalytical applications have already been developed using magnetically modified enzymes and substrates ( As a proof of concept, we employed the nanomagnetic hydrometallurgy process for the capture and electrodeposition of copper from aqueous solution. The quantitative recovery of the metal element was confirmed by parallel energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence measurements (EDXRF) from the copper solutions and from the superparamagnetic nanoparticles collected at the electrode surface. The superparamagnetic nanoparticles of magnetite were obtained by the aqueous co-precipitation method, and coated with SiO Their superparamagnetic behaviour was confirmed by magnetization experiments and related field cooling (FC) and zero field cooling (ZFC) measurements using a Cryogenic Sx600 superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) based magnetometer. Typically, no hysteresis was observed above 115 For academic purposes, the electrochemical experiments were carried out using an AUTOLAB PGSTAT30 potentiostat/galvanostat, with a rectangular electrochemical cell ( Energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence measurements, EDXRF, were carried out using an EDX720 instrument from Shimadzu, equipped with a X-ray tube with Rh target and a Si(Li) detector, working at 5–15 The superparamagnetic nanoparticles containing the electroactive species form a redox conducting layer, allowing efficient electron transfer to the electrode, as shown by the square wave voltammograms in For comparison purposes, the superparamagnetic nanoparticles containing copper(II) ions were removed from the solution, and the dry powder analysed using EDXRF, as shown in In a typical laboratory experiment we employed a more concentrated copper solution, as illustrated in These experiments were here reported as a proof of concept. Our current research is focusing on the process optimization, pursuing new functional groups for many different metals, and a better cell design. Functionalized superparamagnetic nanoparticles can be employed for the capture, transport and electrodeposition of copper from aqueous solution, leading to a strong enhancement of the electrochemical signals due the magnetic confinement at the electrode surface. Based on their versatile performance, a promising alternative approach for the conventional hydrometallurgy process can be devised, allowing metal production under competitive and sustainable conditions provided by the possibility of recovering and recycling the superparamagnetic nanoparticles. Thanks to the pre-concentration effect, another important application will be the commercial exploitation of diluted solutions, and the selective metal removal for environmental remediation purposes. The financial support from