T-shaped acetabular fractures are challenging injuries. The goal of surgical treatment is to achieve a stable and a concentric reduction of the femoral head under the anatomically reduced weight-bearing dome. There is an ongoing debate about the ideal approach and fixation method for T-shaped fractures. In this study, a group of 34 patients with T-shaped acetabular fractures were treated by posterior plating and anterior column screw. All patients, were followed for at least two years or until hip replacement. The aim of this prospective cohort study was to report the rate of postoperative radiological results together with the early clinical outcome. Anatomical reduction was achieved in 62%, satisfactory reduction of the anterior column with restoration of hip congruency in 82% with excellent to good clinical outcome in 75% of cases. We used classification regression trees (CART) to select the important predictors and generate hypotheses on interaction among them. Residual anterior column displacement >3.5mm was associated with poor clinical results. In cases with residual displacement <3.5mm, the presence of a posterior wall fracture was an independent negative predictor.T-shaped acetabular fractures are challenging injuries. The goal of surgical treatment is to achieve a stable and a concentric reduction of the femoral head under the anatomically reduced weight-bearing dome. There is an ongoing debate about the ideal approach and fixation method for T-shaped fractures Recent reports found that the use a single non-extensile approach resulted in fewer complications and higher rate of anatomical reduction The posterior approach exposes the more commonly displaced posterior column. The retro-acetabular surface is a wide and a strong area for osteo-synthesis. The problem with the posterior approach is the limited access to the anterior column. New fluoroscopic views facilitate the evaluation of the reduction of the anterior column segment and the insertion of an ante-grade anterior column screw The aim of this study was to report postoperative radiological results together with the early clinical outcome for a group of patients treated with posterior plating and anterior column screw. The classification and regression tree (CART) analysis, used in this study offered some potential advantages over traditional multiple liner regression. CART is able to identify complex interactions among the predictor variables without a prior specification of the interaction terms, and can handle datasets where the number of predictors is high relative to the number of observations. i.e in small samples At our unit, we follow a certain protocol for diagnosis and management of acetabular fractures. This protocol entails the following steps: This study is a non-comparative prospective cohort study. It started on April 2010. This study was designed to include at least 30 patients. Patients selection was done according to the following criteria The indications for the posterior approach were larger displacement of the posterior column, intra-articular fragment, a posterior wall component, and marginal impaction. Exclusion criteria were very low anterior column, infra-tectal fractures, anterior wall fragment, wide separation of the vertical stem, fractures with symphysis diastasis and cranial extension of a posterior wall component. Every patient signed a written consent stating that the aim of surgery was either All operations were performed on a standard table in the prone position. The image intensifier was positioned accurately before draping of the patient to obtain clear A/P and Judet views projections. In addition the iliac inlet (II) and the obturator outlet (OO) views, necessary to insert the anterior column screw were acquired. A trial closed reduction of the fracture was done with traction, extension and internal rotation of the hip to ascertain the mobility of the anterior column fragment. The surgical exposure of Kocher-Langenbeck approach was done following the steps described by Letournel The guide wire of the cannulated 7.3 partial threaded cancellous screw was inserted under image intensifier control on both the II and OO views. After checking the position of the guide wire, the self-drilling self-tapping cannulated 7.3 screw was inserted over the guide wire ( If the reduction of the anterior column was not satisfactory, a sequential anterior approach was planned after completing the posterior fixation without inserting an anterior column screw. In case there was a contra-indication for anterior approach or there was high degree of posterior comminution, and/or femoral head damage, the best achieved reduction was accepted and the goal of surgery was changed to preservation of the bone stock for future hip replacement. The hip joint was distracted by manual traction through the assistant. Any intra-articular fragments were retrieved. The posterior column was reduced at the border of the greater sciatic notch and a short small fragment set DCP plate versus an inter-fragmentary screw was applied. Articular impaction if present was elevated and grafted by cancellous bone, taken from the greater trochanter. Repositioning of loose articular fragments larger than 1 Prior to closure intra-operative x-rays (A/P and oblique views) were taken to document the intra-operative final reduction and to comment on the congruency of the hip. Postoperatively, A/P and oblique x-rays were done. Residual displacement of the anterior column was measured on the obturator view while that of the posterior column was measured on the iliac view. The correction for magnification was done using the thread diameter of the 4 The post-operative relation between the femoral head and acetabular dome in the three standard x-ray views, was compared to the un-injured side. Hips were classified into either The stitches were removed at 2 weeks. Any wound healing problem or suspected infection had to be reported. The postoperative protocol entails non-weight bearing for 4weeks, protected weight bearing for 8 weeks. Full weight bearing was allowed after 12 weeks. The x-rays were repeated at 2 weeks to check for re-displacement, at 6 weeks to check for union and at 6 months,1 Clinical outcome was measured using the Matta modification of the Merle D’Aubigne score Univariate analysis was done using MedCalc version 15.6.1 for Windows. Kendall Tau’s correlation was used to test linear correlations between quantitative variables while Mann-Whitney and Kruskal–Wallis tests were used to rank and compare quantitative variables between two or more groups. P value ≤0.05 was considered statistically significant. Classification and regression tree (CART) analysis was used to find the important predictors of the modified clinical grading score, determine the optimal values for continuous variables and to detect the potential interaction between important predictors. We used ‘rpart’ package in R to build the CART. The decisions developed by the CART were further tested by statistical test to find out if they can be generalized to the whole population or not. If the p-value was small (<0.05), the decision made by the CART was accepted and the null hypothesis was rejected. If the p-value was large (>0.05), the decision made by CART was considered as specific to the current sample used in the analysis, so it was ignored and the null hypothesis was not rejected. All patients included in the study were younger than 45 years, with male gender predominance. All fractures were treated within 15 The independent postoperative assessment of the x-rays revealed anatomical reduction in 21 cases (62%; 95%CI: 38, 94%) ( The reduction was non-anatomical in 13 cases (38%; 95%CI: 20, 65%). One case had a segmental posterior column with poor reduction (6 The restoration of hip congruency was affected by the residual anterior column displacement. (p The aim was to insert the anterior column screw into center of the medullary canal of the superior pubic ramus. This was achieved in all but two cases (5%, 95%CI: 1,21%) in which the screws were misplaced towards the lateral border of the anterior wall, fortunately without secondary damage. No articular penetration occurred. (0%,95%CI:0,11%). The mean follow-up period was 28.4 All variables were tested against the final clinical score using the appropriate statistical tests (see Post-operative sciatic nerve palsy occurred in four patients (12%). All were partial injury affecting the common peroneal division. By the end of follow-up three of them had full recovery. Despite using a buttress plate for the posterior wall in all cases, posterior re-subluxation of the hip occurred in three cases. This was attributed to re-displacement of a comminuted posterior wall in two cases (6%) and avascular necrosis in the third one (3%). Two cases of these three accepted their functional outcome. The third patient had full ankyloses of the hip due to high grade heterotopic ossification (Brooker IV). This patient had associated head injury. He had a hip replacement with excision of the ectopic bone 13 months after the index surgery. Four patients (12%) developed mild to moderate heterotopic ossification (Brookers I/II) without affecting the final hip range of motion. There were no cases of infection. By the end of follow-up, radiological signs of post-traumatic arthritis were evident in seven patients (21%, 95%CI 8,42%). All the demographic, clinical and radiological variables were included to predict the modified clinical grading score. CART classified the study sample according to the residual displacement and the presence of posterior wall component into three groups. Group 1 contained cases with residual displacement <3.5 The results of this study showed that posterior plating and anterior column screw fixation resulted in anatomical reduction in 62%, restoration of hip congruency in 82% and in an excellent to good clinical outcome in 75% of cases. Using CART analysis, predictors for poor clinical outcome were residual displacement >3.5 Residual mal-reduction of the anterior column >3 Tannast and Siebenrock T-shaped associated with posterior wall fracture had poor prognosis. Out of 14 hips of this type, reported by Matta Posterior plating and percutaneous anterior column screw benefit from prone position for ideal exposure and reduction of the posterior column. Almost all cases with poor reduction in this study were attributed to residual step or gap in the anterior column. Step is the function of mal-reduction while gap is the result of inadequate compression produced by the cannulated 7.3 screws. More experience, and the use of more advanced instrumentation such as collinear clamp may increase the rate of anatomical reduction of the anterior column. The placement of the 7.3 This study has some limitations. First, the small sample size and wide variance among the patient included did not allow a high degree of precision as evident by wide confidence intervals. T-shaped acetabular fractures are not so common. They constituted only 5.3% of Letournel series In conclusion, the treatment of certain T-shaped acetabular fracture was possible through the non-extensile posterior approach and anterior column screw with anatomical and/or congruent reduction in 80% of the cases. Failure to reduce the anterior column was the main problem in 20% of cases. More experience in the reduction maneuvers for the anterior column component may increase the rate of anatomical reduction. A posterior wall component is a negative predictor for good functional outcome in T-shaped fractures. None were declared for all authors.