Deep mining and the related dynamic loading are the critical challenges confronting the reinforcement system like energy-absorbing rockbolts, which plays a decisive role in the dynamic response of underground mine excavations. Over the past decades, various types of novel energy-absorbing rockbolts with different deformation mechanisms and dynamic characteristics have been invented. Meanwhile, the test methods and facilities to quantify the dynamic performance of rockbolts have been proposed, and a lot of test results are obtained. In the companion Part II, with comparative analysis of test results along with available data from literature, some inherent features related to the dynamic performance of bolts have been revealed. The research indicates that, for both shank stretching and ploughing/extrusion bolts, the energy absorption is approximately proportional to the displacement. For the shank stretching bolts, only when the impact energy is higher than a threshold value, yield and strain hardening occurs; in the case of strain hardening, even a low impact energy can roughly predict the dynamic response curve. The statistical analysis of test results indicates that, in laboratory dynamic tests, the strain rate of bolts varies between 0.5/s and 3/s, and the increments of dynamic capacity enhancement factor (DCEF) is 3.4%-10.5%. For a particular bolt, DCEF can be roughly viewed as a constant which is mainly dependent on the yield strength level of the shank. Therefore, dynamic impact load can be approximated as a constant; the dynamic load–displacement curve can be simplified into a unique polyline segment comprising two line segments; and the impact duration is linearly related to the input momentum. These findings could be used for the pre-evaluation of the dynamic performance of the candidate bolts before laboratory test and support scheme design.In the companion paper Part I, the development, dynamic performance of various energy-absorbing bolts has been presented, and the categorization and classification of energy-absorbing rockbolts have been updated. Obviously, the laboratory-based test plays a crucial role in the quantitative evaluation of dynamic performance of energy-absorbing bolts, and facilitates the selection of bolts for field support schemes. However, there are doubts about the similarity and reliability of the laboratory-based test principle and procedures, it was even recognized that the current test approach (especially “drop testing”) was a rough simulation of seismic loading mechanism, and replication of rock mass-support interaction was arguably poor and the loading conditions had no similitude to in situ conditions ( Despite the possible limitations of current laboratory-based test methods, it can provide repeatable results with increased agility. It follows that the test data can possibly be correlated to in situ conditions and become valuable for design purposes ( According to dynamic testing methods detailed in Part I, although there are some differences in the structure and principle of various testing facilities, the current laboratory testing methods are generally based on the mechanical impact principle. In accordance with the theoretical analysis of classical Newtonian mechanics, the impact process involves a dual transfer of both kinetic energy and impact momentum. Prior to impact, the involving indicators include the input kinetic energy and impact momentum, both of which are characterized by parameters like mass and velocity of the falling weight; during the impact, they are impact load, displacement, impact duration, strain rate, yield/strain hardening, dynamic capacity enhancement factor, rupture or not, as shown in In the companion Part II, with comparative analysis of test results along with available data from literature, the close relations between input parameters and rockbolt dynamic performance have been obtained, and some findings related to the dynamic performance have been revealed. As for the accessible dynamic test cases among published literature, due to various differences, such as testing facilities, borehole simulation and sample preparation, there might be different test results even for a particular type of bolt, which complicates the comparative analysis. However, it has been widely accepted that bolts deformation is approximately proportional to energy absorption when subjected to dynamic loading, as detailed in Part I, which is applicable to the majority of bolts ( As indicated in As for bolts with the ploughing mechanism like Cone bolt, the dynamic performance is primarily affected by the grout strength, with a significant difference in performance between low (e.g. 25 MPa) and high strength grout (e.g. 40 MPa), as displayed in Strain hardening is the strengthening of metal by deformation, which occurs because of dislocation movements and dislocation generation within the crystal structure of the material. The impact results of various test series showed that strain hardening occurs immediately after the impact. Here, takes the multiple impact case of PAR1 bolts as an example, referred to as Example A in Part I ( However, strain hardening doesn't always occur for any given amount of impact energy. For a particular bolt, when the impact energy is less than a certain value, it's difficult to induce the strain hardening effect, even if the multiple impact test is adopted. This can be illustrated by two multiple impact test cases, and the impact energy for both cases was 3, 5, 7, 9, 12, 15, 20 kJ successively. The specimens were 20MnSi bolt and BHRB400 bolt, respectively, and the dimensions were 22 mm * 2200 mm ( The strain hardening of shank stretching bolts (mode I) under dynamic impact can be summarized as follows: For a particular bolt, if the minimum energy level is below threshold, it is difficult to stimulate strain hardening. Once subjected to an impact with sufficient kinetic energy, the strain hardening of shank occurs. During the following multiple impacts, the hardening continues but the stress (or load) increment is getting smaller and smaller, even negligible, and eventually tends to be constant. Following the excavation in high stress or burst-prone mines, the seismic events may occur with various magnitudes and sequences, which could ultimately trigger different dynamic loading on the bolts. Apart from the violent loading resulting from the large-magnitude seismic events, which might cause failure of the reinforcement, it's noted that most reinforcement systems are incrementally and repeatedly loaded by static and dynamic deformation before reaching the failure point ( By comparing the test data of different specimens, it was found that, in addition to the linear relationship between energy absorption and deformation, for a particular shank stretching bolts, the yielding, hardening and ultimate load are almost the same regardless of the magnitude of the impact energy as long as the plastic deformation is triggered in the shank. This can be interpreted by the following two representative test cases, which are named Example B and Example C, respectively, in order to facilitate contextual references. In Example B - In order to simulate the dynamic response of D-bolt under varying seismic events, a series of split-tube impact tests were conducted utilizing CANMET test facility ( In Example C - Similar to Example B, BHRB400 rebar bolts also demonstrated the same trend ( Therefore, such an assumption can be made, i.e., for a particular shank stretching bolt, regardless of the magnitude of the impact energy, whether subjected to single or multiple impact, the dynamic response curve or its envelope approximately coincides with the complete load–displacement curve of the critical loading. That is, the complete load–displacement curve is unique. As for the dynamic response curve of small-magnitude impact, it corresponds to a particular segment of the complete curve. It should be added here that critical loading refers to the dynamic loading that results in the bolt failure with a single impact, therefore, to a large extent, it is adopted to simulate the large-magnitude seismic events. Apart from the comparative results of impact load, it was also found that the cumulative deformation and corresponding energy absorption before failure under small-magnitude multiple impact (e.g. 20 kJ per drop) are higher than that of critical loading. This can also be illustrated by preceding test cases. In the preceding Example B, specimen M5 failed with a single impact of 56 kJ; specimen M2, by contrast, ruptured with multiple impact of 20 kJ per drop. By comparing the dynamic responses in In the following Example D, the dynamic performance comparison was conducted with the WASM test facility ( In addition, similar conclusions had been drawn in some other test cases. It is well known in material science that the behavior of engineering material like steel is loading rate dependent ( In this section, firstly, the strain rate of bolts under dynamic test was summarized based on previous test cases. Secondly, the dynamic capacity enhancement factor (DCEF) was adopted to theoretically estimate the potential dynamic response of bolts. Finally, by the comparison of theoretical calculation with previous test results, the assumption in In laboratory-based dynamic impact test, the strain rate is obtained by real-time monitoring the displacement of mark points at distal- and proximal-end of bolt, thereby obtaining the elongation, and then using the mathematical differential algorithm to realize the derivative of the elongation with respect to time at any instant. The mathematical expression is given in Eq. With statistical analysis of specimens from available data source, the typical values of strain rate were summarized and listed in The statistical analysis showed that the strain rate is generally in the range of 0.5/s-3/s under current dynamic test methodology. For instance, the strain rate from the NCM facility is 0.67/s −1.34/s, and CANMET is 1.50/s −2.79/s. In addition, as a supplement to the summary, the WASM results estimated the strain rate to be 1/s, but didn't demonstrate the calculation details ( As has been noted, the yield and ultimate strength of steel usually increase with the strain rate. The dynamic increase factor, i.e. the ratio of the dynamic to quasi-static value, is normally defined as function of strain rate and depends on the grade of steel. It is a key link between strain rate and dynamic yield strength of the bolt, which enables the estimation of dynamic response of engineering materials (e.g. steel) according to its strain rate ( where the dynamic increase factor f is dimensionless, strain rate Therefore, it is reasonable to introduce this factor into the data analysis to estimate the dynamic performance of rockbolts. Corresponding, the dynamic capacity enhancement factor (DCEF) is adopted to characterize the dynamic characteristics of energy-absorbing rockbolts subjected to high strain rate. To our knowledge, for the bolts widely used in underground excavation, the yield strength might be 250–700 MPa. According to Eq. For insightful illustration, a diagram is plotted according to the strength of bolts, as shown in For a particular bolt, the DCEF rises with the increasing of strain rate, which is generally applicable to bolts of varying strength level. With the rising of strength level, the effect of strain rate on DCEF is getting smaller and smaller. For instance, when the strain rate varies from 0.5/s to 3/s, the DCEF of bolt with yield strength of 300 MPa rises from 1.467 to 1.59, increasing by 12.3%, compared to 3.4% for bolts of 600 MPa. When bolts subjected to a given strain rate, the DCEF of low strength bolt is higher than that of higher strength level, e.g. when the strain rate is 2.5/s, the DCEF of bolt of 400 MPa is 1.43 in comparison to 1.176 for bolt of 600 MPa. The yield strength of typical bolts is generally 350–600 MPa; under current laboratory testing conditions, the strain rate varies between 0.5/s and 3/s. According to the distribution of DCEF in It could be summed that, for the widely used bolts, the DCEF increment is generally 3.40%-10.50% when the strain rate varies from 0.5/s to 3/s. In particular, for bolts with yield strength higher than 500 MPa, the DCEF increment is 3.4%-5.8%, which is even within the tolerance of variation for the same group of specimens. Taking a bolt of 400 MPa as an example, the DCEF varies from 1.351 to 1.44. When its diameter is 20 mm, this indicates that the dynamic load is roughly 44.1–55.3 kN higher than quasi-static yield load, and this range of 11.2 kN is equivalent to 8.9% of its quasi-static yield load. Similarly, in the preceding Example A, when subjected to varying momentum, the dynamic load of PAR1 bolts was 228–240 kN, with an increment of 12 kN, which will be detailed in Therefore, for a particular shank stretching bolt, its DCEF can be roughly taken as a constant, which is mainly dependent on its yield strength level. Correspondingly, dynamic impact load can be regarded as a constant, which indicates the uniqueness of the complete load–displacement curve accordingly. Moreover, for simplification, the dynamic response curve can be simplified into a polyline segment, which comprises an oblique segment and a horizontal segment, and the intersection is the dynamic yield load which can be estimated with the DCEF diagram. Up to now, revisiting the preceding assumption and equivalent model proposed in As a supplement to clarification of terms related to dynamic impact, the preceding terms such as average impact load (unit: kN), EAR (unit: kJ/mm), UTL (unit: kN), plastic yield flow strength (unit: kN) and reaction pressure (unit: kN/m According to the rock ejection model in Part I, in addition to the energy transfer process, the interaction between the ejected rock and reinforcement system also involves a transfer of momentum. The momentum of the ejected block is expressed as mv, which needs to be dissipated by the reinforcement system. Where, m is the mass of the ejected block and v the ejection velocity. The momentum of a reinforcement system is expressed as Ft, where F is the impact load and t the impact duration. When a capable energy-absorbing device is used, it yields at a predefined load level or deforms to certain extents to absorb the kinetic energy and to safely transfer the momentum, therefore, the equilibrium Ft = mv is realized in accordance with Newton’s Second Law. The previous test data showed that the resulting indicators (e.g. impact load, impact duration, displacement) are closely related to the initial quantities such as kinetic energy and momentum. It's noted that the initial quantities are closely related to the input parameters (e.g. m, v), that is, even if the kinetic energy is the same, the different combination of m and v may give rise to different resulting indicators. In this section, the linear proportional relationship between momentum and impact duration will be revealed and exemplified. For a dynamic impact test, the momentum conservation equation is given in Eq. As has been verified, that the impact load during the dynamic test is almost constant. At this time, in combination with the momentum conservation equation of Eq. Therefore, the impact momentum determines the impact duration, whereas the impact energy determines whether the bolt fails. As detailed in the preceding Example A, four series of PAR1 bolts was tested with a constant kinetic energy of 11.5 kJ per impact, whereas the impact velocity varied between 2.7 m/s and 5.4 m/s, which contributed to different momentums among each series of specimens ( The comparative analysis showed that, when subjected to varying momentum, the dynamic load of PAR1 bolts was 228–240 kN, approaching the constant of 235 kN. As illustrated in As illustrated in Another typical test case is the preceding Example B. As detailed in The laboratory-based test plays a crucial role in the quantitative evaluation of dynamic performance of energy-absorbing bolts. With comparative analysis of dynamic test results, from available data source, the inherent features underlying the dynamic performance of bolts have been investigated, and some findings related to the dynamic performance have been obtained. It might be helpful for the pre-evaluation of the dynamic performance of the candidate bolts before the laboratory test and support scheme design. For both shank stretching and ploughing/extrusion bolts, the energy absorption is proportional to the displacement during the impact. For the shank stretching bolts, both the impact load and deformation are higher in comparison to quasi-static test, and so is the energy absorption. There is a threshold energy below which it is difficult to stimulate the strain hardening. For a particular shank stretching bolt, both the impact load and its complete dynamic load–displacement curve are unique, respectively; both of which are dependent on the specification of free stretch of the shank. The cumulative deformation and corresponding energy absorption prior to failure under small-magnitude multiple impact are higher than the counterparts of critical loading. This difference indicates that the bolt absorbs slightly more energy under a series of small seismic events than a single- and large-seismic event. Additionally, this indicates that, for accurate evaluation of the bolt's energy absorption capacity, it is necessary to adopt the critical loading of a single impact, rather than multiple impacts, because the latter may overestimate the energy absorption capacity. The impact process involves a dual transfer of both kinetic energy and impact momentum. It is found that the magnitude of the impact energy determines whether the bolt fails, whereas the impact momentum determines how long the impact lasts. Moreover, the impact duration is linearly related to the input momentum, which is due to the fact that impact load is a constant. As a clarification of terms related to dynamic impact, the terms such as average impact load (unit: kN), EAR (unit: kJ/mm), UTL (unit: kN), plastic yield flow strength (unit: kN) and reaction pressure (unit: kN/m The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest. The authors sincerely appreciate the constructive and valuable comments from the editors and anonymous reviewers to help improve the paper. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: