Background
                  Injuries to the Lisfranc complex, although relatively rare carry a high morbidity and are often associated with other injuries. Despite a number published studies to determine the best operative management, there is an ongoing debate to whether open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) or primary arthrodesis (PA) produces the best outcomes for patients. There have been further studies published in the last few years that have not been assessed as part of the wider literature and therefore we wished to perform an updated systematic review and meta-analysis with inclusion of outcomes not assessed in the previous studies.
               
                  Methods
                  We performed a structured search for retrospective and prospective comparative papers and identified 8 relevant articles (2 RCT studies and 6 non-RCT studies) that compared the outcomes of ORIF versus PA; these studies included a total of 547 patients. Each of the studies was assessed for suitability and quality before inclusion. We performed a statistical analysis of the aggregated results as part of the review.
               
                  Results
                  We found no statistically significant difference between the outcomes of ORIF versus PA in terms of return to work or activity (Odds Ratio 0.80 (CI 95%, 0.32–2.02, P=0.64)) and satisfaction rates (Odds Ratio 0.15 (CI 95%, 0.01–.00, P=0.25)). Patients undergoing ORIF have a higher risk of undergoing further surgery to remove the metalwork (Odds Ration 13.13 (CI 95%, 7.65–22.54, P<0.00001)) or to undergo secondary fusion, but, the overall complication rates appear to be equivalent in both groups (risk difference 0.03 (CI 95%, –0.15–0.21, P=0.76)).
               
                  Conclusions
                  Although there were no significant differences in the functional outcomes, the overall power of the studies is low. The rates of metalwork removal and secondary fusion were higher in the ORIF group and this risk should be presented to the patient when counselling them for any procedure. We noted that there is a high level of heterogeneity in the type of injuries and measured outcomes included in each study and, therefore, further trials are needed to determine the best treatment across the spectrum of Lisfranc complex injuries.Management of injuries to the Lisfranc or tarsometatarsal joint (TMTJ) complex continues to be a topic of debate. The evidence continues to be sparse as this is a relatively rare injury accounting for and estimated 0.2% of all fractures [ There are 2 broad groups of surgical interventions available for the treatment of these injuries; either open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) or primary arthrodesis (PA). Even within these broad groups there is some debate into the types of fixation utilised for example using screws or plates for fixation or which rays to fuse, and is often determined on a case by case basis. Traditionally arthrodesis was seen as a salvage procedure [ The question has been asked a number of times regarding which one is the better treatment option as each intervention has particular drawbacks for example the reported incidence of secondary arthrodesis following ORIF has been stated as high as 94% leading to increased morbidity and cost. Conversely previous studies have demonstrated that PA has a higher initial cost and may lead to poor functioning of the forefoot and therefore poorer functional outcomes such as return to work or activity [ Previous studies were inconclusive with regards to determining the best method of treating Lisfranc injuries; the objective of the study is to compare the outcomes of treatment with ORIF versus PA through a meta-analysis of the available published research. A small number of meta-analyses have been performed on the outcomes of ORIF versus PA; we have updated this with the most recent RCT studies and have included retrospective and prospective cohort studies in order to assess the wider evidence base. In addition to the previously reported outcomes we have included return to work as we this had been underreported in two recent meta-analyses and is an important measure in the decision making process when choosing treatments A systematic review and meta-analysis was conducted according to guidelines described in the Cochrane handbook for systematic reviews of interventions and PRISMA statement [ Retrospective and prospective comparative studies are included in this study. The participants were adult patients who underwent surgery for acute Lisfranc injuries. The interventions were ORIF versus PA. Outcome measures used were: complication rates, incidence of unplanned return to theatre (planned removals of metal surgeries are excluded), incidence of metal work removal surgeries, American Academy Foot and Ankle scores (AOFAS), patient satisfaction rates and return to work. Animal and cadaveric studies, non-English language studies and studies where the above mentioned outcomes are not evaluated, were excluded from this meta-analysis as well as any study which has no range or standard deviation given with the means to compare the data. The following databases were searched in November 2018 to establish whether there have been any previous meta-analyses comparing ORIF versus PA in Lisfranc injuries: Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews ( The search strategy was applied independently by two of the authors and all relevant study abstracts were hand searched. After which potentially suitable studies were reviewed in full paper format by each of the authors independently. Disagreement was discussed and resolved with the senior authors. See To assess the quality of the included trials the MINORS score was used; this is a validated scoring system designed to score both RCT and non-RCT studies using specific criteria ( Meta-analysis, performed by Review Manager [Computer program] (Version 5.3. Copenhagen: The Nordic Cochrane Centre, The Cochrane Collaboration, 2012), was used to combine the relevant estimates of the effect of interest from the selected studies to provide an overall estimate of the effect. Dichotomous data for each arm in a particular study were expressed as proportions or risks and the treatment effect as risk ratios. For dichotomous data, the Mantel–Haenszel method was used to combine the estimates [ A total of 346 primary studies were identified. After duplicates were removed 219 papers were excluded based on the inclusion/exclusion criteria, leaving 15 potentially relevant studies for detailed evaluation. This was further reduced to 8 studies for inclusion in the meta-analysis. The complications were reported by 7 of the 8 studies [ Six studies reported fully on the removal of metal work outcome [ Three studies reported on this outcome with a total of 87 ORIF group patients and 40 PA group of patients [ Only three studies reported on return to work with 123 patients in the ORIF group and 52 in the PA group [ Six studies reported on with 84 unplanned returns to theatre from 248 patients within the ORIF group and 34 unplanned returns to theatre from 127 patients in the PA group (33.9% versus 26.8%) [ Patient satisfaction was omitted from all but 2 studies. Only two studies reported on Satisfied and very satisfied patients outcomes were reported with 30 patients in the ORIF and 34 patients in the PA group [ The most commonly used outcome by the studies was complications. Therefore, a funnel plot was produced to assess publication bias. A funnel plot is a scatter plot of the treatment effects estimated from individual studies on the horizontal axis against the standard error of the estimate on the vertical axis. Although the funnel plot was grossly symmetrical, it is likely that there are some unpublished indicated by a small degree of asymmetry in the effect size of the studies; although this is difficult to fully qualify due to the relatively small number of included studies ( The controversy of differing surgical techniques in the management of this difficult and potentially devastating injury continues and this meta-analysis has helped shed some light on the outcomes of the 2 broad modes of treatment; open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) or primary arthrodesis (PA). Searches for existent systematic reviews show 2 previous meta-analysis in the literature comparing ORIF versus PA in Lisfranc injuries [ We have found that ORIF (mean difference in AAFOS 11.40, 95% CI 7.85–14.95, p = 0.14) may be the better option when it comes to post-operative foot and ankle scores and return to function but the results did not reach statistical significance. As per the previous studies we have shown that PA has an equivalent complication rate to ORIF (OR 0.03, 95%CI −0.18 to 0.24, p = 0.76). Overall our results suggest that PA is not inferior to ORIF in terms of functional outcomes and return to work/activity (OR 0.80, 95%CI −1.22 to 2.82, p = 0.64), but again this has not reached statistical significance. Although our results and those of other paper suggest that implant removal is a risk of having ORIF; removal of the metalwork is a logical stage in the treatment as it allows the joints to return to motion. Although the difference in functional outcomes is not significant there may be additional risk and cost associated with additional procedures such as removal of metalwork and secondary arthrodesis in the case of ORIF that are not encountered in PA. There have been a couple of studies in the US suggesting that the cost of PA may be higher, but the additional cost of metalwork removal or secondary arthrodesis in patients who have ORIF may make this a less cost effective procedure [ The risk of developing post traumatic arthritis (PTA) was higher in the ORIF (22.8%) group than the PA group (3.3%) which would be expected. The site of PTA is not clear but would be assumed to be adjacent joints in patients undergoing successful PA. Although these figures represent the mean risk of PTA there were suggestions in one paper that this figure may be as high as 80% in the ORIF group particularly if the reduction was not anatomical [ The highest risk for unplanned return to theatre was in the ORIF group (12.1%) versus the PA group (8.2%). The overall risk of any infection (deep or superficial) was low with 2.7% in the ORIF group versus 4.8% in the PA group. The complications rates were variably reported across the studies and where reported these can be seen in Some authors suggest that in more severe injuries and in complete dislocations with or without fractures then PA is the best choice of treatment due to the high rates of revision to arthrodesis where ORIF has been performed in these cases [ The main limiting factor in all of the studies appears to be the number of patients and, therefore, the resulting statistical power that may lead to a type 2 statistical error, even when determining the combined effect of the included studies. We suggest that an appropriately powered large RCT would be required to determine whether the lack of statistical significance we found in our analysis is indeed true and that the null hypothesis is correct. We identified a number of potential sources of bias within the paper — the scoring of each of the papers according to the given criteria for RCT and non-RCT studies identified those at greatest risk of potential bias. As we included a large number of non-RCT studies these have the greatest potential especially for selection bias. As concluded in previous meta-analysis the operation performed in each arm of the cohorts may have been carried out by a single surgeon, adding further confounding to the results [ In some of the studiesthe specifics of inclusion and exclusion criteria were unclear; Ly and Coetzee [ The term ‘Lisfranc injury’ covers a spectrum of injuries, from multi-ragmentary open fractures through minor ligamentous injuries, and many of the RCTs cover these in broad strokes. The best treatment of each subtype of Lisfranc injuries is therefore still unproven. Although we have a greater number of patients in the analysis than the previous meta-analyses our findings mirror those. Overall, the results still imply that there is no difference in the outcomes between PA and ORIF but clinical judgement remains the best approach; Coetzee et al. have outlined a strategy for treatment of Lisfranc injuries that provides a useful framework given the lack of evidence [ This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.