Because of the complex nature of rock mass in open-pit mines, it is difficult to accurately measure various factors which have great effect on the slope stability. Based on results of the statistical analysis of a large amount of measured data in geotechnical engineering and civil engineering, the fundamental fuzzy models of rock slope stability are established by using the theory of fuzzy measures. In view of the marked “fuzziness” in the factors that have effect on the problems of slope stability, the deformation failure of rock slope in open-pit mine is studied by using the fuzzy mathematical theory in the paper. In accordance with the deformation failure of rock mass in open-pit mines, by applying the theory of fuzzy probability measures, the fuzzy probability formula is derived for the deformation failure of rock masses, and the numerical method is given to calculate the fuzzy probability. Finally, an engineering example of the rock slope in open-pit mine is calculated and analyzed by using the three-points Gauss–Legendre quadrature formula. The practical calculation shows that the method can be used for analyzing and studying the problems of the slope stability in opencast metal mine.As everyone knows, slope stability analyses are used in a wide variety of civil engineering problems and many methods have been used in the stability analysis of rock slope in open-pit mines. The stability of open-pit slopes has always been considered as a very important issue in rock mechanics and mining engineering. In other words, the slope stability in open-pit mine is important because slope failures or landslides can lead to the production safety accidents. In fact, slope stability is a major problem associated with open-pit mining of metal orebody, causing damage to slope rock mass. To avoid adverse impacts of slope instability, a reliable analysis is essential. In recent years, the prediction and analysis of rock slope stability have been studied by many scholars in this field and valuable results have been obtained In recent years, fuzzy mathematics theory has been widely used in slope engineering It is well known that the safety factor ( The safety factor ( In fact, there are a lot of uncertainty factors (i.e. fuzziness factors) in slope stability analysis. In most cases these fuzziness factors (such as the cohesive force of rock mass, the internal friction angle, the elastic modulus, Poisson’s ratio and other parameters) interact with each other and supplement each other. In other words, the problem of slope stability has the feature of fuzziness. The influence factors of slope stability have strong fuzziness, therefore, the slope stability belongs to a class of uncertain problem (fuzziness problem). And the method of fuzzy mathematics can be applied to the analysis of slope stability in metal opencast mine. The nature of uncertainty in a problem is a very important point that engineers should ponder prior to the selection of an appropriate method to express the uncertainty. Fuzzy set theory was developed specially to deal with uncertainties that are nonrandom in nature. Fuzzy probability theory has been widely applied in many fields Suppose triplet (Ω, In If Here Eqs. In Because Let Because A probability space is assumed to be a triplet (Ω, Let a set With the above definitions and theories as a basis, the engineering problems in practical cases, can now be described. In order to facilitate the application of engineering, here, we mainly consider the jointed and fractured rock slope in opencast metal mine and with the help of the calculation formula of the safety coefficient for rock slope. According to a large number of research results in the slope engineering field, generally considered the slide surface of slope can be considered as the circular arc for jointed rock slope If rock having isotropic properties, according to Bishop formula we can get the following equation. Consider the case of Rock mass is uniform. Rock mass is continuous. Rock mass is a kind of complex medium of having isotropic properties. We can simplify the formula For the above formula, we use Based on the above analysis, we can establish the density function of slope failure. Considering the actual situation of the slope engineering, we know that the slope stability is affected by many factors and various factors are interrelated and influence each other and any single factor can’t determine the stability of the slope. According to the research results of Tobutt et al. In analysis of slope stability, need to consider the production blasting vibration effect on slope stability. At different distance relative to the slope, different quantity of explosive will have different effects on the slope rock mass. Therefore, the blasting vibration effect on slope must be considered under the condition of different distance. As the traditional method does not consider the problem, however fuzzy mathematics method can analyze and solve this problem. The use of mathematical methods, need to determine the membership function associated with distance. According to the research results of Constantinou et al. According to the definition of fuzzy probability (see In order to consider more factors in the practical engineering, also need to give distribution density functions associated with Based on the above results and Important factors of the great influence on the slope have been considered in the above probability formula, Therefore, considering only the above three major factors can meet the need for stability analysis in rock slope engineering. Because of formula From the formula In order to facilitate numerical integration for Eq. By using the Gauss–Legendre quadrature formula, then According to the formula From the above formulas can be derived: For the integral expressions in the above formula, can be respectively written as We consider computational problem of the formula According to the formula Based on the above analysis, the computational problems can be attributed to numerical calculation problem of the Eq. From Eq. Further, Eq. Finally, we can get the following two useful equations. According to the formulas According to the research results of reference Hashi–Longmendasha mining area, Mou metal open-pit mine, Northeast China. The slope rock mass is composed of quartzite and black mica quartz schist. The joints and fissures are developed and partially weathered seriously in slope rock mass in the mining area. The influence of blasting vibration and groundwater on the slope rock mass are greatly and their effect on the slope stability cannot be ignored. By November 2010, the slope height has reached 153 meters in the mining area. According to the geological data in the mining area, we can analyze the geological profile A–A (main geological profile). The slope angle is 44°30′ and profile angle of the open-pit bench is 65°. Based on the measured data in the mining area, the engineering parameters are given in numerical calculation. Rock pore pressure ratio is 0.15 and the values of parameters    The deformation and failure fuzzy probability of slope rock mass are calculated by using the fuzzy mathematics method and some theoretical results are included in The values of From the results in The parameter values in numerical calculation are consistent with the actual situation of slope engineering. This result has been confirmed by the observation results of slope rock mass deformation. In the production blasting, a large crack is appeared in the 1362   While the distance from excavating position to the permanent slope is 2   At this time, larger regional landslide has appeared in the slope rock mass and the landslide total volume of about thirty thousands cubic meters. The whole sliding process is approximately 20 Before the landslide, we have calculated the safety factor of slope using limit equilibrium method, the safety factor  By using fuzzy mathematical method, we have taken into account a variety of factors and so the calculation result is more consistent with the actual situation of slope engineering. This shows the predication of slope stability using fuzzy mathematical method is suitable. Fuzzy mathematical model and the classical method can verify each other in the process of analysis for the degree of slope instability and to ensure the safety of the slope. The analytical theoretical formulas have been given in the fuzzy mathematical model, so more convenient for calculation with a computer. The agreement of the theoretical values with the results of the field observation shows that the model is satisfactory and the formulae obtained are valid and thus can be effectively used for predicting the stability of slope rock mass and the safety evaluation of the slope engineering. The Project Supported by Natural Science Foundation – Steel and Iron Foundation of Hebei Province is gratefully acknowledged (No. E2011201114). The assistance of associate researcher XL Pan, of JL Yang and GY Liu, in preparing data for this paper is also acknowledged.