Lepidolite has an Al2O3 content of greater than 22%. Using it efficiently will be very important for the economic extraction of lithium from this low-grade lithium ore if an industrial-scale extraction process is to be developed. This paper presents a novel technique for recovering aluminium and lithium from the gypsum residue generated during the extraction of lithium from lepidolite. The alkali digestion conditions were considered based on the principles behind the Bayer process. Maximum extraction of aluminium (100%) and 96.4% extraction of lithium were recorded at caustic ratio (Na2O/Al2O3 molar ratio) of 1.7, digestion temperature of 136°C and digestion time of 60min. After digestion, aluminium hydroxide was precipitated by cooling and seeding of the digestion solution. Li+ ion was not adsorbed by aluminium hydroxide during this process. Therefore, Li could easily be recovered by adding sodium phosphate (Na3PO4). In addition, the precipitation of lithium at several different molar ratios of Li+/PO4
                     3− was performed to investigate its influence on the recovery process.As the lightest metal, lithium has a range of attributes that make this element useful for many applications, including batteries, ceramics, glass, lubricants, aluminium smelting, and polymers ( More than 80% of the lithium produced in the world comes from brines (which contain 0.06–0.15% Li) because extracting lithium from them costs much less than extracting it from solid minerals ( The concentrate of a low grade lepidolite ore contains only 3.5–4.0% Li In our previous study ( This research aims at recovering and separating aluminium and lithium from the gypsum residue, which will enhance profitability and increase the overall Li yield. The gypsum residue (100% The Bayer process was used to separate aluminium from the gypsum residue. The gypsum residue was first digested by an alkali (NaOH) solution. The digestions were conducted in an autoclave (KCFD, Songlin Chemical Equipment Co., Ltd) with a pressure range of 0.5 Analyses of Al 100 After the gypsum residue was digested by the alkali solution, sodium aluminate (NaAlO The Li Li was still present in the solution after the Al(OH) To avoid contamination of the Al(OH) Some experiments with different caustic ratios (the Na To study the effect of the digestion temperature on the Al and Li extraction efficiencies, experiments were conducted at a caustic ratio of 1.7, digestion time of 30 The effect of the digestion time on the Al and Li extraction efficiencies was investigated in the range of 20 to 80 The results obtained by repeating the experimental procedure five times are listed in The experiments were repeated five times. From  In summary, a novel process for the recovery of aluminium and lithium was developed that is important for decreasing the cost and increasing the overall yield of Li extracted from lepidolite. Based on the Bayer process, the gypsum residue from the lithium extraction process was digested by alkali to extract its aluminium and lithium. 100% aluminium extraction and 96.4% lithium extraction were recorded at caustic ratio (Na Financial support from