A novel two-step reduction process is proposed for the synthesis of homogeneously intermixed nano-SiC/ZrB2 powder using ZrSiO4, B4C and C. During the conventional carbo-borothermal reduction process, B4C reacted with ZrSiO4 to form borosilicate glass or B2O3. The reactions for the formation of B2O3 had lower Gibbs free energy than those to synthesize ZrB2 and SiC. The borosilicate glass also promoted the strong grain growth of ZrB2 and inhibited the formation of SiC. In order to solve the problem, the synthesis process was divided into the carbothermal reduction of ZrSiO4, and subsequent conversion of the resultant ZrC into ZrB2. By the two-step reduction process, the formation of SiC was achieved and the grain growth of ZrB2 could be effectively suppressed. Spark plasma sintering process also helped to minimize the grain growth of the synthesized powder by the fast heating/cooling rate of 100°C/min. The synthesized ZrB2–SiC powders were 10–40nm in size and were homogeneously inter-mixed.Early transition metal borides and carbides, such as ZrB In order to solve the problem, SiC has been added to ZrB In spite of the benefits of SiC in ZrB The fabrication of ZrB ZrSiO The key technology to fabricate nano ZrB ZrSiO A two-step reduction process was performed based on the calculated Gibbs free energy data in order to avoid the formation of unintended products during the synthesis process. For the reduction process, ZrSiO The raw powder mixtures were anisotropically pressed into pellets under 12.5 The synthesized samples were analyzed by X-ray diffraction method (Rigaku, D/Max 2200), field emission scanning electron microscopy (JEOL, JSM-7001F), transmission electron microscopy (JEOL, JEM 2000FXII) equipped with energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS), and laser diffraction particle size analysis (Beckman Coulter™, LS I3 320).  The Gibbs free energy of reaction The Gibbs free energy of reaction While reaction Reactions When B If the resultant ZrC, residual ZrO Based on the thermodynamic consideration, a new synthesis method was introduced in order to prevent the formation of the liquid phase. Because a high energy ball mill equipped with vacuum-sealed WC jar and ball was used, the contamination of oxygen impurities could be effectively suppressed during comminution and mixing process. In addition, only a small amount of WC–Co impurity (< As shown in The effect of excess carbon was not clearly shown in the XRD data of the pre-heated samples except the cases of P14B3 and P14SB3. However, after final heating, the specimens which contained excess carbon showed a SiC peak. The excess carbon promoted reaction P15B was composed of very fine particles with isotropic shape ( The crystallite sizes of ZrB The size of the synthesized powders observed by TEM ranged between 10 and 30 The synthesized particles were surrounded by pyro-carbon as shown in The pyro-carbon coating possibly behaves as a protective layer of the non-oxide nano powders against the corrosion by humidity. Pyro-carbon coating has been applied to commercially available non-oxide ceramic powders such as SiC in order to minimize the formation of oxides during storage When B The conventional carbo-borothermal reduction process using ZrSiO